5^i:5^;a^j^?3»vS»j:^a»?5»75»?^;^js»^s»a»;^i^;5»;a»a»a»;^j5»;5»v5»?a»^»;5»?a»^»;a»a»^»^N3»^ 

5»i^v5»a^?^7^g»v3»j5»a»^;5»;5»;5»;a»?^?5»;^?a»j5»^is»^55»;5i»?5»;a>?5»?5»;5^;5»;5»;5»;5»;^a»? 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  ITESTERN  WORLD  ^ 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 


5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 


10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


11.  EUCLID 

ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 


13. 

14, 

15. 

16, 


VIRGIL 

PLUTARCH 

TACITUS 


PTOLEMY 

COPERNICUS 

KEPLER 


17. 

18, 

19. 

20, 
21, 
22, 
23, 


PLOTINUS 

AUGUSTINE 

THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

DANTE 

CHAUCER 


MACHIAVELLI 

HOBBES 


24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 


RABELAIS 
MONTAIGNE 
SHAKESPEARE  I 
SHAKESPEARE  II 


?a^5^ 


?a^va^ 


5ai^p^ 


^  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


4^^  / 


/-^ 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 


41.  GIBBON  II 


7" 


42.  KANT 


29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 


43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST  (f  ^ 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 


32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 

50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


72i^^p"55p^ 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


28. 

GILBERT 

GALILEO 

HARVEY 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.B.  Clark,  F.L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


•  rw  -.Pf 


’‘S 


.  aJ^OW  H.a3X8aw”  HHT  ^o 

^H::>vii  aoTiaa  .2MiHDTUH  aiiAMYAM 


. -(‘v.  ->  • 


83008  TAa^O 


If*  ■ 


^  Y3REKH 


.  . ..  f  4:.'  .ife'  " 


■?< 


I 


t-jr  -  '■■- 


*■  ' V  • 

■  j 

Taaaiit) 
oaiiiK?) 


;■  .. 
'*'t*  ' 


-rjiV:  ''•.■•■■■  ■■  m  ■.’' 


»i'‘t  lAvWtJj'^rv'  V  ■*->.'  '-!v..  T;V  '  .  f»*.r«KiSil  ■  -I 

f -if  - ,’r.  ■>':3g-r  .  ■,  "..  •  ■■ 


r/jv.r  ^ 


WMMh:i‘...  ,JiajaA.|[,MMiTJioM  t 

(KiaxMa  vaK^^MAioo8TTojfc.MAtf 'vcuj^ro;Qrr2'JknMS^;i«diAKtb\«ini«iM  V 
^  y,  i  j«8iic<I  KAV)l/tAM4AVK^^.^m»^)^.M;ov{J:alMJnQKAXtJl/.,T^UAH.U«:';^)Mi4I^A^> 
atXXtXUM  JUTJ6W,t4'>al  J.8^SAX>.a3  A'<*MkA«t»DWV\«lSi^  . 

'ttMiba YA9X>aiifl riAJJAV 


'^w 


»  < 


A 

ij' 


On  the  Loadstone  and  Magnetic  Bodies 

BY  WILLIAM  GILBERT 

Concerning  the  Two  New  Sciences 

BY  GALILEO  GALILEI 

On  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood 
in  Animals.  On  the  Circulation  of  the 
Blood  On  the  Generation  of  Animals 

BY  WILLIAM  HARVEY 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 
CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  •  TORONTO 


On  the  Loadstone  and  Magnetic  Bodies,  translated  by  P.  Fleury  Mottelay, 
is  reprinted  by  arrangement  with  John  Wiley  and  Sons,  Inc. 

Dialogues  Concerning  the  Ttvo  Netv  Sciences,  translated  by  Henry  Crew  and  Alfonso  de  Salvio, 
is  reprinted  by  arrangement  with  Northwestern  University  Studies 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 


Copyright  in  the  united  states  of  America,  1952, 

BY  encyclopedia  BRITANNICA,  INC. 

Copyright  1952.  Copyright  under  international  copyright  union  by 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC.  AlL  RIGHTS  RESERVED  UNDER  PAN  AMERIGAN 
COPYRIGHT  CONVENTIONS  BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 


On  the  Loadstone  and  Magnetic  Bodies  and  on 
the  Great  Magnet  the  Earth,  Page  i 
By  William  Gilbert 
Translated  by  P.  Fleury  Mottelay 


Dialogues  Concerning  the  Two  New  Sciences,  Page 
By  Galileo  Galilei 

Translated  by  Henry  Crew  and  Alfonso  de  Salvio 


An  Anatomical  Disquisition  on  the  Motion  of 
the  Heart  and  Blood  in  Animals,  Page  2.67 
The  First  Anatomical  Disquisition  on 
the  Circulation  of  the  Blood, 
Addressed  to  John  Riolan,  Page  305 
A  Second  Disquisition  to  John  Riolan,  in  which 
Many  Objections  to  the  Circulation 
of  the  Blood  Are  Refuted,  Page  3 13 
Anatomical  Exercises  on  the  Generation 
of  Animals,  Page  3x9 
By  William  Harvey 
Translated  by  Robert  Willis 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

William  Gilbert,  1540-1603 


Gilbert  was  born  May  24,  1540,  at  Colchester 
in  Essex.  He  came  from  an  ancient  Suffolk  fam¬ 
ily  and  was  the  eldest  of  the  five  sons  of  Hierome 
Gilbert,  recorder  at  Colchester.  After  complet¬ 
ing  his  preliminary  education  at  the  town 
school,  Gilbert  in  1558  entered  St.  John’s  Col¬ 
lege,  Cambridge,  where  he  studied  for  eleven 
years.  He  took  his  bachelors  degree  in  1560, 
was  elected  fellow  the  following  year,  and  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  work  for  his  M.A.,  which  he  received 
in  1564.  It  was  about  this  time  that  his  interest 
in  science  apparently  began  to  attract  notice; 
he  was  appointed  mathematical  examiner  in 
1565  and  then  turned  to  the  study  of  medicine, 
in  which  he  received  his  doctorate  four  years 
later,  when  he  was  also  elected  senior  fellow  at 
St.  John’s  College. 

Shortly  after  receiving  his  degree,  Gilbert 
left  Cambridge  and  apparently  made  extensive 
travels  on  the  continent,  particularly  in  Italy. 
It  is  probable  that  he  received  the  degree  of 
Doctor  of  Physic  from  a  continental  univer¬ 
sity,  and  he  presumably  then  made  the  acquaint¬ 
ance  of  some  of  the|  learned  men  with  whom  he 
was  later  in  correspondence.  After  his  return  to 
England  he  settled  in  London  in  1573,  where 
he  practised  as  a  physician  with  “great  success 
and  applause.”  Admitted  to  the  College  of  Phy¬ 
sicians  about  1576,  Gilbert  held  the  office  of 
censor  from  1581  to  1590;  he  was  treasurer 
from  1587  to  1592  and  again  from  1597  to  1599, 
when  he  succeeded  to  the  presidency  of  the  col¬ 
lege.  He  served  on  the  committee  appointed  to 
superintend  the  preparation  of  the  Pharmaco¬ 
poeia  Londinensis,  which  was  undertaken  by  the 
college  in  1589  although  it  did  not  appear  until 
1618. 

During  these  years  that  Gilbert  was  making 
a  reputation  as  a  physician,  he  was  also  becom¬ 
ing  known  as  a  savant  in  chemistry,  physics, 
and  cosmology.  He  appears  to  have  studied 
these  sciences  from  his  youth.  He  was  perhaps 
the  first  advocate  of  Copernican  views  in  Eng¬ 
land,  and  he  held  that  the  fixed  stars  were  not 
all  at  the  same  distance  from  the  earth.  His 
study  of  navigation  is  said  to  have  resulted  in 
the  invention  of  two  instruments  enabling 


sailors  “to  find  out  the  latitude  without  seeing 
of  sun,  moon,  or  stars.”  But  the  main  basis  of 
his  reputation  as  a  scientist  was  the  publica¬ 
tion  in  1600,  after  eighteen  years  of  reading,  ex¬ 
periment,  and  reflection,  of  his  book  on  the 
magnet,  De  Magnete  Magneticisque  Corporibus 
et  de  Magno  Magnete  Tellnre  Physiologia  Nova, 
It  was  the  first  important  work  in  physical 
science  to  be  published  in  England,  and  almost 
immediately  after  its  publication  Gilbert  was 
famous  throughout  Europe.  Kepler  paid  tribute 
to  its  influence  upon  his  own  physical  specula¬ 
tions.  Galileo  first  turned  his  attention  to  mag¬ 
netism  after  reading  Gilbert  and  said  of  him 
that  he  was  “great  to  a  degree  that  is  enviable.” 
Bacon,  though  he  spoke  disparagingly  of  Gil¬ 
bert’s  attempt  “to  raise  a  general  system  upon 
the  magnet,”  praised  him  as  an  experimental 
philosopher  and  seems  to  have  taken  whole 
paragraphs  of  Gilbert’s  work  as  his  own. 

At  his  London  house,  where  he  possessed  a 
large  collection  of  books,  globes,  instruments, 
and  minerals,  Gilbert  gathered  about  him  men 
who  were  interested  in  discussing  scientific 
problems.  The  group,  which  held  regular 
monthly  meetings  and  constituted  a  kind  of 
society,  is  now  looked  upon  as  a  precursor  of 
the  Royal  Society.  Gilbert  presumably  took  a 
leading  part  in  these  discussions,  and  he  is 
known  to  have  continued  his  scientific  investi¬ 
gations,  but  his  only  other  book,  a  treatise  deal¬ 
ing  with  meteorological  subjects,  De  Mundo 
Nostro  Siiblunari  Philosophia  Nova,  was  edited 
after  his  death  by  his  brother. 

In  1601  Gilbert  was  appointed  physician  to 
Queen  Elizabeth,  and  it  appears  that  he  then 
moved  to  the  court.  Upon  the  death  of  the 
Queen,  it  was  discovered  that  her  only  personal 
legacy  was  made  to  Gilbert  for  the  prosecu¬ 
tion  of  his  studies.  He  was  immediately  reap¬ 
pointed  royal  physician  by  James  I,  but  died 
shortly  afterward,  probably  of  the  plague, 
on  November  30,  1603,  and  was  buried  in  the 
chancel  of  Holy  Trinity  church  in  Colchester. 
He  bequeathed  his  scientific  library  and  in¬ 
struments  to  the  College  of  Physicians,  but 
they  were  destroyed  in  the  great  fire  of  London. 


IX 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


He  left  his  portrait,  which  is  said  to  have  been 
painted  for  that  purpose,  to  Oxford  Univer¬ 
sity.  In  it  he  is  represented  as  standing, 
wearing  his  doctor’s  robes  and  holding  in  his 


hand  a  globe  on  which  is  written  the  word 
terrella;  as  its  inscription  the  painting  has, 
Gilbert,  the  first  investigator  of  the  powers  of  the 
magnet,  * 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note  ix 

Preface  i 


CHAP-  BOOK  I 

1.  Writings  of  ancient  and  modern  authors  con¬ 

cerning  the  loadstone:  various  opinions  and 
delusions  3 

2.  The  loadstone:  what  it  is:  its  discovery  7 

3.  The  loadstone  possesses  parts  differing  in  their 

natural  powers,  and  has  poles  conspicuous  for 
their  properties  9 

4.  Which  pole  is  the  north:  how  the  north  pole  is 

distinguished  from  the  south  pole  10 

5.  One  loadstone  appears  to  attract  another  in  the 

natural  position;  but  in  the  opposite  position 
repels  it  and  brings  it  to  rights  1 1 

6.  The  loadstone  attracts  iron  ore  as  well  as  the 

smelted  metal  12 

7.  What  iron  is;  what  its  matter:  its  use  13 

8.  In  what  countries  and  regions  iron  is  produced  16 

9.  Iron  ore  attracts  iron  ore  17 

10.  Iron  ore  has  and  acquires  poles,  and  arranges 
itself  with  reference  to  the  earth's  poles  17 

11.  Wrought-iron,  not  magnetized  by  the  load¬ 
stone,  attracts  iron  18 

12.  A  long  piece  of  iron,  even  not  magnetized,  as¬ 
sumes  a  north  and  south  direction  18 

13.  Smelted  iron  has  in  itself  fixed  north  and  south 

parts,  magnetic  activity,  verticity,  and  fixed 
vertices  or  poles  19 

14.  Of  other  properties  of  the  loadstone  and  of  its 

medicinal  virtue  19 

15.  The  medicinal  power  of  the  iron  20 

16.  That  loadstone  and  iron  ore  are  the  same,  and 

that  iron  is  obtained  from  both,  like  other 
metals  from  their  ores;  and  that  all  magnetic 
properties  exist,  though  weaker,  both  in  smelted 
iron  and  in  iron  ore  21 

17.  That  the  terrestrial  globe  is  magnetic  and  is  a 

loadstone;  and,  just  as  in  our  hands  the  load¬ 
stone  possesses  all  the  primary  powers  (forces) 
of  the  earth,  so  the  earth  by  reason  of  the  same 
potencies  lies  ever  in  the  same  direction  in  the 
universe  23 


BOOK  II 

1.  Of  magnetic  movements  26 

2.  Of  magnetic  coition,  and,  first,  of  the  attrac¬ 

tion  exerted  by  amber,  or,  more  properly,  the 
attachment  of  bodies  to  amber  26 

3.  Opinions  of  others  concerning  magnetic  coi¬ 
tion,  which  they  call  attraction  34 


Of  the  strength  of  a  loadstone  and  its  form:  the 
cause  of  coition  36 

In  what  manner  the  energy  inheres  in  the  load¬ 
stone  40 

How  magnetized  iron  and  smaller  loadstones 
conform  to  the  terrella,  and  to  the  earth  itself, 
and  are  governed  thereby  42 

Of  the  potency  of  the  magnetic  force,  and  of  its 
spherical  extension  43 

Of  the  geography  of  the  earth  and  the  ter¬ 


rella 


9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 


15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 


43 

44 
44 
44 
44 
44 


Of  the  equinoctial  circle  of  earth  and  terrella 
The  earth’s  magnetic  meridians 
Parallels 

The  magnetic  horizon 
Of  the  magnetic  axis  and  poles 
Why  the  coition  is  stronger  at  the  poles  than  in 
the  parts  between  equator  and  pole;  and  the 
relative  power  of  coition  in  different  parts  of 
the  earth  and  the  terrella  45 

The  magnetic  force  imparted  to  iron  is  more 
apparent  in  an  iron  rod,  than  in  an  iron  sphere, 
or  cube,  or  iron  of  any  other  shape  45 

That  motion  is  produced  by  the  magnetic  force 
through  solid  bodies  interposed:  of  the  inter¬ 
position  of  a  plate  of  iron  45 

Of  the  iron  helmet  (cap)  of  the  loadstone, 
wherewith  it  is  armed  at  the  pole  to  increase  its 
energy;  efficiency  of  the  same  47 

An  armed  loadstone  does  not  endow  with 
greater  force  magnetized  iron  than  does  an 
unarmed  one  47 

That  unition  is  stronger  with  an  armed  load¬ 
stone:  heavier  weights  are  thus  lifted:  the  coi¬ 
tion  is  not  stronger,  but  commonly  weaker  47 
That  an  armed  magnet  lifts  another,  and  that 
one  a  third:  this  holds  good  though  there  be 
less  energy  in  the  first  48 

That  when  paper  or  other  medium  is  inter¬ 
posed,  an  armed  loadstone  does  not  lift  more 
than  one  unarmed  48 

That  an  armed  loadstone  does  not  attract  iron 
more  than  an  unarmed  one;  and  that  the  armed 
stone  is  more  strongly  united  to  the  iron,  is 
shown  by  means  of  an  armed  loadstone  and  a 
cylinder  of  polished  iron  48 

The  magnetic  force  makes  motion  toward 

union,  and  when  united  connects  firmly  48 

That  iron  within  the  field  of  a  loadstone  hangs 
suspended  in  air,  if  on  account  of  an  obstacle  it 
cannot  come  near  49 

Intensifying  the  loadstone’s  forces  49 


xi 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


xii 

26.  Why  the  love  of  iron  and  loadstone  appears 

greater  than  that  of  loadstone  and  loadstone, 
or  iron  and  iron  when  nigh  a  loadstone  and 
within  its  held  50 

27.  That  the  centre  of  the  magnetic  forces  in  the 

earth  is  the  centre  of  the  earth;  and  in  the 
terrella  the  terrella’s  centre  51 

28.  That  a  loadstone  does  not  attract  to  a  hxed 

point  or  pole  only,  but  to  every  part  of  a  ter¬ 
rella,  except  the  equinoctial  circle  51 

29.  Of  difference  of  forces  dependent  on  quantity 

or  mass  51 

30.  The  shape  and  the  mass  of  an  iron  object  are 

important  in  magnetic  coitions  52 

31.  Of  oblong  and  round  stones  52 

32.  Some  problems  and  magnetic  experiments  on 

the  coition,  and  repulsion,  and  regular  move¬ 
ment  of  magnetic  bodies  52 

33.  Of  the  difference  in  the  ratio  of  strength  and 

movement  of  coition  within  the  sphere  of 
influence  54 

34.  Why  a  loadstone  is  of  different  power  in  its 

poles  as  well  in  the  north  as  in  the  south  re¬ 
gions  55 

35.  Of  a  perpetual-motion  engine  actuated  by  the 

attraction  of  a  loadstone,  mentioned  by 
authors  56 

36.  How  a  strong  loadstone  may  be  recognized  56 

37.  Uses  of  the  loadstone  as  it  affects  iron  57 

38.  Of  the  attractions  of  other  bodies  57 

39.  Of  mutually  repellent  bodies  59 

BOOK  III 

1.  Of  direction  60 

2.  Directive  (or  versorial)  force,  which  we  call 

verticity:  what  it  is;  how  it  resides  in  the  load¬ 
stone;  and  how  it  is  acquired  when  not  natu¬ 
rally  produced  62 

3.  How  iron  acquires  verticity  from  the  loadstone, 
and  how  this  verticity  is  lost  or  altered  64 

4.  Why  magnetized  iron  takes  opposite  verticity: 

and  why  iron  touched  by  the  true  north  side  of 
the  stone  moves  to  the  earth’s  north,  and  when 
touched  by  the  true  south  side  to  the  earth’s 
south:  iron  rubbed  with  the  north  point  of  the 
stone  does  not  turn  to  the  south,  nor  vice  versa^ 
as  all  writers  on  the  loadstone  have  erroneously 
thought  65 

5.  Of  magnetizing  stones  of  different  shapes  67 

6.  What  seems  to  be  a  contrary  movement  of 

magnetic  bodies  is  the  regular  tcndence  to 
union  67 

7.  A  determinate  verticity  and  a  directive  power 

make  magnetic  bodies  accord,  and  not  an  at- 
tractiona!  or  a  repulsive  force,  nor  strong  coi¬ 
tion  alone,  or  unition  67 

8.  Of  disagreements  between  pieces  of  iron  on  the 

same  pole  of  a  loadstone;  how  they  may  come 
together  and  be  conjoined  68 

9.  Directional  figures  showing  the  varieties  of 

rotation  69 

10.  Of  the  mutation  of  verticity  and  magnetic 


properties,  or  of  the  alteration  of  the  force 
awakened  by  the  loadstone  70 

11.  Of  friction  of  iron  with  the  mid  parts  of  a  load¬ 

stone  between  the  poles,  and  at  the  equinoctial 
circle  of  a  terrella  71 

12.  How  verticity  exists  in  all  smelted  iron  not 

excited  by  the  loadstone  71 

13.  Why  no  other  bodies  save  the  magnetic  are 

imbued  with  verticity  by  friction  with  a  load¬ 
stone;  and  why  no  body  not  magnetic  can  im 
part  and  awaken  that  force  73 

14.  The  position  of  a  loadstone,  now  above,  anon 

beneath,  a  magnetic  body  suspended  in  equi¬ 
librium,  alters  neither  the  force  nor  the  ver¬ 
ticity  of  the  magnetic  body  73 

15.  The  poles,  equator,  centre,  are  permanent  and 

stable  in  the  unbroken  loadstone,  when  it  is 
reduced  in  size  and  a  part  taken  away,  they 
vary  and  occupy  other  positions  74 

16.  If  the  south  part  of  a  loadstone  have  a  part 

broken  off,  somewhat  of  power  is  taken  away 
from  the  north  part  also  74 

17.  Of  the  use  of  rotary  needles  and  their  advan¬ 

tages;  how  the  directive  iron  rotary  needles  of 
sun-dials  and  the  needles  of  the  mariner’s  com¬ 
pass  are  to  be  rubbed  with  loadstone  in  order  to 
acquire  stronger  verticity  75 

BOOK  IV 

1 .  Of  variation  77 

2.  That  variation  is  due  to  inequality  among  the 

earth’s  elevations  79 

3.  Variation  is  constant  at  a  given  place  80 

4.  The  arc  of  variation  does  not  differ  according 

to  distance  between  places  81 

5.  An  island  in  ocean  does  not  alter  the  variation; 

neither  do  mines  of  loadstone  81 

6.  That  variation  and  direction  are  due  to  the 

controlling  force  of  the  earth  and  the  rotatory 
magnetic  nature,  not  by  an  attraction  or  a  coi¬ 
tion  or  by  other  occult  cause  81 

7.  Why  the  variation  due  to  this  lateral  cause  is 
not  greater  than  hitherto  it  has  been  observed 
to  be,  seldom  appearing  to  amount  to  two 
points  of  the  compass,  except  near  the  poles  82 

8.  Of  the  construction  of  the  common  mariner’s 

compass,  and  of  the  different  compasses  of 
various  nations  83 

9.  Whether  terrestrial  longitude  can  be  found 

from  variation  84 

10.  Why  in  various  places  near  the  pole  the  varia¬ 

tions  are  much  ampler  than  in  lower  lati¬ 
tudes  84 

11.  Cardan’s  error  in  seeking  to  determine  the  dis¬ 

tance  of  the  earth’s  centre  from  the  centre  of 
the  world  by  means  of  the  loadstone  (in  his 
De  ProportioTiibiiS,  V)  85 

12.  Of  finding  the  amount  of  the  variation;  what 
the  quantity  is  of  the  arc  of  the  horizon  from 
its  arctic  or  antarctic  intersection  by  a  meridian 
to  the  point  toward  which  the  needle  turns  85 

13.  Observations  made  by  seamen  commonly  vary 


CONTENTS 


and  are  untrustworthy,  partly  through  mistakes 
and  want  of  knowledge  and  the  imperfectness 
of  the  instruments,  and  partly  because  the  sea 
is  seldom  so  calm  but  shadows  or  lights  may 


rest  on  the  instruments  89 

14.  Of  the  variation  under  the  equinoctial  line  and 

nearby  89 

15.  The  variation  of  the  magnetized  needle  in  the 

great  sea,  Ethiopic  and  American,  below  the 
equator  89 

16.  Of  the  variation  in  Nova  Zembla  90 

17.  Variation  in  the  South  Sea  90 

18.  Of  the  variation  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea  90 

19.  The  variation  in  the  interior  of  the  great  con¬ 
tinents  90 

20.  The  variation  in  the  Eastern  Ocean  90 

21.  How  the  deviation  of  the  needle  is  greater  or 
less  according  to  the  distances  of  places  91 

BOOK  V 

1.  Of  the  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle  92 


2.  Diagram  showing  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle  in 
different  positions  of  a  sphere  and  horizons  of 
the  earth  in  which  there  is  no  variation  of  dip  95 

3.  An  instrument  for  showing  by  the  action  of  a 

loadstone  the  degree  of  dip  below  the  horizon 
in  any  latitude.  Description  of  the  instru¬ 
ment;  its  uses  96 

4.  Of  a  suitable  length  of  needle  on  the  terrella 

for  showing  the  dip  97 

5.  That  dip  is  not  caused  by  the  attraction  of  a 

loadstone  but  by  its  power  of  giving  direction 
and  rotation  97 

6.  Of  the  ratio  of  the  dip  to  latitude  and  the 

causes  thereof  98 

7.  Explanation  of  the  diagram  of  the  rotation  of 


xiii 

magnetized  iron  99 

8.  Diagram  of  the  rotation  of  magnetized  iron 

showing  the  magnetic  dip  in  all  latitudes,  and 
showing  the  latitude  from  the  rotation  and 
dip  100 

9.  Demonstration  of  direction,  or  of  variation 

from  the  true  direction,  together  with  dip, 
simply  by  the  movement  in  water,  due  to  the 
power  of  controlling  and  rotating  10 1 

10.  Of  variation  of  dip  102 

11.  Of  the  formal  magnetic  act  spherically  ef¬ 
fused  102 

12.  The  magnetic  force  is  animate,  or  imitates  a 
soul;  in  many  respects  it  surpasses  the  human 
soul  while  that  is  united  to  an  organic  body  104 

BOOK  VI 

1.  Of  the  globe  of  earth  as  a  great  loadstone  106 

2.  The  magnetic  axis  of  the  earth  remains  in¬ 
variable  1 06 

3.  Of  the  daily  magnetic  revolution  of  the  globes, 

as  against  the  time-honored  opinion  of  a  pri- 
mum  mobile:  a  probable  hypothesis  107 

4.  That  the  earth  hath  a  circular  motion  1 1 1 

5.  Arguments  of  those  who  deny  the  earth’s  mo¬ 
tion,  and  refutation  thereof  113 

6.  Of  the  cause  of  the  definite  time  of  the  total 

revolution  of  the  earth  116 

7.  Of  the  earth’s  primary  magnetic  nature  whereby 

her  poles  are  made  different  from  the  poles  of 
the  ecliptic  117 

8.  Of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  by  reason  of 
the  magnetic  movement  of  the  earth’s  poles  in 
the  arctic  and  antarctic  circle  of  the  zodiac  1 1 7 

9.  Of  the  anomaly  of  the  precession  of  the  equi¬ 
noxes  and  of  the  obliquity  of  the  zodiac  1 1 8 


for 


5rmTr/of>7" 


0P  ^  --  -3....^,  Jlfill  fr>.vfW5Jgm 

iii>it  l93rti;^t^i.iit  lo  oQ]^<»f  lit  id  !Ti6%t<<l  .B 

ben;:  lie  iVt  <(ft;  ^wuf^ 

im  fiotr^in  dh:Hij^l  ;Ji  rT 


{hiiq 
nfi:  f-nr 
'Jbi.^n?  S>4fr> {IriL'i  I,cr. 

#>ail-4jii^f  iS  #Wu  <  *1  ^  fod  m  lo  *o?*i 


•qib'ihiW  mnii  0 

mII  th'.: 


>  ^ 


'JCrtl'  ■  ~  ^  M:9d 

laMtu  nl  tUtm 
OttO/  l»?iiji4  «f  j^}  Iqot 

^>tsm  «fii#  ife;  W  "4^  ^1  Jt 

dPi  \  : 

4i  Mf^  *1 

^  -2  VpMlKf/if  i:  Min  ^ 

^  Iff  .  ^spoKyMjip I 

.^jmyiitirt  drfi  *iinb  .t 

leiot.  9^  iti  /XBfl  '>iir(^  sdl  V  to* 

iir  ,  t-** ‘  ‘  wftsijfep^ 


?i4ir- 


,':^  i  w  Si "' 

BUjr  •jJfe'^U^W  I  «fl  r.i 

.^c  ■  —  ^ —  —a  I 


?  ft  fiKith  p<y  < ^ 


te  •  ‘  . . 

fe  ifcaiT^  ^>^1  i^d 


nosmi/i  !M6^53i?3te%riL 

"id’  ddiKfTf  !tl 


^bifiifd  ^nJ 

^  IV  rxv  tii  ;Jcn^  ' 


ir' 


iTff45^iff4f^«b  Idih  irfj  iQ  .t 

iii  ^aJiyj  sdi  t  icaflrJiOjo'^  d^ii 


w 


irw  I M  rofVM’Mni 


^  ' 

1^;-  " 

K 

^  ’  * 


_ -  *  .  _  _  ^oj|«n 

>«<  R.)  ^1? 


Hn 


I  '  IV-'»V1  -'ll  'aI  Jud^ 

,^-  ^tit.  ■  *'  *  ^ 


4.  - j-n 

.,  «  ■■  ■■' 


jj^.,  4  -  ; 


♦  ^t^^  U!>.'  -ioi 

*..>  :  *i  ’  -  r^/  «»4<8r 

w  ’t  <%  iTl-  i«ir:  * 

E%’<  3^'in 

F,*: 4i'^nu  ■  V  I  Ii^:‘f7i>^.  « 

Ft *  SS:'  V  ■■  -■^'  ■  ^  '  VT>^ir H# 

“X  -‘  V  *  . .  '^-  «if 

■»-  liapi^ 

apiW*‘i'-e3<^>v 

&..>  vyj-'  ■,  •-  • — K.-^  — ■'^'  "■ 

*J1 .'  • '‘ '*•:*-* -V*  .  ■  ■  i  • 


.Mft:*>il*‘  id<.^iT3fct3tf44c  i*d&  , 

'.Mi  d, tif.f4}i0r  '  •■j  * 

1  t^er  flOB  lo  il»i>  kt«Mi ’ojitiUtx 

»l»  L-i. 

-  jpesap  flljiiie  coisii^ 

«»  W  ot  dk  4vi2»fiod^ 

j;Yj«|iM%:  ir«4  <i(  ^ 
ii:'  t^«Di»«^lliEbfifH  ..  -■  '.  - 

It  ’  £^  nr 

.  ^KjB4  ■  '^.  .■f'’  '’'  '""  'V 

)i«^ 

Vk-.  etti4’  irJ^ifca 

. 

f  -i*. rdf MtiMJ  i» rift j« 

!»  ||.  c4jwprc  i4  »4iatftoftfirt!n^  ^ 
>Aiie|^'.:a?rA<^daJltrM  ^ 
r  > .  ;«•!>  3$  / 

'  'r*'-.';^!  '  .  V^'*. 

■  -  :  SI  '■  .  -  v' 


On  the  Loadstone  and  Magnetic  Bodies 
and  on  the  Great  Magnet  the  Earth 


PREFACE 


To  THE  CANDID  READER,  STUDIOUS  OF  THE  MAGNETIC  PHILOSOPHY 


Since  in  the  discovery  of  secret  things  and  in 
the  investigation  of  hidden  causes,  stronger 
reasons  are  obtained  from  sure  experiments 
and  demonstrated  arguments  than  from  prob¬ 
able  conjectures  and  the  opinions  of  philo¬ 
sophical  speculators  of  the  common  sort; 
therefore  to  the  end  that  the  noble  substance  of 
that  great  loadstone,  our  common  mother  (the 
earth),  still  quite  unknown,  and  also  the  forces 
extraordinary  and  exalted  of  this  globe  may  the 
better  be  understood,  we  have  decided  first  to 
begin  with  the  common  stony  and  ferruginous 
matter,  and  magnetic  bodies,  and  the  parts  of 
the  earth  that  we  may  handle  and  may  perceive 
with  the  senses;  then  to  proceed  with  plain 
magnetic  experiments,  and  to  penetrate  to  the 
inner  parts  of  the  earth.  For  after  we  had,  in 
order  to  discover  the  true  substance  of  the 
earth,  seen  and  examined  very  many  matters 
taken  out  of  lofty  mountains,  or  the  depths  of 
seas,  or  deepest  caverns,  or  hidden  mines,  we 
gave  much  attention  for  a  long  time  to  the 
study  of  magnetic  forces — wondrous  forces 
they,  surpassing  the  powers  of  all  other  bodies 
around  us,  though  the  virtues  of  all  things  dug 
out  of  the  earth  were  to  be  brought  together. 
Nor  did  we  find  this  our  labour  vain  or  fruit¬ 
less,  for  every  day,  in  our  experiments,  novel, 
unheard-of  properties  came  to  light:  and  our 
philosophy  became  so  widened,  as  a  result  of 
diligent  research,  that  we  have  attempted  to 
set  forth,  according  to  magnetic  principles,  the 
inner  constitution  of  the  globe  and  its  genuine 
substance,  and  in  true  demonstrations  and  in 
experiments  that  appeal  plainly  to  the  senses,  as 
though  we  were  pointing  with  the  finger  to  ex¬ 
hibit  to  mankind  earth,  mother  of  all. 

And  even  as  geometry  rises  from  certain 
slight  and  readily  understood  foundations  to 
the  highest  and  most  difficult  demonstrations. 


whereby  the  ingenious  mind  ascends  above  the 
aether:  so  does  our  magnetic  doctrine  and  sci¬ 
ence  in  due  order  first  show  forth  certain  facts 
of  less  rare  occurrence;  from  these  proceed 
facts  of  a  more  extraordinary  kind;  at  length, 
in  a  sort  of  series,  are  revealed  things  most  se¬ 
cret  and  privy  in  the  earth,  and  the  causes  are 
recognized  of  things  that,  in  the  ignorance  of 
those  of  old  or  through  the  heedlessness  of  the 
moderns,  were  unnoticed  or  disregarded.  But 
why  should  I,  in  so  vast  an  ocean  of  books 
whereby  the  minds  of  the  studious  are  bemud- 
dled  and  vexed — of  books  of  the  more  stupid 
sort  whereby  the  common  herd  and  fellows 
without  a  spark  of  talent  are  made  intoxicated, 
crazy,  puffed  up;  and  are  led  to  write  numer¬ 
ous  books  and  to  profess  themselves  philoso¬ 
phers,  physicians,  mathematicians,  and  astrolo¬ 
gers,  the  while  ignoring  and  contemning  men 
of  learning — why,  I  say,  should  I  add  aught 
further  to  this  confused  world  of  writings,  or 
why  should  I  submit  this  noble  and  (as  com¬ 
prising  many  things  before  unheard  of)  this 
new  and  inadmissible  philosophy  to  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  men  who  have  taken  oath  to  follow  the 
opinions  of  others,  to  the  most  senseless  cor¬ 
rupters  of  the  arts,  to  lettered  clowns,  gram- 
matists,  sophists,  spouters,  and  the  wrong¬ 
headed  rabble,  to  be  denounced,  torn  to  tatters 
and  heaped  with  contumely.  To  you  alone,  true 
philosophers,  ingenuous  minds,  who  not  only 
in  books  but  in  things  themselves  look  for 
knowledge,  have  I  dedicated  these  foundations 
of  magnetic  science — a  new  style  of  philoso¬ 
phizing.  But  if  any  see  fit  not  to  agree  with  the 
opinions  here  expressed  and  not  to  accept  cer¬ 
tain  of  my  paradoxes,  still  let  them  note  the 
great  multitude  of  experiments  and  discoveries 
— these  it  is  chiefly  that  cause  all  philosophy  to 
flourish;  and  we  have  dug  them  up  and  dem- 


I 


PREFACE 


2 

onstrated  them  with  much  pains  and  sleepless 
nights  and  great  money  expense.  Enjoy  them 
you,  and,  if  ye  can,  employ  them  for  better  pur¬ 
poses.  I  know  how  hard  it  is  to  impart  the  air 
of  newness  to  what  is  old,  trimness  to  what  is 
gone  out  of  fashion;  to  lighten  what  is  dark;  to 
make  that  grateful  which  excites  disgust;  to 
win  belief  for  things  doubtful;  but  far  more 
Jifficult  is  it  to  win  any  standing  for  or  to  es¬ 
tablish  doctrines  that  are  novel,  unheard-of, 
and  opposed  to  everybody’s  opinions.  We  care 
naught,  for  that,  as  we  have  held  that  philoso¬ 
phy  is  for  the  few. 

We  have  set  over  against  our  discoveries  and 
experiments  larger  and  smaller  asterisks  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  importance  and  their  subtility. 
Let  whosoever  would  make  the  same  experi¬ 
ments  handle  the  bodies  carefully,  skilfully, 
and  deftly,  not  heedlessly  and  bunglingly; 
when  an  experiment  fails,  let  him  not  in  his 
ignorance  condemn  our  discoveries,  for  there 
is  naught  in  these  books  that  has  not  been  in¬ 
vestigated  and  again  and  again  done  and  re¬ 
peated  under  our  eyes.  Many  things  in  our  rea¬ 
sonings  and  our  hypotheses  will  perhaps  seem 
hard  to  accept,  being  at  variance  with  the  gen¬ 
eral  opinion;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  here¬ 
after  they  will  win  authoritativeness  from  the 
demonstrations  themselves.  Hence  the  more 
advanced  one  is  in  the  science  of  the  loadstone, 
the  more  trust  he  has  in  the  hypotheses,  and 
the  greater  the  progress  he  makes;  nor  will  one 
reach  anything  like  certitude  in  the  magnetic 
philosophy,  unless  all,  or  at  all  events  most,  of 
its  principles  are  known  to  him. 

This  natural  philosophy  {physiologia)  is  al¬ 
most  a  new  thing,  unheard  of  before;  a  very 
few  writers  have  simply  published  some  mea¬ 
gre  accounts  of  certain  magnetic  forces.  There¬ 
fore  we  do  not  at  all  quote  the  ancients  and 
the  Greeks  as  our  supporters,  for  neither  can 


paltry  Greek  argumentation  demonstrate  the 
truth  more  subtilly  nor  Greek  terms  more  ef¬ 
fectively,  nor  can  both  elucidate  it  better.  Our 
doctrine  of  the  loadstone  is  contradictory  of 
most  of  the  principles  and  axioms  of  the 
Greeks.  Nor  have  we  brought  into  this  work 
any  graces  of  rhetoric,  any  verbal  ornateness, 
but  have  aimed  simply  at  treating  knotty  ques¬ 
tions  about  which  little  is  known  in  such  a 
style  and  in  such  terms  as  are  needed  to  make 
what  is  said  clearly  intelligible.  Therefore  we 
sometimes  employ  words  new  and  unheard  of, 
not  (as  alchemists  are  wont  to  do)  in  order  to 
veil  things  with  a  pedantic  terminology  and  to 
make  them  dark  and  obscure,  but  in  order  that 
hidden  things  with  no  name  and  up  to  this 
time  unnoticed  may  be  plainly  and  fully  pub¬ 
lished. 

After  the  magnetic  experiments  and  the  ac¬ 
count  of  the  homogenic  parts  of  the  earth,  we 
proceed  to  a  consideration  of  the  general  na¬ 
ture  of  the  whole  earth;  and  here  we  decided 
to  philosophize  freely,  as  freely,  as  in  the  past, 
the  Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Latins  published 
their  dogmas;  for  very  many  of  their  errors 
have  been  handed  down  from  author  to  author 
till  our  own  time;  and  as  our  sciolists  still  take 
their  stand  on  these  foundations,  they  continue 
to  stray  about,  so  to  speak,  in  perpetual  dark¬ 
ness.  To  those  men  of  early  times  and,  as  it 
were,  first  parents  of  philosophy,  to  Aristotle, 
Theophrastus,  Ptolemy,  Hippocrates,  Galen, 
be  due  honour  rendered  ever,  for  from  them 
has  knowledge  descended  to  those  that  have 
come  after  them:  but  our  age  has  discovered 
and  brought  to  light  very  many  things  which 
they  too,  were  they  among  the  living,  would 
cheerfully  adopt.  Wherefore  we  have  had  no 
hesitation  in  setting  forth,  in  hypotheses  that 
are  provable,  the  things  that  we  have  through 
a  long  experience  discovered.  Farewell. 


BOOK  FIRST 


CHAPTER  L  Writings  of  ancient  and  modern 
authors  concerning  the  loadstone:  variotis  opin¬ 
ions  and  delusions 

In  former  times  when  philosophy,  still  rude 
and  uncultured,  was  involved  in  the  murki¬ 
ness  of  errors  and  ignorances,  a  few  of  the  vir¬ 
tues  and  properties  of  things  were,  it  is  true, 
known  and  understood:  in  the  world  of  plants 
and  herbs  all  was  confusion,  mining  was  un¬ 
developed,  and  mineralogy  neglected.  But 
when,  by  the  genius  and  labours  of  many 
workers,  certain  things  needful  for  man’s  use 
and  welfare  were  brought  to  light  and  made 
known  to  others  (reason  and  experience  mean¬ 
while  adding  a  larger  hope),  then  did  man¬ 
kind  begin  to  search  the  forests,  the  plains,  the 
mountains  and  precipices,  the  seas  and  the 
depths  of  the  waters,  and  the  inmost  bowels  of 
earth,  and  to  investigate  all  things.  And  by 
good  luck  at  last  the  loadstone  was  found,  as 
seems  probable,  by  iron-smelters  or  by  miners 
in  veins  of  iron  ore.  On  being  treated  by  the 
metallurgists,  it  quickly  exhibited  that  strong 
powerful  attraction  of  iron — no  latent  nor  ob¬ 
scure  property,  but  one  easily  seen  of  all:  one 
observed  and  commended  with  many  praises. 
And  after  it  had  come  forth  as  it  were  out  of 
darkness  and  out  of  deep  dungeons  and  been 
honoured  of  men  on  account  of  its  strong  and 
marvellous  attraction  of  iron,  then  many  an¬ 
cient  philosophers  and  physicians  discoursed  of 
it,  and  briefly  (but  briefly  only)  made  it  matter 
of  record:  as,  for  instance,  Plato  in  the  Ion, 
Aristotle  only  in  his  first  book  On  the  Soul; 
likewise  Theophrastus  the  Lesbian,  Dioscor- 
ides,  Caius  Plinius  Secundus,  Julius  Solinus. 

These  record  only  that  the  loadstone  attracts 
iron:  its  other  properties  were  all  hid.  But  lest 
the  story  of  the  loadstone  should  be  jejune  and 
too  brief,  to  this  one  sole  property  then  known 
were  appended  certain  figments  and  falsehoods 
which  in  the  early  time  no  less  than  nowadays 
were  by  precocious  sciolists  and  copyists  dealt 
out  to  mankind  to  be  swallowed.  For  example, 
they  asserted  that  a  loadstone  rubbed  with  gar¬ 
lic  does  not  attract  iron;  nor  when  it  is  in  pres¬ 
ence  of  a  diamond.  The  like  of  this  is  found  in 


Pliny  and  in  Ptolemy’s  Quadripartitum;  and 
errors  have  steadily  been  spread  abroad  and 
been  accepted — even  as  evil  and  noxious  plants 
ever  have  the  most  luxuriant  growth — down  to 
our  day,  being  propagated  in  the  writings  of 
many  authors  who,  to  the  end  that  their  vol¬ 
umes  might  grow  to  the  desired  bulk,  do  write 
and  copy  all  sorts  about  ever  so  many  things  of 
which  they  know  naught  for  certain  in  the 
light  of  experience.  Such  fables  about  the  load¬ 
stone  even  Georgius  Agricola,  a  man  that  has 
deserved  well  indeed  of  letters,  has  inserted  as 
truthful  history  in  his  books  De  natura  fossil- 
him,  putting  his  trust  in  others’  writings.  Ga¬ 
len,  in  the  ninth  book  of  his  De  simplicium 
medicamentorum  facultatibus ,  recognizes  its 
medicinal  virtue,  and  its  natural  power  of  at¬ 
tracting  iron,  in  the  first  book  of  his  On  the 
Natural  Faculties;  but  he  knew  not  the  cause, 
any  more  than  Dioscorides  before  him,  nor  did 
he  seek  further.  But  his  translator  Matthiolus 
furbishes  again  the  garlic  and  diamond  story, 
and  further  brings  in  the  fable  of  Mohammed’s 
shrine  having  an  arched  roof  of  magnets  so 
that  the  people  might  be  fooled  by  the  trick  of 
the  coffin  suspended  in  air,  as  though  ’twere 
some  divine  miracle.  But  this  is  shown  to  be 
false  by  the  reports  of  travellers.  Pliny,  how¬ 
ever,  records  that  the  architect  Chinocrates  be¬ 
gan  to  put  an  arched  roof  of  loadstone  on  the 
temple  of  Arsinoe  at  Alexandria,  so  that  her 
effigy  in  iron  might  seem  to  be  suspended  in 
air:  in  the  meantime  the  architect  died,  as  also 
Ptolemy,  who  had  ordered  the  work  to  be  done 
in  honor  of  his  sister. 

But  little  has  been  written  by  the  ancients 
about  the  causes  of  the  attraction  of  iron:  some 
trifling  remarks  of  Lucretius  and  others  are 
extant;  other  authors  barely  make  slight  men¬ 
tion  of  the  attraction  of  iron:  all  these  are  be¬ 
rated  by  Cardan  for  being  so  heedless  and  in¬ 
different  about  so  notable  a  matter,  so  broad  a 
field  of  philosophizing,  and  for  not  giving  a 
fuller  account  or  a  more  developed  philosophy; 
yet  Cardan  himself  in  his  ponderous  volumes 
has  handed  down  to  posterity,  beyond  a  few 
commonplaces  and  quotations  from  other  writ- 


3 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


4 

ers  and  false  discoveries,  naught  that  is  worthy 
of  a  philosopher.  Of  later  authors,  some  tell 
only  of  its  efficacy  in  medicine,  as  Antonius 
Musa  Brasevolus,  Baptista  Montanus,  Amatus 
Lusitanus,  as  did  before  them  Oribasius  in 
Book  XIII  of  the  De  jacultate  metalUcorum, 
Avicenna,  Serapio  Mauritanus,  Abohali  (Hali 
Abbas),  Santes  de  Ardoniis,  Petrus  Appon- 
ensis,  Marcellus,  Arnaidus.  Only  a  few  points 
touching  the  loadstone  are  very  briefly  men¬ 
tioned  by  Marbodeus  Gallus,  Albertus,  Mat- 
thaeus  Silvaticus,  Hermolaus  Barbatus,  Camil- 
lus  Leonhardus,  Cornelius  Agrippa,  Fallopius, 
Joannes  Langius,  Cardinal  de  Cusa,  Hannibal 
Roserius  Calaber:  by  all  these  the  subject  is 
handled  in  the  most  careless  way,  while  they 
repeat  only  the  figments  and  ravings  of  others. 
Matthiolus  compares  the  attractive  virtues  of 
the  loadstone,  which  pass  through  iron,  to  the 
mischief  of  the  torpedo,  whose  poison  passes 
through  bodies  and  spreads  in  an  occult  way. 
Gulielmus  Puteanus  in  his  Ratio  purgantium 
medicamentorum  discusses  the  loadstone  brief¬ 
ly  and  crudely.  Thomas  Erastus,  knowing 
naught  of  the  nature  of  the  loadstone,  draws 
from  it  weak  arguments  against  Paracelsus. 
Georgius  Agricola,  like  Encelius  and  other 
writers  on  metals,  simply  describes  it.  Alex¬ 
ander  Aphrodiseus,  in  his  Problemata,  judges 
the  question  of  the  loadstone  to  be  incapable  of 
explication.  Lucretius  Carus,  the  Epicurean 
poet,  deems  the  attraction  to  be  due  to  this,  that 
as  there  is  from  all  things  an  efflux  of  minutest 
bodies,  so  there  is  from  iron  efflux  of  atoms  into 
the  space  betwixt  the  iron  and  the  loadstone — 
a  space  emptied  of  air  by  the  loadstone’s  atoms 
[seeds] ;  and  when  these  begin  to  return  to  the 
loadstone,  the  iron  follows,  the  corpuscles  be¬ 
ing  entangled  with  each  other.  Something  sim¬ 
ilar  is  said  by  Joannes  Costaeus,  following  Plu¬ 
tarch.  Thomas  Aquinas,  in  his  Physica,  Book 
VII,  treating  briefly  of  the  loadstone,  gets  at 
the  nature  of  it  fairly  well:  with  his  godlike 
and  perspicacious  mind  he  would  have  devel¬ 
oped  many  a  point  had  he  been  acquainted 
with  magnetic  experiments.  Plato  holds  the 
magnetic  virtue  to  be  divine. 

But  when,  some  three  or  four  hundred  years 
ago,  the  magnetic  movement  to  the  north  and 
the  south  was  discovered  or  recognized  anew, 
many  learned  men,  each  according  to  his  own 
gifts,  strove  to  honour  with  admiration  and 
praise  or  to  explain  with  feeble  reasonings  a 
property  so  curious  and  so  necessary  for  the  use 
of  mankind.  Of  more  recent  authors,  very 
many  have  striven  to  discover  the  cause  of  this 


direction  and  movement  to  north  and  south, 
and  to  understand  this  so  great  miracle  of  na¬ 
ture  and  lay  it  open  to  others:  but  they  wasted 
oil  and  labor,  because,  not  being  practical  in  the 
research  of  objects  in  nature,  being  acquainted 
only  with  books,  being  led  astray  by  certain 
erroneous  physical  systems,  and  having  made 
no  magnetical  experiments,  they  constructed 
certain  raciocinations  on  a  basis  of  mere  opin¬ 
ions,  and  old-womanishly  dreamt  the  things 
that  were  not.  Marcilius  Ficinus  chews  the  cud 
of  ancient  opinions,  and  to  give  the  reason  of 
the  magnetic  direction  seeks  its  cause  in  the 
constellation  Ursa:  in  the  loadstone,  says  he, 
the  potency  of  Ursa  prevails  and  hence  it  is 
transferred  into  the  iron.  Paracelsus  declares 
that  there  are  stars  which,  gifted  with  the  load¬ 
stone’s  power,  do  attract  to  themselves  iron. 

Levinus  Lemnius  describes  and  praises  the 
mariner’s  compass,  and  on  certain  grounds  in¬ 
fers  its  antiquity:  he  does  not  divulge  the  hid¬ 
den  miracle  which  he  makes  profession  to 
know.  The  people  of  Amalfi,  in  the  kingdom 
of  Naples,  first,  ’tis  said,  constructed  a  mar¬ 
iner’s  compass;  and,  as  Flavius  Blondus  says, 
the  townsmen  do  not  without  reason  boast, 
they  were  so  taught  by  one  Joannes  Goia,  a 
fellow-citizen,  in  the  year  1300.  This  town  is  in 
the  Kingdom  of  Naples,  not  far  from  Salerno, 
and  near  the  promontory  of  Minerva.  The 
sovereignty  of  the  place  was  conferred  by 
Charles  V  on  Andrea  Doria,  the  great  naval 
commander,  in  recognition  of  his  splendid 
achievements.  And  that  nothing  ever  has  been 
contrived  by  the  art  of  man  nor  anything  been 
of  greater  advantage  to  the  human  race  than 
the  mariner’s  compass  is  certain:  but  many  in¬ 
fer  from  ancient  writings  and  from  certain  ar¬ 
guments  and  conjectures,  that  the  compass  was 
discovered  earlier  and  received  among  the  arts 
of  navigation.  Knowledge  of  the  mariner’s 
compass  appears  to  have  been  brought  into 
Italy  by  the  Venetian  Paolo  [Marco  Polo], 
who  about  the  year  1260  learned  the  art  of  the 
compass  in  China;  still  I  do  not  want  to  strip 
the  Amalfitani  of  so  great  an  honour,  seeing 
that  by  them  compasses  were  first  commonly 
made  in  Mediterranean  lands.  Goropius  as¬ 
cribes  the  invention  to  the  Cimbri  or  Teutons, 
on  the  ground  that  the  thirty-two  names  of  the 
winds  inscribed  on  the  compass  are  pro¬ 
nounced  in  German  by  all  mariners,  whether 
they  be  British  or  Spaniards,  or  Frenchmen. 
But  the  Italians  give  them  names  in  their  own 
vernacular.  Some  think  that  Solomon,  King  of 
Judea,  was  acquainted  with  the  compass  and 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


taught  the  use  of  it  to  his  pilots  for  their  long 
voyages  when  they  brought  from  the  Western 
Indies  such  a  quantity  of  gold:  hence  Arias 
Montanus  holds  that  the  regions  in  Peru  that 
abound  in  gold  got  their  name  from  the  He¬ 
brew  word  Paruaim,  But  it  is  more  probable 
that  the  gold  came  from  the  coast  of  lower 
Ethiopia,  or,  as  others  declare,  from  the  region 
called  Cephala.  The  story  seems  less  true  for 
the  reason  that  the  Phoenicians,  next  neighbours 
of  Judea,  most  skilful  navigators  in  early  times 
(whose  talents,  labour,  and  counsels  Solomon 
employed  in  building  ships  and  in  his  expedi¬ 
tions  as  well  as  in  other  ways),  were  ignorant 
of  magnetic  aids,  of  the  use  of  the  mariner's 
compass:  for  were  it  used  by  them,  doubtless 
the  Greeks,  the  Italians,  and  all  the  barbarians 
would  have  known  of  a  thing  so  necessary  and 
so  celebrated  through  common  use ;  nor  would 
things  famous,  most  easily  known,  and  of  the 
highest  necessity  ever  perish  in  oblivion;  on 
the  contrary,  the  knowledge  would  have  been 
handed  on  to  posterity,  or  some  memorial  in 
writing  would  survive. 

Sebastian  Cabot  first  discovered  that  the 
magnetized  iron  (needle)  varied.  Gonzales 
Oviedo  first  made  mention  in  his  history  that 
in  the  meridian  of  the  Azores  there  is  no  varia¬ 
tion.  Fernel,  in  his  book  De  abditis  rerum 
causis,  says  that  in  the  loadstone  is  a  hidden 
and  abstruse  cause:  elsewhere  he  says  this  cause 
is  celestial,  and  he  does  but  explain  the  un¬ 
known  by  the  more  unknown.  This  search  af¬ 
ter  hidden  causes  is  something  ignorant,  beg¬ 
garly,  and  resultless.  The  ingenious  Fracas- 
torio,  a  philosopher  of  no  common  stamp,  asks 
what  gives  direction  to  the  loadstone  [needle], 
and  imagines  the  existence  of  hyperborean 
magnetic  mountains,  attracting  objects  of  mag¬ 
netic  iron.  This  opinion,  in  some  degree  ac¬ 
cepted  by  others  also,  many  authors  follow  in 
their  writings,  their  geographical  maps,  their 
marine  charts,  and  their  descriptions  of  the 
globe:  dreaming  magnetic  poles  and  mighty 
cliffs,  apart  from  the  earth’s  poles.  Of  date  two 
hundred  years  or  more  earlier  than  Fracastorio 
is  a  small  work  attributed  to  one  Petrus  Pere- 
grinus,  a  pretty  erudite  book  considering  the 
time:  many  believe  it  owes  its  origin  to  the 
opinions  of  Roger  Bacon,  Englishman  of  Ox¬ 
ford.  In  this  work  the  arguments  touching  the 
magnetic  direction  are  drawn  from  the  celestial 
poles  and  from  the  heaven  itself.  From  this 
book  of  Petrus  Peregrinus,  Joannes  Taisner 
Hannonius  extracted  the  matter  of  a  little  vol¬ 
ume,  which  he  published  for  new.  Cardan 


makes  much  of  the  star  in  the  tail  of  Ursa 
Major;  the  cause  of  variation  he  assigns  to  its 
rising,  thinking  that  variation  is  always  certain 
at  the  rising  of  the  star.  But  the  difference  of 
variation  for  change  of  locality,  and  the  muta¬ 
tions  in  many  places — mutations  that  even  in 
the  southern  regions  are  irregular — preclude 
this  exclusive  dominance  of  one  star  at  its 
northern  rising.  The  College  of  Coimbra  seeks 
the  cause  in  some  region  of  the  heavens  nigh  to 
the  pole;  Scaliger,  in  the  131st  of  his  Exercita- 
tiones  on  Cardan’s  work  De  subtilitate,  brings 
in  a  celestial  cause  to  himself  unknown,  and 
terrestrial  loadstones  that  have  nowhere  been 
discovered;  and  seeks  the  cause  not  in  the 
“siderite  mountains”  but  in  that  force  which 
formed  them,  to  wit,  in  the  part  of  the  heavens 
which  overhangs  that  northern  point.  This 
opinion  the  learned  author  dresses  in  abundant 
verbiage  and  crowns  with  many  subtile  obser¬ 
vations  in  the  margin:  but  his  reasons  are  not 
so  subtile.  Martinus  Cortesius  holds  that  the 
seat  of  the  attraction  is  beyond  the  poles,  and 
that  it  is  the  heavens  in  motion.  One  Bessard,  a 
Frenchman,  studies  the  pole  of  the  Zodiac,  but 
to  as  little  purpose.  Jacobus  Severtius,  of  Paris, 
after  quoting  a  few  observations  of  others, 
fashions  new  errors  about  loadstones  of  differ¬ 
ent  regions  being  different  in  direction,  as  also 
about  the  eastern  and  western  parts  of  a  load¬ 
stone.  Robert  Norman,  an  Englishman,  posits 
a  point  and  place  toward  which  the  magnet 
looks  (but  whereto  it  is)  not  drawn:  toward 
which  magnetized  iron,  according  to  him,  is 
collimated,  but  which  does  not  attract  it.  Fran- 
ciscus  Maurolycus  discusses  a  few  problems  re¬ 
garding  the  loadstone,  adopting  the  current 
opinions  of  others;  he  believes  that  the  varia¬ 
tion  is  caused  by  a  certain  magnetic  island 
mentioned  by  Olaus  Magnus.  Josephus  Costa, 
knowing  nothing  whatever  of  the  subject,  nev¬ 
ertheless  pours  out  empty  words  alDOut  the 
loadstone.  Livio  Sanuto,  in  his  Geography 
(written  in  Italian),  discourses  at  length  of  the 
prime  magnetic  meridian,  of  the  magnetic 
poles,  whether  they  are  terrestrial  or  celestial; 
treats  also  of  an  instrument  for  finding  the 
longitude;  but  as  he  does  not  understand  the 
nature  of  the  loadstone,  he  does  but  add  errors 
and  obscurities  to  his  otherwise  excellent  trea¬ 
tise.  Fortunius  Affaitatus  has  some  rather  silly 
philosophizing  about  attraction  of  iron  and 
the  turning  toward  the  poles.  Very  recently 
Baptista  Porta,  a  philosopher  of  no  ordinary 
note,  makes  the  seventh  book  of  his  Magia  nau 
uralis  a  very  storehouse  and  repertory  of  mag- 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


6 

netic  wonders;  but  he  knows  little  about  the 
movements  of  the  loadstone,  and  never  has 
seen  much  of  them;  much  of  what  he  has 
learned  about  its  obvious  properties,  either 
from  Messer  Paolo,  the  Venetian,  or  through 
his  own  studies,  is  not  very  accurately  noted 
and  observed;  the  book  is  full  of  most  errone¬ 
ous  experiments,  as  will  appear  in  fitting  place; 
still  I  hold  him  worthy  of  praise  for  that  he 
essayed  so  great  a  task  (even  as  he  has  essayed 
many  another  task,  and  successfully  too,  and 
with  no  inconsiderable  results),  and  that  he 
has  given  occasion  for  further  researches. 

All  these  philosophers,  our  predecessors,  dis¬ 
coursing  of  attraction  on  the  basis  of  a  few 
vague  and  indecisive  experiments  and  of  rea¬ 
sonings  from  the  recondite  causes  of  things; 
and  reckoning  among  the  causes  of  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  magnet,  a  region  of  the  sky,  celestial 
poles,  stars,  asterisms;  or  mountains,  cliffs,  va¬ 
cant  space,  atoms,  attractional  or  collimational 
regions  beyond  the  heavens,  and  other  like  un¬ 
proved  paradoxes,  are  world-wide  astray  from 
the  truth  and  are  blindly  wandering.  But  we  do 
not  propose  just  now  to  overturn  with  argu¬ 
ments  either  these  their  errors  and  impotent 
reasonings,  or  the  other  many  fables  about  the 
loadstone,  or  the  fairy-tales  of  mountebanks 
and  story-tellers;  as,  for  example,  the  questions 
raised  by  Franciscus  Rueus  about  the  load¬ 
stone,  whether  it  is  an  imposture  of  cacodae- 
mons;  or  the  assertion  that  a  loadstone  placed 
unawares  under  the  head  of  a  sleeping  woman 
drives  her  out  of  the  bed  if  she  be  an  adulteress; 
or  that  by  its  fume  and  vapour  the  loadstone  is 
of  use  to  thieves,  as  though  the  stone  were  by 
nature  given  to  promote  thefts;  or  that  it  with¬ 
draws  bolts  and  opens  locks,  as  Serapio  insane¬ 
ly  imagines;  or  that  iron  held  by  a  loadstone’s 
attraction,  being  placed  in  a  balance,  adds 
nought  to  the  weight  of  the  loadstone,  as 
though  the  weight  of  the  iron  were  absorbed  by 
the  virtue  of  the  loadstone;  or  that,  as  Serapio 
and  the  Moors  report,  there  are  in  Indian  seas 
certain  sharp-pointed  rocks  abounding  in  load¬ 
stone,  the  which  draw  every  nail  out  of  ships 
that  land  alongside  them  and  hold  the  vessels: 
this  story,  Olaus  Magnus  does  not  fail  to  recite: 
he  tells  of  mountains  in  the  North  possessing 
such  power  of  attraction  that  ships  have  to  be 
constructed  with  wooden  pegs,  so  that  as  they 
sail  by  the  magnetic  cliffs  there  be  no  iron 
nails  to  draw  out. 

Nor  will  we  take  the  trouble  to  refute  such 
stories  as  that  a  white  loadstone  may  be  used 
as  a  philter;  or  that,  as  Abohali  (Hali  Abbas) 


rashly  asserts,  when  held  in  the  hand  it  cures 
pains  of  the  feet  and  cramps;  or  that,  as  Pictor- 
ius  sings,  it  gives  one  favour  and  acceptance 
with  princes  or  makes  one  eloquent;  that,  as 
Albertus  Magnus  says,  there  are  two  species  of 
loadstones,  one  pointing  north,  the  other  south; 
or  that  iron  is  directed  toward  the  northern 
stars  by  a  force  communicated  from  the  polar 
stars,  even  as  plants,  like  the  sunflower,  follow 
the  sun;  or,  as  the  astrologer  Lucas  Gauricus 
held,  that  beneath  the  tail  of  Ursa  Major  is  a 
loadstone;  Lucas  further  assigns  the  loadstone 
(as  the  sardonyx  and  the  onyx)  to  the  planet 
Saturn,  but  also  to  Mars  (with  the  diamond, 
jasper,  and  ruby),  so  that  the  loadstone,  accord¬ 
ing  to  him,  is  ruled  by  two  planets;  further, 
Lucas  says  that  the  loadstone  belongs  to  the 
sign  Virgo;  and  with  a  veil  of  mathematical 
erudition  does  he  cover  many  similar  disgrace¬ 
ful  stupidities.  Gaudentius  Merula  advises  that 
on  a  loadstone  be  graven  the  image  of  a  bear, 
when  the  moon  looks  to  the  north,  so  that  be¬ 
ing  suspended  by  an  iron  thread  it  may  win 
the  virtue  of  the  celestial  Bear;  Ficinus  writes, 
and  Merula  copies,  that  the  loadstone  draws 
iron  and  makes  it  point  north,  because  it  is  of 
higher  order  than  iron  in  the  Bear.  Others  tell 
that  in  daytime  the  loadstone  possesses  the 
power  of  attracting  iron,  but  that  at  night  this 
power  is  feeble  or  rather  null;  Ruellius  writes 
that  the  loadstone’s  force,  when  failing  or 
dulled,  is  restored  by  the  blood  of  a  buck;  it 
has  been  said  that  a  buck’s  blood  frees  the  mag¬ 
net  from  the  diamond’s  sorcery,  giving  back  its 
lost  power  when  the  magnet  is  bathed  in  the 
blood — this,  because  of  the  variance  between 
that  blood  and  the  diamond;  Arnoldus  de  Vil- 
lanova  fancies  that  the  loadstone  frees  women 
from  witchcraft  and  puts  demons  to  flight; 
Marbodaeus,  a  Frenchman,  fugleman  of  vain 
imaginings,  says  that  it  can  make  husbands 
agreeable  to  wives  and  may  restore  wives  to 
their  husbands;  Caelius  Calcagninius  in  his 
Relationes  says  that  a  magnet  pickled  with  salt 
of  the  sucking-fish  has  the  power  of  picking 
up  a  piece  of  gold  from  the  bottom  of  the  deep¬ 
est  well.  In  such-like  follies  and  fables  do  phil¬ 
osophers  of  the  vulgar  sort  take  delight;  with 
such-like  do  they  cram  readers  a-hungered  for 
things  abstruse,  and  every  ignorant  gaper  for 
nonsense.  But  when  the  nature  of  the  loadstone 
shall  have  been  in  the  discourse  following  dis¬ 
closed,  and  shall  have  been  by  our  labours  and 
experiments  tested,  then  will  the  hidden  and 
recondite  but  real  causes  of  this  great  effect 
be  brought  forward,  proven,  shown,  demon- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


strated;  then,  too,  will  all  darkness  vanish; 
every  smallest  root  of  error,  being  plucked  up, 
will  be  cast  away  and  will  be  neglected;  and 
the  foundations  of  a  grand  magnetic  science 
being  laid  will  appear  anew,  so  that  high  intel¬ 
lects  may  no  more  be  deluded  by  vain  opin¬ 
ions. 

There  are  other  learned  men  who  on  long 
sea  voyages  have  observed  the  differences  of 
magnetic  variation;  as  that  most  accomplished 
scholar  Thomas  Hariot,  Robert  Hues,  Edward 
Wright,  Abraham  Kendall,  all  Englishmen; 
others  have  invented  and  published  magnetic 
instruments  and  ready  methods  of  observing, 
necessary  for  mariners  and  those  who  make 
long  voyages:  as  William  Borough  in  his  little 
work  the  Variation  of  the  Compass,  William 
Barlo  [Barlowe]  in  his  Supplement,  Robert 
Norman  in  his  New  Attractive — the  same  Rob¬ 
ert  Norman,  skilled  navigator  and  ingenious 
artificer,  who  first  discovered  the  dip  of  the 
magnetic  needle.  Many  others  I  pass  by  of 
purpose:  Frenchmen,  Germans,  and  Spaniards 
of  recent  time  who  in  their  writings,  mostly 
composed  in  their  vernacular  languages,  either 
misuse  the  teachings  of  others,  and  like  fur- 
bishers  send  forth  ancient  things  dressed  with 
new  names  and  tricked  in  an  apparel  of  new 
words  as  in  prostitutes’  finery;  or  who  publish 
things  not  even  worthy  of  record;  who,  pilfer¬ 
ing  some  book,  grasp  for  themselves  from  other 
authors,  and  go  a-begging  for  some  patron,  or 
go  a-fishing  among  the  inexperienced  and  the 
young  for  a  reputation;  who  seem  to  trans¬ 
mit  from  hand  to  hand,  as  it  were,  erroneous 
teachings  in  every  science  and  out  of  their 
own  store  now  and  again  to  add  somewhat 
of  error. 

CHAPTER  2.  The  Loadstone:  what  it  is: 
its  discovery 

This  stone  is  commonly  called  magnet,  either 
after  its  finder  (not  Pliny’s  mythical  herdsman 
— copied  from  Nicander — the  hobnails  of 
whose  brogues  and  the  point  of  whose  staff 
were  held  fast  in  a  magnetic  region  while  he 
was  pasturing  his  cattle),  or  after  the  district 
Magnesia  in  Macedonia,  abounding  in  load¬ 
stones;  or  after  the  City  of  Magnesia  in  Ionia 
of  Asia  Minor,  on  the  river  Maender;  hence 
Lucretius  writes,  ** Quern  Magneta  vocant  pat- 
rio  de  nomine  Grail,  Magnetum  quia  sit  patriis 
in  montibus  ortusN^  It  is  called  heracleus  from 

^  Which  the  Greeks  call  magnetes,  from  the  name 
of  its  country,  for  it  had  its  origin  in  the  native  hills 
of  the  Magnesians. 


the  city  Heraclea,  or  after  that  unconquerable 
hero  Hercules,  because  of  its  great  strength  and 
its  power  and  dominion  over  iron  which  is  the 
subduer  of  all  things;  it  is  also  called  sideritis, 
as  though  one  should  say  ferrarius  (ferrarius 
lapis — ironstone).  It  was  not  unknown  to  the 
earliest  writers,  whether  among  the  Greeks,  as 
Hippocrates  and  others,  or  (as  I  believe) 
among  the  Jews  and  the  Egyptians;  for  in  the 
most  ancient  iron  mines,  in  particular  the  most 
famous  mines  of  Asia,  the  loadstone,  brother 
uterine  of  iron,  was  oft  dug  out  in  company 
with  that  ore.  And  if  those  things  be  true 
which  are  told  about  the  people  of  China, 
neither  were  they  in  primitive  times  ignorant 
of  magnetic  experiments,  for  even  in  their 
country  are  seen  the  most  excellent  magnets  in 
the  world.  The  Egyptians,  as  Manetho  relates, 
give  it  the  name  of  “the  bone  of  Horus,”  call¬ 
ing  the  potency  that  presides  over  the  revolu¬ 
tion  of  the  sun  Horus,  as  the  Greeks  called  it 
Apollo.  But  later,  as  Plato  declares,  Euripides 
gave  to  it  the  name  magnet.  It  is  mentioned 
and  praised  by  Plato  in  the  Ion, hy  Nicander  of 
Colophon,  Theophrastus,  Dioscorides,  Pliny, 
Solinus,  Ptolemy,  Galen,  and  other  investiga¬ 
tors  of  nature.  But  considering  the  great  differ¬ 
ences  of  loadstones,  their  dissimilitude  in  hard¬ 
ness,  softness,  heaviness,  lightness,  density, 
firmness,  friableness:  in  colour  and  in  all  other 
qualities;  these  writers  have  not  handed  down 
any  sufficient  account  of  it.  The  history  of  the 
magnet  was  overlooked  by  them,  or,  if  written, 
was  incompletely  given,  because  in  olden  time 
objects  of  many  kinds  and  foreign  products 
never  before  seen  were  not  brought  in  by  trad¬ 
ers  and  mariners  as  they  are  wont  to  be  brought 
in  now,  when  all  manner  of  commodities — 
stones,  woods,  spices,  herbs,  metals,  and  metal¬ 
lic  wares — are  eagerly  sought  for  all  over  the 
earth;  neither  was  mining  carried  on  every¬ 
where  in  early  times  as  it  is  now. 

The  difference  between  loadstones  rests  on 
their  respective  power:  hence  one  loadstone  is 
male,another  female:  so  the  ancients  were  wont 
to  distinguish  many  objects  of  the  same  species. 
Pliny  quotes  from  Sotacus  five  kinds,  viz.:  the 
loadstones  of  Ethiopia,  Macedonia,  Boeotia, 
Troas,  and  Asia,  respectively,  which  were  the 
chief  sorts  known  to  the  ancients.  But  we  rec¬ 
ognize  as  many  kinds  as  there  are  in  the  whole 
world  regions  differing  in  soil;  for  in  every 
clime,  in  every  province,  in  all  kinds  of  land, 
either  the  loadstone  is  found  or  lies  unknown 
because  of  its  deep  site  or  its  inaccessible  situa¬ 
tion;  or,  because  of  its  weaker  and  less  potent 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


8 

virtues,  it  is  not  recognized  by  us  the  while  we 
see  it  and  touch  it. 

For  the  ancients,  the  differences  were  based 
on  the  colour:  The  magnets  from  Magnesia  in 
Macedonia  were  red  and  black,  those  from 
Boeotia  red  rather  than  black,  those  from  the 
Troad  black  without  strength,  those  from  Asi¬ 
an  Magnesia  white,  without  power  of  attract¬ 
ing  iron,  and  resembling  pumice.  A  strong 
loadstone  and  one  that  under  experiment  dem¬ 
onstrates  its  power  nowadays  generally  re¬ 
sembles  unpolished  iron  and  usually  is  found 
in  iron  mines:  sometimes  it  is  found  also  form¬ 
ing  a  continuous  vein  by  itself:  such  load¬ 
stones  are  imported  from  the  East  Indies, 
China,  and  Bengal,  and  they  are  of  the  colour 
of  iron,  or  of  a  dark  blood-red  or  liver  colour. 
These  are  the  most  excellent  and  often  are  of 
great  size  and  weight,  as  if  broken  off  a  great 
rock;  or  again  they  are  as  if  complete  in  them¬ 
selves.  Some  of  these,  though  they  may  weigh 
but  one  pound,  will  lift  four  ounces,  or  half  a 
pound,  or  even  an  entire  pound  of  iron.  In 
Arabia  are  found  red  loadstones  shaped  like 
tiles,  not  as  heavy  as  those  imported  from 
China,  yet  strong  and  good.  Rather  black  load¬ 
stones  are  found  in  Elba,  an  island  of  the 
Etrurian  sea;  with  these  occur  also  white  load¬ 
stones  like  those  from  the  mines  of  Caravaca  in 
Spain:  but  they  are  of  inferior  strength.  Black 
loadstones  also  are  found,  and  these,  too,  are 
rather  inferior  in  strength,  for  example,  those 
met  with  in  the  iron  mines  of  Norway  and  in 
the  coast  region  along  the  Cattegat.  Blue-black 
and  dusky-blue  loadstones  are  likewise  power¬ 
ful  and  highly  prized.  But  there  are  others  of  a 
lead  colour,  fissile  or  not  fissile,  that  can  be  split 
up  like  slate;  I  have  also  loadstones  resembling 
an  ashy-gray  marble,  mottled  like  gray  marble: 
these  take  a  high  polish.  In  Germany  are  load¬ 
stones  perforated  like  the  honeycomb;  these  are 
lighter  than  the  other  sorts,  yet  they  are  power¬ 
ful.  The  metallic  loadstones  are  those  which 
are  smelted  into  the  best  of  iron;  the  rest  are 
not  easily  smelted,  but  are  burnt. 

There  are  loadstones  that  are  very  heavy,  as 
there  are  others  very  light;  some  are  very  pow¬ 
erful  and  carry  masses  of  iron;  others  are 
weaker  and  less  powerful;  some  so  faint  and 
void  of  strength  that  they  can  hardly  attract 
ever  so  small  a  piece  of  iron,  nor  do  they  repel 
an  opposite  magnetized  body.  Others  are  firm 
and  tough,  nor  are  they  easy  to  work;  others 
are  friable.  Again,  some  are  dense  and  hard 
like  corundum,  or  light  or  soft  like  pumice; 
porous  or  solid;  smooth  and  uniform,  or  irreg¬ 


ular  and  corroded.  Now  hard  as  iron,  nay 
sometimes  harder  to  cut  or  to  file  than  iron; 
again  as  soft  as  clay.  Not  all  magnets  can  prop¬ 
erly  be  called  stones:  some  there  are  that  repre¬ 
sent  rather  rocks;  others  are  rather  metallic 
ores;  others  are  like  clods  of  earth.  So  do  they 
vary  and  differ  from  one  another,  and  some 
possess  more,  others  less,  of  the  peculiar  mag¬ 
netic  virtue.  For  they  differ  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  soil,  and  the  different  mixtures  of 
clays  and  humours;  according  to  the  lay  of  the 
land  and  the  decay  of  this  highest  substance 
born  to  earth:  decay  due  to  the  concurrence  of 
many  causes  and  the  never-ceasing  vicissitude 
of  rise  and  decline  and  the  mutations  of  bodies. 
Nor  is  this  stone,  endowed  as  it  is  with  such 
power,  a  rarity:  there  is  no  country  wherein  it 
may  not  be  found  in  one  form  or  other.  But 
were  men  to  seek  it  more  diligently  and  at 
greater  expense,  and  could  they  in  the  face  of 
difficulties  mine  it,  it  might  be  obtained  every¬ 
where,  as  later  we  will  prove.  In  many  regions 
are  found  and  are  now  opened  mines  of  power¬ 
ful  loadstones  unknown  to  ancient  authors,  in 
Germany,  for  example,  where  none  of  them 
ever  said  that  loadstones  were  mined;  and  yet 
since  the  time  within  the  memory  of  our  fa¬ 
thers  when  the  business  of  mining  began  there 
to  be  developed,  in  many  parts  of  Germany 
powerful  loadstones  of  great  virtues  have  been 
taken  out  of  the  earth,  as  in  the  Black  Forest 
near  Helceburg:  in  Mt.  Misena  not  far  from 
Schwarzberg;  some  of  considerable  strength 
from  the  region  betwixt  Schneeberg  and  Anna- 
berg  in  the  Joachimsthal,  as  was  observed  by 
Cordus;  also  near  Pela  in  Franconia;  in  Bo¬ 
hemia  from  the  iron  mines  near  Lesse;  and  in 
other  places,  as  we  are  informed  by  Georgius 
Agricola  and  other  men  learned  in  the  art  of 
mining. 

The  like  is  to  be  said  of  other  countries  in 
our  time;  for  this  stone,  famous  for  its  virtues, 
as  to-day  it  is  well  known  throughout  the 
world,  so  is  produced  in  every  land;  it  is,  so  to 
speak,  a  native  of  all  countries.  In  East  India, 
in  China,  in  Bengal,  along  the  banks  of  the  In¬ 
dus,  it  is  plentiful,  also  in  certain  marine  rocks; 
in  Persia,  too,  in  Arabia  and  the  isles  of  the  Red 
Sea;  in  many  parts  of  Ethiopia,  as  was  an¬ 
ciently  Zimiri,  mentioned  by  Pliny;  in  Asia 
Minor  around  Alexandria,  Boeotia,  Italy,  the 
island  Elba,  Barbary;  in  Spain,  still  in  many 
localities  as  of  old;  in  England  quite  recently  a 
vast  quantity  was  found  in  a  mine  owned  by 
a  gentleman,  named  Adrian  Gilbert,  as  also  in 
Devonshire  and  in  the  Forest  of  Dean;  in  Ire- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


land  too,  in  Norway,  Denmark,  Sweden,  Lap- 
land,  Livonia,  Prussia,  Poland,  Hungary.  For 
albeit  the  terrestrial  globe,  various  humours 
and  diversities  of  soils  being  produced  by  the 
perpetual  vicissitude  of  generaton  and  decay,  is 
ever  to  a  greater  and  greater  depth  beneath  the 
surface  in  the  lapse  of  ages  efflorescing,  and  is 
being  clothed  as  it  were  with  a  diversified  and 
perishable  covering  and  wrappage;  still  from 
its  interior  arises  in  many  places  a  progeny 
nigher  to  the  more  perfect  body,  and  makes  its 
way  into  the  sunlit  air.  But  the  weak  loadstones 
and  those  of  less  strength,  which  thus  have 
been  deprived  of  their  virtue  by  being  soaked 
with  humours,  are  visible  everyvvhere,  in  every 
country-side;  great  masses  of  these  are  to  be 
found  in  every  quarter,  without  tunnelling 
mountains  or  sinking  mines,  and  without  any 
of  the  toils  and  difficulties  of  mining,  as  we  will 
show  in  the  sequel.  These  we  will  so  manipu¬ 
late  according  to  a  simple  process  that  their 
languid  and  dormant  properties  shall  be  made 
manifest. 

The  magnet  is  called  by  the  Greeks  ^rjpaK- 
Xetos,  as  by  Theophrastus,  and  jJLayvTjTLs  and 
fiayvTjs,  as  by  Euripides,  quoted  by  Plato  in 
the  Ion;  by  Orpheus  it  is  called  also  payvijoca 
and  <n8r)pLT7js  {quasi  ironstone);  by  the  Latins 
it  is  called  magnes  Herculeus;  by  the  French 
aimant,  a  corruption  of  adamas;  by  the  Span¬ 
iards  piedramant;  by  the  Italians  calamita;  by 
the  English  loadstone  and  adamant  stone;  by 
the  Germans  magness  and  siegelstein.  Among 
the  English,  French,  and  Spaniards,  it  has  its 
common  name  from  adamas,  and  this  is  prob¬ 
ably  because  at  some  time  those  people  were 
led  astray  by  the  term  siderites,  which  was  ap¬ 
plied  both  to  the  diamond  and  the  magnet.  The 
magnet  is  called  (ndrjpLTTjs  because  of  its  prop¬ 
erty  of  attracting  iron;  and  the  diamond  is 
called  (7L8r}piTr}s  from  the  glistening  of  polished 
iron.  Aristotle  merely  names  the  loadstone  in 
his  work  On  the  Soul,  I.  [405^  19]:  "Eot/ceSe/cat 
GaXrJy  dsv  aTTopvepovevovaiy  KLvr)TiKbv  ri  rrjv 
\pvxvv  iirdXappaveLVy  hirep  tov  \iB6v  ipvxw 
€(j)r)  ex^iv,  oTc  tov  aLdrjpov  Kivel.  (Thales,  too, 
seems,  from  what  they  relate,  to  regard  the 
soul  as  somewhat  producing  motion,  for  he 
said  that  this  stone  has  a  soul,  since  it  moves 
iron.)  The  name  magnet  is  also  given  to  an¬ 
other  stone  differing  widely  from  the  siderites, 
and  having  the  look  of  silver:  in  its  nature  this 
stone  resembles  amianth  (asbestus),  and  in 
form  differs  from  that  inasmuch  as  it  consists, 
like  mica,  of  laminae;  the  Germans  call  it 
Katzensilber  and  Tal\. 


CHAPTER  3.  The  loadstone  possesses  parts  dif¬ 
fering  in  their  natural  powers,  and  has  poles 
conspicuous  for  their  properties 

The  many  qualities  exhibited  by  the  loadstone 
itself,  qualities  hitherto  recognized  yet  not  well 
investigated,  are  to  be  pointed  out  in  the  first 
place,  to  the  end  the  student  may  understand 
the  powers  of  the  loadstone  and  of  iron,  and 
not  be  confused  through  want  of  knowledge  at 
the  threshold  of  the  arguments  and  demon¬ 
strations.  In  the  heavens,  astronomers  give  to 
each  moving  sphere  two  poles;  thus  do  we  find 
two  natural  poles  of  excelling  importance  even 
in  our  terrestrial  globe,  constant  points  related 
to  the  movement  of  its  daily  revolution,  to  wit, 
one  pole  pointing  to  Arctos  (Ursa)  and  the 
north;  the  other  looking  toward  the  opposite 
part  of  the  heavens.  In  like  manner,  the  load¬ 
stone  has  from  nature  its  two  poles,  a  northern 
and  a  southern;  fixed,  definite  points  in  the 
stone,  which  are  the  primary  termini  of  the 
movements  and  effects,  and  the  limits  and  reg¬ 
ulators  of  the  several  actions  and  properties.  It 
is  to  be  understood,  however,  that  not  from  a 
mathematical  point  does  the  force  of  the  stone 
emanate,  but  from  the  parts  themselves;  and 
all  these  parts  in  the  whole — while  they  belong 
to  the  whole — the  nearer  they  are  to  the  poles 
of  the  stone  the  stronger  virtues  do  they  ac¬ 
quire  and  pour  out  on  other  bodies.  These 
poles  look  toward  the  poles  of  the  earth,  and 
move  toward  them,  and  are  subject  to  them. 
The  magnetic  poles  may  be  found  in  every 
loadstone,  whether  strong  and  powerful  (male, 
as  the  term  was  in  antiquity)  or  faint,  weak, 
and  female;  whether  its  shape  is  due  to  design 
or  to  chance,  and  whether  it  be  long,  or  flat,  or 
four-square,  or  three-cornered,  or  polished; 
whether  it  be  rough,  broken-off,  or  unpolished: 
the  loadstone  ever  has  and  ever  shows  its  poles. 
But  inasmuch  as  the  spherical  form,  which, 
too,  is  the  most  perfect,  agrees  best  with  the 
earth,  which  is  a  globe,  and  also  is  the  form 
best  suited  for  experimental  uses,  therefore  we 
propose  to  give  our  principal  demonstrations 
with  the  aid  of  a  globe-shaped  loadstone,  as  be¬ 
ing  the  best  and  the  most  fitting.  Take  then  a 
strong  loadstone,  solid,  of  convenient  size,  uni¬ 
form,  hard,  without  flaw;  on  a  lathe,  such  as  is 
used  in  turning  crystals  and  some  precious 
stones,  or  on  any  like  instrument  (as  the  nature 
and  toughness  of  the  stone  may  require,  for 
often  it  is  worked  only  with  difficulty),  give 
the  loadstone  the  form  of  a  ball.  The  stone  thus 
prepared  is  a  true  homogeneous  offspring  of 
the  earth  and  is  of  the  same  shape,  having  got 


10  WILLIAM 

from  art  the  orbicular  form  that  nature  in  the 
beginning  gave  to  the  earth,  the  common 
mother;  and  it  is  a  natural  little  body  endowed 
with  a  multitude  of  properties  whereby  many 
abstruse  and  unheeded  truths  of  philosophy, 
hid  in  deplorable  darkness,  may  be  more  read¬ 
ily  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  mankind.  To 
this  round  stone  we  give  the  name  fjLiKpoyrj 
[microge]  or  terrella  [earthkin,  little  earth]. 
To  find,  then,  poles  answering  to  the  earth’s 
poles,  take  in  your  hand  the  round  stone,  and 
lay  on  it  a  needle  or  a  piece  of  iron  wire;  the 
ends  of  the  wire  move  round  their  middle 
point,  and  suddenly  come  to  a  standstill.  Now, 
with  ochre  or  with  chalk,  mark  where  the  wire 
lies  still  and  sticks.  Then  move  the  middle  or 
centre  of  the  wire  to  another  spot,  and  so  to  a 
third  and  a  fourth,  always  marking  the  stone 
along  the  length  of  the  wire  where  it  stands 
still:  the  lines  so  marked  will  exhibit  meridian 
circles,  or  circles  like  meridians  on  the  stone  or 
terrella;  and  manifestly  they  will  all  come  to¬ 
gether  at  the  poles  of  the  stone.  The  circles  be¬ 
ing  continued  in  this  way,  the  poles  appear, 
both  the  north  and  the  south,  and  betwixt 
these,  midway,  we  may  draw  a  large  circle  for 
an  equator,  as  is  done  by  the  astronomer  in  the 
heavens  and  on  his  spheres  and  by  the  geogra¬ 
pher  on  the  terrestrial  globe;  for  the  line  so 
drawn  on  this  our  terrella  is  also  of  much 
utility  in  our  demonstrations  and  our  magnetic 
experiments.  Poles  are  also  found  in  the  round 
stone,  in  a  versorium,  in  a  piece  of  iron  touched 


with  a  loadstone  and  resting  on  a  needle  or 
point  (attached  at  its  base  to  the  terrella),  so 
that  it  can  freely  revolve,  as  in  the  figure. 

On  top  of  the  stone  AB  is  set  the  versorium 
in  such  a  way  that  its  pointer  may  remain  in 
equilibrium:  mark  with  chalk  the  direction  of 
the  pointer  when  at  rest.  Then  move  the  in¬ 
strument  to  another  spot  and  again  mark  the 
direction  in  which  the  pointer  looks;  repeat 


GILBERT 

this  many  times  at  many  different  points  and 
you  will,  from  the  convergence  of  the  lines  of 
direction,  find  one  pole  at  the  point  A,  the 
other  at  B,  A  pointer  also  indicates  the  true 
pole  if  brought  near  to  the  stone,  for  it  eagerly 
faces  the  stone  at  right  angles,  and  seeks  the 
pole  itself  direct  and  turns  on  its  axis  in  a  right 
line  toward  the  centre  of  the  stone.  Thus  the 
pointer  D  regards  A  and  F,  the  pole  and  the 
centre,  but  the  pointer  E  looks  not  straight 
either  toward  the  pole  A  or  the  centre  F.  A  bit 
of  fine  iron  wire  as  long  as  a  barley-corn  is 
laid  on  the  stone  and  is  moved  over  the  zones 
and  the  surface  of  the  stone  till  it  stands  per¬ 
pendicularly  erect;  for  at  the  poles,  whether 
N.  or  S.,  it  stands  erect;  but  the  farther  it  is 
from  the  poles  (towards  the  equator)  the  more 
it  inclines.  The  poles  thus  found,  you  are  to 
mark  with  a  sharp  file  or  a  gimlet. 

CHAPTER  4.  Which  pole  is  the  north:  how  the 
north  pole  is  distinguished  jrom  the  south  pole 
One  of  the  earth’s  poles  is  turned  toward  Cyno- 
sura  and  steadily  regards  a  fixed  point  in  the 
heavens  (save  that  it  is  unmoved  by  the  preces¬ 
sion  of  the  fixed  stars  in  longitude,  which 
movement  we  recognize  in  the  earth,  as  we 
shall  later  show);  the  other  pole  is  turned 
toward  the  opposite  aspect  of  the  heavens,  an 
aspect  unknown  to  the  ancients,  but  which  is 
adorned  with  a  multitude  of  stars,  and  is  itself 
a  striking  spectacle  for  those  who  make  long 
voyages.  So,  too,  the  loadstone  possesses  the 
virtue  and  power  of  directing  itself  toward  the 
north  and  the  south  (the  earth  itself  co-operat¬ 
ing  and  giving  to  it  that  power)  according  to 
the  conformation  of  nature,  which  adjusts  the 
movements  of  the  stone  to  its  true  locations. 

In  this  manner  it  is  demonstrated:  put  the 
magnetic  stone  (after  you  have  found  the 
poles)  in  a  round  wooden  vessel — a  bowl  or  a 
dish;  then  put  the  vessel  holding  the  magnet 
(like  a  boat  with  a  sailor  in  it)  in  a  tub  of 
water  or  a  cistern  where  it  may  float  freely  in 
the  middle  without  touching  the  rim,  and 
where  the  air  is  not  stirred  by  winds  (currents) 
which  might  interfere  with  the  natural  move¬ 
ment  of  the  stone:  there  the  stone,  as  if  in  a 
boat  floating  in  the  middle  of  an  unruffled  sur¬ 
face  of  still  water,  will  straightway  set  itself, 
and  the  vessel  containing  it  in  motion,  and  will 
turn  in  a  circle  till  its  south  pole  shall  face 
north  and  its  north  pole,  south.  For,  from  a 
contrary  position,  it  returns  to  the  poles;  and 
though  with  its  first  too  strong  impetus  it 
passes  beyond,  still,  as  it  comes  back  again  and 


II 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


again,  at  last  it  rests  at  the  poles  or  in  the 
meridian  (save  that,  according  to  the  place,  it 
diverges  a  very  little  from  those  points,  or  from 
the  meridional  line,  the  cause  of  which  we  will 
define  later).  As  often  as  you  move  it  out  of 
its  place,  so  often,  by  reason  of  the  extraordi¬ 
nary  power  with  which  nature  has  endowed  it, 
does  it  seek  again  its  fixed  and  determinate 
points.  Nor  does  this  occur  only  when  the  poles 
of  the  loadstone  in  the  float  are  made  to  lie 
evenly  in  the  plane  of  the  horizon;  it  takes 
place  also  even  though  one  pole,  whether  north 
or  south,  be  raised  or  depressed  lo,  20,  30,  40, 
or  80  degrees  from  the  plane  of  the  horizon; 
you  shall  see  the  north  part  of  the  stone  seek 
the  south,  and  the  south  part  the  north;  so 
that  if  the  pole  of  the  stone  be  but  one  degree 
from  the  zenith  and  the  centre  of  the  heavens, 
the  whole  stone  revolves  until  the  pole  finds  its 
own  place;  and  though  the  pole  does  not  point 
exactly  to  its  seat,  yet  it  will  incline  toward  it, 
and  will  come  to  rest  in  the  meridian  of  its 
true  direction.  And  it  moves  with  the  same  im¬ 
petus  whether  the  north  pole  be  directed 
toward  the  upper  heavens,  or  whether  the 
south  pole  be  raised  above  the  horizon.  Yet  it 
must  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  though 
there  are  manifold  differences  between  stones, 
and  one  far  surpasses  another  in  virtue  and 
efficiency,  still  all  loadstones  have  the  same  lim¬ 
its  and  turn  to  the  same  points.  Further,  it  is 
to  be  remembered  that  all  who  hitherto  have 
written  about  the  poles  of  the  loadstone,  all  in¬ 
strument-makers,  and  navigators,  are  egregi- 
ously  mistaken  in  taking  for  the  north  pole  of 
the  loadstone  the  part  of  the  stone  that  inclines 
to  the  north,  and  for  the  south  pole  the  part 
that  looks  to  the  south:  this  we  will  hereafter 
prove  to  be  an  error.  So  ill-cultivated  is  the 
whole  philosophy  of  the  magnet  still,  even  as 
regards  its  elementary  principles. 

CHAPTER  5.  One  loadstone  appears  to  attract 
another  in  the  natural  position;  but  in  the  op¬ 
posite  position  repels  it  and  brings  it  to  rights 
First  we  have  to  describe  in  popular  language 
the  potent  and  familiar  properties  of  the  stone; 
afterward,  very  many  subtile  properties,  as  yet 
recondite  and  unknown,  being  involved  in  ob¬ 
scurities,  are  to  be  unfolded;  and  the  causes  of 
all  these  (nature’s  secrets  being  unlocked)  are 
in  their  place  to  be  demonstrated  in  fitting 
words  and  with  the  aid  of  apparatus.  The  fact 
is  trite  and  familiar,  that  the  loadstone  attracts 
iron;  in  the  same  way,  too,  one  loadstone  at¬ 
tracts  another.  Take  the  stone  on  which  you 


have  designated  the  poles,  N.  and  5.,  and  put 
it  in  its  vessel  so  that  it  may  float;  let  the  poles 
lie  just  in  the  plane  of  the  horizon,  or  at  least 
in  a  plane  not  very  oblique  to  it;  take  in  your 
hand  another  stone  the  poles  of  which  are  also 
known,  and  hold  it  so  that  its  south  pole  shall 
lie  toward  the  north  pole  of  the  floating  stone, 
and  near  it  alongside;  the  floating  loadstone 
will  straightway  follow  the  other  (provided  it 
be  within  the  range  and  dominion  of  its  pow¬ 
ers),  nor  does  it  cease  to  move  nor  does  it  quit 
the  other  till  it  clings  to  it,  unless,  by  moving 
your  hand  away,  you  manage  skilfully  to  pre¬ 
vent  the  conjunction.  In  like  manner,  if  you 
oppose  the  north  pole  of  the  stone  in  your  hand 
to  the  south  pole  of  the  floating  one,  they  come 
together  and  follow  each  other.  For  opposite 
poles  attract  opposite  poles.  But,  now,  if  in  the 
same  way  you  present  N.  to  N.  or  S.  to  S.,  one 
stone  repels  the  other;  and  as  though  a  helms¬ 
man  were  bearing  on  the  rudder  it  is  off  like  a 
vessel  making  all  sail,  nor  stands  nor  stays  as 
long  as  the  other  stone  pursues.  One  stone  also 
will  range  the  other,  turn  the  other  around, 
bring  it  to  right  about  and  make  it  come  to 
agreement  with  itself.  But  when  the  two  come 
together  and  are  conjoined  in  nature’s  order, 
they  cohere  firmly.  For  example,  if  you  present 
the  north  pole  of  the  stone  in  your  hand  to  the 
Tropic  of  Capricorn  (for  so  we  may  distin¬ 


guish  with  mathematical  circles  the  round 
stone,  or  terrella,  just  as  we  do  the  globe  itself) 
or  to  any  point  between  the  equator  and  the 
south  pole:  immediately  the  floating  stone 
turns  round  and  so  places  itself  that  its  south 
pole  touches  the  north  pole  of  the  other  and  is 
most  closely  joined  to  it.  In  the  same  way  you 
will  get  like  effect  at  the  other  side  of  the  equa¬ 
tor  by  presenting  pole  to  pole;  and  thus  by  art 
and  contrivance  we  exhibit  attraction  and  re¬ 
pulsion,  and  motion  in  a  circle  toward  the  con¬ 
cordant  position,  and  the  same  movements  to 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


12 

avoid  hostile  meetings.  Furthermore,  in  one 
same  stone  we  are  thus  able  to  demonstrate  all 
this:  but  also  we  are  able  to  show  how  the  self¬ 
same  part  of  one  stone  may  by  division  become 
either  north  or  south.  Take  the  oblong  stone  ad 
in  which  a  is  the  north  pole  and  d  the  south. 
Cut  the  stone  in  two  equal  parts,  and  put  part 
a  in  a  vessel  and  let  it  float  in  water. 

You  will  find  that  a,  the  north  point,  will 
turn  to  the  south  as  before;  and  in  like  manner 
the  point  d  will  move  to  the  north,  in  the  di¬ 
vided  stone,  as  before  division.  But  b  and  c, 
before  connected,  now  separated  from  each 
other,  are  not  what  they  were  before:  b  is  now 
south  while  c  is  north,  b  attracts  c,  longing 
for  union  and  for  restoration  of  the  original 
continuity.  They  are  two  stones  made  out  of 
one,  and  on  that  account  the  c  of  one  turning 
toward  the  b  of  the  other,  they  are  mutually 
attracted,  and,  being  freed  from  all  impedi¬ 
ments  and  from  their  own  weight,  borne  as 
they  are  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  they  come 
together  and  into  conjunction.  But  if  you  bring 
the  part  or  point  ^  up  to  r  of  the  other,  they 
repel  one  another  and  turn  away;  for  by  such  a 
position  of  the  parts  nature  is  crossed  and  the 
form  of  the  stone  is  perverted:  but  nature  ob¬ 
serves  strictly  the  laws  it  has  imposed  upon 
bodies:  hence  the  flight  of  one  part  from  the 
undue  position  of  the  other,  and  hence  the  dis¬ 
cord  unless  everything  is  arranged  exactly  ac¬ 
cording  to  nature.  And  nature  will  not  suffer 
an  unjust  and  inequitable  peace,  or  an  unjust 
and  inequitable  peace  and  agreement,  but 
makes  war  and  employs  force  to  make  bodies 
acquiesce  fairly  and  justly.  Hence,  when  right¬ 
ly  arranged,  the  parts  attract  each  other,  i.e., 
both  stones,  the  weaker  and  the  stronger,  come 
together  and  with  all  their  might  tend  to 
union:  a  fact  manifest  in  all  loadstones,  and 
not,  as  Pliny  supposed,  only  in  those  from  Ethi¬ 
opia.  The  Ethiopic  stones  if  strong,  and  those 
brought  from  China,  which  are  all  powerful 
stones,  show  the  effect  most  quickly  and  most 
plainly,  attract  with  most  force  in  the  parts 
nighest  the  pole,  and  keep  turning  till  pole 
looks  straight  on  pole. 

The  pole  of  a  stone  has  strongest  attraction 
for  that  part  of  another  stone  which  answers  to 
it  (the  adverse,  as  it  is  called);  e,g,,  the  north 
pole  of  one  has  strongest  attraction  for,  has  the 
most  vigorous  pull  on,  the  south  part  of  an¬ 
other:  so  too  it  attracts  iron  more  powerfully, 
and  iron  clings  to  it  more  firmly,  whether  pre¬ 
viously  magnetized  or  not.  Thus  it  has  been 
settled  by  nature,  not  without  reason,  that  the 


parts  nigher  the  pole  shall  have  the  greatest 
attractive  force;  and  that  in  the  pole  itself  shall 
be  the  seat,  the  throne  as  it  were,  of  a  high  and 
splendid  power;  and  that  magnetic  bodies 
brought  near  thereto  shall  be  attracted  most 
powerfully  and  relinquished  with  most  reluc¬ 
tance.  So,  too,  the  poles  are  readiest  to  spurn 
and  drive  away  what  is  presented  to  them 
amiss,  and  what  is  inconformable  and  foreign. 

CHAPTER  6.  The  loadstone  attracts  iron  ore 
as  well  as  the  smelted  metal 
The  most  potent  virtue  of  the  loadstone  and 
the  one  valued  by  the  ancients  is  the  attraction 
for  iron;  for  Plato  mentions  that  the  magnet, 
so  called  hy  Euripides,  draws  to  itself  iron,  and 
not  only  attracts  iron  rings  but  also  endows 
them  with  the  power  of  doing  as  the  stone  it¬ 
self,  to  wit,  of  attracting  other  rings,  and  that 
thus  sometimes  a  long  chain  of  iron  objects,  as 
nails,  or  rings,  is  made,  the  several  parts  hang¬ 
ing  from  one  another.  The  best  iron  (such  as 
that  which  from  its  uses  is  called  acies,  and 
from  the  country  of  the  Chalybes,  chalybs)  is 
most  readily  and  strongly  attracted  by  a  good 
magnet^;  but  inferior  iron,  iron  that  is  im¬ 
pure,  rusty,  not  well  purged  of  dross,  and  not 
worked  over  in  the  second  furnace  is  attracted 
more  weakly;  and  any  iron  is  more  faintly  at¬ 
tracted  if  covered  and  smeared  with  thick, 
greasy,  tenacious  fluids.  The  loadstone  also  at¬ 
tracts  iron  ores — rich  ores  and  those  of  the  col¬ 
our  of  iron;  poor  ores  and  those  without  much 
pure  metal  it  does  not  attract  unless  they  re¬ 
ceive  special  treatment.  The  loadstone  loses 
some  part  of  its  attractive  power,  and,  as  it 
were,  enters  on  the  decline  of  old  age,  if  it  be 
too  long  exposed  in  open  air  and  not  kept  in  a 
case,  with  a  covering  of  iron  filings  or  iron 
scales:  hence  it  must  be  packed  in  such  ma¬ 
terial.  Nothing  withstands  this  unimpairable 
virtue,  except  what  destroys  the  form  of  the 
body  or  corrodes  it;  no,  not  a  thousand  adam¬ 
ants  made  into  one.  Nor  do  I  believe  in  the 
theamedes,  or  that  it  has  a  power  the  opposite 
of  the  loadstone’s,  albeit  Pliny,  that  eminent 
author  and  best  of  compilers  (for  he  has 
handed  down  to  posterity  the  observations  and 
discoveries  of  others  and  not  always  or  mainly 
his  own),  copies  out  of  other  writers  the  thea¬ 
medes  fable,  now  from  repetition  become  a 
familiar  story  among  the  moderns.  The  story 
is  that  in  India  are  two  mountains  near  the 
river  Indus,  and  that  one  of  them — consisting 
^  See  Aristotle’s  reference  to  the  iron  of  the  Chaly¬ 
bes.  See  Book  i,  Chap.  8,  p.  15,  below. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


of  loadstone — possesses  the  power  of  holding 
everything  containing  iron;  while  the  other, 
consisting  of  theamedes,  repels  the  same. 
Hence  if  you  should  have  iron  nails  in  the  soles 
of  your  shoes,  it  would  be  impossible  to  lift 
your  foot  if  you  were  standing  on  one  of  the 
mountains,  and  impossible  to  stand  on  the 
other  at  all.  Albertus  Magnus  writes  that  in  his 
time  a  loadstone  was  found  that  on  one  side 
drew  iron  to  itself  and  on  the  other  side  re¬ 
pelled  it.  But  Albertus’s  observation  was  faulty, 
for  every  loadstone  attracts  on  one  side  mag¬ 
netized  iron,  on  the  other  repels,  and  attracts 
magnetized  iron  more  powerfully  than  non- 
magnetized. 

CHAPTER  7.  What  iron  is;  what  its  matter; 
its  use 

Having  declared  the  origin  and  nature  of  the 
loadstone,  we  hold  it  needful  first  to  give  the 
history  of  iron  also,  and  to  point  out  properties 
of  iron  as  yet  not  known,  before  we  come  to 
the  explication  of  difficulties  connected  with 
the  loadstone,  and  to  the  demonstrations;  be¬ 
fore  we  come  to  the  consideration  of  its  uniting 
and  according  with  iron.  Iron  is,  by  all,  classed 
among  metals;  it  is  of  bluish  colour,  very  hard, 
grows  red  hot  before  fusion,  is  very  hard  to 
fuse,  spreads  under  the  hammer,  and  is  reso¬ 
nant.  Chemists  say  that,  if  fixed  earthy  sulphur 
be  combined  with  fixed  earthy  mercury  and 
these  two  bodies  present  not  a  pure  white  but 
a  bluish-white  colour,  if  the  sulphur  prevail, 
iron  results.  For  those  hard  masters  of  the  met¬ 
als,  who  in  many  various  processes  put  them 
to  the  torture,  by  crushing,  calcining,  smelting, 
subliming,  precipitating,  distinguish  this,  on 
account  both  of  the  earthy  sulphur  and  the 
earthy  mercury,  as  more  truly  the  child  of 
earth  than  any  other  metal;  for  neither  gold, 
nor  silver,  nor  lead,  nor  tin,  nor  even  copper  do 
they  hold  to  be  so  earthy;  and  therefore  it  is 
treated  only  in  the  hottest  furnaces  with  the 
help  of  bellows;  and  when  thus  smelted  if  it 
becomes  hard  again  it  cannot  be  smelted  once 
more  without  great  labour;  and  its  slag  can  be 
fused  only  with  the  utmost  difficulty.  It  is  the 
hardest  of  metals,  subduing  and  breaking 
them  all,  because  of  the  strong  concretion  of 
the  more  earthy  substance. 

Hence  we  shall  better  understand  what  iron 
is  when  we  shall  have  developed,  in  a  way  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  of  those  who  have  gone  before 
us,  what  are  the  causes  and  the  matter  of  met¬ 
als.  Aristotle  supposes  their  matter  to  be  an  ex¬ 
halation.  The  chemists  in  chorus  (unison) 


declare  that  sulphur  and  quicksilver  are  the 
prime  elements.  Gilgil,  the  Mauretanian,  holds 
the  prime  element  to  be  ash  moistened  with 
water;  Georgius  Agricola,  a  mixture  of  water 
with  earth;  and  his  opinion  differs  nought 
from  Gilgil’s  thesis.  But  our  opinion  is  that 
metals  have  their  origin  and  do  effloresce  in  the 
uppermost  parts  of  the  globe,  each  distinct  by 
its  form,  as  do  many  other  minerals  and  all  the 
bodies  around  us.  The  globe  of  the  earth  is  not 
made  of  ash  or  of  inert  dust.  Nor  is  fresh  water 
an  element,  but  only  a  less  complex  consistence 
of  the  earth’s  evaporated  fluids.  Unctuous  bod¬ 
ies  corpora) water  void  of  prop¬ 

erties,  quicksilver,  sulphur:  these  are  not  the 
principles  of  the  metals:  they  are  results  of  an¬ 
other  natural  process;  nor  have  they  a  place 
now  or  have  they  had  ever,  in  the  process  of 
producing  metals.  The  earth  gives  forth  sundry 
humours,  not  produced  from  water  nor  from 
dry  earth,  nor  from  mixtures  of  these,  but  from 
the  matter  of  the  earth  itself:  these  are  not  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  opposite  qualities  or  substances. 
Nor  is  the  earth  a  simple  substance,  as  the 
Peripatetics  imagine.  The  humours  come  from 
sublimed  vapours  that  have  their  origin  in  the 
bowels  of  the  earth. 

And  all  waters  are  extractions  from  the  earth 
and  exudations,  as  it  were.  Therefore  Aristotle 
is  partly  in  the  right  when  he  says  that  the  ex¬ 
halation  which  condenses  in  the  earth’s  veins  is 
the  prime  matter  of  metals:  for  exhalations  are 
condensed  in  situations  less  warm  than  the 
place  of  their  origin,  and  owing  to  the  structure 
of  lands  and  mountains,  they  are  in  due  time 
condensed,  as  it  were  in  wombs,  and  changed 
into  metals.  But  they  do  not  of  themselves 
alone  constitute  the  veins  of  ore;  only  they 
flow  into  and  coalesce  with  solider  matter  and 
form  metals. 

When,  therefore,  this  concreted  matter  has 
settled  in  more  temperate  cavities,  in  these 
moderately  warm  spaces  it  takes  shape,  just  as 
in  the  warm  uterus  the  seed  or  the  embryo 
grows.  Sometimes  the  exhalation  coalesces  only 
with  matter  homogeneous  throughout,  and 
hence  some  metals  are  now  and  then  but  not 
often  obtained  pure  and  not  needing  to  be 
smelted.  But  other  exhalations,  being  mixed 
with  foreign  earths,  must  be  smelted;  and  thus 
are  treated  the  ores  of  all  metals,  which  are 
freed  from  all  their  dross  by  the  action  of  fire; 
when  smelted  into  the  metallic  state  they  are 
fluid  and  then  are  freed  from  earthly  impur¬ 
ities  but  not  from  the  true  substance  of  the 
earth.  But  that  there  is  gold,  or  silver,  or  cop- 


14  WILLIAxM 

per,  or  that  any  other  metals  exist,  does  not 
happen  from  any  quantitas  or  proportion  of 
matter  nor  by  any  specific  virtues  of  matter,  as 
the  chemists  fondly  imagine;  but  it  happens 
when,  earth  cavities  and  the  conformation  of 
the  ground  concurring  with  the  fit  matter, 
those  metals  take  from  universal  nature  the 
forms  by  which  they  are  perfected,  just  as  in 
the  case  of  all  other  minerals,  ail  plants  and  all 
animals:  else  the  kinds  of  metals  would  be 
vague  and  undefined;  in  fact,  the  varieties  are 
very  few,  hardly  ten  in  number. 

But  why  nature  should  be  so  grudging  in 
the  number  of  metals,  or  why  there  should  be 
even  so  many  metals  as  are  recognized  by  man, 
were  not  easy  to  explain,  though  simpletons 
and  raving  astrologers  refer  to  the  several 
planets  their  respective  metals.  But  neither  do 
the  planets  agree  with  the  metals  nor  the  met¬ 
als  with  the  planets,  either  in  number  or  in 
properties.  For  what  is  common  between  Mars 
and  iron,  save  that,  like  many  other  imple¬ 
ments,  swords  and  artillery  are  made  of  iron.^ 
What  has  copper  to  do  with  Venus  Or  how 
does  tin,  or  zinc,  relate  to  Jupiter?  These  were 
better  dedicated  to  Venus.  But  a  truce  to  old 
wives’  talk.  Thus  exhalations  are  the  remote 
cause  of  the  generation  of  metals;  the  proxi¬ 
mate  cause  is  the  fluid  from  the  exhalations: 
like  the  blood  and  the  semen  in  the  generation 
of  animals.  But  these  exhalations  and  the 
fluids  produced  from  them  enter  bodies  often 
and  change  them  into  marchasites^  and  they 
pass  into  veins  (we  find  many  instances  of  tim¬ 
ber  so  transformed),  into  appropriate  matrices 
within  bodies,  and  these  metals  are  formed; 
oftenest  they  enter  the  more  interior  and  more 
homogeneous  matter  of  the  globe,  and  in  time 
there  results  a  vein  of  iron,  or  loadstone  is  pro¬ 
duced,  which  is  nothing  but  a  noble  iron  ore; 
and  for  this  reason  and  also  on  account  of  its 
matter  being  quite  peculiar  and  distinct  from 
that  of  all  other  metals,  nature  very  seldom  or 
never  mingles  with  iron  any  other  metal, 
though  the  other  metals  are  very  often  com¬ 
mingled  in  some  small  proportion  and  are  pro¬ 
duced  together.  Now,  when  these  exhalations 
or  fluids  happen  to  meet  efflorescences  altered 
from  the  homogeneous  matter  of  the  globe — 
sundry  precipitates,  and  salts,  in  suitable  mat¬ 
rices  (operant  forms) — the  other  metals  are 
produced  (a  specificating  nature  operating  in 
that  place).  For  within  the  globe  are  hidden 
the  principles  of  metals  and  stones,  as  at  the 
earth’s  surface  are  hidden  the  principles  of 

^The  crystallized  form  of  iron  pyrites. 


GILBERT 

herbs  and  plants.  And  earth  dug  from  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  a  deep  pit,  where  there  appears  to  be 
no  chance  of  any  seed  being  formed,  produces, 
if  strewn  on  the  top  of  a  very  high  tower,  green 
herbage  and  unbidden  grasses,  the  sun  and  the 
sky  brooding  over  earth;  the  earth  regions  pro¬ 
duce  those  things  which  in  each  are  spontane¬ 
ous;  each  region  produces  its  own  peculiar 
herbs  and  plants,  its  own  metals. 

Do  you  not  see  how  Tmolus  sends  fragrant 
saffron,  India  its  ivory,  the  Sabaens  their  frankin¬ 
cense,  the  naked  Chalybes  iron,  Pontus  the  malo¬ 
dorous  castor,  Epirus  the  mares  that  have  won  at 
Olympia?  (Virgil,  Georgies,  [i.56-59].) 

What  the  chemists  (as  Geber  and  others) 
call  the  fixed  earthy  sulphur  in  iron  is  nothing 
else  but  the  homogenic  matter  of  the  globe 
held  together  by  its  own  humour,  hardened  by 
a  second  humour:  with  a  minute  quantity  of 
earth-substance  not  lacking  humour  is  intro¬ 
duced  the  metallic  humour.  Hence  it  is  said 
very  incorrectly  by  many  authors  that  in  gold 
is  pure  earth,  in  iron  impure;  as  though  nat¬ 
ural  earth  and  the  globe  itself  were  become  in 
some  incomprehensible  sense  impure.  In  iron, 
especially  in  best  iron,  is  earth  in  its  true  and 
genuine  nature.  In  the  other  metals  is  not  so 
much  earth  as,  instead  of  earth  and  precipitate, 
condensed  and  (so  to  speak)  fixed  salts,  which 
are  efflorescences  of  the  earth,  and  which  also 
differ  in  firmness  and  consistence.  In  mines 
they  ascend  in  great  volume,  with  double  hu¬ 
mour  from  the  exhalations;  in  the  subterra¬ 
nean  spaces  they  are  consolidated  into  metallic 
ores;  so  too  they  are  produced  together,  and  in 
virtue  of  their  place  and  of  the  surrounding 
bodies,  they  acquire,  in  natural  matrices,  their 
specific  forms. 

Of  the  various  bodily  constitutions  of  load¬ 
stones,  their  different  substances,  colours,  and 
properties,  we  have  spoken  before:  but  now  af¬ 
ter  having  declared  the  cause  and  origin  of 
metals,  the  matter  of  iron,  not  in  the  smelted 
metal  but  in  the  ore  from  which  that  is  ob¬ 
tained  by  smelting,  has  to  be  examined.  Iron, 
that  from  its  colour  appears  pure,  is  found  in 
the  earth;  yet  it  is  not  exactly  metallic  iron,  not 
quite  suitable  for  the  different  uses  of  iron. 
Sometimes  it  is  found  covered  with  a  white 
moss-like  substance,  or  with  a  coating  of  other 
stones. 

Such  ore  is  often  seen  in  the  sands  of  rivers: 
such  is  the  ore  from  Noricum  (the  region  south 
of  the  Danube,  watered  by  the  Inn  and  the 
Drave;  mostly  comprised  in  the  modern  Aus- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


tria).  Iron  ore,  nearly  pure,  is  often  mined  in 
Ireland:  from  this  the  smith,  without  the  labor 
of  the  furnace,  forges  in  his  shop  iron  imple¬ 
ments.  From  an  ore  of  liver  colour  is  very  often 
obtained  in  France  an  iron  with  bright  scales 
{hract€c£)\  such  iron  is  made  in  England 
without  the  scales;  carpenters  use  it  instead  of 
chalk.  In  Sussex,  in  England,  is  a  rich  ore  of 
dark,  and  one  of  pale  ashy  colour;  both  of  these 
ores  when  made  red  hot  for  some  time,  or  when 
kept  in  a  moderate  fire,  take  the  colour  of  liver: 
in  Sussex  also  is  a  dark-coloured  ore  in  square 
masses,  with  a  black  rind  of  harder  material. 
The  liver-like  ore  is  often  mixed  with  other 
stones  in  various  ways,  as  also  with  perfect 
loadstone,  which  yields  the  best  iron.  There  is 
likewise  rust-coloured  ore,  ore  of  a  lead  colour 
mixed  with  black,  simply  black,  or  black  mixed 
with  cobalt;  there  is  also  an  ore  with  admixture 
of  pyrites  or  sterile  plumbago.  One  kind  of  ore 
resembles  jet,  another  the  precious  stone  hcema- 
tiles.  The  stone  smiris  (emery;  corundum) 
used  by  workers  in  glass  for  glass-cutting  and 
called  by  the  English  emerelstone  and  by  the 
Germans  stneargel,  is  of  iron,  albeit  iron  is 
smelted  from  it  with  difficulty;  it  attracts  an 
unmagnetized  needle.  It  is  often  found  in  deep 
silver  and  iron  mines.  Thomas  Erastus  tells  of 
having  been  informed  by  a  certain  learned 
man,  of  iron  ores,  in  colour  resembling  metallic 
iron,  but  quite  soft  and  greasy,  capable  of  being 
moulded  with  the  fingers  like  butter;  we  have 
seen  ores  of  about  the  same  kind  that  were 
found  in  England:  they  resemble  Spanish  soap. 
Besides  the  numberless  forms  of  stony  ores, 
there  is  a  substance  like  iron  rust  deposited 
from  ferriferous  water:  it  is  got  from  mud, 
loam,  and  from  ochre.  In  England,  a  good  deal 
of  iron  is  obtained  in  the  furnace  from  sand 
stones  and  clayey  stones  that  appear  to  con¬ 
tain  not  so  much  iron  as  sand,  marl,  or  other 
mud.  In  Aristotle’s  book  De  admirandis  narra- 
tionibus,  we  read: 

’Tis  said  the  iron  of  the  Chalybes  and  the 
Myseni  has  quite  a  peculiar  origin,  being  car¬ 
ried  in  the  gravel  of  the  streams.  Some  say  that, 
after  being  merely  washed,  it  is  smelted  in  the 
furnace;  others  that  it  is  washed  repeatedly,  and 
as  often  the  residue  treated  with  fire  in  the  fur¬ 
nace,  together  with  the  stone  pyrimachus  (a 
stone  refractory  to  the  action  of  fire),  which 
occurs  there  in  great  abundance.  Thus  do 
many  sorts  of  substances  contain  in  themselves 
strikingly  and  most  plentifully  this  ferric  and 
telluric  element.  Many,  too,  and  most  plentiful 
in  every  soil  are  the  stones  and  earths  and  the 


various  bodies  and  compounds,  which  contain 
iron  (though  not  in  such  abundance)  and  yield 
it  in  the  furnace  fire,  but  which  are  reject¬ 
ed  by  the  metallurgist  as  not  workable  with 
profit;  and  there  are  other  earths  that  give 
evidence  of  the  presence  of  iron  in  them; 
these,  being  very  poor  in  the  metal,  are  not 
smelted  at  all,  and  not  being  esteemed  they 
are  not  known. 

The  kinds  of  manufactured  iron  differ  very 
much  from  one  another.  For  one  kind  has 
great  tenacity;  and  that  is  the  best.  There  is  a 
medium  kind.  Another  kind  is  brittle;  that  is 
the  worst.  Sometimes  the  iron,  on  account  of 
the  excellence  of  the  ore,  is  made  into  steel;  as 
in  Noricum  at  present.  From  the  best  iron  also, 
worked  over  and  over  again,  and  purged  of 
all  impurities,  or  plunged  red-hot  into  water, 
is  produced  what  the  Greeks  call  crro/zojjua 
and  the  Latins  acies  and  aciarium  [steel],  and 
which  is  variously  called  Syrian,  Parthian, 
Norican,  Comese  and  Spanish;  in  other  places 
it  takes  its  name  from  the  water  in  which  it  is 
repeatedly  immersed,  as  at  Como  in  Italy,  and 
Bilbao  and  Tariassone  in  Spain.  Steel  sells  at  a 
far  higher  price  than  iron.  And,  on  account  of 
its  superiority,  it  is  in  better  accord  with  the 
magnet.  It  is  often  made  from  powerful  load¬ 
stone,  and  it  acquires  the  magnetic  virtue 
readily,  retains  it  a  long  time  unimpaired  and 
fit  for  all  magnetic  experiments. 

The  iron,  after  it  has  been  smelted  in  the 
first  furnace,  is  then  treated  with  various 
processes  in  great  forges  or  mills,  the  metal 
under  mighty  blows  acquiring  toughness,  and 
dropping  its  impurities.  When  first  smelted  it 
is  brittle  and  by  no  means  perfect.  Therefore, 
here  in  England,  when  great  cannons  are  cast, 
in  order  that  they  may  be  able  to  withstand 
the  explosive  force  of  the  ignited  gunpowder, 
the  metal  is  specially  purged  of  impurities: 
while  fluid  it  is  made  to  pass  a  second  time 
through  a  narrow  opening,  and  thus  is  freed  of 
recremental  substances.  Smiths,  with  the  use  of 
certain  liquids  and  hammer-strokes,  toughen 
the  iron  laminae  from  which  are  made  shields 
and  coats  of  mail  not  penetrable  by  any 
musket-ball.  Iron  is  made  harder  by  skill  and 
tempering;  but  skill  also  makes  it  softer  and  as 
pliant  as  lead.  It  is  made  hard  by  certain 
waters  into  which  it  is  plunged  at  white  heat, 
as  in  Spain.  It  is  made  soft  again  either  by  fire 
alone  when,  without  hammering  and  without 
the  use  of  water,  it  is  allowed  to  grow  cool; 
or  by  being  dipped  in  grease;  or  it  is  variously 
tempered,  to  serve  the  purposes  of  the  different 


i6  WILLIAM 

arts,  by  being  smeared  with  special  prepara¬ 
tions.  This  art  is  described  by  Baptista  Porta 
in  Book  XIII  of  the  Magia  naturalis. 

Thus  is  this  ferric  and  telluric  substance  con¬ 
tained  in  and  extracted  from  various  kinds  of 
stones,  ores,  and  earths;  thus  too  does  it  differ 
in  appearance,  form,  and  efficiency;  and  by 
various  processes  of  art  it  is  smelted  and  puri¬ 
fied  and  made  to  serve  man’s  uses  in  all  sorts  of 
trades  and  in  all  sorts  of  tools,  as  no  other  body 
can  serve.  One  kind  of  iron  is  suitable  for 
breastplates,  another  withstands  cannon  balls, 
another  protects  against  swords  or  the  curved 
blades  called  scimitars;  one  kind  is  used  in 
making  swords,  another  in  forging  horseshoes. 
Of  iron  are  made  nails,  hinges,  bolts,  saws, 
keys,  bars,  doors,  folding-doors,  spades,  rods, 
pitchforks,  heckles,  hooks,  fish-spears,  pots, 
tripods,  anvils,  hammers,  wedges,  chains,  man¬ 
acles,  fetters,  hoes,  mattocks,  sickles,  hooks  for 
pruning  vines,  and  for  cutting  rushes,  shovels, 
weeding-hooks,  ploughshares,  forks,  pans, 
ladles,  spoons,  roasting-spits,  knives,  dag¬ 
gers,  swords,  axes,  Celtic  and  Gallic  darts, 
Macedonian  pikes,  lances,  spears,  anchors  and 
many  nautical  implements;  furthermore,  bul¬ 
lets,  javelins,  pikes,  corselets,  helmets,  breast¬ 
plates,  horseshoes,  greaves,  wire,  strings  of 
musical  instruments,  armchairs,  portcullises, 
bows,  catapults,  and  those  pests  of  humanity, 
bombs,  muskets,  cannon-balls,  and  no  end  of 
implements  unknown  to  the  Latins. 

I  have  recounted  so  many  uses  in  order  that 
the  reader  may  know  in  how  many  ways  this 
metal  is  employed.  Its  use  exceeds  that  of  all 
other  metals  a  hundredfold;  it  is  smelted  daily; 
and  there  are  in  every  village  iron  forges.  For 
iron  is  foremost  among  metals  and  supplies 
many  human  needs,  and  they  the  most  press¬ 
ing:  it  is  also  far  more  abundant  in  the  earth 
than  the  other  metals,  and  it  is  predominant. 
Therefore  it  is  a  vain  imagination  of  chemists 
to  deem  that  nature’s  purpose  is  to  change  all 
metals  to  gold,  that  being  brightest,  heaviest, 
strongest,  as  though  she  were  invulnerable, 
would  change  all  stones  into  diamonds  because 
the  diamond  surpasses  them  all  in  brilliancy 
and  in  hardness.  Iron  ore,  therefore,  as  also 
manufactured  iron,  is  a  metal  slightly  different 
from  the  primordial  homogenic  telluric  body 
because  of  the  metallic  humour  it  has  imbibed; 
yet  not  so  different  but  that  in  proportion  as 
it  is  purified  it  takes  in  more  and  more  of 
the  magnetic  virtues,  and  associates  itself 
with  that  prepotent  form  and  duly  obeys  the 
same. 


GILBERT 

CHAPTER  8.  In  ivhat  countries  and  regions 
iron  is  produced 

Iron  mines  are  very  numerous  everywhere — 
both  the  ancient  mines  mentioned  by  the  earli¬ 
est  writers  and  the  new  and  modern  ones.  The 
first  and  greatest  were,  I  think,  in  Asia,  for  in 
the  countries  of  Asia,  which  naturally  abound 
in  iron,  government  and  the  arts  did  most 
flourish;  and  there  were  the  things  needful  for 
man’s  use  first  discovered  and  sought  for.  It  is 
related  that  iron  existed  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Andria;  in  the  land  of  the  Chalybes,  on  the 
banks  of  the  river  Thermodon  in  Pontus;  in 
the  mountains  of  Palestine  on  the  side  toward 
Arabia;  in  Carmania.  In  Africa,  there  was  an 
iron  mine  in  the  island  of  Meroe.  In  Europe, 
iron  was  found  in  the  hills  of  Britain,  as  Strabo 
writes;  in  hither  Spain,  in  Cantabria;  among 
the  Petrocorii  and  the  Cabi  Bituriges  in  Gaul 
were  smithies  in  which  iron  was  made.  In 
Germany  was  a  mine  near  Luna,  mentioned  by 
Ptolemy;  the  Gothinian  iron  is  spoken  of  by 
Cornelius  Tacitus;  and  the  iron  of  Noricum  is 
famed  in  poesy;  there  was  also  iron  in  Crete 
and  in  Euboea.  Many  other  mines,  neither 
meagre  nor  scant,  but  of  vast  extent,  were  over¬ 
looked  by  writers  or  were  unknown  to  them. 
Pliny  calls  hither  Spain  and  the  whole  region 
of  the  Pyrenees  an  iron  country;  and  he  says 
that,  in  the  part  of  Cantabria  washed  by  the 
ocean,  there  is  a  mountain  steep  and  high 
which  (wonderful  to  tell)  is  all  iron.  The  earli¬ 
est  mines  were  iron  mines,  not  mines  of  gold, 
silver,  copper  or  lead:  for  iron  is  more  sought 
after  for  the  needs  of  man;  besides,  iron  mines 
are  plainly  visible  in  every  country,  in  every 
soil,  and  they  are  less  deep  and  less  encom¬ 
passed  with  difficulties  than  other  mines. 

But  were  I  simply  to  enumerate  modern  iron 
mines  and  those  worked  in  our  own  time,  a 
very  large  book  would  have  to  be  written,  and 
paper  would  fail  me  before  iron:  yet  each  one 
of  these  mines  could  supply  a  thousand  forges. 
For  among  minerals  there  is  no  other  substance 
so  plentiful:  all  metals  and  all  stones  distinct 
from  iron  ore  are  surpassed  by  ferric  and  fer¬ 
ruginous  substances.  For  you  cannot  easily  find 
a  district,  hardly  a  township,  throughout  all 
Europe,  if  you  search  thoroughly,  that  has  not 
a  rich  and  plentiful  vein  of  iron,  or  that  does 
not  yield  an  earth  either  saturated  with  iron- 
rust  or  at  least  slightly  tinctured  with  it.  That 
this  is  so,  is  easily  shown  by  any  one  versed  in 
metallurgy  and  chemistry. 

Besides  iron  and  its  ore,  there  is  another  fer¬ 
ric  substance,  which,  however,  does  not  yield 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


the  metal,  because  the  thin  humour  is  burnt  up 
by  the  fierce  fires  and  is  converted  into  dross 
like  that  separated  from  the  metal  when  first 
smelted.  Such  is  the  white  clay  and  argillaceous 
earth  which  is  seen  to  make  up  a  great  part  of 
our  British  island;  this,  if  treated  with  strong 
heat,  either  exhibits  a  ferric  and  metallic  body, 
or  is  transformed  into  a  ferric  vitrification:  this 
fact  can  be  verified  in  houses  built  of  brick,  for 
the  bricks  that  in  the  kiln  are  laid  nearest  to  the 
fires,  and  are  there  burnt,  show  ferric  vitrifica¬ 
tion  at  their  other  end,  which  grows  black. 
Furthermore,  all  those  earths  when  prepared 
are  attracted  by  the  magnet  like  iron.  Lasting 
and  plentiful  is  the  earth’s  product  of  iron. 
Georgius  Agricola  says  that  nearly  all  moun¬ 
tainous  regions  are  full  of  its  ores;  and  we  our¬ 
selves  know  that  a  rich  iron  ore  is  often  dug  in 
the  lowlands  and  plains  throughout  England 
and  Ireland,  as  Agricola  tells  of  iron  being  dug 
in  the  meadows  near  the  town  of  Saga  out  of 
ditches  not  more  than  two  feet  deep.  Nor  is 
iron  lacking,  as  some  say,  in  the  West  Indies; 
but,  there,  the  Spaniards,  intent  on  gold,  avoid 
the  toilsome  manufacture  of  iron  and  do  not 
search  for  rich  iron  ores  and  mines.  It  is  prob¬ 
able  that  nature  and  the  terrestrial  globe  can¬ 
not  repress,  but  is  ever  sending  forth  into  the 
light  a  great  quantity  of  its  own  native  sub¬ 
stance,  and  that  this  action  is  not  entirely  im¬ 
peded  by  the  pressure  of  the  mingled  sub¬ 
stances  and  eflSorescences  at  the  circumference. 

But  iron  is  produced  not  only  in  the  common 
mother  (the  globe  of  earth),  but  sometimes  is 
also  in  the  air,  in  the  uppermost  clouds  from 
the  earth’s  vapours.  It  rained  iron  in  Lucania 
the  year  that  Marcus  Crassus  met  his  death. 
They  tell,  too,  of  a  mass  of  iron,  resembling 
slag,  having  fallen  out  of  the  air  in  the  Neth- 
orian  forest  near  Grina,  which  is  said  to  have 
weighed  several  pounds;  and  that  it  could  not 
be  carried  to  that  village  it  was  so  heavy,  and 
could  not  be  taken  on  a  wagon  because  there 
were  no  roads.  This  happened  before  the  civil 
war  of  the  Saxons,  waged  by  the  dukes.  A  sim¬ 
ilar  occurrence  is  mentioned  by  Avicenna.  In 
the  Torinese,  it  once  rained  iron  at  several 
points,  some  three  years  before  that  province 
was  conquered  by  the  king.  In  the  year  1510, 
as  Cardan  relates  in  his  book  De  rerum  varie- 
tate,  there  fell  from  the  sky,  upon  a  field  near 
the  river  Abdua,  1200  stones,  one  of  which 
weighed  120,  another  30  or  40  pounds,  all  of 
them  the  colour  of  iron  and  exceedingly  hard. 
These  occurrences,  because  they  happen  sel¬ 
dom,  seem  to  be  portents,  like  the  earth-rains 


and  stone-showers  mentioned  in  the  annals  of 
the  Romans.  But  that  it  ever  rained  other  met¬ 
als  is  not  mentioned;  for  it  does  not  appear 
that  gold,  silver,  lead,  tin,  or  zinc  ever  fell  from 
heaven.  But  copper  has  sometimes  been  ob¬ 
served  to  fall  from  the  clouds — a  metal  differ¬ 
ing  not  much  from  iron:  and  this  cloud- 
gendered  iron  and  copper  are  seen  to  be  imper¬ 
fect  metals,  absolutely  infusible  and  unforge- 
able.  For  the  earth,  in  its  eminences,  abounds 
in  store  of  iron,  and  the  globe  contains  great 
plenty  of  ferric  and  magnetic  matter.  Exhala¬ 
tions  of  such  matter  sent  forth  with  some  vio¬ 
lence  may,  with  the  concurrence  of  powerful 
agencies,  become  condensed  in  the  upper  re¬ 
gions,  and  so  may  be  evolved  a  certain  mon¬ 
strous  progeny  of  iron. 

CHAPTER  9.  Iron  ore  attracts  iron  ore 
Like  the  other  metals,  iron  is  obtained  from 
various  substances — stones,  earths,  and  such¬ 
like  concretions,  called  by  miners  ores,  or  veins, 
because  they  are  produced  in  fissures  of  the 
earth.  Of  the  diversity  of  ores  we  have  already 
spoken.  A  piece  of  crude  iron  ore  of  the  colour 
of  iron  and  rich  as  miners  say,  when  floated  in 
a  bowl  or  other  vessel  in  water  (as  in  the  case 
of  the  loadstone  supra)  is  usually  attracted  by 
a  like  piece  of  ore  held  in  the  hand  and 
brought  near  to  it,  but  it  is  not  attracted  strong¬ 
ly  and  with  rapidity  as  a  loadstone  is  drawn 
by  a  loadstone,  but  slowly  and  weakly.  Stony 
ores,  and  those  of  an  ashy,  brown,  ruddy,  etc., 
colour,  neither  attract  one  another  nor  are  at¬ 
tracted  even  by  a  powerful  loadstone,  any  more 
than  so  much  wood  or  lead  or  silver  or  gold 
would  be.  Take  some  pieces  of  such  ores  and 
roast  or  rather  heat  them  in  a  moderate  fire  so 
that  they  may  not  suddenly  split  or  fly  to  pieces, 
and  retain  them  ten  or  twelve  hours  in  the  fire, 
which  is  to  be  kept  up  and  moderately  in¬ 
creased;  then  suffer  them  to  cool,  according  to 
the  method  given  in  Book  III,  Of  Direction: 
these  stones  so  manipulated,  the  loadstone  now 
attracts;  they  show  mutual  sympathy,  and, 
when  arranged  according  to  artificial  condi¬ 
tions,  they  come  together  through  the  action  of 
their  own  forces. 

CHAPTER  10.  Iron  ore  has  and  acquires  poles, 
and  arranges  itself  with  reference  to  the  earth^s 
poles 

Men  are  deplorably  ignorant  with  respect  to 
natural  things,  and  modern  philosophers,  as 
though  dreaming  in  the  darkness,  must  be 
aroused  and  taught  the  uses  of  things,  the  deal- 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


i8 

ing  with  things;  they  must  be  made  to  quit 
the  sort  of  learning  that  comes  only  from 
books,  and  that  rests  only  on  vain  arguments 
from  probability  and  upon  conjectures.  For 
the  science  of  iron  (than  which  nought  is  more 
in  use  among  us),  as  of  many  other  bodies,  re¬ 
mains  unknown — iron,  I  say,  whose  rich  ore, 
by  an  inborn  force,  when  floated  in  a  vessel  on 
water,  assumes,  like  the  loadstone,  a  north  and 
south  direction,  coming  to  a  standstill  at  those 
points,  whence  if  it  be  turned  away,  it  goes 
back  to  them  again  in  virtue  of  its  inborn  ac¬ 
tivity.  But  of  less  perfect  ores  which,  however, 
under  the  guise  of  stone  or  earth  contain  a  good 
deal  of  iron,  few  possess  the  power  of  move¬ 
ment;  yet  when  treated  artificially  with  fire, 
as  told  in  the  foregoing  chapter,  these  acquire 
polar  activity,  strength  {verticity,  as  we  call  it) ; 
and  not  only  such  ores  as  miners  seek,  but  even 
earths  simply  impregnated  with  ferruginous 
matter,  and  many  kinds  of  rock,  do  in  like 
manner  (provided  they  be  skilfully  placed), 
tend  and  glide  toward  those  positions  of  the 
heavens,  or  rather  of  the  earth,  until  they  reach 
the  point  they  are  seeking:  there  they  eagerly 
rest. 

CHAPTER  11.  Wrought-iron,  not  magnetized  by 
the  loadstone,  attracts  iron 

Iron  is  extracted  in  the  first  furnace  from  the 
ore,  which  is  converted  or  separated  partly  into 
metal,  pardy  into  dross,  by  the  action  of  very 
great  heat  continued  for  eight,  ten,  or  twelve 
hours.  The  metal  flows  out,  leaving  behind  the 
dross  and  useless  substances,  and  forms  a  great 
long  mass,  which  under  the  blows  of  a  large 
hammer  is  cut  into  pieces:  from  these,  after 
being  reduced  in  another  furnace  and  again 
put  on  the  anvil,  the  workmen  form  cubical 
masses,  or  more  usually  bars,  which  are  sold  to 
merchants  and  blacksmiths:  from  these  blocks 
or  bars  are  everywhere  made  in  smiths’  shops 
various  implements.  This  we  call  wrought- 
iron,  and,  as  every  one  knows,  it  is  attracted  by 
the  loadstone.  But  we,  steadily  trying  all  sorts 
of  experiments,  have  discovered  that  mere  iron 
itself,  magnetized  by  no  loadstone,  nor  impreg¬ 
nated  with  any  extraneous  force,  attracts  other 
iron,  though  it  does  not  seize  the  other  iron  as 
eagerly  nor  as  suddenly  pulls  it  to  itself  as 
would  a  strong  loadstone. 

That  this  is  so  you  may  learn  from  the  fol¬ 
lowing  experiment:  a  small  piece  of  cork, 
round,  and  the  size  of  a  filbert,  has  an  iron 
wire  passed  through  it  to  the  middle  of  the 
wire:  float  this  in  still  water  and  approach 


(without  contact)  to  one  end  of  that  wire,  the 
end  of  another  wire:  wire  attracts  wire,  and 
when  the  one  is  withdrawn  slowly  the  other 
follows,  yet  this  action  takes  place  only  within 
fit  limits.  In  the  figure,  A  is  the  cork  holding 


the  wire,  B  one  end  of  the  wire  rising  a  little 
out  of  the  water,  C  the  end  of  the  second  wire, 
which  pulls  B.  You  may  demonstrate  the  same 
thing  with  a  larger  mass  of  iron.  Suspend  in 
equilibrium  with  a  slender  silken  cord  a  long 
rod  of  polished  iron,  such  as  are  used  to  sup¬ 
port  hangings  and  curtains;  bring  within  the 
distance  of  half  a  finger’s  length  of  one  end  of 
this  as  it  rests  still  in  the  air,  some  oblong  mass 
of  polished  iron  with  suitable  end:  the  balanced 
rod  returns  to  the  mass;  then  quickly  with¬ 
draw  your  hand  with  the  mass  in  a  circular 
track  around  the  point  of  equilibrium  of  the 
suspended  rod,  and  the  cord  holding  the  rod 
will  travel  in  a  circle. 

CHAPTER  12.  A  long  piece  of  iron,  even  not 
magnetized ,  assumes  a  north  and  south  direc¬ 
tion 

All  good  and  perfect  iron,  if  it  be  drawn  out 
long,  acts  like  a  loadstone  or  like  iron  rubbed 
with  loadstone:  it  takes  the  direction  north 
and  south — a  thing  not  at  all  understood  by 
our  great  philosophers  who  have  laboured  in 
vain  to  demonstrate  the  properties  of  the  load¬ 
stone  and  the  causes  of  the  friendship  of  iron 
for  the  loadstone.  Experiment  can  be  made 
either  with  large  or  small  objects  of  iron,  either 
in  air  or  in  water.  A  straight  rod  of  iron  six 
feet  in  length  and  as  thick  as  one’s  finger  is  (as 
described  in  the  foregoing  chapter)  suspended 
in  exact  equilibrium  with  a  fine  but  strong  silk 
thread.  The  thread,  however,  should  be  com¬ 
posed  of  several  silk  filaments,  twisted  differ¬ 
ently  and  not  all  in  one  direction.  Let  the  ex¬ 
periment  be  made  in  a  small  room  with  doors 
and  windows  all  closed,  to  prevent  currents  of 
air  in  the  room:  hence  it  is  not  well  to  experi¬ 
ment  on  windy  days  or  when  a  storm  is  brew¬ 
ing.  The  rod  of  iron  freely  acts  according  to  its 
property  and  moves  slowly  until  at  last  coming 
to  a  stop  at  its  goals  it  points  north  and  south, 
like  magnetized  iron  in  a  sun-dial,  a  common 
magnetic  compass,  and  the  mariner’s  com- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


pass.  You  may,  if  you  are  curious  of  such 
experiments,  suspend  at  once  from  slender 
threads,  iron  rods,  or  wires,  or  knitting-nee¬ 
dles:  you  shall  find  them  all  in  accord  unless 
there  is  some  flaw  in  the  conduct  of  this  inter¬ 
esting  experiment;  for  unless  you  make  all  the 
preparations  precisely  and  exactly,  your  labour 
will  be  vain.  Test  the  thing  in  water  also:  here 
the  result  is  more  sure  and  more  easily  ob¬ 
tained.  Pass  through  a  round  cork  an  iron  wire 
two  or  three  fingers  long,  more  or  less,  so  that 
it  may  just  float  in  water:  the  moment  you  put 
it  in  the  water  it  turns  round  on  its  centre,  and 
one  end  of  the  wire  travels  to  the  north,  the 
other  to  the  south:  the  cause  of  this,  you  will 
find  later,  when  we  treat  of  the  reasons  of  the 
loadstone’s  directions.  And  it  is  well  to  know 
and  to  hold  fast  in  memory,  that  as  a  strong 
loadstone  and  iron  magnetized  by  the  same, 
point  not  always  toward  the  true  pole,  but  ex¬ 
actly  to  the  point  of  variation;  likewise  will  a 
weaker  loadstone  and  iron  that  directs  itself  by 
its  own  force,  and  not  by  force  derived  from 
the  impress  of  any  magnet;  so,  too,  all  iron 
ores,  and  all  substances  imbued  with  any  ferric 
matter  and  duly  prepared,  turn  to  the  same 
point  in  the  horizon — to  the  place  of  varia¬ 
tion  of  the  locality  concerned  (if  variation 
exist  there),  and  there  they  remain  and  rest. 

CHAPTER  13.  Smelted  iron  has  in  itselj  fixed 
north  and  south  parts,  magnetic  activity,  ver- 
ticity,  and  fixed  vertices  or  poles 
Iron  takes  a  direction  toward  north  and  south, 
but  not  with  the  same  point  directed  toward 
either  pole;  for  one  end  of  a  piece  of  iron  ore 
or  of  an  iron  wire  steadily  and  constantly  points 
to  the  north  and  the  other  to  the  south,  whether 
it  be  suspended  in  air,  or  floating  in  water, 
and  whether  the  specimens  be  iron  bars  or  thin 
wires.  Even  an  iron  rod  or  wire  ten,  twenty, 
or  more  ells  in  length  will  point  with  one  ex¬ 
tremity  to  the  north,  with  the  other  to  the 
south.  And  if  you  cut  off  a  part,  if  the  farther 
end  of  that  piece  is  boreal  (northern),  the 
farther  end  of  the  other  piece,  with  which  it 
was  before  joined,  will  be  austral  (southern). 
And  so,  if  you  divide  the  rod  or  wire  into  sev¬ 
eral  pieces,  you  shall  know  the  poles  even  be¬ 
fore  you  make  an  experiment  by  floating  the 
pieces  in  water.  In  all  these  fragments  a  boreal 
end  attracts  an  austral,  and  repels  a  boreal,  and 
vice  versa,  according  to  magnetic  law.  But, 
herein,  manufactured  iron  so  differs  from  load¬ 
stone  and  iron  ore,  that  in  a  ball  of  iron  of 
whatever  size — e.g,,  bombs,  cannon-balls,  cul- 


verin  balls,  falcon  balls — polarity  (verticity)  is 
less  easily  acquired  and  less  readily  manifested 
than  in  the  loadstone  itself,  in  ore,  and  in  a 
round  loadstone;  but  in  iron  instruments  of 
any  length  the  force  is  at  once  seen:  the  cause 
of  which,  as  also  the  modes  of  acquiring  polar¬ 
ity  and  poles  without  a  loadstone,  together 
with  the  account  of  all  other  recondite  facts 
touching  verticity,  we  will  set  forth  when  we 
come  to  treat  of  the  movement  of  direction, 

CHAPTER  14.  Of  other  properties  of  the 
loadstone  and  of  its  medicinal  virtue 
Dioscorides  tells  that  loadstone  blended  in 
water  is  administered  in  a  dose  of  three  oboli 
to  expel  gross  humours.  Galen  writes  that  it 
has  virtues  like  those  of  bloodstone.  Others  say 
that  loadstone  causes  mental  disturbance  and 
makes  people  melancholic,  and  often  is  fatal. 
Gartias  ab  Horto  does  not  think  it  injurious  or 
unwholesome.  The  people  of  East  India,  he 
says,  declare  that  loadstone  taken  in  small 
quantity  preserves  youthfulness:  for  this  rea¬ 
son  the  elder  King  Zeilam  (Zeilan)  is  said  to 
have  ordered  made  of  loadstone  some  pans  for 
cooking  his  food  {victus),  “The  man  who  was 
ordered  to  do  this  thing  told  me,”  says  Gartias. 
Many  are  the  varieties  of  loadstone,  produced 
by  different  mixtures  of  earths,  metals,  and 
humours;  therefore  are  they  totally  different  in 
their  virtues  and  effects,  according  to  the 
neighbourhoods  of  places  and  the  nearness  of 
adhering  bodies,  and  the  pits  themselves — un¬ 
clean  matrices,  as  it  were.  Hence  one  load¬ 
stone  is  able  to  purge  the  bowels,  and  another 
loadstone  to  stay  the  purging;  with  a  sort  of 
fumes,  it  can  gravely  affect  the  mind;  it  may 
corrode  the  stomach  and  produce  in  it  serious 
disease:  for  such  disorders,  quacks  prescribe 
gold  and  emerald,  practising  the  vilest  impos¬ 
ture  for  lucre’s  sake.  Pure  loadstone  also  may 
be  harmless;  and  not  only  that,  but  many  cor¬ 
rect  excessive  humours  of  the  bowels  and 
putrescence  of  the  same,  and  may  bring  about 
a  better  temperature:  such  loadstones  are  the 
Oriental  ones  from  China,  the  more  compact 
loadstones  of  Bengal:  these  kinds  of  loadstone 
are  not  distasteful  nor  ungrateful  to  the  senses. 
Plutarch  and  Caius  Ptolemy,  and  all  the  copy¬ 
ists  that  came  after  them,  believe  that  loadstone 
rubbed  with  garlic  does  not  attract  iron.  Hence 
some  writers  conjecture  that  garlic  is  of  service 
against  the  harmful  action  of  loadstone:  in  this 
way  does  many  an  untrue  and  vain  opinion  in 
philosophy  take  its  rise  in  fables  and  false¬ 
hoods.  Not  a  few  physicians  have  thought  that 


20  WILLIAM 

loadstone  has  power  to  extract  an  iron  arrow¬ 
head  from  a  human  body:  but  a  loadstone  at¬ 
tracts  when  it  is  whole,  not  when  reduced  to 
powder,  deformed,  buried  in  a  plaster;  for  it 
does  not  with  its  matter  attract  in  such  case, 
but  serves  rather  to  heal  the  ruptured  tissues  by 
exsiccation,  so  causing  the  wound  to  close  and 
dry  up,  whereby  the  arrow-head  becomes  fixed 
in  the  wound.  Thus  do  pretenders  to  science 
vainly  and  preposterously  seek  for  remedies, 
ignorant  of  the  true  causes  of  things. 

Headaches,  despite  the  opinion  of  many,  are 
no  more  cured  by  application  of  a  loadstone, 
than  by  putting  on  the  head  an  iron  helmet  or 
a  steel  hat.  Administration  of  loadstone  to 
dropsical  persons  is  either  an  error  of  the  an¬ 
cients  or  a  blundering  quotation  of  their  tran¬ 
scribers,  albeit  a  loadstone  may  be  found  cap¬ 
able  of  purging  the  bowels,  after  the  manner  of 
sundry  metallic  substances:  but  the  effect 
would  be  due  to  some  vice  of  the  stone,  not  to 
its  magnetic  force.  Nicolaus  puts  into  his  “di¬ 
vine  plaster”  a  good  deal  of  loadstone,  as  do 
the  Augsburg  doctors  in  their  “black  plaster” 
for  fresh  wounds  and  stabs;  because  of  the  ex¬ 
siccating  effect  of  the  loadstone  without  cor¬ 
rosion,  it  becomes  an  efficacious  and  useful 
remedy.  Paracelsus,  in  like  manner  and  for  the 
same  end,  makes  loadstone  an  ingredient  of 
his  plaster  for  stab-wounds. 

CHAPTER  15.  The  medicinal  power  of  the  iron 
It  will  not  be  alien  to  our  purpose  to  treat 
briefly  of  the  medicinal  power  of  iron;  for  it  is 
beneficial  in  many  diseases  of  the  human  sys¬ 
tem,  and  by  its  virtues,  both  natural  and  ac¬ 
quired  through  fit  and  skilful  preparation,  it 
brings  about  wonderful  changes  in  the  human 
body;  so  that  we  may  more  clearly  describe  its 
nature  through  its  medicinal  power  and  by 
means  of  a  few  well-known  experiments;  to 
the  end  that  even  those  prentices  of  medicine 
who  abuse  this  most  excellent  medicinal  agent 
may  learn  to  prescribe  it  more  judiciously,  for 
the  curing  of  patients,  not  as  is  too  often  the 
case,  to  their  destruction.  The  best  iron,  />., 
stomoma,  chalybs,  acies,  or  aciarium  [steel],  is 
reduced  by  filing  to  a  fine  powder;  this  pow¬ 
der  has  strongest  vinegar  poured  on  it,  is  dried 
in  the  sun,  again  treated  with  vinegar,  and 
once  more  dried.  Then  it  is  washed  in  spring 
water  or  other  water  at  hand,  and  dried.  It  is 
again  pulverized  and  pounded  fine  on  por¬ 
phyry,  sifted  through  a  fine  sieve,  and  kept  for 
use.  It  is  given  chiefly  in  cases  of  lax  and  over- 
humid  liver,  and  in  cases  of  tumid  spleen  after 


GILBERT 

suitable  evacuations;  hence  young  women  of 
pale,  muddy,  blotchy  complexion  are  by  it  re¬ 
stored  to  soundness  and  comeliness,  for  it  is 
highly  exsiccative  and  harmlessly  astringent. 
But  some,  who  in  every  internal  disorder 
always  recognize  obstructions  of  liver  and 
spleen,  think  it  beneficial  in  such  cases,  as  re¬ 
moving  obstructions;  and  herein  they  accept 
the  opinions  chiefly  of  certain  Arabic  writers. 
Hence  in  cases  of  dropsy,  schirrus  of  the  liver, 
of  chronic  jaundice,  and  hypochondriac  melan¬ 
cholia,  or  complaints  of  the  oesophagus,  they 
prescribe  it,  or  add  it  to  electuaries,  often  to  the 
sure  destruction  of  many  a  patient.  Fallopius 
recommends  a  preparation  of  iron  of  his  own 
for  schirrus  of  the  spleen;  but  he  is  much  mis¬ 
taken,  for  though  loadstone  is  exceedingly 
beneficial  where  the  spleen  is  lax  and  tumid  on 
account  of  humours,  so  far  is  it  from  curing  a 
spleen  thickened  to  a  schirrhus,  that  it  makes  the 
mischief  far  worse;  for  agents  that  are  greatly 
siccative  and  that  absorb  humours,  transform 
viscera  that  have  been  thickened  by  schirrhus, 
into  the  hardness  almost  of  a  stone.  Some  there 
are  who  dry  it  at  a  high  temperature  in  an 
oven,  burning  it  till  its  colour  is  changed  to 
red:  it  is  then  called  “saffron  of  Mars,”^  and  is 
a  very  powerful  exsiccant  and  quickly  pene¬ 
trates  the  intestines.  Further,  they  prescribe  vio¬ 
lent  exercise  so  that  the  remedy  may  enter  the 
heated  intestines  and  reach  the  part  affected. 
Hence  it  is  reduced  to  a  very  fine  powder;  else 
it  would  remain  in  the  oesophagus  and  in  the 
chyle  and  would  not  penetrate  to  the  intestines. 
Therefore  this  dry,  earthly  medicament  is 
proved  by  the  most  conclusive  tests  to  be,  after 
due  evacuations,  a  remedy  in  diseases  arising 
from  humour  (when  the  intestines  are  running 
and  overflowing  with  morbid  fluids).  A  prep¬ 
aration  of  steel  is  indicated  for  tumid  spleen; 
chalybeate  waters  also  reduce  the  spleen,  al¬ 
beit,  as  a  rule,  iron  is  of  frigid  efficiency  and  a 
constringent  rather  than  a  resolvent;  but  it  does 
this  neither  by  heat  nor  by  cold,  but  by  its  own 
dryness  when  mixed  with  a  penetrant  fluid;  in 
this  way  it  dissipates  humours,  thickens  the 
villi;  strengthens  the  fibres  and  when  they  are 
lax  makes  them  contract;  then  the  natural 
warmth  in  the  organs  thus  strengthened  be¬ 
coming  stronger  does  the  rest;  but  should  the 
liver  be  indurated  and  impaired  through  age 
or  chronic  obstruction,  or  should  the  spleen  be 
dried  up  and  thickened  into  a  schirrhus,  under 
which  complaints  the  flesh  parts  of  the  mem¬ 
bers  become  atrophied,  and  water  collects  all 
*See  Book  ii,  Chap.  xxui. 


21 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


over  the  body  under  the  skin — in  such  cases  the 
preparation  of  steel  does  but  hasten  a  fatal  re¬ 
sult  and  makes  the  mischief  worse.  Some  re¬ 
cent  authorities  prescribe,  as  a  highly  com¬ 
mended  and  celebrated  remedy  for  dried-up 
liver,  an  electuary  of  iron  slag  described  by 
Razes  (Rhazes — Abu  Bekr  Arrasi)  in  book 
ninth  Ad  Almansorem ,  or  of  prepared  steel  fil¬ 
ings:  bad  and  pernicious  counsel.  But  now  if 
they  never  will  learn  from  our  philosophy,  at 
least  daily  experience  and  the  decline  and  death 
of  their  patients  will  convince  them,  slow  and 
sluggish  as  they  are. 

Whether  iron  be  warm  or  cold  is  a  question 
over  which  many  contend.  Manardus,  Curtius, 
Fallopius,  and  others  bring  many  arguments 
for  both  sides:  every  one  judges  according  to 
his  own  way  of  looking  at  it.  Some  will  have  it 
cold,  saying  that  iron  has  the  power  of  refrig¬ 
eration,  since  Aristotle  in  the  Meteorology 
declares  it  to  belong  to  the  class  of  bodies  that 
become  concreted  through  cold  by  emission  of 
all  their  warmth.  Galen,  too,  says  that  iron  gets 
its  consistency  from  cold;  further,  that  it  is  an 
earthy  body  and  dense.  It  is  declared  to  be  cold 
also  because  it  is  astringent,  and  because  chaly¬ 
beate  water  stills  thirst;  they  mention  also  the 
sensation  of  coolness  produced  by  thermic  chaly¬ 
beate  waters.  But  others  hold  it  to  be  warm, 
since  Hippocrates  says  that  chalybeate  waters 
issuing  from  places  where  iron  exists  are  warm. 
Galen  says  that  in  all  metals  there  is  much  sub¬ 
stance  or  essence  of  fire.  Razes  will  have  it  that 
iron  is  warm  and  dry  in  the  third  degree.  The 
Arabs  hold  that  iron  opens  the  spleen  and  the 
liver:  hence  it  is  warm.  Montagnana  recom¬ 
mends  it  for  frigid  complaints  of  uterus  and 
oesophagus.  And  thus  do  sciolists  wrangle  with 
one  another,  and  confuse  the  minds  of  learners 
with  their  questionable  cogitations,  and  debate 
over  the  question  of  goat’s  wool,  philosophiz¬ 
ing  about  properties  illogically  inferred  and 
accepted:  but  these  things  will  appear  more 
plainly  when  we  come  to  treat  of  causes,  the 
murky  cloud  being  dispersed  that  has  so  long 
involved  all  philosophy.  Iron  filings,  iron  scales, 
iron  dross,  do  not,  says  Avicenna,  lack  harmful 
quality  (perhaps  when  they  are  not  properly 
prepared,  or  are  taken  in  too  large  doses),  hence 
they  produce  violent  intestinal  pains,  roughness 
in  the  mouth  and  on  the  tongue,  marasmus, 
and  drying  up  of  the  members.  But  mistakenly 
and  old  womanishly  does  Avicenna  declare 
that  the  true  antidote  of  this  ferric  poison  is  a 
drachm  of  loadstone  taken  in  a  draught  of  the 
juice  of  dog’s  mercury  or  of  beet-root;  for  load¬ 


stone  too  is  of  a  twofold  nature,  and  often  is  in¬ 
jurious  and  fatal  in  its  effects;  neither  does  it 
withstand  iron,  for  it  attracts  it;  nor  is  it  able 
to  attract  when  drunk  as  a  powder  in  liquid; 
rather  does  it  cause  the  self-same  mischiefs 

CHAPTER  16.  That  loadstone  and  iron  ore  are 
the  same,  and  that  iron  is  obtained  from  both, 
like  other  metals  jroin  their  ores;  and  that  all 
magnetic  properties  exist y  though  weaker,  both 
in  smelted  iron  and  in  iron  ore 
So  far  we  have  been  telling  of  the  nature  and 
properties  of  loadstone,  as  also  of  the  properties 
and  nature  of  iron;  it  now  remains  that  we 
point  out  their  mutual  affinities — their  consan¬ 
guinity,  so  to  speak — and  that  we  show  the  two 
substances  to  be  very  nearly  allied.  In  the  up¬ 
permost  part  of  the  terrestrial  globe  or  its  su¬ 
perficies  of  detritus — its  rind  as  it  were — these 
two  bodies  come  into  being  and  are  generated 
in  the  same  matrix,  in  one  bed,  like  twins. 
Strong  loadstones  are  mined  from  separate  de¬ 
posits,  and  weaker  loadstones  also  have  their 
own  beds.  Both  occur  in  iron  mines.  Iron  ore 
occurs  usually  by  itself,  unaccompanied  by 
strong  loadstone  (for  the  more  perfect  load¬ 
stones  occur  more  rarely).  A  strong  loadstone 
looks  like  iron:  from  it  is  often  made  the  best 
iron,  which  the  Greeks  call  stomoma,  the  Lat¬ 
ins  acies,  and  the  Barbarians,  not  inappropri¬ 
ately,  aciare  or  aciarium.  This  stone  attracts 
and  repels  other  loadstones,  and  governs  their 
directions;  points  to  the  earth’s  poles,  attracts 
molten  iron,  and  does  miany  other  wonderful 
things,  some  of  which  we  have  already  men¬ 
tioned,  but  many  more  remain  yet  to  be  pointed 
out.  A  weak  loadstone  will  do  the  same,  but 
less  forcefully:  and  iron  ore,  and  also  smelted 
iron  (if  they  be  prepared),  show  their  virtues 
in  all  magnetic  experiments,  no  less  than  do 
weak  magnets;  and  the  inert  iron  ore, endowed 
with  no  magnetic  powers,  that  is  taken  out  of 
the  mine,  becomes  awake  when  treated  in  the 
furnace  and  fittingly  prepared,  and  then  is  a 
loadstone  in  power  and  properties.  Sometimes 
ironstone  or  iron  ore  exerts  attractive  action 
the  moment  it  comes  from  the  mine,  and  with¬ 
out  being  prepared  in  any  way;  native  iron, 
also,  or  ore  of  iron  colour,  attracts  iron  and 
makes  it  point  to  the  poles.  Thus  the  form,  ap¬ 
pearance,  and  essence  are  one.  For  to  me  there 
seems  to  be  greater  difference  and  unlikeness 
between  a  very  strong  loadstone  and  a  weak 
one  that  is  hardly  able  to  attract  a  single  parti¬ 
cle  of  iron  filings;  between  a  hard,  firm,  and 
metallic  loadstone  and  one  that  is  soft,  friable, 


22  WILLIAM 

clayey,  with  so  great  a  difference  between  them 
in  colour,  substance,  qualities  and  weight;  than 
between  the  best  ore,  rich  in  iron,  or  iron  that 
from  the  first  is  metallic,  on  the  one  hand, 
and  the  best  loadstone  on  the  other.  Nay,  the 
two  are  usually  not  to  be  distinguished  by  any 
signs,  nor  can  miners  tell  one  from  the  other, 
for  they  agree  in  all  respects. 

Further,  we  see  both  the  finest  magnet  and 
iron  ore  visited  as  it  were  by  the  same  ills  and 
diseases,  aging  in  the  same  way  and  with  the 
same  indications,  preserved  by  the  same  reme¬ 
dies  and  protective  measures,  and  so  retaining 
their  properties:  so,  too,  the  one  adds  to  the 
other’s  power  and  intensifies  and  increases  it, 
when  the  two  are  artificially  connected.  For 
they  are  both  impaired  by  the  action  of  acrid 
liquids  as  though  by  poisons;  the  aqua  forth 
of  the  chemists  does  equal  injury  to  both;  ex¬ 
posed  for  a  long  time  to  the  action  of  the  at¬ 
mosphere  they  both,  in  equal  degree,  age  as  it 
were  and  decline;  each  is  saved  from  impair¬ 
ment  by  being  kept  in  the  debris  and  scrapings 
of  the  other,  and  a  suitable  piece  of  steel  or  iron 
being  applied  to  its  pole,  the  magnetic  power  is 
intensified  by  the  steadfast  union.  A  loadstone 
is  kept  in  iron  filings  not  as  though  it  fed  on 
iron,  or  as  though  it  were  a  living  thing  need¬ 
ing  victual,  as  Cardan  philosophizes;  neither 
because  thus  it  is  protected  from  the  injurious 
action  of  the  atmosphere  (wherefore  both  the 
loadstone  and  iron  are  kept  in  bran  by  Scaliger; 
though  Scaliger  is  mistaken  here,  for  they  are 
not  best  preserved  so,  and  loadstone  and  iron 
in  some  of  their  forms  last  a  long  time);  but 
because  each  is  kept  unimpaired  in  filings  of 
the  other  and  their  extremities  do  not  become 
weak,  but  are  cherished  and  preserved.  For  as 
in  their  native  sites  and  mines,  similar  bodies 
surrounded  by  other  bodies  of  the  same  kind, 
e.g.,  the  minor  interior  parts  of  some  great 
mass,  endure  for  ages  whole  and  undecayed; 
so  loadstone,  and  iron  ore,  when  buried  in  a 
like  material,  do  not  part  with  their  native  hu¬ 
mour,  and  do  not  become  weak,  but  retain 
their  original  properties.  A  loadstone  packed 
in  iron  filings,  as  also  iron  ore  in  scrapings  of 
loadstone,  and  manufactured  iron  in  the  same 
or  in  iron  filings,  lasts  longer. 

Thus  these  two  associated  bodies  possess  the 
true,  strict  form  of  one  species,  though,  because 
of  their  outwardly  different  aspect  and  the  in¬ 
equality  of  the  self-same  innate  potency,  they 
have  hitherto  been  by  all  held  to  be  different, 
and  by  sciolists  to  be  s{')ecifically  different,  for 
sciolists  have  not  understood  that  in  both  sub¬ 


GILBERT 

stances  reside  exactly  the  same  potencies,  dif¬ 
fering  however  in  strength.  They  are  in  fact 
true  parts  and  intimate  parts  of  the  globe,  re¬ 
taining  nature’s  primal  powers  of  mutual  at¬ 
traction,  of  mobility,  and  of  ordering  them¬ 
selves  according  to  the  position  of  the  globe  it¬ 
self:  these  powers  they  impart  to  each  other, 
enhancing  each  other's  powers,  confirming 
them,  taking  them  from  each  other,  and  hold¬ 
ing  them.  The  stronger  invigorates  the  weaker, 
not  as  if  it  imparted  of  its  own  substance  or 
parted  with  aught  of  its  own  strength,  neither 
by  injecting  into  that  other  any  physical  sub¬ 
stance;  but  the  dormant  power  of  one  is  awak¬ 
ened  by  the  other’s  v/ithout  expenditure.  For 
if  with  one  loadstone  you  magnetize  one  thou¬ 
sand  compass  needles  for  mariners’  use  that 
loadstone  not  less  powerfully  attracts  iron  than 
it  did  before;  with  one  stone  weighing  a  pound 
any  one  can  suspend  in  air  looo  pounds  of  iron. 
For  if  one  were  to  drive  into  a  wall  a  number 
of  iron  nails  weighing  all  together  looo  pounds, 
and  were  to  apply  to  them  an  equal  number  of 
other  nails  properly  magnetized  by  contact 
with  a  loadstone,  the  nails  would  plainly  hang 
suspended  in  air  through  the  power  of  one  sin¬ 
gle  stone.  Hence  this  is  not  the  action,  work, 
or  outlay  of  the  loadstone  solely,  for  the  iron, 
which  is  something  extracted  from  loadstone, 
a  transformation  of  loadstone  into  metal,  and 
which  gains  force  from  the  loadstone  and 
(whatever  ore  it  may  have  been  derived  from) 
by  its  proximity  strengthens  the  loadstone’s 
magnetic  power,  at  the  same  time  enhances  its 
own  native  force  by  the  proximity  of  the  load¬ 
stone  and  by  contact  therewith,  even  though 
solid  bodies  intervene  between  them.  Iron 
touched  by  loadstone  renovates  other  iron  by 
contact  and  gives  it  magnetic  direction;  and 
that  does  the  same  for  a  third  piece  of  iron.  But 
if  you  rub  with  loadstone  any  other  metal,  or 
wood,  or  bone,  or  glass,  as  they  will  not  move 
toward  a  fixed  and  determinate  quarter  of  the 
heavens,  nor  will  be  attracted  by  a  magnetized 
body;  so  they  cannot  impart  by  attrition  or  by 
infection  any  magnetic  property  either  to  other 
bodies  or  to  iron  itself. 

Loadstone  differs  from  iron  ore,  as  also  from 
some  weak  loadstones,  in  that  when  reduced  in 
the  furnace  to  a  ferric  and  metallic  molten 
mass,  it  does  not  always  assume  readily  the 
fluid  condition  and  become  changed  to  metal, 
but  sometimes  is  burnt  into  ash  in  the  large 
furnaces:  this,  either  because  of  a  certain  ad¬ 
mixture  of  sulphurous  matter,  or  because  of  its 
own  excellence  and  more  simple  nature;  or  be- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


cause  of  the  resemblance  it  bears  to  nature,  and 
the  form  it  has  in  common  with  that  mother 
of  all;  for  earths,  ferruginous  stones,  and  load¬ 
stones  rich  in  metal,  are  much  loaded  and  dis¬ 
figured  with  drossy  metallic  humours  and  with 
foreign  earthy  admixtures  in  their  substance, 
like  most  weak  magnets  from  the  mines;  hence 
they  are  farther  removed  from  the  common 
mother  and  are  degenerate,  and  in  the  furnace 
they  are  more  easily  melted  and  give  a  softer 
sort  of  iron  and  no  good  steel.  Most  loadstones, 
if  they  be  not  unduly  burnt,  yield  in  the  furnace 
the  best  of  iron.  But  in  all  these  prime  qualities 
iron  ore  agrees  with  loadstone,  for  both,  being 
more  akin  to  the  earth  and  more  nearly  associ¬ 
ated  to  it  than  any  other  bodies  around  us,  pos¬ 
sess  within  themselves  the  magnetic,  genuine, 
homogenic,  and  true  substance  of  the  terres¬ 
trial  globe,  less  tainted  and  impaired  by  for¬ 
eign  impurities,  and  less  mixed  with  the  efflo¬ 
rescences  on  the  earth’s  surface  and  the  debris 
of  generations  of  organisms.  And  on  this 
ground  does  Aristotle  seem,  in  the  fourth  book 
of  his  Meteorology,  to  distinguish  iron  from 
all  other  metals.  Gold,  says  he,  silver,  copper, 
tin,  lead,  pertain  to  water;  but  iron  is  earthy. 
Galen,  in  the  fourth  book  De  jacultatibus  sim- 
plicium  medicamentorum ,  says  that  iron  is  an 
earthy  and  dense  body. 

So,  according  to  our  reasoning,  loadstone  is 
chiefly  earthy;  next  after  it  comes  iron  ore  or 
weak  loadstone;  and  thus  loadstone  is  by  origin 
and  nature  ferruginous,  and  iron  magnetic,  and 
the  two  are  one  in  species.  Iron  ore  in  the  fur¬ 
nace  yields  iron;  loadstone  in  the  furnace  yields 
iron  also,  but  of  far  finer  quality,  which  is 
called  steel;  and  the  better  sort  of  iron  ore  is 
weak  loadstone,  just  as  the  best  loadstone  is  the 
most  excellent  iron  ore  in  which  we  will  show 
that  grand  and  noble  primary  properties  in¬ 
here.  It  is  only  in  weaker  loadstone,  or  iron  ore, 
that  these  properties  are  obscure,  or  faint,  or 
scarcely  perceptible  to  the  senses. 

CHAPTER  17.  That  the  terrestrial  globe  is  mag¬ 
netic  and  is  a  loadstone;  and  p4St  as  in  our  hands 
the  loadstone  possesses  all  the  primary  powers 
(forces)  of  the  earth,  so  the  earth  by  reason  of 
the  same  potencies  lies  ever  hi  the  same  direc¬ 
tion  in  the  universe 

Before  we  expound  the  causes  of  the  magnetic 
movements  and  bring  forward  our  demonstra¬ 
tions  and  experiments  touching  matters  that 
for  so  many  ages  have  lain  hid — the  real  foun¬ 
dations  of  terrestrial  philosophy — we  must  for¬ 
mulate  our  new  and  till  now  unheard-of  view 


of  the  earth,  and  submit  it  to  the  judgment  of 
scholars.  When  it  shall  have  been  supported 
with  a  few  arguments  of  prima  facie  cogency, 
and  these  shall  have  been  confirmed  by  subse¬ 
quent  experiments  and  demonstrations,  it  will 
stand  as  firm  as  aught  that  ever  was  proposed 
in  philosophy,  backed  by  ingenious  argumen¬ 
tation,  or  buttressed  by  mathematical  demon¬ 
strations.  The  terrestrial  mass  which  together 
with  the  world  of  waters  produces  the  spheri¬ 
cal  figure  and  our  globe,  inasmuch  as  it  con¬ 
sists  of  firm  durable  matter,  is  not  easily  al¬ 
tered,  does  not  wander  nor  fluctuate  with  inde¬ 
terminate  movements  like  the  seas  and  the 
flowing  streams;  but  in  certain  hollows,  within 
certain  bounds,  and  in  many  veins  and  arter¬ 
ies,  as  it  were,  holds  the  entire  volume  of  liquid 
matter,  nor  suffers  it  to  spread  abroad  and  be 
dissipated.  But  the  solid  mass  of  the  earth  has 
the  greater  volume  and  holds  pre-eminence  in 
the  constitution  of  our  globe.  Yet  the  water  is 
associated  with  it,  though  only  as  something 
supplementary  and  as  a  flux  emanating  from 
it;  and  from  the  beginning  it  is  intimately 
mixed  with  the  smallest  particles  of  earth  and 
is  innate  in  its  substance.  The  earth  growing 
hot  emits  it  as  vapour,  which  is  of  the  greatest 
service  to  the  generation  of  things. 

But  the  strong  foundation  of  the  globe,  its 
great  mass,  is  that  terrene  body,  far  surpassing 
in  quantity  the  whole  aggregate  of  fluids  and 
waters  whether  in  combination  with  earth  or 
free  (whatever  vulgar  philosophers  may  dream 
about  the  magnitudes  and  proportions  of  their 
elements);  and  this  mass  makes  up  most  of 
the  globe,  constituting  nearly  its  whole  inte¬ 
rior  framework,  and  of  itself  taking  on  the 
spherical  form.  For  the  seas  do  but  fill  certain 
not  very  deep  hollows,  having  very  rarely  a 
depth  of  a  mile,  and  often  not  exceeding  loo 
or  50  fathoms.  This  appears  from  the  observa¬ 
tions  of  navigators  who  have  with  line  and 
sinker  explored  their  bottoms.  In  view  of  the 
earth’s  dimension,  such  depressions  cannot 
much  impair  the  spheroidal  shape  of  the  globe. 
Still  the  portion  of  the  earth  that  ever  comes 
into  view  for  man  or  that  is  brought  to  the  sur¬ 
face  seems  small  indeed,  for  we  cannot  pene¬ 
trate  deep  into  its  bowels,  beyond  the  debris  of 
its  outermost  efflorescence,  hindered  either  by 
the  waters  that  flow  as  through  veins  into  great 
mines;  or  by  the  lack  of  wholesome  air  neces¬ 
sary  to  support  the  life  of  the  miners;  or  by  the 
enormous  cost  of  executing  such  vast  undertak¬ 
ings,  and  the  many  difficulties  attending  the 
work.  Thus  we  cannot  reach  the  inner  parts  of 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


24 

the  globe,  and  if  one  goes  down,  as  in  a  few 
mines,  400  fathoms,  or  (a  very  rare  thing)  500 
fathoms,  it  is  something  to  make  every  one 
wonder.  But  how  small,  how  almost  null,  is 
the  proportion  of  500  fathoms  to  the  earth's  di¬ 
ameter — 6872  miles — can  be  easily  understood. 
So  we  do  only  see  portions  of  the  earth’s  cir¬ 
cumference,  of  its  prominences;  and  every¬ 
where  these  are  either  loamy,  or  argillaceous, 
or  sandy;  or  consist  of  organic  soils  or  marls; 
or  it  is  all  stones  and  gravel;  or  we  find  rock- 
salt,  or  ores,  or  sundry  other  metallic  sub¬ 
stances.  In  the  depths  of  the  ocean  and  other 
waters  are  found  by  mariners,  when  they  take 
soundings,  ledges  and  great  reefs,  or  bowlders, 
or  sands,  or  ooze.  The  Aristotelian  element, 
earth,  nowhere  is  seen,  and  the  Peripatetics  are 
misled  by  their  vain  dreams  about  elements. 
But  the  great  bulk  of  the  globe  beneath  the  sur¬ 
face  and  its  inmost  parts  do  not  consist  of  such 
matters;  for  these  things  had  not  been  were  it 
not  that  the  surface  was  in  contact  with  and  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  atmosphere,  the  waters,  and  the 
radiations  and  influences  of  the  heavenly  bod¬ 
ies;  for  by  the  action  of  these  are  they  generated 
and  made  to  assume  many  different  forms  of 
things,  and  to  change  perpetually.  Still  do 
they  imitate  the  inner  parts  and  resemble  their 
source,  because  their  matter  is  of  the  earth,  al¬ 
beit  they  have  lost  the  prime  qualities  and  the 
true  nature  of  terrene  matter;  and  they  bear 
toward  the  earth’s  centre  and  cohere  to  the 
globe  and  cannot  be  parted  from  it  save  by 
force. 

Yet  the  loadstone  and  all  magnetic  bodies — 
not  only  the  stone  but  all  magnetic,  homogenic 
matter — seem  to  contain  within  themselves  the 
potency  of  the  earth’s  core  and  of  its  inmost 
viscera,  and  to  have  and  comprise  whatever  in 
the  earth’s  substance  is  privy  and  inward:  the 
loadstone  possesses  the  actions  peculiar  to  the 
globe,  of  attraction,  polarity,  revolution,  of 
taking  position  in  the  universe  according  to  the 
law  of  the  whole;  it  contains  the  supreme  ex¬ 
cellencies  of  the  globe  and  orders  them:  all  this 
is  token  and  proof  of  a  certain  eminent  com¬ 
bination  and  of  a  most  accordant  nature.  For,  if 
among  bodies  one  sees  aught  that  moves  and 
breathes  and  has  senses  and  is  governed  and 
impelled  by  reason,  will  he  not,  knowing  and 
seeing  this,  say  that  here  is  a  man  or  something 
more  like  man  than  a  stone  or  a  stalk  The 
loadstone  far  surpasses  all  other  bodies  around 
us  in  the  virtues  and  properties  that  pertain  to 
the  common  mother  of  all;  but  those  proper¬ 
ties  have  been  very  little  understood  and  noted 


by  philosophers.  Toward  it,  as  we  see  in  the 
case  of  the  earth,  magnetic  bodies  tend  from  all 
sides,  and  adhere  to  it;  it  has  poles — not  mathe¬ 
matical  points,  but  natural  points  of  force  that 
through  the  co-operation  of  all  its  parts  excel  in 
prime  efficiency;  such  poles  exist  also  in  the 
same  way  in  the  globe,  and  our  forefathers  al¬ 
ways  sought  them  in  the  heavens.  Like  the 
earth,  it  has  an  equator,  a  natural  line  of  de- 
markation  between  the  two  poles;  for  of  all  the 
lines  drawn  by  mathematicians  on  the  terres¬ 
trial  globe,  the  equator  (as  later  will  appear)  is 
a  natural  boundary,  and  not  merely  a  mathe¬ 
matical  circle. 

Like  the  earth,  the  loadstone  has  the  power 
of  direction  and  of  standing  still  at  north  and 
south;  it  has  also  a  circular  motion  to  the  earth’s 
position,  whereby  it  adjusts  itself  to  the  earth’s 
law.  It  follows  the  elevations  and  depressions  of 
the  earth’s  poles,  and  conforms  precisely  to 
them:  according  to  the  position  of  the  earth  and 
of  the  locality,  it  naturally  and  of  itself  elevates 
its  poles  above  the  horizon,  or  depresses  them. 
The  loadstone  derives  properties  from  the  earth 
ex  tempore,  and  acquires  verticity;  and  iron  is 
affected  by  the  verticity  of  the  globe  as  it  is  af¬ 
fected  by  a  loadstone.  Magnetic  bodies  are  gov¬ 
erned  and  regulated  by  the  earth,  and  they  are 
subject  to  the  earth  in  all  their  movements.  All 
the  movements  of  the  loadstone  are  in  accord 
with  the  geometry  and  form  of  the  earth  and 
are  strictly  controlled  thereby,  as  will  later  be 
proved  by  conclusive  experiments  and  dia¬ 
grams;  and  the  greater  part  of  the  visible  earth 
is  also  magnetic,  and  has  magnetic  movements, 
though  it  is  defaced  by  all  sorts  of  waste  matter 
and  by  no  end  of  transformations. 

Why,  then,  do  we  not  recognize  this  primary 
and  homogeneous  earth-substance,  likest  of  all 
substances  to  the  inmost  nature,  to  the  very 
marrow,  of  the  earth  itself,  and  nearest  to  it.^ 
For  not  any  of  the  other  mixed  earths — those 
suitable  for  agriculture, — not  any  of  the  metal¬ 
liferous  veins,  no  stones,  no  sands,  no  other 
fragments  of  the  globe  that  come  under  our 
notice,  possess  such  stable,  such  distinctive  vir¬ 
tues.  Yet  we  do  not  hold  the  whole  interior  of 
this  our  globe  to  be  of  rock  or  of  iron,  albeit  the 
learned  Franciscus  Maurolycus  deems  the  earth 
in  its  interior  to  consist  throughout  of  rigid 
rock.  For  not  every  loadstone  that  we  find  is  a 
stone,  being  sometimes  like  a  clod  of  earth,  or 
like  clay,  or  like  iron;  consisting  of  various  ma¬ 
terials  compacted  into  hardness,  or  soft,  or  by 
heat  reduced  to  the  metallic  state;  and  in  the 
earth’s  surface  formations,  according  to  cir- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


cumstances  of  place,  of  the  bodies  around  it, 
and  of  its  matrix  in  the  mine,  a  magnetic  sub¬ 
stance  is  distinguished  by  divers  qualities  and 
by  adventitious  accretions,  as  we  see  in  marl,  in 
some  stones,  and  in  iron  ores.  But  the  true 
earth-matter  we  hold  to  be  a  solid  body  homo¬ 
geneous  with  the  globe,  firmly  coherent,  en¬ 
dowed  with  a  primordial  and  (as  in  the  other 
globes  of  the  universe)  an  energic  form.  By  be¬ 
ing  so  fashioned,  the  earth  has  a  fixed  verticity, 
and  necessarily  revolves  with  an  innate  whirl¬ 
ing  motion:  this  motion  the  loadstone  alone  of 
all  the  bodies  around  us  possesses  genuine  and 
true,  less  spoilt  by  outside  interferences,  less 
marred  than  in  other  bodies, — as  though  the 
motion  were  an  homogeneous  part  taken  from 
the  very  essence  of  our  globe.  This  pure  native 
iron  is  produced  when  homogenic  portions  of 
the  earth’s  substance  coalesce  to  form  a  metal¬ 
lic  vein;  loadstone  is  produced  when  they  are 
transformed  into  metallic  stone  or  a  vein  of  the 
finest  iron  or  steel;  so,  too,  rather  imperfect 
homogenic  material  collects  to  form  other  iron 
ores — ^just  as  many  parts  of  the  earth,  even  parts 
that  rise  above  the  general  circumference,  are 
of  homogenic  matter,  only  still  more  debased. 
Native  iron  is  iron  fused  and  reduced  from 
homogenic  matters,  and  coheres  to  earth  more 
tenaciously  than  the  ores  themselves. 

Such,  then,  we  consider  the  earth  to  be  in  its 
interior  parts;  it  possesses  a  magnetic  homo¬ 
genic  nature.  On  this  more  perfect  material 
(foundation)  the  whole  world  of  things  terres¬ 
trial,  which,  when  we  search  diligently,  mani¬ 
fests  itself  to  us  everywhere,  in  all  the  magnetic 
metals  and  iron  ores  and  marls,  and  multi¬ 
tudinous  earths  and  stones;  but  Aristotle’s 
“simple  element,”  and  that  most  vain  terrestrial 
phantasm  of  the  Peripatetics, — formless,  inert, 
cold,  dry,  simple  matter,  the  substratum  of  all 
things,  having  no  activity, — never  appeared  to 
any  one  even  in  dreams,  and  if  it  did  appear 
would  be  of  no  effect  in  nature.  Our  philoso¬ 
phers  dreamt  only  of  an  inert  and  simple  mat¬ 
ter.  Cardan  thinks  the  loadstone  is  not  a  stone 
of  any  species,  but  that  it  is,  as  it  were,  a  per¬ 
fect  portion  of  a  certain  kind  of  earth  that  is 
absolute,  whereof  a  proof  is  its  abundance,  for 
there  is  no  place  where  it  is  not  found.  He  says 
that  this  kind  of  conceptive,  generative  earth, 


possessed  of  an  affinity  like  that  of  the  marriage 
tie,  is  perfected  when  it  has  been  placed  in  con¬ 
tact  with,  or  received  the  fecundating  influ¬ 
ence  of,  the  masculine  or  Herculean  stone,  it 
having  been,  moreover,  shown  in  a  previous 
proposition  {Libro  de  proportionibus)  that  the 
loadstone  is  true  earth. 

A  strong  loadstone  shows  itself  to  be  of  the 
inmost  earth,  and  in  innumerable  experiments 
proves  its  claim  to  the  honour  of  possessing  the 
primal  form  of  things  terrestrial,  in  virtue  of 
which  the  earth  itself  remains  in  its  position 
and  is  directed  in  its  movements.  So  a  weak 
loadstone,  and  all  iron  ore,  all  marls  and  argil¬ 
laceous  and  other  earths  (some  more,  some 
less,  according  to  the  difference  of  their  hu¬ 
mours  and  the  varying  degrees  in  which  they 
have  been  spoilt  by  decay),  retain,  deformed, 
in  a  state  of  degeneration  from  the  primordial 
form,  magnetic  properties,  powers,  that  are 
conspicuous  and  in  the  true  sense  telluric.  For 
not  only  does  metallic  iron  turn  to  the  poles, 
not  only  is  one  loadstone  attracted  by  another 
and  made  to  revolve  magnetically,  but  so  do  (if 
prepared)  all  iron  ores  and  even  other  stones, 
as  slates  from  the  Rhineland,  the  black  slates 
{ardoises,  as  the  French  call  them)  from  An¬ 
jou,  which  are  used  for  shingles,  and  other  sorts 
of  fissile  stone  of  different  colours;  also  clays, 
gravel,  and  several  sorts  of  rock;  and,  in  short, 
all  of  the  harder  earths  found  everywhere,  pro¬ 
vided  only  they  be  not  fouled  by  oozy  and  dank 
defilements  like  mud,  mire,  heaps  of  putrid 
matter,  or  by  the  decaying  remains  of  a  mixture 
of  organic  matters,  so  that  a  greasy  slime  oozes 
from  them,  as  from  marl, — they  are  all  at¬ 
tracted  by  the  loadstone,  after  being  prepared 
simply  by  the  action  of  fire  and  freed  from  their 
excrementitious  humour;  and  as  by  the  load¬ 
stone,  so,  too,  are  they  magnetically  attracted 
and  made  to  point  to  the  poles  by  the  earth  it¬ 
self,  therein  differing  from  all  other  bodies;  and 
by  this  innate  force  they  are  made  to  conform 
to  the  ordering  and  planning  of  the  universe 
and  the  earth,  as  later  will  appear.  Thus  every 
separate  fragment  of  the  earth  exhibits  in  in¬ 
dubitable  experiments  the  whole  impetus  of 
magnetic  matter;  in  its  various  movements  it 
follows  the  terrestrial  globe  and  the  common 
principle  of  motion. 


BOOK  SECOND 


CHAPTER  1.  Of  magnetic  movanents 

Of  opinions  touching  the  loadstone  and  its  va¬ 
rieties;  of  its  poles  and  its  recognized  faculties; 
of  iron  and  its  properties;  of  the  magnetic  sub¬ 
stance  common  to  loadstone  and  iron  and  the 
earth  itself,  we  have  treated  briefly  in  the  fore¬ 
going  book.  Now  remain  the  magnetic  move¬ 
ments  and  their  broader  philosophy  as  devel¬ 
oped  by  experiments  and  demonstrations. 
These  movements  are  impulsions  of  homogene¬ 
ous  parts  toward  one  another  or  toward  the  pri¬ 
mary  conformation  of  the  whole  earth.  Aristot¬ 
le  admits  only  two  simple  movements  of  his  ele¬ 
ments — from  the  centre  and  toward  the  centre; 
light  objects  upward,  heavy  objects  downward: 
so  that  in  the  earth  there  is  but  one  motion  of 
all  its  parts  toward  the  centre  of  the  world, — a 
wild  headlong  falling.  We,  however,  will  else¬ 
where  consider  what  this  “light”  may  be,  and 
will  show  how  erroneously  it  is  inferred  by  the 
Peripatetics  from  the  simple  motion  of  the  ele¬ 
ments;  we  shall  also  inquire  what  “heavy” 
means.^  But  now  we  have  to  inquire  into  the 
causes  of  the  other  movements  depending  on  its 
true  form:  these  we  see  clearly  in  all  magnetic 
bodies;  these  also  we  find  existing  in  the  earth 
and  all  its  homogenic  parts;  further,  we  find  that 
they  are  in  accord  with  the  earth,  and  are 
bound  up  in  its  forces.  Now  five  movements  or 
differences  of  movement  are  perceived  by  us: 
Coition^  (commonly  called  attraction),  an  im¬ 
pulsion  to  magnetic  union;  direction^  toward 
the  earth’s  poles,  and  verticity  of  the  earth  to¬ 
ward  determinate  points  in  the  universe,  and 
the  standstill  there;  variation,^  deflection 
from  the  meridian — this  we  call  a  perverted  mo¬ 
tion;  DECLINATION^  (inclination  or  dip),  a  de¬ 
scent  of  the  magnetic  pole  beneath  the  horizon; 
and  circular  movement,  or  revolution.®  Of 
each  of  these  we  will  treat  separately,  and  will 
show  how  they  all  proceed  from  a  congregant 
nature,  or  from  verticity  or  from  volubility. 
Jofrancus  Offusius  distinguishes  several  magnet- 

*  See  Plato’s  Timaeus.  ^  See  ii,  2,  et  seq. 

*  See  III.  ^  Sec  IV.  ^Seev. 

®  See  VI,  3,  et  seq. 


ic  movements,  the  first  to  the  centre,  the  second 
to  the  pole,  traversing  77  degrees,  the  third  to 
iron,  the  fourth  to  a  loadstone.  The  first  is  not 
always  to  the  centre,  for  only  at  the  poles  is  it 
in  a  right  line  to  the  centre,  if  the  motion  is 
magnetic,  otherwise  it  is  only  the  movement  of 
matter  toward  its  mass  and  toward  the  earth. 
The  second,  of  77  degrees  to  the  pole,  is  no 
movement,  but  a  direction  or  a  variation  to  the 
earth’s  pole.  The  third  and  the  fourth  are  mag¬ 
netic,  and  are  but  one  movement.  Thus  this  au¬ 
thor  recognizes  no  true  magnetic  movement 
but  coition  toward  iron  or  loadstone,  commonly 
known  as  attraction.  There  is  another  move¬ 
ment  in  the  earth  as  a  whole,  which  does  not 
take  place  toward  the  terrella  or  the  parts,  i.e.y 
the  movement  of  coacervation  and  that  move¬ 
ment  of  matter  called  by  philosophers  a  “right 
movement”:  of  that  elsewhere. 

CHAPTER  2.  Of  magnetic  coition;  and,  firsts  of  the 
attraction  exerted  by  amber y  or  more  properly  the  at¬ 
tachment  of  bodies  to  amber 

Great  has  ever  been  the  fame  of  the  loadstone 
and  of  amber  in  the  writings  of  the  learned: 
many  philosophers  cite  the  loadstone  and  also 
amber  whenever,  in  explaining  mysteries,  their 
minds  become  obfuscated  and  reason  can  no 
farther  go.  Over-inquisitive  theologians,  too, 
seek  to  light  up  God’s  mysteries  and  things  be¬ 
yond  man’s  understanding  by  means  of  the  load¬ 
stone  and  amber :  j  ust  as  light-headed  metaphysi¬ 
cians,  when  they  utter  and  teach  their  vain  imag¬ 
inings,  employ  the  loadstone  as  a  sort  of  Delphic 
sword  and  as  an  illustration  of  all  sorts  of  things. 
Medical  men  also  (at  the  bidding  of  Galen),  in 
proving  that  purgative  medicines  exercise  at¬ 
traction  through  likeness  of  substance  and  kin¬ 
ships  of  juices  (a  silly  error  and  gratuitous!), 
bring  in  as  a  witness  the  loadstone,  a  substance 
of  great  authority  and  of  noteworthy  efficiency, 
and  a  body  of  no  common  order.  Thus  in  very 
many  affairs  persons  who  plead  for  a  cause  the 
merits  of  which  they  cannot  set  forth,  bring  in 
as  masked  advocates  the  loadstone  and  amber. 
But  all  these,  besides  sharing  the  general  misap¬ 
prehension,  are  ignorant  that  the  causes  of  the 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


loadstone’s  movements  are  very  different  from 
those  which  give  to  amber  its  properties;  hence 
they  easily  fall  into  errors,  and  by  their  own 
imaginings  are  led  farther  and  farther  astray. 
For  in  other  bodies  is  seen  a  considerable  power 
of  attraction,  differing  from  that  of  the  load¬ 
stone, — in  amber,  for  example.  Of  this  substance 
a  few  words  must  be  said,  to  show  the  nature  of 
the  attachment  of  bodies  to  it,  and  to  point  out 
the  vast  difference  between  thisand  the  magnetic 
actions;  for  men  still  continue  in  ignorance,  and 
deem  that  inclination  of  bodies  toamber  to  bean 
attraction,  and  comparable  to  the  magnetic  coi¬ 
tion.  The  Greeks  call  this  substance  rjXe/crpox^, 
because,  when  heated  by  rubbing,  it  attracts  to 
itself  chaff;  whence  it  is  also  called  apira^,  and 
fromitsgoldencolour,xpi’o'o06pov.ButtheMoors 
call  it  carabcy  because  they  used  to  offer  it  in 
sacrifices  and  in  the  worship  of  the  gods;  for  in 
Arabic  carab  means  oblation,  not  rapiens paleas 
(snatching  chaff),  as  Scaliger  would  have  it, 
quoting  from  the  Arabic  or  Persian  of  Abohali 
(Hali  Abbas).  Many  call  this  substance  ainbra 
(amber)  especially  that  which  is  brought  from 
India  and  Ethiopia.  The  Latin  name  succinum 
appears  to  be  formed  from  siiccus,  juice.  The 
Sudavienses  or  Sudini  call  the  substance 
as  though geniturn  terra  (produced  by  the  earth). 
The  erroneous  opinion  of  the  ancients  as  to  its 
nature  and  source  being  exploded,  it  is  certain 
that  amber  comes  for  the  most  part  from  the 
sea:  it  is  gathered  on  the  coast  after  heavy 
storms,  in  nets  and  through  other  means,  by 
peasants,  as  by  the  Sudini  of  Prussia;  it  is  also 
sometimes  found  on  the  coast  of  our  own  Brit¬ 
ain.  But  it  seems  to  be  produced  in  the  earth 
and  at  considerable  depth  below  its  surface,  like 
the  rest  of  the  bitumens;  then  to  be  washed  out 
by  the  sea-waves,  and  to  gain  consistency  under 
the  action  of  the  sea  and  the  saltness  of  its  wa¬ 
ters.  For  at  first  it  was  a  soft  and  viscous  matter, 
and  hence  contains,  buried  in  its  mass  forever¬ 
more  {deternis  sepulchris  relucentes),  but  still 
(shining)  visible,  flies,  grubs,  midges,  and  ants. 
The  ancients  as  well  as  moderns  tell  (and  their 
report  is  confined  by  experience)  that  amber  at¬ 
tracts  straws  and  chaff.  The  same  is  done  by  jet, 
a  stone  taken  out  of  the  earth  in  Britain,  Ger¬ 
many,  and  many  other  regions:  it  is  a  hard  con¬ 
cretion  of  black  bitumen, — a  sort  of  transfor¬ 
mation  of  bitumen  to  stone.  Many  modern  au¬ 
thors  have  written  about  amber  and  jet  as  at¬ 
tracting  chaff  and  about  other  facts  unknown  to 
the  generality,  or  have  copied  from  other  writ¬ 
ers:  with  the  results  of  their  labors  booksellers’ 
shops  are  crammed  full.  Our  generation  has  pro¬ 


duced  many  volumes  about  recondite,  abstruse, 
and  occult  causes  and  wonders,  and  in  all  of 
them  amber  and  jet  are  represented  as  attract¬ 
ing  chaff;  but  never  a  proof  from  experiments, 
never  a  demonstration  do  you  find  in  them. 
The  writers  deal  only  in  words  that  involve  in 
thicker  darkness  subject-matter;  they  treat  the 
subject  esoterically,  miracle-mongeringly,  ab¬ 
strusely,  reconditely,  mystically.  Hence  such 
philosophy  bears  no  fruit;  for  it  rests  simply  on 
a  few  Greek  or  unusual  terms — just  as  our  bar¬ 
bers  toss  off  a  few  Latin  words  in  the  hearing  of 
the  ignorant  rabble  in  token  of  their  learning, 
and  thus  win  reputation — bears  no  fruit,  be¬ 
cause  few  of  the  philosophers  themselves  are  in¬ 
vestigators,  or  have  any  first-hand  acquaintance 
with  things;  most  of  them  are  indolent  and  un¬ 
trained,  add  nothing  to  knowledge  by  their 
writings,  and  are  blind  to  the  things  that  might 
throw  a  light  upon  their  reasonings.  For  not 
only  do  amber  and  (gagates  or)  jet,  as  they  sup¬ 
pose,  attract  light  corpuscles  (substances):  the 
same  is  done  by  diamond,  sapphire,  carbuncle, 
iris  stone,  opal,  amethyst,  vincentina,  English 
gem  (Bristol  stone,  bristola),  beryl,  rock  crystal. 
Like  powers  of  attracting  are  possessed  by  glass, 
especially  clear,  brilliant  glass;  by  artificial  gems 
made  of  (paste)  glass  or  rock  crystal,  antimony 
glass,  many  fluor-spars,  and  belemnites.  Sul¬ 
phur  also  attracts,  and  likewise  mastich,  and 
sealing-wax  [of  lac],  hard  resin,  orpiment  (weak¬ 
ly).  Feeble  power  of  attraction  is  also  possessed 
in  favoring  dry  atmosphere  by  sal  gemma  [na¬ 
tive  chloride  of  sodium],  mica,  rock  alum.  This 
we  may  observe  when  in  mid-winter  the  atmos¬ 
phere  is  very  cold,  clear,  and  thin;  when  the 
electrical  effluvia  of  the  earth  offer  less  impedi¬ 
ment,  and  electric  bodies  are  harder:  of  all  this 
later.  These  several  bodies  (electrics)  not  only 
draw  to  themselves  straws  and  chaff,  but  all 
metals,  wood,  leaves,  stones,  earths,  even  water 
and  oil;  in  short,  whatever  things  appeal  to  our 
senses  or  are  solid:  yet  we  are  told  that  it  at¬ 
tracts  nothing  but  chaff  and  twigs.  Hence  Alex¬ 
ander  Aphrodiseus  incorrectly  declares  the 
question  of  amber  to  be  unsolvable,  because 
that  amber  does  attract  chaff,  yet  not  the  leaves 
of  basil;  but  such  stories  are  false,  disgracefully 
inaccurate.  Now  in  order  clearly  to  understand 
by  experience  how  such  attraction  takes  place, 
and  what  those  substances  may  be  that  so  at¬ 
tract  other  bodies  (and  in  the  case  of  many  of 
these  electrical  substances,  though  the  bodies 
influenced  by  them  lean  toward  them,  yet  be¬ 
cause  of  the  feebleness  of  the  attraction  they 
ate  not  drawn  clean  up  to  them,  but  are  easily 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


28 

made  to  rise),  make  yourself  a  rotating-ncedle 
(electroscope — versorium)  of  any  sort  of  metal, 
three  or  four  fingers  long,  pretty  light,  and 
poised  on  a  sharp  point  after  the  manner  of  a 
magnetic  pointer.  Bring  near  to  one  end  of  it  a 

<  t — < 


piece  of  amber  or  a  gem,  lightly  rubbed,  pol¬ 
ished  and  shining:  at  once  the  instrument  re¬ 
volves.  Several  objects  are  seen  to  attract  not 
only  natural  objects,  but  things  artificially  pre¬ 
pared,  or  manufactured,  or  formed  by  mixture. 
Nor  is  this  a  rare  property  possessed  by  one  ob¬ 
ject  or  two  (as  is  commonly  supposed),  but  evi¬ 
dently  belongs  to  a  multitude  of  objects,  both 
simple  and  compound,  e.g.y  sealing-wax  and  oth¬ 
er  unctuous  mixtures.  But  why  this  inclination 
and  what  these  forces, — on  which  points  a  few 
writers  have  given  a  very  small  amount  of  in¬ 
formation,  while  the  common  run  of  philoso¬ 
phers  give  us  nothing, — these  questions  must  be 
considered  fully.  Galen  recognizes  in  all  three 
kinds  of  attractions  in  nature:  first,  the  attrac¬ 
tion  exercised  by  those  bodies  which  attract  by 
an  elemental  quality — heat,  to  wit;  secondly, 
by  those  which  attract  by  the  in- rush  into  a 
vacuum;  thirdly,  by  those  which  attract 
through  a  property  pertaining  to  their  entire 
m.ass:  and  these  three  kinds  are  enumerated  by 
Avicenna  and  others.  This  division  cannot  by 
any  means  content  us,  nor  does  it  define  the 
causes  of  amber,  jet,  diamond,  and  other  like 
substances,  which  owe  to  the  same  virtue  the 
forces  they  possess;  nor  of  loadstone  or  of  other 
magnetic  bodies,  which  possess  a  force  altogeth¬ 
er  different  from  that  of  those  other  bodies, 
both  in  its  efficiency  and  in  the  sources  whence 
it  is  derived.  We  must,  therefore,  find  other 
causes  of  movements,  or  must  with  these  stray 
about  as  it  were  in  darkness,  never  at  all  reach¬ 
ing  our  goal.  Now  amber  does  not  attract  by 
heat,  for  when  heated  at  a  fire  and  brought  near 
to  straws,  whether  it  is  merely  warm,  or  wheth¬ 
er  it  is  hot,  even  burning  hot,  or  even  brought 
to  the  flaming  point,  it  has  no  attraction.  Car¬ 
dan  (and  Pictorius  too)  is  of  opinion  that  the 
attraction  of  amber  is  much  like  that  seen  in  the 
cupping-glass:  yet  the  attractional  force  of  the 
cupping-glass  does  not  really  come  from  igne¬ 
ous  force;  but  he  had  already  said  that  a  dry 
body  is  eager  to  drink  up  one  that  is  moist  and 
juicy,  and  therefore  such  bodies  are  drawn  to  it. 
These  two  explications  are  inconsistent,  and 


they  are  without  ground  in  reason  also.  For 
were  amber  to  move  toward  its  sustenance,  or 
other  bodies  to  turn  to  amber,  as  to  their  food, 
the  one,  being  swallowed  up,  would  disappear, 
while  the  other  would  increase  in  size.  And  then 
why  seek  in  amber  the  attractive  force  of  fire.? 
If  fire  attracts,  why  do  not  many  other  bodies 
heated  by  the  fire,  the  sun,  or  by  friction  at¬ 
tract  also?  Nor  can  attraction,  because  of  air 
displaced,  occur  in  open  air,  though  this  is  the 
cause  Lucretius  assigns  for  magnetic  move¬ 
ments;  nor  in  the  cupping-glass  can  heat  or  fire 
feeding  on  the  air  attract:  the  air  in  the  cup¬ 
ping-glass  rarefied  to  flame,  when  again  it  be¬ 
comes  dense  and  is  compressed  into  small  space, 
causes  the  skin  and  flesh  to  rise,  because  nature 
avoids  a  vacuum.  In  open  air,  heated  objects 
cannot  attract,  not  even  metals  or  stones 
brought  to  a  very  high  temperature  by  fire.  For 
an  iron  rod  at  white  heat,  a  flame,  a  candle,  a 
flaming  torch,  or  a  red-hot  coal  when  brought 
near  to  straws  or  to  a  revolving  pointer  {yer- 
sorium)  does  not  attract;  and  yet  plainly  all 
these  cause  the  air  to  come  to  them  in  a  cur¬ 
rent,  for  they  consume  air  as  a  lamp  consumes 
oil.  But  of  heat,  and  how  very  different  is  the 
view  held  by  the  whole  crowd  of  the  philoso¬ 
phers,  as  to  its  attractive  power  in  natural  bod¬ 
ies  and  materia  medica,  from  the  fact  as  seen  in 
nature,  we  will  treat  elsewhere  when  we  come 
to  explain  what  heat  and  cold  really  are.  They 
are  very  general  properties  or  close  appurtenan¬ 
ces  of  substances,  but  are  not  called  true  causes; 
and  if  I  may  use  the  expression,  they  utter  cer¬ 
tain  words,  but  in  fact  they  show  nothing  spe¬ 
cifically.  Nor  does  the  supposed  attractive  force 
of  amber  arise  from  any  peculiar  property  of  its 
substance  or  from  any  special  relation  between 
it  and  other  bodies;  for  in  many  other  substan¬ 
ces,  if  we  but  search  with  any  diligence,  we  see 
the  same  effect,  and,  by  them,  all  other  bodies, 
of  whatever  properties  possessed,  are  attracted. 
And  likeness  is  not  the  cause  of  amber’s  attract¬ 
ing,  for  all  things  that  we  see  on  the  globe, 
whether  similar  or  dissimilar,  are  attracted  by 
amber  and  such  like;  hence  no  strong  analogy  is 
to  be  drawm  either  from  likeness  or  from  iden¬ 
tity  of  substance.  Besides,  like  does  not  attract 
like — a  stone  does  not  attract  a  stone,  flesh 
flesh:  there  is  no  attraction  outside  of  the  class 
of  magnetic  and  electric  bodies.  Fracastorio 
thinks  that  all  bodies  that  mutually  attract  are 
alike,  or  of  the  same  species,  and  that,  either  in 
their  action  or  in  their  proper  subjectum:  “Now 
the  proper  subjectum^'  says  he,  “is  that  from 
which  is  emitted  that  emanational  something 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


which  attracts,  and,  in  mixed  substances,  this 
is  not  perceptible  on  account  of  deformation, 
whereby  they  are  one  thing  actu,  another  po¬ 
tential  Hence,  perhaps,  hairs  and  twigs  are 
drawn  to  amber  and  diamond  not  because  they 
are  hairs,  but  because  there  is  imprisoned  with¬ 
in  them  either  air  or  some  other  principle  that 
is  first  attracted  and  that  has  reference  and  an¬ 
alogy  to  that  which  of  itself  attracts;  and  herein 
amber  and  diamond  are  as  one,  in  virtue  of  a 
principle  common  to  both.”  So  much  for  Fra- 
castorio.  But  had  he  in  experiment  noted  that 
all  bodies  are  attracted  by  electrics  save  those 
which  are  afire  or  flaming,  or  extremely  rare¬ 
fied,  he  never  would  have  entertained  such 
views.  Men  of  acute  intelligence,  without  ac¬ 
tual  knowledge  of  facts,  and  in  the  absence  of 
experiment,  easily  slip  and  err.  In  greater  error 
are  they  who  hold  amber,  diamond,  etc.,  and 
the  objects  attracted  by  them,  to  be  like  one 
another,  but  not  the  same,  near  to  one  another 
in  kind,  and  that  therefore  like  moves  toward 
like,  and  is  by  it  perfected.  But  that  is  reckless 
speculation;  for  all  bodies  are  drawn  to  all  elec¬ 
trics,  save  bodies  aflame  or  too  rarefied,  as  the 
air  which  is  the  universal  effluvium  of  the  globe. 
Plants  draw  moisture,  and  thus  our  crops  thrive 
and  grow;  but  from  this  analogy  Hippocrates  in 
his  book  De  natiira  hominis^  i,  illogically  infers 
that  morbid  humour  is  purged  by  the  specific 
virtue  of  a  drug.  Of  the  action  of  purges  we  will 
treat  elsewhere.  Wrongly,  too,  attraction  is  pos¬ 
tulated  to  exist  in  other  effects;  e.g.,  when  a 
stoppered  bottle  of  water  being  covered  with  a 
heap  of  wheat,  its  liquid  is  drawn  out:  for  in 
fact  the  liquid  is  reduced  to  vapour  by  the  spirit 
of  the  fermenting  wheat,  and  the  wheat  takes  in 
that  vapour.  Nor  do  elephants’  tusks  suck  up 
moisture,  but  transform  it  into  vapour  and  ab¬ 
sorb  it.  And  thus  very  many  bodies  are  said  to 
attract,  whereas  the  ground  of  their  action  is  to 
be  sought  elsewhere.  A  large  polished  lump  of 
amber  attracts;  a  smaller  piece,  or  a  piece  of  im¬ 
pure  amber,  seems  not  to  attract  without  fric¬ 
tion.  But  very  many  electric  bodies  (as  pre¬ 
cious  stones,  etc.)  do  not  attract  at  all  unless  they 
are  first  rubbed;  while  sundry  other  bodies,  and 
among  them  some  gems,  have  no  power  of  at¬ 
traction,  and  cannot  be  made  to  attract,  even 
by  friction;  such  bodies  are  emerald,  agate,  car- 
nelian,  pearls,  jasper,  chalcedony,  alabaster, 
porphyry,  coral,  the  marbles,  lapis  lydius 
(touchstone,  basanite),  flint,  bloodstone,  emery 
or  corundum,  bone,  ivory;  the  hardest  woods, 
as  ebony;  some  other  woods,  as  cedar,  juniper, 
cypress;  metals,  as  silver,  gold,  copper,  iron. 


29 

The  loadstone,  though  it  is  susceptible  of  a  very 
high  polish,  has  not  the  electric  attraction.  On 
the  other  hand,  many  bodies  (already  men¬ 
tioned)  that  can  be  polished  attract  when  rubbed. 
All  this  we  shall  understand  when  we  have  more 
closely  studied  the  prime  origin  of  bodies.  As 
is  plain  to  all,  the  earth’s  mass  or  rather  the 
earth’s  framework  and  its  crust  consist  of  a  two¬ 
fold  matter,  a  matter,  to  wit,  that  is  fluid  and 
humid,  and  a  matter  that  is  firm  and  dry.  From 
this  twofold  matter,  or  from  the  simple  concre¬ 
tion  of  one  of  these  matters,  come  all  the  bodies 
around  us,  which  consist  in  major  proportion 
now  of  terrene  matter,  anon  of  watery.  Those 
that  derive  their  growth  mainly  from  humours, 
whether  watery  humour  or  one  more  dense;  or 
that  are  fashioned  from  these  humours  by  sim¬ 
ple  concretion,  or  that  were  concreted  out  of 
them  long  ages  ago;  if  they  possess  sufficient 
firmness,  and  after  being  polished  are  rubbed, 
and  shine  after  friction,  such  substances  attract 
all  bodies  presented  to  them  in  the  air,  unless 
the  said  bodies  be  too  heavy.  For  amber  and  jet 
are  concretions  of  water;  so  too  are  all  shining 
gems,  as  rock-crystal,  which  is  a  product  of  lim¬ 
pid  water,  not  always  of  such  water  at  an  ex¬ 
tremely  low  temperature,  as  some  have  thought, 
but  sometimes  at  a  more  moderate  degree  of 
cold,  the  nature  of  the  ground  fashioning  them, 
and  the  humour  or  juices  being  prisoned  in  defi¬ 
nite  cavities,  just  as  fluorites  are  generated  in 
mines.  So  clear  glass  is  reduced  from  sand  and 
other  substances  that  have  their  origin  in  hu¬ 
mid  juices.  But  these  substances  contain  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  impurities  of  metals,  or  metals  them¬ 
selves,  stones,  rocks,  wood,  earth,  or  are  largely 
mixed  with  earth;  therefore  they  do  not  attract. 
Rock  crystal,  mica,  glass,  and  other  electric 
bodies  do  not  attract  if  they  be  burned  or  high¬ 
ly  heated,  for  theirjprimordialhumour  is  destroy¬ 
ed  by  the  heat,  is  altered,  and  discharged  as  va¬ 
pour.  Hence  all  bodies  that  derive  their  origin 
principally  from  humours,  and  that  are  firmly 
concreted,  and  that  retain  the  appearance  and 
property  of  fluid  in  a  firm,  solid  mass,  attract  all 
substances,  whether  humid  or  dry.  Such  as  are 
parts  of  the  true  substance  of  the  earth  or  differ 
but  little  from  that,  appear  to  attract  also,  but 
in  a  very  different  way,  and,  so  to  speak,  mag¬ 
netically:  of  them  we  are  to  treat  later.  But 
those  that  consist  of  mixed  water  and  earth,  and 
that  result  from  equal  degradation  of  both  ele¬ 
ments — in  which  the  magnetic  force  of  the 
earth  is  degraded  and  lies  in  abeyance,  while 
the  aqueous  humour,  spoilt  by  combination  with 
a  quantity  of  earth,  does  not  form  a  concretion 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


30 

by  itself,  but  mingles  with  the  earthy  matter — 
such  bodies  are  powerless  to  attract  to  them- 
selves  aught  that  they  are  not  in  actual  con¬ 
tact  with,  or  to  repel  the  same.  For  this  reason 
it  is  that  neither  metals,  marbles,  flints,  woods, 
grasses,  flesh,  nor  various  other  substances  can 
attract  or  solicit  a  body,  whether  magnetically 
or  electrically  (for  it  pleases  us  to  call  electric 
force  that  force  which  has  its  origin  in  hu¬ 
mours).  But  bodies  consisting  mostly  of  hu¬ 
mour  and  not  firmly  compacted  by  nature 
wherefore  they  do  not  stand  friction,  but  ei¬ 
ther  fall  to  pieces  or  grow  soft,  or  are  sticky,  as 
pitch,  soft  rosin,  camphor,  galbanum,  ammoni- 
acum,  storax,  asa,  gum  benjamin,  asphaltum 
(especially  in  a  warm  atmosphere),  do  not  at¬ 
tract  corpuscles.  For  without  friction  few  bodies 
give  out  their  true  natural  electric  emanation 
and  effluvium.  Turpentine  resin  in  the  liquid 
state  does  not  attract,  because  it  cannot  be 
rubbed;  but  when  it  hardens  to  a  mastic  it  does 
attract. 

And  now,  at  last,  we  have  to  see  why  cor¬ 
puscles  are  drawn  toward  substances  that  de¬ 
rive  their  origin  from  water,  and  by  what 
manner  of  force,  by  what  hands,  so  to 
speak,  such  substances  lay  hold  of  matters  nigh 
them. 

In  all  bodies  everywhere  are  presented  two 
causes  or  principles  whereby  the  bodies  are 
produced,  to  wit,  matter  {materia)  and  form 
{forma).  Electrical  movements  come  from  the 
materia,  but  magnetic  from  the  prime  forma; 
and  these  two  differ  widely  from  each  other  and 
become  unlike — the  one  ennobled  by  many  vir¬ 
tues,  and  prepotent;  the  other  lowly,  of  less  po¬ 
tency,  and  confined  in  certain  prisons,  as  it 
were:  wherefore  its  force  has  to  be  awakened  by 
friction  till  the  substance  attains  a  moderate 
heat,  and  gives  out  an  effluvium,  and  its  surface 
is  made  to  shine.  Moist  air  blown  upon  it  from 
the  mouth  or  a  current  of  humid  air  from  the 
atmosphere  chokes  its  powers;  and  if  a  sheet  of 
paper  or  a  linen  cloth  be  interposed  there  is  no 
movement.  But  loadstone,  neither  rubbed  nor 
heated,  and  ev^en  though  it  be  drenched  with 
liquid,  and  whether  in  air  or  water,  attracts 
magnetic  bodies,  and  that,  though  solidest  bod¬ 
ies  or  boards,  or  thick  slabs  of  stone  or  plates  of 
metal,  stand  between.  A  loadstone  attracts  only 
magnetic  bodies;  electrics  attract  everything. 
A  loadstone  lifts  great  weights;  a  strong  one 
weighing  two  ounces  lifts  half  an  ounce  or  one 
ounce.  Electrics  attract  only  light  weights;  e.g., 
a  piece  of  amber  three  ounces  in  weight  lifts 
only  one-fourth  of  a  barleycorn’s  weight. 


But  this  attraction  of  amber  and  of  electric 
bodies  must  be  investigated  further;  and  since 
it  is  an  acquired  state  the  question  arises  why 
amber  is  rubbed,  and  what  state  is  brought 
about  by  rubbing;  also,  what  causes  are  evoked 
that  seize  all  sorts  of  substances.  By  friction  it 
is  made  moderately  hot  and  also  smooth;  and 
these  conditions  must  in  most  cases  concur;  but 
a  large  polished  piece  of  amber  or  of  jet  attracts 
even  without  friction,  though  not  strongly;  yet 
if  it  be  carefully  brought  nigh  to  a  flame  or  a 
red  coal  and  warmed  to  the  same  degree  as  by 
friction,  it  does  not  attract  corpuscles,  because 
it  becomes  involved  in  dark  fumes  from  the 
body  of  the  hot  or  flaming  mass,  which  emits  a 
hot  exhalation;  and  the  vapour  from  that  other 
body  is  driven  upon  it — something  quite  alien 
to  the  nature  of  the  amber.  Besides,  the  exhala¬ 
tion  produced  in  the  amber  by  an  alien  heat  is 
feeble,  for  the  amber  must  not  have  any  heat 
save  that  produced  by  friction:  its  own  heat,  so 
to  speak, — not  heat  contributed  by  other  bod¬ 
ies.  For  as  the  igneous  heat  emitted  by  any 
flaming  matter  is  useless  to  procure  for  electrics 
their  virtue,  so,  too,  heat  from  the  sun’s  rays 
does  not  excite  an  electric  by  the  right  dissolu¬ 
tion  of  its  matter — rather  dissipates  and  con¬ 
sumes  it  (albeit  a  body  that  undergoes  friction 
and  then  is  exposed  to  the  solar  rays  retains  its 
powers  longer  than  it  does  in  shade,  because 
that  in  shade  effluvia  are  condensed  more  and 
more  quickly);  further,  the  sun’s  heat,  height¬ 
ened  by  means  of  a  burning-glass,  imparts  no 
power  to  amber,  for  it  dissipates  and  spoils  all 
the  electric  effluvia.  Again,  flaming  sulphur  and 
burning  sealing-wax  do  not  attract,  for  heat  pro¬ 
duced  by  friction  dissolves  bodies  into  effluvia, 
and  these  are  consumed  by  flame.  It  is  impossi¬ 
ble  for  solid  electrics  to  be  resolved  into  their 
effluvia  otherwise  than  by  attrition,  save  a  few 
that,  because  of  their  native  strength,  emit  ef¬ 
fluvia  continually.  They  are  to  be  rubbed  with 
bodies  that  do  not  foul  the  surface,  and  that 
cause  them  to  shine,  e.g.,  strong  silk,  and  coarse 
woollen  cjoth,  scrupiflously  clean,  and  the  dry 
palm  of  the  hand.  Amber  may  be  rubbed  with 
amber,  with  diamond,  with  glass,  etc.  Thus  are 
electrics  made  ready  for  action. 

And  now  what  is  it  that  produces  the  move¬ 
ment  ?  The  body  itself  circumscribed  by  its  con¬ 
tour. Or  is  it  something  imperceptible  for  us 
flowing  out  of  the  substance  into  the  ambient 
air?  (This  appears  to  have  been  in  some  sense 
the  opinion  of  Plutarch,  who,  in  the  Oiidestiones 
Flatonicde,  says  that  there  is  in  amber  something 
flame-like,  or  having  the  nature  of  the  breath. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


and  that  this,  when  the  paths  are  cleared  by 
friction  of  the  surface,  is  emitted  and  attracts 
bodies.)  And  if  it  is  an  effluvium,  does  the  efflu¬ 
vium  set  the  air  in  current,  and  is  the  current 
then  followed  by  the  bodies?  or  is  it  the  bodies 
themselves  directly  that  are  drawn  up?  But  if 
the  amber  attracts  the  body  itself,  then  suppos¬ 
ing  its  surface  is  clean  and  free  from  adhesions, 
what  need  is  there  of  friction?  Nor  does  the 
force  come  from  the  lustre  proceeding  from  the 
rubbed  and  polished  electric;  for  the  vincentina, 
the  diamond,  and  pure  glass  attract  when  they 
are  rough,  but  not  so  strongly  nor  so  readily; 
because  then  they  are  not  so  easily  cleansed  of 
extraneous  moisture  settled  on  the  surface,  nor 
are  they  subjected  all  over  to  such  an  equal  de¬ 
gree  of  friction  as  to  be  resolved  into  effluvia. 
Nor  does  the  sun,  with  its  shining  and  its  rays, 
which  are  of  vast  importance  in  nature,  attract 
bodies  thus;  and  yet  the  common  run  of  phi¬ 
losophizers  think  that  liquids  are  attracted  by 
the  stm,  whereas  only  the  denser  humours  are 
resolved  into  rarer,  (and)  into  vapour  and  air; 
and  thus,  through  the  motion  given  to  them  by 
diffusion,  they  ascend  to  the  upper  regions,  or, 
being  attenuated  exhalations,  are  lifted  by  the 
heavier  air.  Neither  does  it  seem  that  the  elec¬ 
tric  attraction  is  produced  by  the  effluvia  rare¬ 
fying  the  air  so  that  bodies,  impelled  by  the 
denser  air,  are  made  to  move  toward  the  source 
of  the  rarefaction:  if  that  were  so,  then  hot  bod¬ 
ies  and  flaming  bodies  would  also  attract  other 
bodies;  but  no  lightest  straw,  no  rotating  point¬ 
er  is  drawn  toward  a  flame.  If  there  is  afflux 
and  appulsion  of  air,  how  can  a  minute  diamond 
of  the  size  of  a  chick-pea  pull  to  itself  so  much 
air  as  to  sweep  in  a  corpuscle  of  relatively  con¬ 
siderable  length,  the  air  being  pulled  toward 
the  diamond  only  from  around  a  small  part  of 
one  or  other  end?  Besides,  the  attracted  body 
must  stand  still  or  move  more  slowly  before 
coming  into  contact,  especially  if  the  attract¬ 
ing  body  be  a  broad  flat  piece  of  amber,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  heaping  up  of  air  on  the  surface, 
and  its  rebounding  after  collision.  And  if  the 
effluvia  go  out  rare  and  return  dense  (as  with 
vapours),  then  the  body  would  begin  to  move 
toward  the  electric  a  little  after  the  beginning 
of  its  application;  yet,  when  rubbed  electrics 
are  suddenly  applied  to  a  versorium,  instantly 
the  pointer  turns,  and  the  nearer  it  is  to  the  elec¬ 
tric  the  quicker  is  the  attraction.  But  if  rare  ef¬ 
fluvia  rarefy  the  medium,  and  therefore  the 
bodies  pass  from  a  denser  into  a  rarer  medium, 
then  the  bodies  might  be  attracted  sideways  or 
downward,  but  not  upward,  or  the  attraction 


and  holding  of  the  bodies  would  be  only  for  a 
moment.  But  jet  and  amber  after  one  friction 
strongly  and  for  a  length  of  time  solicit  and  at¬ 
tract  bodies,  sometimes  for  as  long  as  five  min¬ 
utes,  especially  if  the  weather  is  fair.  But  if  the 
mass  of  amber  be  large,  and  its  surface  polished, 
it  attracts  without  friction.  Flint,  on  being 
struck,  gives  off  inflammable  matter  that  turns 
to  sparks  and  heat.  Hence  the  denser  fire-con¬ 
taining  effluvia  of  flint  are  very  different  indeed 
from  the  electrical  effluvia,  which,  by  reason  of 
their  extreme  tenuity,  cannot  take  fire,  nor  are 
they  fit  matter  of  flame.  They  are  not  a  breath, 
for,  when  given  forth,  they  do  not  exert  pro¬ 
pelling  force;  they  flow  forth  without  any  per¬ 
ceptible  resistance,  and  reach  bodies.  They  are 
exceedingly  attenuated  humours,  much  more 
rarefied  than  the  ambient  air;  to  produce  them 
requires  bodies  generated  of  humour  and  consol¬ 
idated  to  considerable  hardness.  Non-electric 
bodies  are  not  resolvable  into  humid  effluvia; 
and  such  effluvia  mingle  with  the  common  and 
general  effluvia  of  the  earth,  and  are  not  pecu¬ 
liar.  In  addition  to  the  attracting  of  bodies,  elec¬ 
trics  hold  them  for  a  considerable  time.  Hence 
it  is  probable  that  amber  exhales  something  pe¬ 
culiar  that  attracts  the  bodies  themselves,  and 
not  the  air.  It  plainly  attracts  the  body  itself  in 
the  case  of  a  spherical  drop  of  water  standing  on 
a  dry  surface;  for  a  piece  of  amber  held  at  suit¬ 
able  distance  pulls  toward  itself  the  nearest  par¬ 
ticles  and  draws  them  up  into  a  cone;  were  they 
drawn  by  the  air  the  whole  drop  would  come 
toward  the  amber.  And  that  amber  does  not  at¬ 
tract  the  air  is  thus  proved:  take  a  very  slender 
wax  candle  giving  a  very  small  clear  flame; 
bring  a  broad  flat  piece  of  amber  or  jet,  careful¬ 
ly  prepared  and  rubbed  thoroughly,  within  a 
couple  of  fingers'  distance  from  it;  now  an  am¬ 
ber  that  will  attract  bodies  from  a  considerable 
radius  will  cause  no  motion  in  the  flame,  though 
such  motion  would  be  inevitable  if  the  air  were 
moving,  for  the  flame  would  follow  the  current 
of  air.  The  amber  attracts  from  as  far  as  the  ef¬ 
fluvia  are  sent  out;  but  as  the  body  comes  near¬ 
er  the  amber  its  motion  is  quickened,  the  forces 
pulling  it  being  stronger,  as  is  the  case  also  in 
magnetic  bodies,  and  in  all  natural  motion;  and 
the  motion  is  not  due  to  rarefaction  of  the  air 
or  to  an  action  of  the  air  impelling  the  body  to 
take  the  vacated  place;  for  in  that  case  the  body 
would  be  pulled  but  not  held,  since,  at  first,  ap¬ 
proaching  bodies  would  even  be  repelled  just 
as  the  air  itself  would  be:  yet  in  fact  the  air  is  not 
in  the  least  repelled  even  at  the  instant  that  the 
rubbed  amber  is  brought  near  after  very  rapid 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


32 

friction.  An  eflluvium  is  exhaled  by  the  am¬ 
ber  and  is  sent  forth  by  friction;  pearls,  carncli- 
an,  agate,  jasper,  chalcedony,  coral,  metals,  and 
the  like,  when  rubbed  are  inactive;  but  is  there 
nought  that  is  emitted  from  them  also  by  heat 
and  friction.'^  There  is  indeed;  but  what  is  emit¬ 
ted  from  the  denser  bodies,  and  those  with  con¬ 
siderable  admixture  of  earth  matter,  is  thick 
and  vaporous;  and  in  fact  in  the  case  of  very 
many  of  the  electric  bodies,  if  they  be  violently 
rubbed,  there  is  but  a  faint  attraction  of  bodies 
to  them,  or  none  at  all;  the  best  method  is  to 
use  gentle  but  very  rapid  friction,  for  so  the  fin¬ 
est  effluvia  are  elicited.  The  effluvia  arise  from 
a  subtle  solution  of  moisture,  not  from  force  ap¬ 
plied  violently  and  recklessly;  this  is  true  espec¬ 
ially  of  bodies  that  are  of  oily  substance  consol¬ 
idated,  which,  when  the  atmosphere  is  thin  and 
the  wind  is  from  the  north,  or  here  in  England 
from  the  east,  produce  their  effects  best  and 
with  most  certainty;  but  in  a  south  wind  and  a 
humid  atmosphere  the  effect  is  very  slight:  so 
that  effluvia  that  attract  but  feebly  when  the 
weather  is  clear,  produce  no  motion  at  all  when 
it  is  cloudy.  And  this  as  well  because  in  thick 
weather  light  objects  are  harder  to  move,  as  also 
(and  rather)  because  the  effluvia  are  stifled,  and 
the  surface  of  the  rubbed  body  is  affected  by  the 
vaporous  air,  and  the  effluvia  are  stopped  at 
their  very  origin;  hence  it  is  that  in  amber,  jet, 
and  sulphur,  because  these  bodies  do  not  so 
readily  collect  the  humid  air  on  their  surface, 
and  are  much  more  thoroughly  resolved,  this 
force  is  not  so  easily  suppressed  as  in  gems,  rock- 
crystal,  glass,  and  the  like,  which  collect  the 
condensed  moist  air  on  their  surface.  But  the 
question  may  arise,  why  amber  attracts  water, 
though  water  existing  on  a  surface  annuls  its 
action.  That  is  because  it  is  one  thing  to  sup¬ 
press  the  eflluvium  at  its  rise,  another  to  destroy 
it  after  it  is  emitted.  7'hus  a  certain  gauzy  tex¬ 
ture  of  silk,  commonly  called  sarsenet^  when 
quickly  laid  over  amber  immediately  after  fric¬ 
tion,  hinders  the  body’s  attraction;  but  if  it  be 
interposed  midway  between  the  two  bodies,  it 
does  not  altogether  annul  the  attraction.  Mois¬ 
ture  from  steam,  a  breath  from  the  mouth, 
water  thrown  on  the  amber,  instantly  check  the 
eflluvium.  But  olive-oil  that  is  light  and  pure 
does  not  prevent  it,  and  even  rubbing  amber 
with  a  warm  finger  dipped  in  the  oil  does  not 
prevent  attraction.  But  if  after  that  friction  the 
amber  be  drenched  with  alcohol,  or  brandy,  it 
does  not  attract,  as  the  spirit  is  heavier,  denser, 
than  the  oil,  and  when  added  to  the  oil  sinks 
below  it.  For  olive-oil  is  light  and  rare,  and  does 


not  oppose  the  passage  of  the  lightest  effluvia. 
A  breath,  then,  proceeding  from  a  body  that  is 
a  concretion  of  moisture  or  aqueous  fluid,  reach¬ 
es  the  body  that  is  to  be  attracted,  and  as  soon 
as  it  is  reached  it  is  united  to  the  attracting  elec¬ 
tric;  and  a  body  in  touch  with  another  body  by 
the  peculiar  radiation  of  effluvia  makes  of  the 
two  one:  united,  the  two  come  into  most  inti¬ 
mate  harmony,  and  that  is  what  is  meant  by 
attraction.  This  unity  is,  according  to  Pytha¬ 
goras,  the  principle,  through  participation,  in 
which  a  thing  is  said  to  be  one.  For  as  no  action 
can  be  performed  by  matter  save  by  contact, 
these  electric  bodies  do  not  appear  to  touch, 
but  of  necessity  something  is  given  out  from 
the  one  to  the  other  to  come  into  close  contact 
therewith,  and  be  a  cause  of  incitation  to  it. 

All  bodies  are  united  and,  as  it  were,  cement¬ 
ed  together  by  moisture,and  hence  a  wet  body 
on  touching  another  body  attracts  it  if  the  other 
body  be  small;  and  wet  bodies  on  the  surface  of 
water  attract  wet  bodies.  But  the  peculiar 
effluvia  of  electrics,  being  the  subtilest  matter  of 
solute  moisture,  attract  corpuscles.  Air,  too  (the 
earth’s  universal  eflluvium),  unites  parts  that 
are  separated,  and  the  earth,  by  means  of  the 
air,  brings  back  bodies  to  itself;  else  bodies 
would  not  so  eagerly  seek  the  earth  from  heights. 
The  electric  effluvia  differ  much  from  air,  and 
as  air  is  the  earth’s  effluvium,  so  electric  bodies 
have  their  own  distinctive  effluvia;  and  each  pe¬ 
culiar  effluvium  has  its  own  individual  power 
of  leading  to  union,  its  own  movement  to  its 
origin,  to  its  fount,  and  to  the  body  that  emits 
the  eflluvium.  But  bodies  that  give  out  a  thick 
or  a  vaporous  or  an  aerial  effluvium  when  rubbed 
have  no  effect;  for  either  such  effluvia  are 
diverse  from  humour  (unifier  of  all  things),  or, 
being  very  like  the  common  air,  they  become 
blended  with  the  air  and  one  with  it:  wherefore 
they  have  no  effect  in  the  air,  and  do  not  produce 
any  movements  different  from  those  of  that  uni¬ 
versal  and  common  element.  Bodies  tend  to 
come  together  and  move  about  on  the  surface 
of  water  like  the  rod  C,  which  dips  a  little  into 


the  water.  Evidently  the  rod  EF,  floated  by  the 
cork  H  and  having  only  the  wetted  end  F above 
the  water’s  surface,  will  be  attracted  by  the  rod 
C,  if  C  be  wetted  a  little  above  the  water’s  sur- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


face.  As  a  drop  brought  into  contact  with  an¬ 
other  drop  is  attracted,  and  the  two  forthwith 
unite,  in  the  same  way  a  wet  object  on  the  sur¬ 
face  of  water  seeks  union  with  another  wet  ob¬ 
ject  when  the  surface  of  the  water  rises  in  both: 
at  once,  like  drops  or  bubbles  of  water,  they 
come  together;  but  they  are  in  much  nigher 
neighborhood  than  in  the  case  of  electrics,  and 
they  unite  by  their  wetted  surfaces.  But  if  the 
whole  rod  C  be  dry  above  the  water,  it  no  longer 
attracts  but  repels  the  rod  EF.  The  same  is  seen 
in  the  case  of  bubbles  on  water:  one  is  seen  to 
approach  another,  all  the  more  rapidly  the  near¬ 
er  they  are.  Solids  draw  to  solids  through  the 
medium  of  liquid;  e.g.^  touch  the  end  of  a  ver- 
sorium  with  the  end  of  a  rod  on  which  a  drop  of 
water  stands:  the  instant  the  rotating  pointer 
comes  in  contact  with  the  circumference  of  the 
drop  it  adheres  to  it  with  a  sudden  motion.  So 
do  bodies  concreted  from  liquids  when  melted 
a  little  in  the  air  exercise  attraction,  their  efflu¬ 
via  being  the  means  of  unition;  for  the  water  in 
humid  bodies  or  in  bodies  drenched  with  super¬ 
ficial  moisture  on  the  top  of  water  has  the  force 
of  an  effluvium.  A  clear  atmosphere  is  a  good 
medium  for  the  electric  effluvium  developed 
from  concreted  humour.  Wet  bodies  projecting 
out  of  the  surface  of  water  come  together,  if 
they  be  near,  and  unite,  for  the  water’s  surface 
rises  around  wet  surfaces.  A  dry  body  does  not 
move  toward  a  wet,  nor  a  wet  toward  a  dry,  but 
rather  they  seem  to  go  away  from  each  other; 
for  if  all  of  the  body  that  is  above  the  water  is 
dry,  the  nearest  water  surface  does  not  rise  but 
falls  away  with  subsidence  of  the  surface  around 
the  dry  object.  So,  too,  a  dry  body  does  not  run 
to  the  dry  rim  of  a  vessel  containing  water;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  a  wet  object  does.  In  the  figure, 
AB  is  the  water  surface;  C,  Z),  two  rods  with 


their  projecting  ends  wet.  Evidently  the  sur¬ 
face  of  the  water  at  C  and  D  rises  simultaneously 
with  the  rods;  hence  the  rod  C,  because  its  wa¬ 
ter,  standing  above  the  general  level,  seeks  equi¬ 
librium  and  union,  moves  with  the  water  to¬ 
ward  D.  On  the  wet  rod  E  the  water  rises  also, 
but  by  the  dry  rod  F  the  water  is  depressed,  and 
as  it  strives  to  depress  also  the  water  rising  on  E, 
the  higher  water  at  E  turns  away  from  F,  for  it 
refuses  to  be  depressed.  All  electric  attractions 
are  effected  by  means  of  moisture,  and  thus  all 


things  come  together  because  of  humour:  fluid 
bodies  and  aqueous  bodies  come  together  on  the 
surface  of  water,  and  concreted  bodies,  if  re¬ 
duced  to  vapour,  come  together  in  the  air.  And 
in  the  air  the  effluvium  of  electrics  is  very  rare, 
that  so  it  may  more  thoroughly  permeate  the 
atmosphere,  and  yet  not  give  it  impulsion  by 
its  own  motion.  For  were  this  effluvium  as  dense 
as  air,  or  the  winds,  or  the  fumes  of  burning 
saltpetre,  or  as  the  thick,  foul  effluvia  emitted 
with  much  force  from  other  bodies,  or  as  the 
air  from  vaporized  water  rushing  forth  from  a 
pipe  (as  in  the  instrument  described  by  Hero  of 
Alexandria  in  his  book  Spiritnalia) :  in  such  case 
it  would  repel  everything,  and  not  attract.  But 
those  thinner  effluvia  lay  hold  of  the  bodies  with 
which  they  unite,  enfold  them,  as  it  were,  in 
their  arms,  and  bring  them  into  union  with  the 
electrics;  and  the  bodies  are  led  to  the  electric 
source,  the  effluvia  having  greater  force  the 
nearer  they  are  to  that.  But  what  is  the  effluvi¬ 
um  from  rock-crystal,  glass,  diamond— substan¬ 
ces  very  hard  and  very  highly  compressed  ?  For 
such  effluvium  there  is  no  need  of  any  notable 
or  sensible  outflow  of  substance:  no  need  of 
abrading,  or  rubbing,  or  otherwise  disfiguring 
the  electric  body:  odoriferous  substances  give 
forth  fragrance  for  many  years,  exhale  contin¬ 
ually,  yet  are  not  soon  consumed.  Cypress  wood, 
as  long  as  it  remains  sound — and  it  lasts  a  very 
long  time — is  fragrant,  as  many  learned  men 
testify  from  experience.  Such  an  electric,  after 
only  a  moment’s  friction,  emits  powers  subtile 
and  fine,  far  beyond  all  odors;  but  sometimes 
an  odor  also  is  emitted  by  amber,  jet,  sulphur, 
these  bodies  being  more  readily  resolved.  Hence 
it  is  that  usually  they  attract  after  the  gentlest 
friction,  or  even  without  friction;  and  they  at¬ 
tract  more  powerfully  and  keep  hold  longer  be¬ 
cause  their  effluvia  are  stronger  and  more  last¬ 
ing.  But  diamond,  glass,  rock-crystal,  and  very 
many  of  the  harder  and  more  compacted  gems 
are  heated,  and  then  rubbed  for  a  good  while  at 
first,  after  which  they,  too,  attract  strongly: 
they  cannot  be  resolved  in  any  other  way.  Elec¬ 
trics  attract  all  things  save  flame  and  objects 
aflame,  and  thinnest  air.  And  as  they  do  not 
draw  to  themselves  flame,  so  they  have  no  effect 
on  a  versorium  if  it  have  very  near  it  on  any  side 
the  flame  of  a  lamp  or  of  any  burning  substance; 
for  it  is  plain  that  the  effluvia  are  consumed  by 
flame  and  igneous  heat.  Therefore  electrics  do 
not  attract  either  flame  or  bodies  near  flame;  for 
such  effluvia  have  the  virtue  and  analogy  of 
rarefied  humour,  and  they  will  produce  their 
effect,  bringing  about  unition  and  continuity, 


34  WILLIAM 

not  through  the  external  action  of  humours,  or 
through  heat,  or  through  attenuation  of  heated 
bodies,  but  through  the  attenuation  of  the  hu¬ 
mid  substance  into  its  own  specific  effluvia.  Yet 
they  draw  to  themselves  the  smoke  from  an  ex¬ 
tinguished  candle;  and  the  lighter  the  smoke  be¬ 
comes  as  it  ascends,  the  less  strongly  is  it  attract¬ 
ed,  for  substances  that  are  too  rare  do  not  suf¬ 
fer  attraction.  At  last,  when  the  smoke  has  near¬ 
ly  vanished,  it  is  not  attracted  at  all,  as  is  plain¬ 
ly  seen  when  the  fact  is  observed  toward  the 
light.  But  when  it  has  passed  quite  into  the  air 
it  is  not  stirred  by  electrics,  as  has  already  been 
shown.  For  thin  air  itself  is  in  no  wise  attracted, 
save  by  reason  of  its  coming  into  a  vacuum,  as 
is  seen  in  furnaces  in  which  air  is  supplied  by 
means  of  appliances  for  drawing  it  in.  Therefore 
the  effluvium  called  forth  by  a  friction  that  does 
not  clog  the  surface — an  effluvium  not  altered 
by  heat,  but  which  is  the  natural  product  of  the 
electric  body  —  causes  unition  and  cohesion, 
seizure  of  the  other  body,  and  its  confluence  to 
the  electrical  source,  provided  the  body  to  be 
drawn  is  not  unsuitable  by  reason  either  of  the 
circumstances  of  the  bodies  or  of  its  own  weight. 
Hence  corpuscles  are  carried  to  the  electrical 
bodies  themselves.  The  effluvia  spread  in  all  di¬ 
rections:  they  are  specific  and  peculiar,  and  sui 
generis^  different  from  the  common  air;  gener¬ 
ated  from  humour;  called  forth  by  calorific  mo¬ 
tion  and  rubbing,  and  attenuation;  they  are  as 
it  were  material  rods — hold  and  take  up  straws, 
chaff,  twigs,  till  their  force  is  spent  or  vanishes; 
and  then  these  small  bodies,  being  set  free  again, 
are  attracted  by  the  earth  itself  and  fall  to  the 
ground.  The  difference  (distinction)  between 
electric  and  magnetic  bodies  is  this:  all  magnet¬ 
ic  bodies  come  together  by  their  joint  forces 
(mutual  strength);  electric  bodies  attract  the 
electric  only,  and  the  body  attracted  under¬ 
goes  no  modification  through  its  own  native 
force,  but  is  drawn  freely  under  impulsion  in  the 
ratio  of  its  matter  (composition).  Bodies  are  at¬ 
tracted  to  electrics  in  a  right  line  toward  the 
centre  of  electricity:  a  loadstone  approaches 
another  loadstone  on  a  line  perpendicular  to 
the  circumference  only  at  the  poles,  elsewhere 
obliquely  and  transversely,  and  adheres  at  the 
same  angles.  The  electric  motion  is  the  motion 
of  coacervation  of  matter;  the  magnetic  is  that 
of  arrangement  and  order.  The  matter  of  the 
earth’s  globe  is  brought  together  and  held  to¬ 
gether  by  itself  electrically.  The  earth’s  globe 
is  directed  and  revolves  magnetically;  it  both 
coheres  and,  to  the  end  it  may  be  solid,  is  in  its 
interior  fast  joined. 


GILBERT 

CHAP!  3.  Opinions  of  others  concerning  magnetic 
coition,  which  they  call  attraction 

H-wing  treated  of  electrics,  we  have  now  to  set 
forth  the  causes  of  magnetic  coition.  Coition, 
we  say,  not  attraction,  for  the  term  attraction 
has  wrongfully  crept  into  magnetic  philosophy, 
through  the  ignorance  of  the  ancients;  for  where 
attraction  exists,  there,  force  seems  to  be  brought 
in  and  a  tyrannical  violence  rules.  Hence,  if  we 
have  at  any  time  spoken  of  magnetic  attraction, 
what  we  meant  was  magnetic  coition  and  pri¬ 
mary  confluence.  But  here  it  will  be  not  un¬ 
profitable  first  to  set  forth  briefly  the  views  of 
others,  both  among  the  ancients  and  the  mod¬ 
erns.  Orpheus,  in  his  hymns,  tells  that  iron  is 
drawn  by  the  loadstone  as  the  bride  to  the  em¬ 
braces  of  her  spouse.  Epicurus  holds  that  iron 
is  drawn  by  the  loadstone  as  straws  by  amber; 
and  adds  a  reason*.  “Atoms,”  he  says,  “and  in¬ 
divisible  bodies  that  flow  from  stone  and  from 
iron,  agree  together  in  their  figures,  so  that  they 
readily  embrace  mutually;  hence,  when  they 
impinge  on  concretions  both  of  iron  and  stone, 
they  rebound  into  the  middle  space,  connected 
together  on  the  way,  and  carr}^  the  iron  with 
them,”  This,  surely,  cannot  be,  for  though  solid 
and  very  dense  bodies,  or  blocks  of  marble, 
stand  between,  they  do  not  hinder  the  passage 
of  this  potency,  though  they  can  separate  atoms 
from  atoms;  besides,  on  the  hypothesis,  the 
stone  and  iron  would  quickly  be  resolved  into 
atoms,  so  profuse  and  incessant  would  be  the 
atomic  outflow.  And  as  the  mode  of  attraction 
is  quite  different  in  amber,  there  the  Epicurean 
atoms  cannot  agree  in  their  figures.  Thales,  as 
we  are  told  by  Aristotle,  in  Book  i,  On  the  Soul, 
deemed  the  loadstone  endowed  with  a  sort  of 
life,  because  it  possesses  the  power  of  moving 
and  attracting  iron.  Anaxagoras  was  of  the  same 
opinion.  The  opinion  of  Plato  in  the  Timseus, 
about  the  effect  of  the  Herculean  stone,  is  base¬ 
less.  He  says:  “With  respect  to  all  the  motions 
of  water,  the  fallings  of  thunder,  and  the  won¬ 
derful  circumstances  obser\*ed  in  the  attraction 
of  amber,  and  the  Herculean  stone — in  all  these, 
no  real  attraction  takes  place  at  all,  but,  as  a 
vacuum  can  nowhere  be  found,  the  particles 
are  mutually  impelled  by  each  other;  hence,  as 
they  all  individually,  both  in  a  separate  and 
mingled  state,  have  an  attraction  for  their  own 
proper  seats,  it  is  by  the  mutual  intermingling 
of  these  affections,  that  such  admirable  effects 
present  themselves  to  the  view  of  the  accurate 
investigator.”  Galen  knows  not  why  Plato 
should  have  chosen  rather  the  theory  of  cir- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


cumpulsion  than  of  attraction  (on  this  point 
alone  differing  from  Hippocrates),  seeing  that 
circumpulsion  harmonizes  in  fact  neither  with 
reason  nor  with  experiment.  For  neither  is  air 
nor  anything  else  circumpelled,  and  even  the 
bodies  that  are  attracted  are  not  borne  to  the 
attracting  body  in  confused  fashion  or  in  a  cir¬ 
cle.  The  Epicurean  poet  Lucretius  thus  presents 
his  master’s  theory: 

Principio  Jiuere  e  lapide  hocpermulta  necesset 
Semina  sive  xstnm,  qui  disciitit  aera  plagis; 

Inter  qui  la pidem  y  f err  unique  esty  ciimqtie  locatuSy 
Hoc  iibi  inanitur  spatiiimy  midtiusque  vacefit 
Jn  medio  locus',  extemplo  primordia  f err i 
In  vacuum  prolap sa  cadunt  coniuncta'y  jit  ut  qui 
Anidus  ipse  sequatuTy  eatque  ita  corpore  totOy  etcd- 

A  similar  explication  is  offered  by  Plutarch  in 
the  Qudestiones  Platonicde.  He  says  that  the  load¬ 
stone  emits  heavy  exhalations,  whereby  the 
contiguous  air,  being  impelled,  makes  dense  the 
air  in  front  of  it,  and  that  air,  driven  round  in  a 
circle  and  returning  to  the  part  whence  the  air 
was  displaced,  forcibly  carries  the  iron  with  it. 
The  following  theory  of  the  powers  of  loadstone 
and  amber  is  propounded  by  Joannes  Costaeus 
of  Lodi:  Costaeus  holds  that  “there  is  work  on 
both  sides,  result  on  both  sides,  and  therefore 
the  motion  is  produced  in  part  by  the  load¬ 
stone’s  attraction,  in  part  by  the  iron’s  spontan¬ 
eous  movement;  for,  as  we  say  that  the  vapours 
given  out  by  the  loadstone  do  by  their  own  na¬ 
ture  haste  to  attract  the  iron,  so,  too,  do  we  say 
that  the  air  impelled  by  the  vapours,  while 
seeking  a  place  for  itself,  is  turned  back,  and 
when  turned  back  impels  and  transfers  the  iron, 
which  is  picked  up,  as  it  were,  by  it,  and  which, 
besides,  is  exerted  on  its  own  account.  In  this 
way  there  is  found  a  certain  composite  move¬ 
ment,  resulting  from  the  attraction,  the  spon¬ 
taneous  motion,  and  the  impulsion;  which  com¬ 
posite  motion,  however,  is  rightly  to  be  refer¬ 
red  to  attraction,  because  the  beginning  of  this 
motion  is  invariably  from  one  term,  and  its  end 
is  there  too;  and  that  is  precisely  the  distin¬ 
guishing  character  of  attraction.”  There  is,  it  is 
true,  mutual  action,  not  mutual  work;  the  load¬ 
stone  does  not  thus  attract,  and  there  is  no  im¬ 
pulsion;  neither  is  the  principle  of  the  motion 
found  in  vapours  and  their  return  movements: 
that  is  Epicurus’s  theory,  so  oft  repeated  by 
others.  Galen  errs  in  his  first  book.  On  the  Nat¬ 
ural  FacidtieSy  ch.  14,  when  he  expresses  the 
opinion  that  whatever  agents  draw  out  the  ven¬ 
om  of  serpents  or  arrows  possess  the  same  pow¬ 
ers  as  the  loadstone.  As  for  this  attraction  (if 

^  See  On  the  Hature  of  Things y  vi.  1002-8. 


attraction  it  may  be  called)  of  medicaments, 
we  will  treat  of  it  in  another  place.  Drugs 
against  poisons  and  arrow-wounds  have  no  re¬ 
lation,  no  resemblance,  to  the  actions  of  mag¬ 
netic  bodies.  Galen’s  followers,  who  teach  that 
purgative  medicines  attract  because  of  likeness 
of  substance,  say  that  bodies  are  attracted  on 
account  of  resemblance,  not  of  identity;  there¬ 
fore,  say  they,  loadstone  draws  iron,  but  iron 
does  not  draw  loadstone.  But  we  say  and  prove 
that  this  takes  place  in  all  prime  bodies,  and  in 
bodies  that  are  allied  and  especially  that  are 
near  akin  to  these,  and  this  on  account  of  iden¬ 
tity:  wherefore  loadstone  draws  loadstone,  and 
iron  draws  iron;  all  true  earth  substance  draws 
its  kind;  and  iron  invigorated  by  the  action  of  a 
loadstone  within  whose  sphere  of  influence  it  is, 
draws  iron  more  powerfully  than  it  does  load¬ 
stone.  Cardan  asks  why  no  other  metal  is  drawn 
by  any  stone;  and  his  answer  is,  because  no  oth¬ 
er  metal  is  so  cold  as  iron:  as  if,  forsooth,  cold 
were  cause  of  attraction,  or  iron  were  much 
colder  than  lead,  which  neither  follows  the  load¬ 
stone  nor  Jeans  toward  it.  But  this  is  sorry  tri¬ 
fling,  no  better  than  old  wives’  gossip.  Of  the 
same  sort  is  the  belief  that  the  loadstone  is  a 
living  thing,  and  that  iron  is  its  victual.  But  how 
does  loadstone  feed  on  iron  if  the  iron  filings  it 
is  kept  in  neither  are  consumed  nor  become 
lighter  in  weight.^  Cornelius  Gemma  (Cosmo- 
crity  x),  declares  that  loadstone  draws  iron  to  it¬ 
self  by  -leans  of  invisible  rods;  and  to  this  opin¬ 
ion  he  tacks  on  a  story  of  the  sucking-fish  and 
the  catablepas.  Guilelmus  Puteanus  deduces  the 
power  of  the  loadstone,  not  from  a  property  of 
its  whole  substance  unknown  to  any  one  and  in¬ 
capable  of  demonstration  (as  Galen  held,  and 
after  him  nearly  all  physicians),  but  from  “its 
substantial  form  as  from  a  prime  motor  and  self¬ 
motor,  and  as  from  its  own  most  potent  nature 
and  its  natural  temperament,  as  the  instrument 
which  the  efficient  form  of  its  substance,  or  the 
second  cause,  which  is  without  a  medium,  em¬ 
ploys  in  its  operations.  So  the  loadstone  attracts 
iron  not  without  a  physical  cause,  and  for  the 
sake  of  some  good.”  But  nothing  like  this  is 
done  in  other  bodies  by  any  substantial  form  un¬ 
less  it  be  the  primary  one,  and  this  Puteanus 
does  not  recognize.  Naught  but  good  is  assured¬ 
ly  held  out  to  the  loadstone,  to  be  got  from  the 
appulsion  of  the  iron  (a  sort  of  friendly  associa¬ 
tion),  yet  the  temperament  of  which  he  speaks 
is  not  to  be  found,  cannot  even  be  imagined  as 
something  that  is  to  be  the  instrument  of  the 
form.  For  of  what  use  can  temperament  be  in 
magnetic  movements  that  are  calculable,  defi- 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


36 

nite,  constant,  comparable  to  the  movements 
of  the  stars;  at  great  distance,  with  thick,  dense 
bodies  interposed.  In  Baptista  Porta’s  opinion, 
the  loadstone  seems  to  be  a  mixture  of  stone  and 
iron,  i.e.,  ferruginous  stone,  or  stony  iron.  “The 
stone,”  he  says,  “is  not  changed  into  iron  so  as 
to  lose  its  own  nature,  nor  is  the  iron  so  merged 
in  the  stone  but  that  it  retains  its  own  essence; 
and  while  each  strives  to  overcome  each,  from 
the  struggle  results  attraction  of  the  iron.  In  the 
mass  (of  the  loadstone)  there  is  more  stone  than 
iron;  therefore  the  iron,  lest  it  should  be  depen¬ 
dent  on  (subdued  by)  the  stone,  craves  the 
strength  and  company  of  iron,  to  the  end  that 
what  it  cannot  procure  of  itself  it  may  obtain 
by  the  help  of  the  other. . . .  The  loadstone  does 
not  attract  stones  because  it  has  no  need  of  them 
there  being  stone  enough  in  its  mass;  and  if  one 
loadstone  attracts  another  that  is  not  for  the 
sake  of  the  stone,  but  of  the  iron  shut  up  in  the 
stone.”  As  though  the  iron  in  a  loadstone  were 
a  distinct  body  and  not  one  blended  with  an¬ 
other,  like  all  other  metals  in  their  ores.  And  it 
is  height  of  absurdity  to  speak  of  these  substan¬ 
ces,  thus  confounded  together,  as  warring  with 
each  other  and  quarreling,  and  calling  out  from 
the  battle  for  forces  to  come  to  their  aid.  Now, 
iron  itself  when  touched  with  loadstone  seizes 
iron  with  not  less  force  than  loadstone  itself. 
These  fights,  seditions,  conspiracies,  in  a  stone, 
as  though  it  were  nursing  quarrels  as  an  occasion 
for  calling  in  auxiliary  forces,  are  the  maunder- 
ings  of  a  babbling  hag,  rather  than  the  devices 
of  an  accomplished  prestigiator.  Others  have 
thought  that  the  cause  is  a  sympathy.  But  even 
were  fellow-feeling  there,  even  so,  fellow-feeling 
is  not  a  cause;  for  no  passion  can  rightly  be  said 
to  be  an  efficient  cause.  Others  again  assign  as 
the  cause  likeness  of  substance,  and  still  others 
postulate  rods  (r^^//) imperceptible  to  the  senses. 
These,  in  very  many  ways,  make  a  sad  misuse  of 
a  term  first  employed  by  mathematicians.  In 
more  scholarly  fashion,  Scaliger  declares  that 
iron  moves  to  the  loadstone  as  to  its  mother’s 
womb,  there  to  be  perfected  with  recondite 
principles,  as  the  earth  tends  to  the  centre.  The 
godlike  Thomas,^  in  Book  vii  of  his  Physica^ 
treating  of  the  causes  of  motion,  says:  “A  thing 
can  in  another  sense  be  said  to  pull,  in  that  it 
moves  (an  object)  toward  itself,  by  altering  it 
in  any  way,  by  which  alteration  it  comes  about 
that  the  body  altered  moves  with  respect  to 
place;  and  in  this  way  is  the  loadstone  said  to 
draw  iron:  for  as  a  generant  moves  heavy  things 
and  light  in  so  far  as  it  gives  them  the  form 
*  Thomas  Aquinas. 


whereby  they  are  moved  to  a  place;  so  does  the 
loadstone  give  to  iron  some  quality  through 
which  it  is  moved  to  the  loadstone.”  This  view, 
one  by  no  means  ill-conceived,  this  most  learned 
man,  proceeds  later  briefly  to  corroborate,  cit¬ 
ing  incredible  accounts  of  the  loadstone  and  of 
the  power  of  garlic  over  the  loadstone. 

Nor  is  what  Cardinal  de  Cusa  states  to  be  dis¬ 
regarded.  Says  he:  “Iron  hath  in  the  loadstone 
a  certain  principle  of  its  efflux,  and  while  the 
loadstone  by  its  presence  excites  the  heavy  and 
ponderous  iron,  the  iron  is,  by  a  wonderful 
longing,  raised  above  the  natural  motion  (where¬ 
by  it  ought  to  tend  downward  according  to  its 
weight),  and  moves  upward,  uniting  in  its  prin¬ 
ciple.  For  were  there  not  in  iron  some  natural 
foretaste  of  the  loadstone,  it  would  no  more 
move  toward  that  than  toward  any  other  stone; 
and  were  there  not  in  the  loadstone  a  stronger 
inclination  toward  iron  than  toward  copper, 
that  attraction  would  not  exist.”  Such,  as  pro¬ 
pounded  by  different  writers,  are  current  opin¬ 
ions  about  the  attraction  of  the  loadstone,  all 
of  them  full  of  doubt  and  uncertainty.  As  for 
the  causes  of  magnetic  movements,  referred  to 
in  the  schools  of  philosophers  to  the  four  ele¬ 
ments  and  to  prime  qualities,  these  we  leave  for 
roaches  and  moths  to  prey  upon. 

CHAPTER  4.  Of  the  strength  of  a  loadstone  and  its 
form:  the  cause  of  coition 

Quitting  the  opinions  of  others  about  the  at¬ 
traction  of  the  loadstone,  we  will  now  show  the 
reason  of  its  coition  and  the  nature  of  its  mo¬ 
tion.  There  are  two  kinds  of  bodies  that  are 
seen  to  attract  bodies  by  motions  perceptible 
to  our  senses  — electric  bodies,  and  magnetic. 
Electrical  bodies  do  this  by  means  of  natural 
effluvia  from  humour;  magnetic  bodies  by  for¬ 
mal  efficiencies  or  rather  by  primary  native 
strength  (vigor').  This  form  is  unique  and  pe¬ 
culiar:  it  is  not  what  the  Peripatetics  call  causa 
formalis  and  causa  specifica  in  mixtis  and  secunda 
forma;  nor  is  it  causa  propagatrix  generantium 
corporum\  but  it  is  the  form  of  the  prime  and 
principal  globes;  and  it  is  of  the  homogeneous 
and  not  altered  parts  thereof,  the  proper  entity 
and  existence  which  we  may  call  the  primary, 
radical,  and  astral  form;  not  Aristotle’s  prime 
form,  but  that  unique  form  which  keeps  and 
orders  its  own  globe.  Such  form  is  in  each  globe 
— the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars — one;  in  earth 
also  ’tis  one,  and  it  is  that  true  magnetic  po¬ 
tency  which  we  call  the  primary  energy.  Hence 
the  magnetic  nature  is  proper  to  the  earth  and 
is  implanted  in  all  its  real  parts  according  to  a 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


primal  and  admirable  proportion.  It  is  not  de¬ 
rived  from  the  heavens  as  a  whole,  neither  is  it 
generated  thereby  through  sympathy,  or  in¬ 
fluence,  or  other  occult  qualities:  neither  is  it 
derived  from  any  special  star;  for  there  is  in  the 
earth  a  magnetic  strength  or  energy  of  its  own, 
as  sun  and  moon  have  each  its  own  forma  \  and 
a  little  fragment  of  the  moon  arranges  itself,  in 
accordance  with  lunar  laws,  so  as  to  conform  to 
the  moon’s  contour  and  form,  or  a  fragment  of 
the  sun  to  the  contour  and  form  of  the  sun, 
just  as  a  loadstone  does  to  the  earth  or  to  an¬ 
other  loadstone,  tending  naturally  toward  it  and 
soliciting  it.  Thus  we  have  to  treat  of  the  earth, 
which  is  a  magnetic  body,  a  loadstone;  then, 
too,  of  its  true,  native  parts,  which  are  magnet¬ 
ic,  and  of  how  they  are  affected  by  coition. 

A  body  that  is  attracted  by  a  magnetic  body 
is  not  by  it  altered,  but  remains  unimpaired  and 
unchanged  as  it  was  before,  neither  has  it  now 
greater  virtue.  A  loadstone  draws  magnetic  bod¬ 
ies,  and  they  from  its  energy  eagerly  draw  for¬ 
ces  not  in  their  extremities  only,  but  in  their 
inmost  parts.  For  an  iron  rod  held  in  the  hand 
is  magnetized  in  the  end  where  it  is  grasped,  and 
the  magnetic  force  travels  to  the  other  extrem¬ 
ity,  not  along  the  surface  only,  but  through  the 
inside,  through  the  middle.  Electrical  bodies 
have  material,  corporeal  efliuvia.  Is  any  magnet¬ 
ic  effluvium  emitted,  corporeal  or  incorporeal.? 
Or  is  nothing  at  all  that  subsists  emitted .?  But  if 
the  effluvium  is  a  body,  it  must  needs  be  light 
and  spiritual  so  as  to  enter  the  iron.  Is  it  such 
as  is  exhaled  from  lead  when  quicksilver,  which 
is  liquid  and  fluid,  is  by  the  mere  odour  and  vap¬ 
our  of  lead  solidified,  and  remains  as  a  strongly 
coherent  metal .?  Gold  too,  which  is  very  solid 
and  dense,  is  reduced  to  a  powder  by  the  thin 
vapour  of  lead.  Can  it  be  that  as  quicksilver  can 
enter  gold,  so  the  magnetic  odour  can  enter  the 
substance  of  iron,  changing  it  by  its  substantial 
property,  though  in  the  bodies  themselves  there 
is  no  change  perceptible  by  our  senses.?  For 
without  such  entering  a  body  is  not  changed 
by  another  body,  as  the  chemists,  not  without 
reason,  do  teach.  But  if  these  effects  were  pro¬ 
duced  by  a  material  entrance,  then  were  resist¬ 
ant,  dense  bodies  interposed  between  such  bod¬ 
ies;  or  were  the  magnetic  bodies  shut  up  in  the 
middle  of  very  thick,  dense  bodies,  objects  of 
iron  would  not  be  acted  on  by  the  loadstone. 
Nevertheless,  these  two  do  strive  to  come  to¬ 
gether  and  are  changed.  Therefore  the  magnetic 
forces  have  no  such  conception,  no  such  origin, 
as  this:  nor  are  they  due  to  those  most  minute 
particles  of  loadstone  imagined  by  Baptista  Porta 


concentrated  as  it  were  into  hairs,  and  springing 
from  friction  of  the  loadstone,  which  parts  fast¬ 
ening  on  to  the  iron  give  it  the  magnetic  powers. 
For  the  electric  effluvia,  as  they  are  hindered  by 
the  interposition  of  any  dense  body,  so  too  are 
unable  to  attract  through  a  flame,  or  if  a  flame  be 
near  by.  But  iron,  which  is  hindered  by  no  ob¬ 
stacle  (from)  deriving  from  the  loadstone  force 
and  motion,  passes  through  the  midst  of  a  flame 
to  join  the  loadstone.  Take  a  short  piece  of  iron 
wire,  and  when  you  have  brought  it  near  to  a 
loadstone  it  will  make  its  way  through  the 
flames  to  the  stone;  and  a  needle  turns  no  less 
rapidly,  no  less  eagerly,  to  the  loadstone  though 
a  flame  intervenes  than  if  only  air  stands  be¬ 
tween.  Hence  a  flame  interposed  does  not  pre¬ 
vent  coition.  But  were  the  iron  itself  red-hot, 
it  certainly  would  not  be  attracted.  Apply  a 
red-hot  iron  rod  to  a  magnetized  needle  and  the 
needle  stands  still,  not  turning  to  the  iron;  but 
as  soon  as  the  temperature  has  fallen  somewhat 
it  at  once  turns  to  it.  A  piece  of  iron  that  has 
been  magnetized,  if  placed  in  a  hot  fire  until  it 
becomes  red-hot,  and  permitted  to  remain  for  a 
little  while,  loses  the  magnetic  power.  Even 
loadstone  itself  loses  its  native  and  inborn  pow¬ 
ers  of  attracting,  and  all  other  magnetic  prop¬ 
erties,  if  left  long  in  fire.  And  though  some  mag¬ 
netic  ores  when  roasted  exhale  a  deep-blue  or 
sulphurous  and  foul-smelling  vapour,  neverthe¬ 
less  such  vapour  is  not  the  soul  of  the  loadstone; 
neither  is  it  the  cause  of  the  attraction  of  iron, 
as  Porta  supposes.^  Nor  do  all  loadstones  when 
roasted  or  burned  smell  of  sulphur  or  give  out 
sulphur  fumes:  that  property  is  something  add¬ 
ed,  a  sort  of  congenital  evil  which  comes  from 
the  foul  bed  or  matrix  in  which  the  loadstone 
is  produced;  nor  does  the  material  corporeal 
cause  introduce  into  the  iron  anything  of  the 
same  sort,  for  iron  derives  from  loadstone  the 
power  of  attracting  and  the  property  of  verti- 
city,  though  glass  or  gold  or  another  sort  of 
stone  stand  between,  as  later,  when  treating  of 
the  magnetic  direction,  we  shall  clearly  prove. 
But  fire  destroys  in  the  loadstone  the  magnetic 
qualities,  not  because  it  plucks  out  of  it  any 
particular  attractional  particles,  but  because 
the  quick,  penetrating  force  of  the  flame  de¬ 
forms  it  by  breaking  its  matter  up;  just  as  in 
the  human  body  the  soul’s  primary  powers  are 
not  burnt,  though  yet  the  burnt  body  remains 
without  faculties.  But  though  the  iron  remains 
after  perfect  ignition,  and  is  not  converted  into 
either  ash  or  slag;  still,  as  Cardan  not  injudi¬ 
ciously  remarks,  red-hot  iron  is  not  iron,  but 
^  Natural  Magic ^  vii,  2. 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


38 

something  lying  outside  its  own  nature,  until 
it  returns  to  itself.  For  just  as,  by  the  cold  of 
the  ambient  air,  water  is  changed  from  its  own 
nature  into  ice,  so  iron  made  white-hot  by  fire 
has  a  confused,  disordered  form,  and  therefore  is 
not  attracted  by  a  loadstone,  and  even  loses  its 
power  of  attracting,  however  acquired;  it  also 
acquires  a  different  verticity  when,  as  though 
born  anew,  it  is  impregnated  by  a  loadstone  or 
the  earth;  in  other  words,  when  its  form,  not 
utterly  destroyed,  yet  confused,  is  restored.  I 
shall  have  more  to  say  on  this  subject  when 
treating  of  changed  verticity  (Book  in.  10). 
Hence,  Fracastorio  finds  no  confirmation  of  his 
opinion  that  the  iron  is  not  altered :  “For,”  says 
he,  “if  it  were  altered  by  the  loadstone’s  form, 
the  form  of  the  iron  would  be  spoiled.”  Yet  this 
alteration  is  not  generation,  but  restitution  and 
re-formation  of  a  confused  form. 

Hence  that  is  not  corporeal  which  emanates 
from  the  loadstone,  or  which  enters  the  iron,  or 
which  is  given  forth  again  by  the  awakened 
iron;  but  one  loadstone  gives  portion  to  another 
loadstone  by  its  primary  form.  And  a  loadstone 
recalls  the  cognate  substance,  iron,  to  formate 
energy  and  gives  it  position:  hence  does  it  leap 
to  the  loadstone  and  eagerly  conforms  thereto 
(the  forces  of  both  harmoniously  working  to 
bring  them  together);  for  the  coition  is  not  in¬ 
determinate  and  confused,  it  is  not  a  violent  in¬ 
clination  of  body  to  body,  not  a  mad  chance 
confluence.  Here  no  violence  is  offered  to  bod¬ 
ies,  there  are  no  strifes  or  discords;  but  here  we 
have,  as  the  condition  of  the  world  holding  to¬ 
gether,  a  concerted  action— to  wit,  an  accord¬ 
ance  of  the  perfect,  homogeneous  parts  of  the 
world’s  globes  with  the  whole,  a  mutual  agree¬ 
ment  of  the  chief  forces  therein  for  soundness, 
continuity,  position,  direction,  and  unity.  In 
view  of  this  so  wonderful  effect,  this  stupendous 
innate  energy — an  energy  (strength)  not  exist¬ 
ing  in  other  elements — the  opinion  of  Thales 
the  Milesian  is,  in  Scaliger’s  judgment,  not  ut¬ 
terly  absurd,  not  a  lunatic’s  fancy.  Thales  as¬ 
cribed  to  the  loadstone  a  soul,  for  it  is  incited, 
directed,  and  moved  in  a  circle  by  a  force  that 
is  entire  in  the  whole  and  entire  in  each  part, 
as  later  will  appear,  and  because  it  seems  most 
nearly  to  resemble  a  soul.  For  the  power  of  self¬ 
movement  seems  to  betoken  a  soul,  and  the 
supernal  bodies,  which  we  call  celestial,  as  it 
were  divine,  are  by  some  regarded  as  animated 
because  that  they  move  with  wondrous  regu¬ 
larity.  If  two  loadstones  be  set  over  against  each 
other  in  their  floats  on  the  surface  of  water, 
they  do  not  come  together  forthwith,  but  first 


they  wheel  round,  or  the  smaller  obeys  the  larg¬ 
er  and  takes  a  sort  of  circular  motion:  at  length, 
when  they  are  in  their  natural  position  they 
come  together.  In  iron  that  has  not  been  excited 
by  the  loadstone,  there  is  no  need  of  these  pre¬ 
liminaries;  for  iron,  though  made  from  the  fin¬ 
est  loadstone,  has  no  verticity  save  such  as  it 
gets  by  chance  and  momentarily;  and  this  is  not 
stable  nor  fixed,  for  while  it  ran  liquid  in  the 
furnace  its  parts  were  thrown  into  confusion. 
Such  a  body  instantly  receives  from  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  loadstone  verticity  and  natural  con¬ 
formity  to  it,  being  powerfully  altered  and  con¬ 
verted,  and  absolutely  metamorphosed  into  a 
perfect  magnet:  so,  like  an  actual  part  of  the 
loadstone,  it  flies  to  it.  For  there  is  naught  that 
the  best  loadstone  can  do  which  cannot  be  done 
by  iron  excited  by  a  loadstone — not  magnet¬ 
ized  at  all,  but  only  placed  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  of  a  loadstone.  For  as  soon  as  it  comes  with¬ 
in  the  loadstone’s  sphere  of  influence,  though 
it  be  at  some  distance  from  the  loadstone  it¬ 
self,  the  iron  changes  instantly,  and  has  its  form 
renewed,  which  before  was  dormant  and  inert, 
but  now  is  quick  and  active:  all  this  will  appear 
clearly  when  we  come  to  present  the  proofs  of 
magnetic  direction  (in  Book  iii).  Thus  the  mag¬ 
netic  coition  is  the  act  of  the  loadstone  and  of 
the  iron,  not  of  one  of  them  alone :  it  is  hrehex' 
eta,  not  epyop;  it  is  avvevTeXex^La  and  conactus 
(mutual  action)  rather  than  sympathy.  There  is, 
properly  speaking,  no  magnetic  antipathy;  for 
the  flight  and  turning  away  of  the  poles  and  the 
wheeling  around  of  the  whole  is  the  act  of  each 
of  the  two  toward  unition,  resulting  from  the 
avvevTekex^t^CL  and  conactus^  of  both.  Thus  the 
iron  puts  on  anew  its  form;  and  because  that  is 
awakened,  as  also  in  order  more  surely  to  gain 
its  form,  it  rushes  headlong  on  the  loadstone,  and 
not  with  circlings  and  wheelings,  as  in  the  case  of 
two  loadstones.  For  as,  long  ages  ago,  nay  at  the 
very  beginning  of  things,  there  were  gendered 
in  the  loadstone  and  therein  fixed  verticity  and 
the  power  of  coordinating;  and  since  the  great 
mastering  form  of  the  earthly  globe  cannot  be 
readily  changed  by  another  magnet,  as  iron  is 
changed,  therefore,  the  nature  of  each  being 
constant,  neither  hath  the  momentary  power 
of  altering  the  verticity  of  the  other,  but  the 
two  do  but  come  to  agreement  with  each  other. 
And  magnetized  iron,  in  case  it  is  unable  for 
whatever  reason  to  cause  the  piece  of  iron  in 
the  natural  state  to  turn,  as  does  the  pointer 
of  a  versorium,  is  itself  seized  at  either  end  by 
^  Conactus^  /.<?.,  combined  or  mutual  action.  See  Book 

V,  12. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


a  loadstone  brought  nigh  it.  For  the  loadstone, 
as  it  imparts  so  can  it  alter  verticity,  and  it  can 
in  an  instant  bestow  the  formal  energy  in  either 
end.  Thus  iron  may  be  transformed  variously, 
as  that  form  is  adventitious  and  has  not  yet 
abided  long  in  the  metal.  In  iron,  because  its 
body  is  fused  when  a  magnetic  or  a  ferruginous 
ore  is  smelted,  the  virtue  of  the  primal  form, 
which  previously  existed  distinct,  is  now  con¬ 
fused;  but  a  sound  loadstone,  when  brought 
near,  sets  up  again  the  primal  action:  the  form, 
now  arranged  and  ordered  again,  joins  forces 
with  the  loadstone,  and,  each  with  other,  the 
two  come  to  agreement,  after  the  manner  of  the 
loadstone,  in  all  their  movements  toward  union; 
they  enter  into  alliance,  and  whether  joined 
by  bodily  contact  or  standing  within  their 
sphere  of  influence,  are  one  and  the  same.  For 
when  iron  is  reduced  in  the  furnace  from  its 
ore,  or  when  steel  is  got  from  its  ore,  which  is 
loadstone,  the  metallic  matter  is  melted  and  be¬ 
comes  fluid,  and  the  iron  and  the  steel  run  off, 
leaving  their  slag:  this  slag  consists  of  matter 
spoilt  by  the  intense  heat  of  the  fire,  or  of  use¬ 
less  matter,  or  of  dross,  due  to  some  imperfec¬ 
tion  or  to  some  intermixture  in  the  projecting 
surface  of  the  earth.  Thus  the  iron  or  steel  is  a 
purified  material,  wherein  the  metallic  element, 
all  disordered  by  the  smelting  (for  the  forces  of 
that  primal  form  are  all  confused  and  unset¬ 
tled),  is  brought  back  again,  as  it  were,  to  life, 
to  normal  form,  and  to  completeness.  Its  mat¬ 
ter  is  thus  awakened,  and  tends  to  union,  which 
is  the  bond  of  the  universe  and  the  necessary 
condition  of  the  conservation  of  all  things. 

For  this  reason,  and  because  of  the  purging 
of  the  ore  and  its  change  into  a  purer  body,  the 
loadstone  gives  to  iron  greater  power  of  attract¬ 
ing  than  exists  in  itself.  For  if  you  put  some 
iron-filings  or  a  nail  on  a  large  magnet,  a  piece 
of  iron  joined  to  the  magnet  steals  the  filings 
and  the  nail,  and  holds  them  as  long  as  it  re¬ 
mains  alongside  the  magnet:  so,  too,  iron  at¬ 
tracts  iron  more  powerfully  than  does  a  load¬ 
stone,  if  the  iron  be  afformed,  and  remain  with¬ 
in  the  sphere  of  the  form  given  out  to  it.  Again, 
a  piece  of  iron  nicely  adjusted  to  the  pole  of  a 
loadstone  holds  a  greater  weight  than  the  load¬ 
stone  does.  So,  then,  iron  and  steel  are  the 
better  elements  of  their  ores,  purified  by  the 
action  of  fire,  and  the  loadstone  impregnates 
them  again  with  their  forms;  wherefore  to  it 
do  they  come  by  spontaneous  approach,  so  soon 
as  they  enter  the  circle  of  the  magnetic  forces, 
for  by  it  are  they  first  possessed,  and  made  con¬ 
tinuous,  and  united  with  perfect  union.  Once 


within  that  circle  they  have  absolute  continu¬ 
ity,  and  they  are  joined  by  reason  of  their  ac¬ 
cordance,  albeit  the  bodies  themselves  be  sep¬ 
arated.  For  the  iron  is  not,  after  the  manner  of 
electrics,  possessed  and  pulled  by  substantial  ef¬ 
fluvia,  but  only  by  the  immaterial  act  of  the 
form  or  by  its  incorporeal  going  forth,  which  as 
in  a  continuous  and  homogeneous  body  doth 
act  in  the  iron  subjectiim^  and  is  received  into 
it;  nor  has  it  need  of  wider  paths. 

Hence  it  is  that,  with  the  densest  bodies  in¬ 
terposed,  the  iron  is  put  in  motion  throughout 
and  is  attracted,  and  that  the  iron,  in  presence 
of  the  loadstone  thoroughly  stirs  and  attracts 
the  loadstone  itself,  and  that  with  their  mutual 
forces  they  make  that  rush  toward  union  which 
commonly  is  called  attraction.  But  these  for¬ 
mal  forces  sally  forth  and  in  meeting  unite;  and 
the  force  conceived  in  the  iron,  that  also  forth¬ 
with  has  its  efflux.  But  Julius  Scaliger,  who,  in 
his  344th  disquisition,  cites  other  examples  to 
prove  this  explanation  to  be  absurd,  is  far  a- 
stray.  For  the  virtues  of  prime  bodies  are  not 
comparable  with  those  that  are  derivate  and 
mixed.  Were  he  still  among  the  living,  he  might 
now,  in  the  chapter  on  “Effused  Magnetic 
Spherical  Forms,”  discover  what  is  the  nature 
of  effused  forms. 

But  if  iron  be  badly  injured  by  rust  it  is  but 
little  or  not  at  all  affected  by  the  loadstone, 
for  when  the  metal  is  corroded  and  marred  by 
external  causes  or  by  decay  it  is  spoilt,  as  has 
been  said  of  the  loadstone,  and  loses  its  prime 
qualities  that  are  conjoined  to  its  form,  or,  the 
stone  being  impaired  by  age,  these  qualities  are 
weak  and  feeble;  neither  can  it  be  duly  informed 
when  once  it  has  suffered  decay.  But  a  strong, 
fresh  loadstone  pulls  all  sound  clean  iron,  and 
the  iron  (having  conceived  force)  powerfully 
attracts  other  iron — as  pieces  of  iron  wire,  iron 
nails;  and  not  only  these  separately  and  directly 
but  one  after  another,  one  at  the  end  of  another, 
thus  holding  three,  four,  or  five:  thus  forming 
as  it  were  a  chain,  the  successive  nails  sticking 
to  one  another  and  suspended  from  one  another. 
But  the  loadstone  would  not  attract  the  last 
piece  in  such  a  line  if  there  were  no  nails  in  the 
mid-space.  Thus  a  loadstone  placed  at  A  pulls 

P  C _  B  ^ 


the  nail  or  bar  B,  and,  in  like  manner,  after  B 
pulls  C,  and  after  C,D;  but  at  the  same  distance 
does  not  pull  aloft  D:  that  is  so  for  the  reason 
that  when  the  nails  form  an  unbroken  line  the 
presence  of  the  loadstone  A,  because  of  its  prop- 


40 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


er  forces,  raises  the  magnetic  form  of  the  iron 
objects  B  and  C,  and  makes  them  as  it  were  its 
auxiliary  forces,  while  B  and  C,  like  a  continu¬ 
ous  magnetic  body,  conduct  on  to  D  the  force 
whereby  it  is  seized  or  conformed,  yet  not  so 
powerfully  as  C  is  seized  by  B,  And  these  iron 
nails  derive  the  force  from  the  mere  contact, 
and  from  the  presence  of  the  loadstone  without 
contact,  and  they  retain  it  in  their  bodies,  as 
will  be  shown  when  we  treat  of  Direction 
(Book  in).  For  the  iron  does  not  assume  these 
powers  only  while  in  presence  of  a  loadstone, 
nor  does  it  hold  them  of  the  stone  only  momen¬ 
tarily  as  Themistius  supposes  in  his  Physica,  vin. 
The  best  iron  (steel)  is  solicited  by  the  load¬ 
stone  from  a  greater  distance,  a  greater  weight 
of  it  is  lifted,  it  is  more  powerfully  held,  and  it 
acquires  greater  force,  than  does  common, 
cheaper  iron,  for  it  is  made  of  the  best  ore  or  of 
loadstone,  and  is  imbued  with  superior  forces; 
but  iron  from  impure  ores  is  weaker,  and  is  at¬ 
tracted  more  feebly.  As  for  what  Fracastorio 
writes,  of  having  seen  a  bit  of  loadstone  that 
on  one  side  attracted  loadstone  but  not  iron,  on 
another  side  attracted  iron  but  not  loadstone, 
and  on  another  attracted  both — proof,  accord¬ 
ing  to  him,  that  in  one  spot  there  was  more 
loadstone,  in  another  more  iron,  in  the  third 
the  two  were  present  equally;  hence  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  attraction — all  this  is  utterly  er¬ 
roneous,  and  the  result  of  mal -observation  on 
the  part  of  Fracastorio,  who  did  not  know  how 
to  present  one  loadstone  to  another  properly. 
Loadstone  attracts  iron  and  loadstone  if  both 
be  properly  situated,  and  free  to  move  and  un¬ 
restrained.  A  light  object  is  more  readily  moved 
from  its  position  and  place  than  a  heavy  one, 
for  heavy  objects  make  greater  resistance,  but 
a  light  object  bestirs  itself  to  meet  a  heavy  one 
and  is  pulled  by  it. 

CHAPTER  5.  In  what  manner  the  energy  inheres  in 
the  loadstone 

That  the  loadstone  draws  loadstone,  iron,  and 
other  magnetic  bodies  was  shown  in  Book  i,  as 
also  by  what  forces  the  magnetic  coition  is  reg¬ 
ulated;  we  have  now  to  inquire  how  this  energy 
is  ordered  in  magnetic  bodies.  Here  we  must 
bring  in  the  analogy  of  a  large  loadstone.  A 
magnetic  body  unites  forcibly  with  a  loadstone 
if  the  loadstone  is  powerful,  feebly  if  it  be  de¬ 
fective  or  if  it  has  from  any  fault  become  im¬ 
paired.  Loadstone  does  not  attract  iron  with 
equal  force  at  every  point;  in  other  words,  the 
magnetic  body  does  not  tend  with  the  same 
force  to  every  point  of  the  loadstone;  for  the 


loadstone  has  points  (/>.,  true  poles)  at  which 
its  rare  energy  is  most  conspicuous.  And  the 
regions  nearest  the  poles  are  the  stronger,  those 
remotest  are  the  weaker;  yet  in  all  the  energy 
is  in  some  sense  equal.  In  the  figure  of  a  terrella. 


A 


A,  By  are  the  poles,  CD  is  the  equinoctial  line; 
the  greatest  attractive  force  is  seen  at  A  and  B. 
At  C and  D  there  is  no  force  that  attracts  to  the 
body  the  ends  of  magnetic  objects,  for  the  forces 
tend  toward  each  of  the  poles.  But  the  directive 
force  at  the  equator  is  strong.  C  and  D  are  at 
equal  distances  from  both  poles;  hence  a  piece 
of  iron  on  the  line  CD,  being  pulled  in  con- 
trary  directions,  does  not  cling  steadily,  but  it 
stays  and  adheres  to  the  stone  only  when  it  falls 
to  either  side  of  the  line.  At  E  the  attractive 
force  is  greater  than  at  F,  for  E  is  nigher  the 
pole.  And  this  is  not  for  the  reason  that  there 
is  more  energy  resident  at  the  pole,  but  be¬ 
cause  all  the  parts,  being  united  in  the  whole, 
direct  their  forces  to  the  pole. 

By  the  confluence  of  the  forces  from  the 
plane  of  the  equinoctial  toward  the  pole  the 
energy  increases  poleward,  and  absolute  vertic- 
ity  is  seen  at  the  pole  so  long  as  the  loadstone 
remains  whole;  but  let  it  be  divided  or  broken 
up,  and  in  the  separate  parts  the  verticity  will 
find  other  abiding-places.  For  with  change  of 


mass  always  goes  change  of  verticity.  Hence,  if 
the  terrella  be  severed  along  the  line  AB  so  as 
to  make  two  stones,  the  poles  in  the  severed 
parts  will  not  be  ABy  but  EG  and  HL  And 
though  these  two  stones  now  are  so  interrelated 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


that  F  does  not  tend  to  H,  nevertheless  if,  be¬ 
fore  division,  A  was  the  north  pole,  F  likewise 
is  now  north,  as  is  H  also.  For  the  verticity  is 
not  reversed,  as  Baptista  Porta  erroneously  af¬ 
firms  (Porta  [Natural  Magic],  vii.  4)^  for 
though  F  and  H  are  not  so  related  as  mutually 
to  attract,  yet  the  two  turn  to  the  same  point 
of  the  horizon.  If  the  hemisphere  HI  be  cut  in 
two  quarter  spheres,  one  pole  will  be  at  H  and 
the  other  at  /.  The  integral  mass  of  the  stone, 
as  I  have  said,  gives  to  the  vertex  or  pole  a  con¬ 
stant  place;  and  any  part  of  the  stone,  before  it 
was  hewed  out  of  the  rock  might  have  been  the 
pole  or  vertex:  but  of  this  we  shall  have  more 
to  say  under  Direction.  For  the  present,  the 
thing  to  be  understood  and  to  be  borne  stead¬ 
ily  in  mind  is,  that  the  poles  are  dominant  in 
virtue  of  the  force  of  the  whole,  for  (the  mag¬ 
netic  empire  being  divided  in  two  by  the  equi- 


curves  starting  from  every  point  of  the  equator 
that  divides  the  sphere  into  two  equal  parts: 
from  every  point  of  the  superficies  from  the 
equator  to  the  north  on  one  side,  and  from  the 
equator  to  the  south  on  the  other.  Hence  the 
verticity  is,  in  each  hemisphere,  from  the  equi¬ 
noctial  circle  to  the  pole.  This  force  resides  in 
the  whole  mass.  From  A  the  energy  is  transmit¬ 
ted  to  B,  from  AB  to  G,  from  ABC  to  D,  and 
from  them  to  E,  and  likewise  from  G  to  H;  and 
so  on  as  long  as  the  whole  mass  is  one  body.  But 
if  the  piece  AB  be  cut  out,  though  it  be  near 
the  equator,  nevertheless  the  effect  will  be  as 
great  on  the  magnetic  action  as  if  CD  or  DE, 
equal  quantities,  had  been  taken  away.  For  no 
part  has  any  supereminent  value  in  the  whole; 
whatever  it  be,  that  it  is  because  of  the  parts 
adjoining,  whereby  an  absolute  and  perfect 
whole  is  produced. 


L 


noctial  line)  all  the  forces  of  the  hemisphere 
tend  north,  and,  conversely,  all  those  of  the 
other  hemisphere  tend  south,  so  long  as  the 
parts  are  united,  as  appears  from  the  following 
demonstration.  For  the  whole  force  tends  sep¬ 
arately  to  the  two  poles  along  an  infinity  of 

^  “But  the  two  points  we  speak  of  are  the  end  of  the 
right  line,  running  through  the  middle  of  the  stone  from 
North  to  South;  if  any  man  break  the  stone,  and  break 
this  line,  those  ends  of  the  division  will  presently  be  of 
another  property  and  vertue,  and  will  be  enemies  one  to 
the  other:  which  is  great  wonder;  for  these  two  points, 
when  they  were  joined  together,  had  the  same  force  of 
turning  to  the  pole,  but,  now  being  parted  asunder,  one 
will  turn  to  the  North,  the  other  to  the  South,  keeping 
the  same  posture  and  position  they  had  in  the  mine  where 
they  were  bred:  and  the  same  happens  in  the  least  bits 
that  are  seen  in  the  greatest  loadstone.” 


Let  HEQ  be  a  terrella,  Ea  pole,  M  the  centre, 
HMQ  the  plane  of  the  equinoctial  circle.  From 
every  point  of  the  equinoctial  plane  the  energy 
reaches  out  to  the  periphery,  but  differently 
from  each:  for  from  A  the  formal  energy  goes 
toward  CFNE  and  to  every  point  betwixt  C 
and  E  (the  pole),  and  not  toward  B;  neither 
from  G  toward  C.  The  attractive  force  in  the 
region  FGH  is  not  strengthened  by  the  force 
residing  in  the  region  GMFE;  but  FGH  in¬ 
creases  the  energy  in  the  rising  curve  FE.  Thus 
energy  never  proceeds  from  the  lines  parallel 
to  the  axis  to  points  above  those  parallels,  but 
always  internally  from  the  parallels  to  the  pole. 
From  every  point  of  the  plane  of  the  equator 
the  energy  goes  to  the  pole  E;  the  point  F  de- 


42 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 
H 


Diagram  of  the  magnetic  energy  diffused froin  the  plane 
of  the  equator  to  the  periphery  of  a  terrella  or  of  the  earth 


rives  its  forces  only  from  GH,  and  the  point  'N 
from  OH\  but  the  pole  E  is  strengthened  by 
the  whole  plane  HO.  Therefore  this  mighty 
power  has  here  its  chief  excellency;  here  is  its 
throne,  so  to  speak.  But  in  the  intervals  at  F, 
for  example,  there  resides  so  much  attractional 
energy  as  can  be  given  by  the  section  HG  of  the 
plane. 

CHAPTER  6.  How  magnetized  iron  and  smaller  load¬ 
stones  conform  to  the  terrella  and  to  the  earth  itself 
and  are  governed  thereby 

Coition  of  bodies  that  are  separate  from  one 
another,  and  that  cohere  naturally,  takes  place 
by  another  sort  of  movement,  if  they  be  free 
to  move.  The  terrella  sends  its  force  abroad  in 
all  directions,  according  to  its  energy  and  its 
quality.  But  whenever  iron  or  other  magnetic 
body  of  suitable  size  happens  within  its  sphere 
of  influence  it  is  attracted;  yet  the  nearer  it  is 
to  the  loadstone  the  greater  the  force  with 
which  it  is  borne  toward  it.  Such  bodies  tend  to 
the  loadstone  not  as  toward  a  centre  nor  to¬ 
wards  its  centre:  that  they  do  only  at  its  poles, 
/.<?.,  when  that  which  is  attracted  and  the  pole 


of  the  loadstone,  as  well  as  its  centre,  are  in  a 
right  line.  But  in  the  interv’als  between  they 
tend  to  it  in  an  oblique  line,  as  seen  in  the  fig¬ 
ure  below,  wherein  is  shown  how  the  force  goes 
out  to  the  magnetic  associate  bodies  within  the 
sphere.  At  the  poles  the  line  is  a  right  one.  The 
nearer  the  parts  to  the  equinoctial  circle  the 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


more  obliquely  do  magnetic  bodies  attract,  but 
the  parts  nearer  the  poles  attract  more  directly; 
at  the  poles  themselves  attraction  is  in  a  right 
line.  All  loadstones  alike,  whether  spherical  or 
oblong,  have  the  selLsame  mode  of  turning  to 
the  poles  of  the  world;  but  it  is  easiest  to  exper¬ 
iment  with  oblong  ones.  For  whatever  the  shape, 
verticity  is  present,  and  there  are  poles;  but 
owing  to  imperfect  and  irregular  shape,  load¬ 
stones  are  often  subject  to  drawbacks,  and  are 
interfered  with  in  their  movements.  If  the  load¬ 
stone  be  oblong,  with  vertices  at  the  extremi¬ 
ties  and  not  at  the  sides,  it  attracts  best  at  the 
vertex;  for  the  parts  convey  to  the  poles  a 
greater  force  in  right  lines  than  in  oblique.  Thus 
do  the  loadstone  and  the  earth  conform  mag¬ 
netic  movements. 

CHAPTER  7.  Of  the  potency  of  the  magnetic  force^ 
and  of  its  spherical  extension 

The  magnetic  force  is  given  out  in  all  direc¬ 
tions  around  the  body;  around  the  terrella  it  is 
given  out  spherically;  around  loadstones  of  oth¬ 
er  shapes  unevenly  and  less  regularly.  But  the 
sphere  of  influence  does  not  persist,  nor  is  the 
force  that  is  diffused  through  the  air  permanent 
or  essential;  the  loadstone  simply  excites  mag¬ 
netic  bodies  situated  at  convenient  distance.  And 
as  light — so  opticians  tell  us — arrives  instantly 
in  the  same  way,  with  far  greater  instantaneous¬ 
ness,  the  magnetic  energy  is  present  within  the 
limits  of  its  forces;  and  because  its  act  is  far 
more  subtile  than  light,  and  it  does  not  accord 
with  non-magnetic  bodies,  it  has  no  relations 
with  air,  water,  or  other  non-magnetic  body; 
neither  does  it  act  on  magnetic  bodies  by  means 
of  forces  that  rush  upon  them  with  any  motion 
whatever,  but  being  present  solicits  bodies  that 
are  in  amicable  relations  to  itself.  And  as  a  light 
impinges  on  whatever  confronts  it,  so  does  the 
loadstone  impinge  upon  a  magnetic  body  and 
excites  it.  And  as  light  does  not  remain  in  the 
atmosphere  above  the  vapors  and  effluvia  nor 
is  reflected  back  by  those  spaces,  so  the.  magnet¬ 
ic  ray  is  caught  neither  in  air  nor  in  water.  The 
forms  of  things  are  in  an  instant  taken  in  by  the 
eye  or  by  glasses;  so  does  the  magnetic  force 
seize  magnetic  bodies.  In  the  absence  of  light 
bodies  and  reflecting  bodies,  the  forms  of  objects 
are  neither  apprehended  nor  reflected;  so,  too, 
in  the  absence  of  magnetic  objects  neither  is  the 
magnetic  force  imbibed  nor  is  it  again  given 
back  to  the  magnetic  body.  But  herein  does  the 
magnetic  energy  surpass  light, — that  it  is  not 
hindered  by  any  dense  or  opaque  body,  but 
goes  out  freely  and  diffuses  its  force  every 


whither.  In  the  case  of  the  terrella  and  in  a 
spherical  loadstone  the  magnetic  energy  extends 
outside  the  body  in  a  circle;  yet  in  the  case  of 
an  oblong  loadstone  it  does  not  extend  out  in  a 
circle,  but  into  an  area  of  form  determined  by 
the  shape  of  the  stone,  as  in  the  stone  in  the 
figure,  the  energy  reaches  to  the  limits  FCD, 
everywhere  equidistant  from  the  stone  A. 


CHAPTER  8.  Of  the  geography  of  the  earth  and  the 
terrella 

We  have  next  to  speak  of  magnetic  circles  and 
magnetic  limits,  so  that  what  follows  later  may 
be  better  understood.  Astronomers,  in  order  to 
account  for  and  observe  the  movements  of  the 
planets  and  the  revolution  of  the  heavens,  as 
also  more  accurately  to  describe  the  heavenly 
order  of  the  fixed  stars,  have  drawn  in  the 
heavens  certain  circles  and  bounds,  which  geog¬ 
raphers  also  imitate  so  as  to  map  out  the  diver¬ 
sified  superficies  of  the  globe  and  to  delineate 
the  fairness  of  the  several  regions.  In  a  different 
sense  we  accept  those  bounds  and  circles,  for  we 
have  discovered  many  such,  both  in  the  ter¬ 
rella  and  in  the  earth;  but  these  are  determined 
by  nature  itself,  and  are  not  merely  imaginary 
lines.  Geographers  make  a  division  of  the  earth 
chiefly  by  defining  the  equator  and  the  poles; 
and  these  bounds  are  set  and  defined  by  nature. 
Meridians,  too,  indicate  tracks  from  pole  to 
pole,  passing  through  fixed  points  in  the  equator; 
along  such  lines  the  magnetic  force  proceeds 
and  gives  direction.  But  the  tropics  and  the 
arctic  circles,  as  also  the  parallels  of  latitude, 
are  not  natural  bounds  described  on  the  earth; 
yet  all  these  parallel  circles  indicate  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  conformity  between  themselves  exists 
among  regions  of  the  earth  situate  in  the  same 
latitude  or  diametrically  opposite  to  them.  All 
these  are  of  service  to  mathematicians  in  con¬ 
structing  globes  and  maps.  Thus  such  circles 
are  of  use  in  the  terrella,  but  they  need  not  be 
drawn  as  geographers  draw  them — on  the  sur¬ 
face,  for  the  loadstone  may  be  perfectly  even 
and  uniform  all  over.  Nor  are  there  any  “upper” 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


44 

or  “lower”  parts,  in  the  terrestrial  globe,  as 
there  are  also  none  in  the  terrella,  save  perhaps 
that  one  may  choose  to  call  these  parts  “upper” 
which  are  at  the  periphery  and  those  “lower” 
which  are  nigher  the  centre. 

CHAPTER  9.  Of  the  equinoctial  circle  of  earth  and 
terrella 

The  equinoctial  circle  imagined  by  astrono¬ 
mers,  which  is  equidistant  from  both  poles  and 
divides  the  earth  in  the  middle,  measures  the 
movements  of  their  primunt  mobile  or  tenth 
sphere,'  and  is  called  the  zone  of  the  primum 
mobile^  it  is  called  “equinoctial”  because  when 
the  sun  is  in  this  circle — which  must  happen 
twice  a  year — the  days  are  of  equal  length  with 
the  nights.  This  circle  is  designated  also  aequidi- 
alts;  hence  the  Greeks  give  it  the  name  iarjfjLepL- 
vos  (which  means  the  same,  “equal  day”).  And 
it  is  also  well  called  “equator,”  for  it  divides  the 
whole  globe  of  the  earth  from  pole  to  pole  in 
two  equal  parts.  To  the  terrella  also  is  justly  as¬ 
signed  an  equator  whereby  its  power  is  distrib¬ 
uted  between  two  parts.  By  the  plane  of  this 
equator,  as  it  passes  through  the  centre,  the 
whole  terrella  is  divided  into  two  parts  equal 
in  mass  and  in  verticity,  and  imbued  with  equal 
energy,  as  though  a  wall  stood  betwixt  the  two 
verticities. 

CHAPTER  10.  The  earth's  magnetic  meridians 

Geographers  have  devised  meridians  for  the 
purpose  of  distinguishing  the  longitude  and  lat¬ 
itude  of  regions.  But  the  magnetic  meridians 
are  numberless,  and,  even  as  the  earth’s  merid¬ 
ians,  they  pass  through  fixed  and  opposite  points 
in  the  equator  and  through  the  poles.  On  them 
also  is  magnetic  latitude  measured.  By  means 
of  them  we  understand  declinations;  and  along 
them  there  is  a  fixed  direction  toward  the  poles, 
except  when  the  magnetic  body  for  any  cause 
varies,  and  is  jostled  out  of  the  right  course. 
The  meridian  commonly  called  magnetic  is  not 
properly  magnetic,  neither  is  it  a  meridian,  but 
is  supposed  to  pass  through  the  limits  of  varia¬ 
tion  in  the  horizon.  Variation  is  in  fact  a  faulty 
deviation  from  the  meridian.  In  various  places 
it  is  not  fixed  or  constant  in  any  meridian. 

CHAPTER  11.  Parallels 

In  parallel  circles  the  same  energy  and  equal 
potency  is  seen  throughout,  when  different 
magnetic  bodies  are  placed  on  one  and  the  same 
parallel,  either  of  the  earth  or  of  the  terrella. 
For  the  bodies  are  at  equal  distances  from  the 

^  For  primum  mobile ^  see  Book  vi,  3. 


poles  and  have  equal  changes  of  declination,  and 
are  attracted  and  held  and  come  together 
under  the  action  of  like  forces;  just  as  regions 
of  the  earth  on  the  same  parallel,  though  they 
may  differ  in  longitude,  are  said  to  have  still 
the  same  quantity  of  daylight  and  the  same 
climate. 

CHAPTER  12.  The  magnetic  horizon 

An  horizon  is  a  great  circle  separating  the  things 
seen  from  those  that  are  out  of  sight,  as  one 
half  of  the  heavens  is  always  plainly  visible  while 
another  half  is  always  hid.  So  it  seems  to  us  by 
reason  of  the  great  distance  of  the  starry^  sphere; 
yet  the  difference  is  in  the  ratio  of  the  earth's 
semi-diameter  to  the  semi-diameter  of  the  star¬ 
ry^  heavens — a  difference  not  perceived  by  the 
senses.  But  we  take  the  magnetic  horizon  to  be 
a  plane  perfectly  level  throughout,  tangent  to 
the  earth  or  to  the  terrella  at  the  place  of  the 
region,  with  which  plane  the  semi-diameter, 
whether  of  the  earth  or  of  the  terrella,  being 
extended,  makes  right  angles  on  all  sides.  Such 
a  plane  is  to  be  imagined  for  the  earth,  and  for 
the  terrella  likewise,  for  the  sake  of  magnetic 
proofs  and  demonstrations.  For  we  are  consid¬ 
ering  the  bodies  themselves,  and  not  the  general 
aspects  of  the  world.  Therefore,  not  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  sight — for  that  varies  according  to  the 
elevation  of  regions — we  assume  in  magnetic 
demonstrations  a  sensible  horizon,  not  what  is 
called  by  astronomers  the  rational  horizon. 

CHAPTER  13.  Of  the  magnetic  axis  and  poles 

A  LINE  drawn  through  the  centre  of  the  earth 
(or  of  the  terrella)  to  the  poles  is  called  the 
axis.  The  poles  are  so  called  by  the  Greeks  (tto- 
Xot,  (XTro  Tov  TToXetv — poloi  from  polein^  to  re¬ 
volve),  and  by  the  Latins  car  dines  (hinges,  piv¬ 
ots)  and  vertices  (centres  of  a  whirling  motion); 
and  these  names  were  given  to  signif)'-  that  the 
world  rotates  and  is  ever  whirling.  We  propose 
to  show  that  the  earth  and  the  terrella  are  by 
the  magnetic  force  made  to  revolve  round  these 
poles,  whereof  that  one  in  the  earth  which  points 
to  Cynosura-  is  called  the  North,  the  Boreal,  or 
the  Arctic  pole;  the  opposite  one  is  called  the 
South,  Austral,  or  Antarctic  pole.  And  neither 
in  earth  nor  in  terrella  do  the  poles  exist  merely 
for  the  sake  of  rotation;  they  are  furthermore 
reference  points  of  direction  and  of  position — 
on  the  one  hand  towards  one’s  destination  on 
the  earth,  and  on  the  other  hand  as  regards  their 
angular  distance. 

*  Cynosure — the  constellation  of  the  Lesser  Bear  {Ursa 
Minor)  containing  the  polar  star. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


CHAPTER  14.  IV/iy  the  coition  is  stronger  at  the 
pole  than  in  the  parts  between  equator  and  pole;  and 
the  relative  power  of  coition  in  different  parts  of  the 
earth  and  the  terrella 

We  have  already  shown  that  the  supreme  at- 
tractional  power  is  at  the  pole,  while  the  weaker 
and  more  sluggish  power  is  in  the  parts  nigh  the 
equator.  And  as  in  the  declination  it  is  seen 
that  this  ordering  and  rotating  force  increases 
as  we  advance  from  the  equator  to  the  poles,  so 
too  does  the  coition  of  magnetic  bodies  grow 
stronger  by  the  same  degrees  and  in  the  same 
proportion.  For  at  points  remote  from  the  pole 
the  loadstone  does  not  pull  magnetic  bodies  in  a 
right  line  toward  its  centre,  but  they  tend  to  it 
obliquely,  and  obliquely  are  attracted.  For  as  a 
very  small  chord  of  a  circle  differs  from  the 
diameter,  by  so  much  do  differ  the  attractional 
powers  of  different  parts  of  the  terrella.  For 
inasmuch  as  the  attraction  is  a  coition  to  a  body, 
and  magnetic  bodies  come  together  owing  to 
their  natural  tendency  to  turn  to  each  other, 
in  the  diameter  drawn  from  pole  to  pole  a  body 
impinges  on  the  loadstone  in  a  right  line;  but 
not  so  in  other  parts.  Therefore  the  less  it  turns 
toward  the  body,  the  less  and  the  more  weak 
is  the  coition  and  the  cohesion.  Let  ab  be  the 


poles.  An  iron  bar  or  the  other  magnetic  body 
c  is  attracted  at  e\  yet  the  end  that  is  pulled 
does  not  tend  toward  the  centre  of  the  load¬ 
stone,  but  obliquely  toward  the  pole,  and  a 
chord  drawn  from  that  end  obliquely  in  the 
direction  in  which  the  body  is  attracted  is  a 
short  one;  the  strength  of  the  coition  therefore 
is  less,  and  so  too  the  attracted  object  turns  at 
a  less  angle  to  the  terrella.  But  as  from  a  body 
at/a  longer  chord  proceeds,  so  the  action  there 
is  stronger.  At  g  the  chord  is  still  longer.  At  a 
(the  pole)  it  is  longest  of  all  (for  the  diameter  is 
the  longest  Hne),  and  thither  do  all  the  parts 
send  their  forces:  there  stands,  as  it  were,  the 
citadel,  the  judgment-seat,  of  the  whole  region 


— not  that  the  pole  holds  this  eminence  in  its 
own  right,  but  because  it  is  the  depository  of 
forces  contributed  to  it  by  all  the  other  parts; 
it  is  like  soldiers  bringing  reinforcement  to  their 
commander.  Hence  a  rather  oblong  loadstone 
attracts  better  than  a  spherical  one,  if  its  length 
stretch  from  pole  to  pole,  and  yet  the  two  may 
be  from  the  same  mine,  and  be  of  equal  size  and 
volume.  The  way  is  longer  from  one  pole  to  the 
other  in  the  oblong  stone,  and  the  forces  sup¬ 
plied  by  the  other  parts  are  not  so  scattered  as 
in  a  spherical  loadstone  and  the  terrella;  they 
are  better  massed  and  united,  and  thus  united 
they  are  stronger  and  greater.  But  a  flat  or  ob¬ 
long  loadstone  is  much  less  effective  when  the 
length  is  in  the  direction  of  the  parallels,  and 
the  pole  ends  neither  in  a  point  nor  in  a  circle 
or  sphere,  but  lies  flat  on  a  plane  surface  so  as 
to  be  held  for  something  abject  and  of  no  ac¬ 
count,  for  its  unfit  and  unadaptable  form. 

CHAPTER  15.  The  magnetic  force  imparted  to  iron 
is  more  apparent  in  an  iron  rod  than  in  an  iron  sphere 
or  cube,  or  iron  of  any  other  shape 

It  has  been  already  said  that  an  oblong  load¬ 
stone  lifts  a  greater  weight  of  iron:  so  in  a  long 
piece  of  iron  rubbed  with  a  loadstone  the  mag¬ 
netic  force  is  stronger  if  the  poles  are  at  the 
ends;  for  the  magnetic  forces,  which  are  sent  to 
both  ends  from  the  poles,  are  concentrated  at 
the  narrow  terminals,  and  not  diffused.  In 
square  and  other  angular  figures  the  force  is 
scattered,  nor  does  it  proceed  in  right  lines  or 
along  suitable  arcs.  The  iron  sphere,  too,  though 
it  hath  the  figure  of  the  earth,  still  has  less  at¬ 
traction  for  magnetic  bodies  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son;  hence  an  excited  iron  spherule  acts  with 
less  force  on  iron  than  does  a  magnetized  bar  of 
the  same  weight. 

CHAPTER  16.  That  motion  is  produced  by  the  mag¬ 
netic  force  through  solid  bodies  interposed:  of  the 
interposition  of  a  plate  of  iron 

An  iron  wire  passed  through  a  suitable  piece  of 
cork,  or  a  needle  poised  on  a  point  or  in  a  mari¬ 
ner’s  compass,  is  set  in  motion  when  a  loadstone 
is  brought  near  it  or  is  passed  beneath  it,  though 
the  water,  the  vessel,  or  compass-box  stand  be¬ 
tween.  No  hindrance  is  offered  by  thick  boards, 
or  by  walls  of  pottery  or  marble,  or  even  of  met¬ 
als:  there  is  naught  so  solid  as  to  do  away  with 
this  force  or  to  check  it,  save  a  plate  of  iron. 
Whatever  substances  are  interposed,  however 
dense  they  be,  as  they  do  not  annul  the  force 
nor  obstruct  its  path,  so  do  they  in  no  wise 
hinder  or  lessen  or  retard.  Nor  is  the  whole  of 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


46 

the  force  suppressed  by  a  plate  of  iron,  but  in 
part  diverted.  For  when  the  force  enters  the 
middle  of  an  iron  plate  placed  within  the  sphere 
of  magnetic  influence  or  directly  over  the  pole 
of  the  loadstone,  that  force  is  distributed  chiefly 
to  the  extremities,  so  that  the  rim  of  a  eircular 
plate  of  suitable  size  attracts  pieces  of  iron  wire 
at  all  points.  The  same  is  seen  in  a  long  iron  rod 
rubbed  with  a  loadstone  in  the  middle;  it  has 
the  same  verticity  at  both  ends.  In  the  figure, 
CD  is  a  long  rod  magnetized  in  the  middle  by 
the  north  pole  E;  C  is  a  south  end  or  south  pole, 
and  D  is  another  south  end.  But  here  note  the 
singular  fact,  that  a  needle  magnetized  by  that 
pole  turns  to  that  pole,  though  the  round  plate 
stands  between,  the  plate  not  hindering,  but 
the  attraction  being  only  weaker;  for  the  force 
is  scattered  to  the  extremities  of  the  plate,  and 
departs  from  the  straight  track,  but  yet  the 
plate  in  its  middle  retains  the  same  verticity 
with  the  pole  when  it  is  nigh  it  and  alongside 


it:  hence  does  the  needle  magnetized  by  the 
same  pole  tend  to  the  centre  of  the  plate.  If  the 
loadstone  is  a  weak  one,  the  needle  hardly  turns 
if  an  iron  plate  be  interposed;  for,  being  diffused 
out  to  the  extremities  of  the  plate,  the  load¬ 
stone’s  energy  is  less  able  to  pass  through  the 
centre.  But  let  the  plate  be  magnetized  in  the 
middle  by  the  pole,  and  then  let  it  be  removed 
beyond  the  loadstone’s  sphere  of  influence,  and 
you  shall  see  the  point  of  the  same  needle  go  in 
the  contrary  direction  and  quit  the  centre  of 
the  plate,  which  before  it  sought:  for  outside  of 
the  sphere  of  influence  the  plate  has  the  con¬ 
trary  verticity,  but  near  the  loadstone  it  has 
the  same;  for  near  the  loadstone  the  plate  is  as 
it  were  part  of  the  loadstone  and  has  the  same 
pole. 

Let  /I  be  an  iron  plate  near  a  pole;  B  a  needle 
with  point  tending  toward  the  centre  of  the 
plate,  which  plate  has  been  magnetized  by  the 
pole  C  of  a  loadstone.  Now  if  the  same  plate  he 
placed  outside  the  sphere  of  magnetic  influ¬ 
ence,  the  point  of  the  needle  will  not  turn  to 
its  centre,  but  only  the  crotch  (the  other  end) 
of  the  same  needle.  But  an  iron  sphere  inter¬ 
posed  (if  it  be  not  too  large)  attracts  the  point 
of  the  needle  at  the  other  side  of  the  stone,  for 


the  verticity  of  that  side  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  adjoining  pole  of  the  loadstone.  And  this 
turning  of  the  needle’s  point  (/.e.,  the  end  of  it 
magnetized  by  contact  with  that  pole)  and  of 


its  cross  (other  end)  at  a  considerable  distance 
takes  place  with  an  iron  sphere  interposed, 
whereas  it  would  not  take  place  at  all  were  the 
space  between  vacant;  for  the  magnetic  force 
travels  through  bodies  and  is  continued  on  by 
them. 

Let  ^  be  a  terrella,  B  an  iron  sphere,  F  a 
needle  between  the  two  bodies,  with  its  point 
magnetized  by  the  pole  C.  In  the  second  figure 
A  is  the  terrella,  C a  pole,  B  an  iron  sphere:  the 
needle  tends  toward  C,  the  terrella’s  pole, 
through  the  iron  sphere.  The  needle  thus  placed 
between  terrella  and  sphere  vibrates  more  for¬ 
cibly  toward  the  pole  of  the  terrella,  because 
the  loadstone  imparts  instantaneous  verticity 
to  the  opposite  sphere.  The  earth’s  efficiency  is 
the  same,  produced  by  the  same  cause.  For  if 
in  a  thick  box  made  of  gold  (the  densest  of  met¬ 
als)  or  glass,  or  marble,  you  put  a  needle  free  to 


revolve,  that  needle,  in  spite  of  the  box,  will 
show  that  its  forces  are  most  closely  allied  to 
and  unified  with  those  of  the  earth;  of  its  own 
accord  and  instantly,  regardless  of  the  box  that 
prisons  it,  it  turns  to  its  desiderated  points  of 
north  and  south.  And  it  does  the  same  though 
it  be  shut  up  in  iron  vaults  sufficiently  roomy. 
Whatever  bodies  are  produced  here  on  the  earth 
or  are  manufactured  from  nature’s  products  by 
art,  all  consist  of  the  matter  of  the  globe:  such 
bodies  do  not  interfere  with  the  prime  poten¬ 
cies  of  nature  derived  from  the  primary  form; 
nor  can  they  withstand  them,  save  by  contrary 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


forms.  But  no  forms  of  mixed  bodies  are  inimi¬ 
cal  to  the  innate  primary  form,  though  some  of 
them  oft  do  not  accord  among  themselves.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  all  the  bodies  that  have  a 
material  cause  of  attraction  (e.g,,  amber,  jet, 
sulphur)  action  is  hindered  by  interposition  of 
a  body  (as  paper,  leaves,  glass,  etc.),  and  the 
way  is  obstructed  and  blocked  so  that  that 
which  is  exhaled  cannot  reach  the  light  body 
that  is  to  be  attracted.  But  coition  and  move¬ 
ment  of  the  earth  and  the  loadstone,  though 
corporeal  hindrances  be  interposed,  are  shown 
also  in  the  efficiencies  of  other  chief  bodies  that 
possess  the  primary  form.  The  moon,  more  than 
the  rest  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  is  in  accord 
with  the  inner  parts  of  the  earth  because  of  her 
nearness  and  her  likeness  of  form.  The  moon 
causes  the  movement  of  the  waters  and  the 
tides  of  ocean ;  makes  the  seashore  to  be  covered 
and  again  exposed  twice  between  the  time  she 
passes  a  given  point  of  the  heavens  and  reaches 
it  again  in  the  earth’s  daily  rotation:  this  move¬ 
ment  of  the  waters  is  produced  and  the  seas 
rise  and  fall  no  less  when  the  moon  is  below  the 
horizon  and  in  the  nethermost  heavens,  than 
when  she  is  high  above  the  horizon.  Thus  the 
whole  mass  of  the  earth,  when  the  moon  is  be¬ 
neath  the  earth,  does  not  prevent  the  action  of 
the  moon;  and  thus  in  certain  positions  of  the 
heavens,  when  the  moon  is  beneath  the  horizon, 
the  seas  nearest  to  our  countries  are  moved,  and, 
being  stirred  by  the  lunar  power  (though  not 
struck  by  rays  nor  illumined  by  light),  they  rise, 
approach  with  great  impetus,  and  recede.  Of 
the  reason  of  this  we  will  treat  elsewhere:  suffice 
it  here  just  to  have  touched  the  threshold  of  the 
question.  Hence,  here  on  earth,  naught  can  be 
held  aloof  from  the  magnetic  control  of  the 
earth  and  the  loadstone,  and  all  magnetic  bod¬ 
ies  are  brought  into  orderly  array  by  the  su¬ 
preme  terrene  form,  and  loadstone  and  iron 
sympathize  with  loadstone  though  solid  bodies 
stand  between. 

CHAPTER  17.  Of  the  iron  helmet  {cap)  of  the  load¬ 
stone^  wheretvith  it  is  armed  at  the  pole  to  increase 
its  energy;  efficiency  of  the  same 

A  CONCAVE  hemisphere  of  thin  iron,  a  finger’s 
width  in  diameter,  is  applied  to  the  convex  po¬ 
lar  superficies  of  a  loadstone  and  properly  fast¬ 
ened;  or  an  iron  acorn-shaped  ball  rising  from 
the  base  into  an  obtuse  cone,  hollowed  out  a 
little  and  fitted  to  the  surface  of  the  stone,  is 
made  fast  to  the  pole.  The  iron  must  be  the  best 
(steel),  smooth,  polished,  and  even.  Fitted  with 
this  contrivance,  a  loadstone  that  before  lifted 


only  4  ounces  of  iron  will  now  lift  12  ounces. 
But  the  greatest  force  of  the  co-operating  or 
rather  unified  matter  is  seen  when  two  load¬ 
stones  fitted  with  these  projections  are  so  joined 
as  mutually  to  attract  and  lift  each  other:  thus 
may  a  weight  of  20  ounces  be  lifted,  though 
either  stone  unarmed  would  lift  only  4  ounces. 
Iron  is  held  faster  by  an  armed  loadstone  than 
by  one  not  armed,  and  hence  it  lifts  greater 
weights,  because  iron  clings  more  strongly  to 
the  armed  stone:  for,  by  the  contiguous  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  loadstone,  the  iron  of  the  armature 
and  the  iron  attracted  are  bound  fast  together; 
and  when  the  armature  has  imbibed  the  mag¬ 
netic  energy  by  reason  of  the  presence  of  the 
loadstone,  and  another  piece  of  iron  adjoining 
at  the  same  time  derives  force  from  the  presence 
of  a  loadstone,  the  two  unite  energetically. 
Hence  when  two  powerful  armatures  are  in  con¬ 
tact  they  cohere  strongly.  This  is  proved  in 
Book  III.  4,  by  iron  rods  cohering,  as  also  where 
we  mention  the  transformation  of  steel -filings 
into  a  concreted  mass.  For  this  reason  iron  sit¬ 
uate  near  a  loadstone  takes  away  from  it  pieces 
of  iron  of  suitable  weight,  provided  only  it  be 
in  contact  with  them;  else,  however  near  they 
may  be,  it  does  not  match  them.  For  masses  of 
magnetic  iron  do  not,  within  the  field  of  a  load¬ 
stone  or  near  a  loadstone,  attract  more  strongly 
than  the  loadstone  attracts  any  iron;  but  once 
they  are  in  contact  with  each  other  they  unite 
more  strongly,  and  become  as  it  were  clamped 
together,  though  with  the  same  forces  at  work 
the  substance  remains  the  same. 

CHAPTER  18.  An  armed  loadstone  does  not  endow 
with  greater  force  magnetized  iron  than  does  an  un¬ 
armed  one 

Take  two  pieces  of  iron,  one  magnetized  with 
an  armed  and  the  other  with  an  unarmed  load¬ 
stone,  and  apply  to  one  of  them  a  weight  of  iron 
proportioned  to  its  powers:  the  other  loadstone 
will  lift  the  same  weight,  and  no  more.  Two 
needles  also  turn  with  the  same  velocity  and 
constancy  toward  the  poles  of  the  earth,  though 
one  needle  may  have  been  touched  by  an  armed 
magnet  and  the  other  by  one  unarmed. 

CHAPTER  19.  That  unition  is  stronger  with  an  armed 
loadstone;  heavier  weights  are  thus  lifted;  the  coition 
is  not  stronger^  hut  commonly  weaker 

That  an  armed  loadstone  lifts  a  greater  weight 
is  evident  to  all;  but  iron  is  drawn  from  the 
same  distance,  or  rather  from  a  greater  distance, 
to  the  loadstone  when  the  stone  is  without  the 
iron  helmet.  This  is  to  be  tried  with  two  pieces 


48  WILLIAM  GILBERT 

of  iron  of  the  same  weight  and  form  at  equal 
distance,  or  with  one  and  the  same  needle,  test¬ 
ed  first  with  the  armed  then  with  the  unarmed 
stone,  at  equal  distances. 


CHAPTER  20.  That  an  armedmag- 
net  lifts  another^  and  that  one  a 
third:  this  holds  good  though  there 
be  less  energy  in  the  first 

Armed  loadstones  duly  joined  to¬ 
gether  cohere  firmly  and  form 
one;  and  though  the  first  be  weak, 
the  second  nevertheless  clings  to 
it,  not  alone  with  the  force  of  the 
first,  but  of  the  second,  the  stones 
thus  helping  each  other:  to  the 
second  a  third  will  often  cling, 
and  with  strong  loadstones  a 
fourth  to  the  third. 


CHAPTER  21.  That  when  paper  or  other  medium  is 
interposed,^  an  armed  loadstone  does  not  lift  more 
than  one  unarmed 

It  has  been  shown  above  that  an  armed  load¬ 
stone  does  not  attract  at  a  greater  distance  than 
an  unarmed  one,  but  that  it  lifts  a  greater  quan¬ 
tity  of  iron,  if  it  be  in  contact  with  the  iron  and 
continuous  therewith.  But  put  a  leaf  of  paper 
between,  and  this  intimate  coherence  is  hind¬ 
ered,  norare  objects  of  iron  held  together  by  the 
action  of  the  loadstone. 

CHAPTER  22.  That  an  artned  loadstone  does  not 
attract  iron  more  than  an  unarmed  one;  and  that 
the  armed  stone  is  more  strongly  united  to  the  iron,  is 
shown  by  means  of  an  armed  loadstone  and  a  cylin¬ 
der  of  polished  iron 

On  a  plane  surface  lay  a  cylinder  too  heavy  for 
the  unarmed  loadstone  to  lift;  then,  with  paper 
between,  apply  at  the  middle  of  the  cylinder  the 
pole  of  an  armed  loadstone:  if  the  cylinder  is 
pulled  by  the  loadstone,  it  follows  after  it  with 
rolling  motion;  but  when  there  is  no  paper  be¬ 
tween,  the  cylinder,  joined  to  the  loadstone,  is 
pulled  by  it,  and  does  not  roll  at  all.  But  if  the 
same  loadstone  be  unarmed,  it  pulls  the  rolling 
cylinder  with  the  same  velocity  as  does  an  armed 


loadstone  with  paper  between,  or  wrapped  in 
paper. 

Armed  loadstones  of  different  weights,  force, 
and  shape,  but  out  of  the  same 
mine,  show  an  equal  degree  of 
strength  in  adhering  to  or  hanging 
from  iron  objects  of  suitable  size 
and  shape.  The  same  is  true  of  un¬ 
armed  ones.  A  suitable  piece  of  iron 
applied  to  the  under  side  of  a  load¬ 
stone  that  hangs  from  a  magnetic 
body  heightens  the  energy  of  the 
loadstone,  so  that  it  clings  with 
greater  force.  For  a  pendent  load¬ 
stone  clings  faster  to  the  body 
above,  to  which  it  is  attached, 
when  a  piece  of  iron  is  applied  and 
hangs  from  it,  than  when  a  piece  of 
lead  or  other  nonmagnetic  material 
is  fastened  to  it. 

A  loadstone,  whether  armed  or 
not,  attached  by  its  proper  pole  to 
the  pole  of  another  loadstone, 
armed  or  not,  makes  that  other  lift 
a  greater  weight  at  its  opposite  end. 

The  same  thing  is  seen  when  iron  is 
applied  to  the  pole  of  a  loadstone, 
viz.,  the  opposite  pole  carries  a 
greater  weight  of  iron:  thus,  as  in 
the  figure,  the  loadstone  with  a  bar 
of  iron  superposed  carries  the  bar  below,  but 
cannot  carry  it  if  the  upper  piece  be  removed. 
Magnetic  bodies  in  conjunction  form  one  mag¬ 
netic  body;  hence,  the  mass  increasing,  the 
magnetic  energy  increases  also. 

An  armed  loadstone,  as  also  an  unarmed  one, 
leaps  more  quickly  to  a  large  mass  of  iron  and 
combines  with  it  more  strongly  than  with  a 
small  mass. 

CHAPTER  23.  The  magnetic force  maizes  motion  to¬ 
ward  union,  and  when  united  connects  firmly 

Magnetized  objects  cohere  well  and  duly  to 
one  another  according  to  their  forces.  Pieces  of 
iron  in  the  presence  of  a  loadstone,  though  not 
in  contact  with  it,  come  together,  eagerly  seek 
and  seize  one  another,  and  when  in  conjunc¬ 
tion  are,  as  it  were,  glued  together.  Iron  dust  or 
iron  reduced  to  a  powder,  packed  in  paper 
tubes,  and  placed  on  the  meridian  of  a  load¬ 
stone  or  merely  brought  near  it,  coalesces  into 
one  mass,  and  in  an  instant  the  many  particles 
come  together  and  combine;  and  the  multi¬ 
tude  of  united  grains  acts  on  a  piece  of  iron  and 
attracts  it,  as  though  they  formed  but  one  con¬ 
tinuous  rod  of  iron,  and  take  the  north  and 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


south  direction  when  laid  on  the  loadstone.  But 
if  they  be  taken  away  from  the  stone  to  any 
distance,  the  particles,  resolved  again  to  their 
original  condition,  separate,  and  each  stands 
alone:  thus  it  is  that  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
are  conjoined,  connected,  held  together,  mag¬ 
netically.  So  let  not  Ptolemy  of  Alexandria, 
and  his  followers  and  our  philosophers,  main¬ 
tain  that  the  earth  will  go  to  pieces,  neither  let 
them  be  alarmed  if  the  earth  spins  round  in  a 
circle. 

Iron-filings  when  made  hot  are  attracted  by 
the  loadstone  not  so  strongly  nor  from  as  great 
a  distance  as  if  they  were  not  heated.  A  load¬ 
stone  subjected  to  any  great  heat  loses  some  of 
its  energy;  for  its  humor  is  dissipated,  and  so 
its  peculiar  nature  is  marred.  So,  too,  a  mass  of 
iron-filings,  if  roasted  in  a  reverberatory  furnace 
and  changed  to  crocus  Martis^  is  not  attracted 
by  a  loadstone;  but  if  it  has  not  been  very  high¬ 
ly  heated,  not  quite  wasted,  it  clings  to  load¬ 
stone,  though  more  feebly  than  iron  that  has 
not  been  put  in  fire.  For  crocus  Martis  has  noth¬ 
ing  of  the  form  of  iron  left;  but  metal  that  has 
been  made  hot  takes  heat  from  the  fire,  and  in 
its  vitiated  substance  the  magnetic  powers  are 
less  powerfully  awakened  by  the  loadstone,  and 
iron  that  has  quite  lost  its  nature  is  not  attract¬ 
ed  by  the  loadstone. 

CHAPTER  24.  That  iron  within  the  field  of  a  load¬ 
stone  hangs  suspended  in  air,  if  on  account  of  an 
obstacle  it  cannot  come  near 

Iron  within  the  magnetic  field  tends  toward 
the  points  of  the  stone  that  have  the  most  ener¬ 
gy,  if  it  be  not  hindered  by  force  or  by  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  an  intervening  body;  and  this  is  so  wheth¬ 
er  the  iron  tends  downward  to  the  loadstone,  or 
seeks  it  from  one  side  and  obliquely,  or  whether 
it  leaps  up  to  it.  But  if  on  account  of  an  obstacle 
it  cannot  reach  the  stone,  it  sticks  to  the  obsta¬ 
cle  and  there  remains,  yet  is  held  by  a  less  con¬ 
stant  bond,  for,  owing  to  the  greater  intervals 
and  distances,  the  association  (with  the  load¬ 
stone)  is  less  amicable.  Fracastorio,  in  his  Chap¬ 
ter  8,  De  sympathia,  says  that  a  piece  of  iron  will 
be  suspended  in  air  so  that  it  cannot  move  ei¬ 
ther  up  or  down  if  a  loadstone  be  placed  above  it 
that  has  an  attractive  force  on  the  iron  equal  to 
the  force  by  which  the  iron  tends  downward: 
thus  the  iron  will  stand  fixed  in  mid-air.  That 
is  ridiculous:  for  the  nearer  the  loadstone  the 
greater  always  is  its  force;  and  hence  the  iron 
that  is  lifted  ever  so  little  above  the  earth  by 
the  loadstone’s  force  must  needs  be  steadily 
drawn  to  it,  and  must  cling  to  it.  Baptista  Porta 


suspends  in  air  a  piece  of  iron  (with  a  loadstone 
fixed  above),  and  holds  back  the  iron  by  means 
of  a  thin  thread  fastened  to  it  beneath,  so  that 
it  shall  not  rise  to  the  stone — hardly  a  very 
brilliant  idea.  The  piece  of  iron  is  pulled  in  a 
perpendicular  line  by  the  loadstone,  though  the 
two  are  not  in  contact,  but  only  near  each  oth¬ 
er;  but,  as  on  account  of  the  greater  nearness, 
the  iron  mass  is  stirred  by  the  force  that  was  lift¬ 
ing  it,  straightway  it  speeds  to  the  loadstone  and 
clings  to  it.  For  the  iron,  the  nearer  it  comes  to 
the  loadstone,  the  more  is  excited,  and  the 
stronger  is  the  attraction. 

CHAPTER  25.  Intensifymg  the  loadstone’s  forces 

One  loadstone  far  surpasses  another  in  energy, 
for  one  will  snatch  up  almost  its  own  weight  of 
iron,  while  another  is  hardly  able  to  move  the 
smallest  particle.  All  animals  and  plants  that  pos¬ 
sess  life  have  need  of  victual  of  some  sort,  to  the 
end  their  powers  may  last  and  become  firmer 
and  stronger.  But  iron  is  not  attracted  by  the 
loadstone,  as  Cardan  and  Alexander  Aphrodisc- 
us  supposed,  so  that  it  may  be  nourished  with 
morsels  of  it;  neither  does  the  loadstone  gain 
strength  from  iron-filings  as  from  a  nutritious 
food.  Baptista  Porta,  having  his  doubts  about 
this  view,  and  wishing  to  make  an  experiment, 
took  a  loadstone  of  determinate  weight  and 
buried  it  in  iron-filings  of  a  weight  not  un¬ 
known;  and,  after  he  had  left  it  there  many 
months,  he  found  the  stone  heavier,  the  filings 
lighter.  But  the  difference  was  so  minute  that 
Porta  was  uncertain  as  to  the  truth.  This  ex¬ 
periment  of  Porta’s  does  not  prove  that  the 
stone  devours  anything,  nor  does  it  show  any 
process  of  nutrition,  for  minute  quantities  of 
filings  are  easily  lost  by  handling.  So,  too,  a  very 
small  quantity  of  the  iron  dust  may  adhere  to 
some  small  part  of  the  loadstone  and  not  be 
noticed,  thus  adding  somewhat  to  the  weight 
of  the  stone;  but  that  is  a  superficial  accretion, 
and  can  be  brushed  off  without  much  difficulty. 
Many  think  that  when  weak  and  sluggish  the 
stone  can  bring  itself  back  to  a  better  condition, 
and  that  a  very  strong  stone  can  endow  a  weaker 
one  with  the  highest  degree  of  force.  Is  it  as 
when  animals  gain  strength  when  they  feed  and 
are  filled  ?  Is  a  remedy  found  for  the  loadstone 
in  addition  or  subtraction  of  something.?  Is 
there  aught  that  can  restore  this  primary  form 
or  give  it  anew.?  Surely  nothing  can  do  such  a 
thing  save  what  possesses  magnetic  properties. 
Magnetic  bodies  can  restore  soundness  (when 
not  totally  lost)  to  magnetic  bodies,  and  can 
give  to  some  of  them  powers  greater  than  they 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


50 

hail  originally;  but  to  those  that  are  by  their 
nature  in  the  highest  degree  perfect,  it  is  not 
possible  to  give  further  strength.  Mence  the 
more  infamous  becoiues  all  the  charlatanry  of 
Paracelsus,  who  declares  that  the  loadstone’s 
force  and  energy  may  be  increased  and  trans¬ 
formed  to  tenfold  what  it  is  naturally.  And  the 
wav  of  doing  this  is,  so  to  speak,  to  half-candes- 
cifv  the  loadstone,  to  make  it  very  hot,  yet 
so  that  it  does  not  reach  white  heat,  and  then 
immediately  to  dip  it  in  oil  of  \  itriol  made  from 
the  bestCorynthian  steel,  letting  it  become  sat¬ 
urated.  “In  this  way,”  says  Paracelsus,  “you 
can  give  to  a  loadstone  such  strength  that  it  will 
pull  a  nail  out  of  a  wall,  and  perform  many  other 
the  like  marvels  impossible  for  a  common  load¬ 
stone.”  But  a  loadstone  so  dipped  not  only  ac¬ 
quires  no  force,  but  suffers  some  loss  it  already 
hath.  .\  loadstone  rubbed  and  smoothed  with 
steel  is  made  better.  When  covered  wdth  filings 
of  the  best  iron  or  pure  steel,  not  rusty,  it  retains 
its  properties.  Sometimes,  too,  a  good  strong 
loadstone  gains  some  strength  wLen  rubbed  on 
its  opposite  pole  w  ith  the  pole  of  another  load¬ 
stone:  it  takes  in  force.  In  such  experiments  it 
is  well  to  observe  the  earth’s  pole,  and  to  lay 
down  in  the  direction  required  by  the  mag¬ 
netic  laW'S  the  stone  that  one  wdshes  to  make 
stronger:  this  point  we  will  establish  hereafter. 
A  strong,  large  loadstone  increases  the  powder  of 
another  loadstone,  as  also  the  pow  er  of  iron.  If, 
on  the  north  pole  of  a  loadstone,  you  place  an¬ 
other  loadstone,  the  north  pole  of  the  second 
becomes  stronger,  and  a  piece  of  iron  clings  like 
an  arrow'  to  the  north  pole  17,  and  not  at  all  to 
the  south  pole  b,  .\nd  the  pole  i7,  w'hen  it  is  in 
a  right  line  above  with  the  axis  of  both  load¬ 
stones,  they  being  joined  according  to  the  mag¬ 
netic  law’s,  raises  the  piece  of  iron  to  the  per¬ 
pendicular:  this  it  cannot  do  if  the  larger  load¬ 
stone  be  moved  aw^ay,  for  its  strength  is  insuffi¬ 
cient.  But  as  a  ball  of  iron  on  the  pole  of  the 


terrella  raises  the  piece  of  iron  to  the  perpendic¬ 
ular,  so,  at  the  side,  the  iron  is  .not  directed  to- 
w’ard  the  centre,  but  stands  oblique  and  sticks 
everyw  here;  for  in  the  iron  ball  the  pole  is  ever 
the  point  of  contact  w’ith  the  terrella’s  pole,  and 
it  is  not  constant,  as  it  is  in  the  smaller  terrella. 
The  parts  of  the  earth,  as  of  all  magnetic  bodies, 
are  in  accord  and  enjoy  neighborhood  with 
each  other:  there  is  in  them  all  mutual  love, 
undying  good-will.  The  weaker  loadstones  are 
refreshed  by  the  stronger  ones,  and  the  less  vig¬ 
orous  bring  no  damage  to  the  more  vigorous. 
Yet  a  strong  loadstone  exerts  more  attraction 
in  another  strong  one  than  in  one  that  is  feeble, 
for  a  vigorous  stone  contributes  forceful  action, 
and  itself  hastes,  flies  to  the  other,  and  solicits 
it  vehemently ;  accordingly  there  is  co-operation 
and  a  clearer  and  stronger  cohesion. 

CHAPTER  26.  Why  the  love  of  iron  and  loadstone 
appears  greater  than  that  of  loadstone  and  loadstone^ 
or  iron  and  iron  when  nigh  a  loadstone  and  within 
its  field 

One  loadstone  does  not  attract  another  on  all 
its  sides  as  it  does  iron,  but  only  at  one  fixed  point : 
hence  the  poles  of  the  tw  o  must  be  properly  ar¬ 
ranged,  else  they  do  not  duly  and  pow’erfully 
cohere.  But  this  arranging  is  not  easy  nor  the 
work  of  an  instant:  therefore  one  loadstone  will 
seem  to  be  refractory  tow’ard  another,  wLereas 
they  may  be  in  perfect  harmony.  Iron,  sud¬ 
denly  impressed  by  a  loadstone,  is  not  only  at¬ 
tracted  by  it,  but  is  renovated  and  its  powers 
enhanced,  w^hereby  it  pursues  and  solicits  the 
loadstone  w’ith  a  force  not  less  than  its  ow’n,  and 
also  makes  captive  other  iron  objects.  Suppose 
a  little  iron  bar  firmly  adhering  to  a  loadstone: 
if  you  bring  near  this  piece  of  iron  an  iron  rod, 
but  without  touching  the  loadstone,  you  shall 
see  the  iron  instantly  follow^  the  rod,  relinquish¬ 
ing  the  loadstone,  leaning  tow’ard  the  rod,  and, 
on  contact,  firmly  adhering  thereto;  for  iron  in 
union  and  contact  pulls  more  vigorously 
another  piece  of  iron  within  the  field  of  a 
loadstone  than  does  the  loadstone  itself. 
The  natural  magnetic  force,  which  in  iron 
lies  confined  and  asleep,  is  aw’akened  by  a 
loadstone,  associates  itself  with  it,  and 
comes  into  sympathy  with  it  in  virtue  of 
the  primary  form:  hence  comes  the  per¬ 
fect  magnetized  iron,  which  is  as  strong 
as  the  loadstone  itself;  for  as  the  one  im¬ 
parts  and  arouses,  so  the  other  conceives, 
and,  being  aw’akened,  endures,  and  by  its 
very  act  gives  back  the  force  again.  But 
in  so  much  as  iron  is  liker  to  iron  than  is 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


loadstone,  and  in  two  pieces  of  iron  within  the 
field  of  a  loadstone,  the  nighness  of  the  latter 
enhances  the  powers  of  both:  then,  their  forces 
being  equal,  likeness  of  substance  becomes  de¬ 
cisive,  and  iron  gives  itself  up  to  iron,  and  the 
two  pieces  are  united  by  their  most  like  (iden¬ 
tical)  and  homogeneous  forces.  This  is  efl'ected 
not  only  by  coition,  but  by  a  firmer  union;  and 
a  steel  cap  or  snout  {glansvelnastis)  properly  ad¬ 
justed  to  the  pole  of  a  loadstone  lifts  greater 
weights  than  can  the  stone  by  itself.  When  steel 
or  iron  is  made  from  loadstone  or  from  iron  ore, 
the  slag  and  impurities  are  separated  from  the 
substance  by  a  better  fusion :  hence  usually  such 
iron  contains  the  matter  of  the  earth  purged  of 
foreign  admixture  and  dross,  and  more  homo- 
genic  and  perfect  (than  before  smelting),  albeit 
deformed  by  fusion.  And  this  matter,  when 
acted  on  by  a  loadstone,  conceives  the  magnet¬ 
ic  virtue,  and  within  the  magnetic  field  is  en¬ 
dowed  with  force  surpassing  that  of  an  inferior 
loadstone,  which  is  seldom  without  some  ad¬ 
mixture  of  impurities. 

CHAPTER  27.  That  the  centre  of  the  magnetic forces 
in  the  earth  is  the  centre  of  the  earth;  and  in  the  terr el- 
la  the  terrella's  centre 

The  rays  of  magnetic  force  are  dispersed  in  a 
circle  in  all  directions;  and  the  centre  of  this 
sphere  is  not  in  the  pole  (as  Baptista  Porta 
deems.  Chap.  22),  but  in  the  centre  of  the 
stone  and  of  the  terrella.  So,  too,  the  earth’s 
centre  is  the  centre  of  the  earth’s  magnetic 
movements,  though  magnetic  bodies  are  not 
borne  direct  toward  the  centre  in  the  magnetic 
movement  save  when  they  are  attracted  by  the 
pole.  For  as  the  formal  power  of  loadstone  and 
earth  promotes  simply  unity  and  conformity 
between  things  separate,  it  follows  that  every- 


A 


where  at  equal  distance  from  the  centre  or  from 
the  convex  circumference,  just  as  at  one  point 
it  seems  to  attract  in  a  right  line,  so  at  another 
it  can  control  and  rotate  the  needle,  provided 


only  the  loadstone  be  not  of  unequal  powen 
For  if  at  the  distance  C  from  pole  D  the  stone 
is  able  to  attract  the  needle,  then  at  an  equal 
distance  A  above  its  equator  it  can  control  and 
rotate  the  needle.  Thus  the  centre  and  middle 
of  the  terrella  is  the  centre  of  force,  and  thence 
to  the  circumference  of  its  sphere  of  influence 
its  magnetic  virtues  extend  (for)  equal  distances 
in  all  directions. 

CHAPTER  28.  That  a  loadstone  does  not  attract  to  a 
fixed  pomt  or  pole  only^  but  to  every  part  of  a  terrella  y 
except  the  equinoctial  circle 

Coition  is  always  strongest  when  pole  touches 
pole,  for  at  the  poles  the  force  is  greatest  by 
concert  of  the  whole:  hence  one  pole  seizes  the 
other  with  greatest  force.  Points  at  distances 
from  the  poles  possess  at tractional  power  also, 
but  somewhat  weaker  and  sluggish  in  the  ratio 
of  the  distance,  so  that  finally  in  the  equinoc¬ 
tial  line  they  are  utterly  enervate  and  faint. 
The  poles,  too,  do  not  attract  as  mathematical 
points,  nor  does  magnetized  iron  unite  at  its 
poles  only  with  the  poles  of  a  loadstone.  On  the 
contrary,  the  coition  takes  place  all  over  the 
periphery,  north  and  south,  the  force  emanat¬ 
ing  from  the  whole  mass.  Magnetic  bodies,  how¬ 
ever,  are  attracted  feebly  in  the  parts  near  the 
equator,  but  quickly  in  the  parts  near  the  poles. 
Wherefore  not  the  poles  alone,  and  not  the  parts 
alone  that  are  near  the  poles,  attract  and  solicit 
magnetic  bodies;  but  magnetic  bodies  are  con¬ 
trolled  and  rotated  and  unite  with  other  mag¬ 
netic  bodies  according  as  parts  neighboring  and 
adjoining  lend  their  forces,  which  forces  are 
ever  of  the  same  potency  in  the  same  parallel, 
except  when  otherwise  distributed  by  causes 
producing  variation. 

CHAPTER  29,  Of  difference  of  forces  dependent  on 
quantity  or  mass 

Loadstones  coming  from  the  same  mine,  and 
not  intermingled  with  neighboring  metals  or 
ores,  have  the  same  potency;  yet  the  stone  that 
is  largest  exhibits  greatest  force,  as  it  carries  the 
greatest  weight  and  has  a  wider  sphere  of  influ¬ 
ence.  A  loadstone  weighing  an  ounce  does  not 
lift  an  iron  spike  as  does  one  that  weighs  a 
pound,  nor  does  its  control  reach  so  far,  nor  does 
its  force  extend  to  such  a  distance.  And  if  you 
take  from  a  one-pound  stone  a  part,  somewhat 
of  its  power  will  be  seen  to  leave  also;  for  when 
a  part  is  taken  away  some  of  the  energy  is  lost. 
But  when  such  part  is  duly  applied  and  united 
to  the  stone,  though  it  be  not  cemented  there 
nor  perfectly  fitted  in  by  the  mere  apposition. 


52  WILLIAM  GILBERT 


the  original  strength  is  recovered,  and  the  force 
returns.  Sometimes,  however,  the  energy  is  in¬ 
creased  by  detachment  of  a  part  because  of  mal¬ 
formation  of  the  stone,  as  when  the  force  is 
diffused  through  awkward  corners. 

In  stones  of  different  sorts  the  ratio  of  power 
is  different:  one  weighing  a  drachm  may  have 
more  force  than  another  one  of  20  pounds. 
Many  a  loadstone  is  so  weak  that  the  force  can 
scarcely  be  noticed,  and  such  faint  magnets  are 
often  surpassed  by  masses  prepared  of  potter’s 
earth.  But  we  may  ask:  supposing  that  a  stone 
of  a  given  kind  and  of  definite  goodness,  and 
weighinga  drachm,  carries  one  drachm,  whether 
one  weighing  an  ounce  will  carry  an  ounce,  a 
pound  a  pound,  and  so  on.?  So  it  is,  for  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  size  such  loadstone  has  greater  or 
less  strength:  so  that  a  loadstone  of  proportion¬ 
ate  size  and  weight,  a  drachm  weight  of  which 
lifts  a  drachm  weight  of  iron,  will,  when 
brought  near  a  suitable  great  obelisk  or  enor¬ 
mous  pyramid  of  iron,  attract  it  and  pull  it  to  it¬ 
self,  and  that  with  no  greater  effort  of  its  nature 
and  with  no  greater  pains  than  when  a  drachm 
weight  of  loadstone  seizes  a  drachm  weight  of 
iron.  But  in  all  such  experiments  the  power  of 
the  loadstones  should  be  equal,  the  form  of  the 
stones  should  be  exactly  proportioned:  this  is 
true  not  less  of  an  armed  than  of  a  naked  load¬ 
stone.  As  an  experiment,  take  a  loadstone 
weighing  8  oz.,  which  when  armed  lifts  12  oz. 
of  iron;  cut  off  of  this  stone  a  part  which,  when 
brought  to  the  form  of  the  whole  stone  as  it 
was  before,  shall  weigh  only  2  oz. :  such  a  stone, 
armed,  lifts  3  oz.  of  iron.  In  this  experiment  it 
is  requisite  that  the  form  of  the  3-oz.  piece  of 
iron  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  12-oz.  piece;  if 
the  12  oz.  mass  rose  in  form  of  a  cone,  the  3-oz. 
piece  must  assume  a  pyramidal  form  propor¬ 
tioned  to  the  figure  of  the  original  mass. 

CHAPTER  30.  The  shape  and  the  mass  of  an  iron 
object  are  important  in  magnetic  coitions 

It  was  shown  before  that  the  shape  and  mass  of 
a  loadstone  are  weighty  factors  in  magnetic  coi¬ 
tions:  similarly,  the  shape  and  mass  of  the  iron 
determine  whether  its  force  shall  be  great  or 
little.  Oblong,  bacilliform  pieces  are  both  more 
quickly  attracted  and  cling  more  firmly  than 
spherical  or  square  pieces,  and  this  for  the  causes 
we  have  shown  with  regard  to  the  loadstone. 

It  is  also  worthy  of  note,  that  when  a  smaller 
iron  object  has  attached  to  it  a  weight  of  dif¬ 
ferent  material,  so  that  the  weight  of  the  two 
shall  equal  that  of  another  larger  piece  whose 
weight  is  proportioned  to  the  power  of  the 


loadstone,  it  is  not  lifted  by  the  loadstone  like 
the  larger  object;  for  the  smaller  piece  is  not  so 
powerfully  attracted  by  the  loadstone,  because 
it  gives  back  less  force,  and  only  magnetic  mat¬ 
ter  conceives  the  magnetic  energy:  foreign  mat¬ 
ter  appended  to  such  a  body  cannot  take  in  mag¬ 
netic  force. 

CHAPTER  31.  Of  oblong  and  round  stones 

Iron  bodies  are  more  forcibly  attracted  by  an 
oblong  stone  than  by  a  round  one,  provided 
only  the  pole  of  the  stone  is  at  the  extreme  end 
of  its  length.  The  reason  is  that  in  the  oblong 
stone  the  magnetic  body  at  the  extremity  is 
directed  straight  toward  a  body  wherein  the 
force  proceeds  in  right  lines  and  through  a 
longer  diameter.  But  the  oblong  stone  has  only 
little  force  on  the  side;  for,  plainly,  the  attrac¬ 
tion  at  a  and  B  is  stronger  in  a  round  loadstone 
at  equal  distance  from  the  pole,  than  in  randD. 


CHAPTER  32.  Some  problems  and  magnetic  experi¬ 
ments  on  the  coition^  and  repulsion,  and  regular 
movement,  of  magnetic  bodies 

Loadstones  that  are  equal  come  together  with 
equal  mutual  incitation. 

Magnetized  iron  bodies  that  are  in  all  re¬ 
spects  equal  do  also  come  together  with  equal 
mutual  incitation. 

Iron  bodies  not  magnetized,  if  they  are  equal, 
and  not  hindered  by  their  bulk,  do  also  come 
together  with  equal  movement. 

Two  loadstones  placed  on  suitable  floats  apart 
on  the  surface  of  water,  if  they  be  suitably  ar¬ 
ranged  within  their  magnetic  field,  attract  each 
other.  So,  too,  a  proportionate  piece  of  iron  on 
one  float  hastes  to  a  loadstone  with  the  same 
speed  with  which  the  magnet  itself,  afloat, 
strives  to  reach  the  iron.  For  the  two  are  im¬ 
pelled  from  their  own  places  on  either  side  to 
come  together  midway  and  coalesce.  Two  mag¬ 
netized  iron  wires,  floated  in  water  by  suitable 
corks  move  fonvard  to  contact,  and,  with  the 
proper  end  on,  strike  and  are  joined. 

With  magnetic  bodies  that  are  equal,  coition 
is  more  vigorous,  and  quicker  than  repulsion 
and  separation.  That  magnetic  bodies  are  more 
sluggish  in  repelling  than  in  attracting,  is  seen 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


in  every  magnetic  experiment,  as  when  load- 
stones  are  borne  on  suitable  floats  on  water,  or 
when  magnetized  iron  wire  or  little  bars  are 
driven  through  cork  and  set  afloat  in  water,  as 
also  in  experiments  with  a  needle.  The  reason 
is  that,  since  the  power  of  coition  is  one  thing, 
the  power  of  conformation  and  of  ordering  in 
place  is  another,  therefore  repulsion  and  aver- 
sation  are  the  act  of  the  force  ordering  in  place; 
but  the  coming  together  is  the  result  of  mutual 
attraction  to  contact  as  well  as  of  the  force  that 
orders  in  place;  t.e.y  it  is  due  to  a  twofold  force. 

The  ordering  force  is  often  only  the  forerun¬ 
ner  of  coition,  so  that  the  bodies  shall  stand  in 
due  position  before  the  onset:  hence  they  turn 
in  the  direction  of  the  points  of  coition,  if  they 
be  hindered  from  attaining  those  points.  If  a 


loadstone  be  cut  in  two  equal  parts  along  the 
meridian,  the  separated  parts  repel  each  other, 
if  the  poles  be  placed  at  a  suitable  even  distance 
from  each  other;  for  they  mutually  repel  with 
greater  velocity  than  is  the  case  when  pole  is 
wrongly  opposed  to  pole.  Thus  the  half  5  of  a 
loadstone,  placed  near  the  other  half  Ay  repels  A 
on  its  float,  because  D  withdraws  from  Fand  E 
from  C.  But  if  B  be  again  joined  exactly  with 
Ay  they  come  together  and  form  one  magnetic 
body;  yet  when  they  are  only  near  each  other 
they  are  mutually  hostile.  And  if  one  half  be 
turned  about  so  as  to  bring  C opposite  to  D  and 
F  to  Ey  then  A  follows  B  within  the  field  and  be¬ 
comes  joined  to  it. 

South  parts  of  a  stone  retreat  from  south 
parts,  and  north  parts  from  north.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  if  you  bring  the  south  end  of  a  piece  of  iron 
near  to  the  south  part  of  the  stone,  the  iron  is 
seized  and  the  two  are  held  ir  friendly  embrace; 
as  the  verticity  fixed  in  the  iron  is  reversed  and 
changed  by  the  presence  of  the  more  powerful 
loadstone,  which  is  more  constant  in  its  forces 
than  the  iron.  For  they  come  together  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  nature,  if  either  by  reversal  or 
change  there  be  produced  true  conformity  and 
orderly  coition  as  well  as  regular  direction. 


Loadstones  of  identical  shape,  size,  and  strength 
attract  each  other  with  equal  force,  and  when 
in  wrong  position  repel  with  like  energy. 

Little  rods  of  unmagnetized  iron,  though  like 
and  equal,  yet  act  on  one  another  often  with 
different  force;  for  as  there  are  different  grounds 
for  the  acquisition  of  verticity  and  also  of 
strength  and  vigor,  so  the  particles  that  are 
most  strongly  excited  by  the  loadstones  them¬ 
selves  in  turn  act  with  most  force. 

Pieces  of  iron  that  have  been  magnetized  at 
one  same  pole  of  a  loadstone  repel  one  another 
at  the  magnetized  ends;  and  their  other  extrem¬ 
ities  are  also  mutually  hostile. 

In  rotating  needles  when  the  points  are  mag¬ 
netized  but  not  the  crotches,  the  latter  repel 
one  another,  but  only  feebly  and  in  proportion 
to  length. 

In  like  rotating  needles  when  the  points  are 
magnetized  by  the  same  pole  of  a  loadstone  the 
crotches  attract  with  equal  force. 

In  a  long  rotating  needle  the  crotch  is  attract¬ 
ed  feebly  by  the  point  of  a  short  needle;  the 
crotch  of  a  short  one  is  attracted  strongly  by  the 
point  of  a  long  one,  because  the  crotch  of  a  long 
needle  has  feeble  verticity,  but  the  point  of  a 
long  needle  has  strong  verticity. 

The  point  of  a  long  needle  repels  the  point 
of  a  short  one  more  strongly  than  the  point  of  a 
short  needle  repels  that  of  a  long  one,  if  one  of 
them  be  poised  free  on  a  sharp  point  and  the 
other  held  in  the  hand;  for  though  both  have 
been  equally  magnetized  by  the  same  loadstone, 
still  the  longer  one,  by  reason  of  its  greater  mass, 
has  greater  force  at  its  point. 

In  unmagnetized  iron  rods  the  south  end  of 
one  attracts  the  north  end  of  another,  and  the 
north  end  the  south;  the  meridional  parts,  too, 
repel  meridional  parts,  and  north  parts  north 
parts. 

If  magnetic  bodies  be  divided  or  in  any  way 
broken  up,  each  several  part  hath  a  north  end 
and  a  south  end. 

A  needle  is  stirred  by  a  loadstone  at  as  great  a 
distance  with  an  obstacle  interposed  as  in  air 
and  in  an  open  medium. 

Rods  magnetized  by  friction  with  the  pole  of 
a  loadstone  draw  toward  that  pole  and  follow  it. 
Baptista  Porta  is  therefore  in  error  when  he 
says  (Chapter  4)  that  “if  you  bring  a  part  nigh 
the  part  that  gave  it  the  force,  it  shudders,  and 
repels  and  drives  it  away,  and  attracts  the  con¬ 
verse  and  opposite  part.” 

The  laws  of  rotation  and  attraction  are  the 
same  as  between  loadstone  and  loadstone,  load¬ 
stone  and  iron,  and  iron  and  iron. 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


54 

When  the  parts  of  a  magnetic  body  that  has 
been  broken  up  by  force  and  cut  into  pieces 
arc  put  together  again  and  properly  joined, 
they  form  one  body  and  their  joint  force  is  one; 
nor  have  they  separate  poles. 

The  separated  parts,  if  di\dsion  has  not  been 
made  on  the  parallels,  assume  new  poles,  north 
and  south;  if  the  division  is  along  a  parallel, 
they  may  retain  one  pole  in  the  same  place  as 
before. 

Iron  rubbed  and  excited  by  a  loadstone  is 
seized  at  the  fitting  ends  by  a  loadstone  more 
powerfully  than  iron  not  magnetized. 

If  a  small  iron  bar  be  set  erect  on  the  pole  of  a 
loadstone,  another  bar-iron  pin  in  touch  with 
its  upper  end  becomes  firmly  attached  thereto, 
and  if  it  be  mov’ed  away  pulls  the  standing  bar 
from  the  terrella. 

If,  to  the  nether  end  of  the  erect  bar  you  ap¬ 
ply  the  end  of  another  bar,  it  does  not  cohere, 
nor  do  they  unite. 

As  a  rod  of  iron  pulls  iron  away  from  the 
terrella,  so  does  a  small  loadstone  or  a  smaller 
terrella  albeit  of  less  force.  Here  the  iron  bar  C 


F 


coalesces  with  the  terrella  .i,  and  thus  its  force 
is  enhanced  and  awakened  magnetically  both  in 
the  end  in  conjunction  and  also  in  the  distal 
end  by  reason  of  its  contact  with  the  terrella; 
the  distal  end  furthermore  receives  energy 
from  the  loadstone  By  and  the  pole  D  of  this 
magnet  also  gains  force  by  reason  of  its  favour¬ 
able  position  and  the  nearness  of  the  pole  E  of 


the  terrella.  Hence  many  causes  co-operate  to 
make  the  bar  C,  attached  to  the  loadstone  By 
cling  more  strongly  to  that  than  to  the  terrella 
A,  I'he  energy  called  forth  in  the  bar,  also  the 
energy  called  forth  in  the  loadstone  By  and  B’s 
native  energy,  all  concur;  therefore  D  is  mag¬ 
netically  bound  more  strongly  to  C  than  E  to  C. 

But  if  you  turn  the  pole  F  to  the  iron  C,  then 
C  does  not  cling  to  Eas  it  did  before  to  D;  for, 
within  the  magnetic  field,  stones  so  arranged 
stand  in  an  unnatural  order:  hence  F  does  not 
get  force  from  E. 

Two  loadstones,  or  two  magnetized  pieces  of 
iron,  duly  cohering,  fly  apart  on  the  coming  of 
a  stronger  loadstone  or  a  stronger  magnetized 
mass  of  iron;  for  the  newcomer,  presenting  the 
opposite  pole,  puts  one  to  flight  and  overmas¬ 
ters  it,  and  the  mutual  action  of  the  two  that 
before  were  conjoined  ceases.  So  the  forces  of 
one  of  the  bodies  are  reduced  and  fail;  and  were 
it  possible,  it  would  shake  off  its  fellow,  and, 
turning  about,  would  go  rolling  over  to  the 
stronger.  For  this  reason  it  is  that  magnetic 
bodies  held  pendent  in  air  drop  to  the  ground 
when  the  opposite  pole  of  a  loadstone  is  present¬ 
ed  to  them;  and  this  not  because  there  is  any 
weakening  or  numbing  of  the  forces  of  both  of 
the  bodies  before  conjoined,  as  Baptista  Porta 
maintains,  for  pole  cannot  be  hostile  to  both  of 
the  ends  that  cohere,  but  to  one  only:  this  end 
the  newcomer,  the  stronger  loadstone,  drives 
away  from  itself  by  presenting  its  opposite  pole, 
and  thus  one  of  the  smaller  bodies  is  compelled 
to  give  up  its  friendly  association  with  the 
other. 

CHAPTE  R  33.  O/' the  difference  in  the  ratio  of  strength 

and  movement  of  coition  within  the  sphere  of  mflu' 

ence 

If  the  greatest  weight  that  is  attracted  to  a 
loadstone  at  the  nearest  distance  be  divided  into 
a  given  number  of  parts,  and  the  radius  of  the 
sphere  of  magnetic  attraction  into  the  same 
number  of  parts,  the  parts  of  the  weight  will 
correspond  to  the  intermediate  parts  of  the 
radius. 

The  sphere  of  influence  extends  farther  than 
the  sphere  of  movement  of  any  magnetic  body, 
for  a  magnetic  body  is  aflected  at  the  outer¬ 
most  edge  though  it  may  not  move  with  local 
motion:  that  is  done  when  the  loadstone  is 
brought  nearer.  A  needle,  e\'en  a  ver)^  small  one, 
turns  round  while  remote  from  a  loadstone, 
though,  at  the  same  distance  and  free  to  move 
and  in  no  wise  hindered,  it  does  not  come  to  the 
loadstone. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


The  velocity  of  the  movement  of  a  magnetic 
body  to  a  loadstone  is  in  proportion  to  the 
strength  of  the  loadstone,  or  its  mass,  or  its 
shape,  or  the  nature  of  the  medium,  or  the  dis¬ 
tance  within  the  magnetic  sphere  of  action. 

A  magnetic  body  approaches  with  greater 
velocity  a  powerful  loadstone  than  a  sluggish 
one,  in  the  ratio  of  the  respective  energies  of 
the  two  loadstones.  A  smaller  mass  of  iron,  as 
also  one  rather  oblong  in  shape,  is  attracted 
with  the  greater  velocity.  The  velocity  of  the 
movement  of  a  magnetic  body  to  a  loadstone 
varies  according  to  the  medium,  for  bodies 
move  with  greater  velocity  in  air  than  in  water, 
and  in  a  serene  atmosphere  than  in  thick  and 
foggy  weather. 

In  the  ratio  of  distance,  movement  is  quicker 
from  anear  than  from  afar.  At  the  outermost  edge 
of  a  terrella’s  field  magnetic  bodies  move  faint¬ 
ly  and  slowly.  In  the  immediate  neighborhood 
of  the  terrella  the  motor  impetus  is  greatest. 

A  loadstone  that  in  the  outermost  verge 
of  its  field  of  force,  at  the  distance  of  one 
foot,  can  hardly  stir  a  rotating  needle, 
will,  when  connected  with  a  long  iron  rod, 
strongly  attract  and  repel  (accordingly  as 
its  different  poles  are  presented)  the 
needle  at  the  distance  of  three  feet,  and 
this  whether  the  loadstone  is  armed  or 
unarmed.  The  iron  rod  should  be  of  fit¬ 
ting  quality,  and  of  the  thickness  of  the 
little  finger. 

For  the  energy  of  the  loadstone  awak¬ 
ens  verticity  in  the  iron  and  passes  in  and 
through  iron  to  a  far  greater  distance 
than  it  extends  through  air. 

The  force  also  passes  through  a  number  of 
pieces  of  iron  conjoined  at  their  extremities, 
yet  not  so  surely  as  through  one  continuous  rod. 

Steel-filings  strewed  on  paper  rise  on  end  and 
present  the  appearance  of  stubby  steel  hairs 
when  a  loadstone  is  brought  near  above  them; 
when  the  loadstone  is  applied  beneath,  the  hair¬ 
like  crop  rises  also. 

Steel-filings,  when  the  pole  of  a  loadstone  is 
brought  near,  coalesce  into  one  body;  but  when 
it  would  come  to  the  loadstone,  the  body  is 
broken  up  and  rises  to  the  steel  in  smaller  masses 
that  still  hold  together. 

But  if  the  loadstone  be  beneath  the  paper, 
the  consolidated  mass  breaks  up  as  before,  and 
into  very  many  parts,  each  of  which  consists  of 
a  multitude  of  grains;  and  they  remain  united, 
like  separate  bodies;  and  while  the  lowermost 
parts  of  these  eagerly  follow  the  pole  of  the  load¬ 
stone  beneath,  so  the  separate  masses  stand  like 


55 

solid  magnetic  bodies.  In  like  manner  a  bit  of 
iron  wire  one  barley-corn  or  two  in  length 
stands  on  end  when  a  loadstone  is  applied  either 
beneath  or  above. 

CHAPTER  34.  IV/jy  a  loadstone  is  of  different  power 
in  its  poles  as  well  in  the  north  as  in  the  south  regiotis 

The  extraordinary  magnetic  energy  of  the  earth 
is  beautifully  shown  in  the  following  neat  ex¬ 
periment:  Take  a  terrella  of  no  ordinary  power, 
or  an  oblong  loadstone  with  equal  cones  form¬ 
ing  its  polar  ends;  but  in  any  figure  not  exactly 
spherical  it  is  easy  to  fall  into  mistakes,  and  the 
experiment  is  difficult.  In  northern  latitudes 
raise  the  true  north  pole  above  the  horizon 
straight  toward  the  zenith.  Plainly  it  holds  erect 
on  its  north  pole  a  larger  bar  of  iron  than  could 
the  south  pole  of  the  same  terrella  if  turned  in 
like  manner  toward  the  centre  of  the  sky.  The 
same  demonstration  is  made  with  a  small  ter¬ 
rella  set  atop  of  a  large  one. 


Let  ab  be  the  earth  or  a  large  terrella,  and 
ab  a  small  terrella;  a  larger  bar  is  raised  erect 
by  the  north  pole  of  the  small  terrella  than  the 
b  pole  of  the  same,  if  turned  skyward,  can  raise 
to  the  erect  position.  And  the  a  pole  of  the 
small  terrella  derives  force  from  the  greater, 
turning  from  zenith  to  the  plane  of  the  horizon 
or  to  the  level.  Now  if,  the  smaller  terrella  hav¬ 
ing  its  poles  directed  as  before,  you  apply  a 
piece  of  iron  to  its  lower  or  south  pole,  that  will 
attract  and  hold  a  greater  weight  than  can  the 
south  pole  if  that  be  turned  down.  Which  is 
thus  shown:  Let  A  be  the  earth  or  a  terrella; 
E  the  north  pole  or  some  point  in  high  latitude; 
let  E  be  a  large  terrella  above  the  earth,  or  a 
small  terrella  above  a  larger  one;  D  the  south 
pole:  it  is  plain  that  D  (south  pole)  attracts  a 
larger  piece  of  iron,  C,  than  can  E  (the  north 
pole),  if  that  pole  be  turned  downward  to  the 
position  Z),  looking  toward  the  earth  or  the  ter- 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


56 

rella  in  their  northern  regions.  Magnetic  bodies 
gain  force  from  other  magnetic  bodies  if  they 
be  arranged  duly  and  according  to  their  nature 
in  neighbourhood  and  within  the  sphere  of  in¬ 
fluence;  and  hence,  when  a  terrella  is  imposed 
on  the  earth  or  on  another  terrella  in  such  way 
that  the  south  pole  looks  toward  the  north  pole 
and  north  is  turned  away  from  north,  the  ener¬ 
gy  and  forces  of  its  poles  are  augmented.  Hence 
the  north  pole  of  a  terrella  in  such  position  lifts 
a  heavier  piece  of  iron  than  the  south  pole  does 
if  that  be  turned  away.  In  like  manner  the 
south  pole,  gaining  force  from  the  earth  or  the 
larger  terrella  when  it  is  duly  placed  as  nature 
requires,  attracts  and  holds  heavier  bars  of  iron. 
In  the  other  portion  of  the  terrestrial  globe,  to¬ 
ward  the  south,  as  also  in  the  southern  parts  of 


F 


the  terrella,  the  case  is  reversed,  for,  there,  the 
south  pole  of  the  terrella  is  strongest  when  distal, 
as  is  the  north  pole  of  the  terrella  when  it  faces 
the  earth  or  terrella.  The  farther  a  place  is  from 
the  equinoctial  line,  whether  of  the  earth  or  of 
a  terrella,  the  greater  is  seen  to  be  the  accession 
of  force;  but  nigh  the  equator  the  difference  is 
slight;  at  the  equator  it  is  null;  at  the  poles  it  is 
greatest. 

CHAPTER  35.  Of  a  perpetual-motion  engine  actuated 
by  the  attraction  of  a  loadstone^  mentioned  by  authors 

Cardan  writes  that  out  of  iron  and  loadstone 
may  be  constructed  a  perpetual-motion  engine 
— not  that  he  saw  such  a  machine  ever;  he  mere¬ 


ly  offers  the  idea  as  an  opinion,  and  quotes  from 
the  report  of  Antonius  de  Fantis,  of  Treviso; 
such  a  machine  he  describes  in  Book  ix,  De 
rerum  varietate.  But  the  contrivers  of  such  ma¬ 
chines  have  but  little  practice  in  magnetic  ex¬ 
periments.  For  no  magnetic  attraction  can  be 
greater  (whatever  art,  whatever  form  of  instru¬ 
ment  you  employ)  than  the  force  of  retention; 
and  objects  that  are  conjoined,  and  that  are 
near,  are  held  with  greater  force  than  objects 
solicited  and  set  in  motion  are  made  to  move; 
and  as  we  have  already  shown,  this  motion  is  a 
coition  of  both,  not  an  attraction  of  one.  Such 
an  engine  Petrus  Peregrinus,  centuries  ago,  ei¬ 
ther  devised  or  delineated  after  he  had  got  the 
idea  from  others;  and  Joannes  Taysner  pub¬ 
lished  this,  illustrating  it  with  wretched  figures, 
and  copying  word  for  word  the  theory  of  it. 
May  the  gods  damn  all  such  sham,  pilfered, 
distorted  works,  which  do  but  muddle  the 
minds  of  students! 

CHAPTER  36.  Hoiu  a  strong  loadstone  may  be 
recognized 

A  STRONG  loadstone  sometimes  lifts  in  air  a 
mass  of  iron  weighing  as  much  as  itself;  a  weak 
loadstone  hardly  attracts  a  bit  of  fine  wire. 
Those,  then,  are  the  stronger  loadstones  which 
attract  and  hold  the  larger  bodies,  unless  there 
is  some  defect  of  shape,  or  unless  the  pole  of  the 
stone  is  not  properly  applied.  Besides,  the 
stronger  loadstone,  when  afloat,  more  readily 
turns  its  poles  toward  the  poles  of  the  earth  or 
the  points  of  variation  on  the  horizon.  But  the 
stone  that  acts  sluggishly,  betrays  some  flaw  in 
itself,  shows  that  its  force  is  exhausted.  Load¬ 
stones  are  to  be  all  prepared  in  the  same  way, 
shaped  alike,  and  made  of  the  same  size;  for 
when  they  are  unlike  and  unequal,  experiments 
are  doubtful.  All  loadstones  are  tested  for 
strength  in  the  same  way,  viz,y  with  a  versorium 
(rotating  needle)  held  at  some  distance;  the 
stone  that  at  the  greatest  distance  is  able  to 
make  the  needle  go  round  is  the  best  and  strong¬ 
est.  Baptista  Porta  also  rightly  determines  the 
power  of  a  loadstone  by  thus  weighing  in  a  bal¬ 
ance.  A  piece  of  loadstone  is  put  in  one  scale  and 
an  equal  weight  of  another  substance  in  the  oth¬ 
er,  so  that  the  scales  are  balanced.  Then  some 
iron  lying  on  a  board  is  brought  nigh,  so  that 
it  shall  cleave  to  the  loadstone  in  the  scale,  and 
the  two  bodies  cohere  perfectly  at  their  points 
of  attraction;  into  the  opposite  scale  sand  is 
poured  gradually  till  the  scale  in  which  is  the 
loadstone  separates  from  the  iron.  By  weighing 
the  sand  the  force  of  the  loadstone  is  ascer- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


tained.  So,  too,  we  can  make  experiment  and 
find  the  stronger  stone  by  weighing  sand,  if  we 
put  in  a  pair  of  scales  loadstones  that  balance 
each  other.  Such  is  an  experiment  given  by  Car¬ 
dinal  Cusanus  in  his  Statica^  and  from  him  Por¬ 
ta  would  seem  to  have  learned  the  one  he  cites. 
The  stronger  loadstones  turn  readily  toward  the 
poles  or  the  points  of  variation;  so,  too,  they 
propel  their  floats  and  cause  them  and  other 
cumbrances,  as  so  much  wood,  to  wheel  about. 
In  an  inclination  or  dip  instrument  the  greater 
power  of  a  loadstone  is  manifested  and  there 
greater  power  is  requisite.  Hence  loadstones  are 
stronger  the  more  speedily  they  do  their  work, 
and  the  more  rapidly  they  travel  from  side  to 
side  and  return,  and  the  sooner  they  come  to  a 
standstill.  Feeble,  exhausted  loadstones  travel 
more  sluggishly,  come  to  a  rest  more  slowly, 
stick  at  the  pole  less  decisively,  and  are  easily 
displaced  therefrom. 

CHAPTER  37.  Uses  of  the  loadstone  as  it  affects  iron 

By  means  of  magnetic  coition  we  test  an  iron 
ore.  The  ore  is  roasted  in  a  furnace,  is  crushed, 
washed,  dried,  and  so  is  freed  from  foreign  hu¬ 
mours.  The  loadstone  being  thrust  among  the 
particles  collected  from  the  bath  attracts  the 
iron  dust,  which  being  removed  by  a  feather 
brush  is  caught  in  a  crucible;  again  and  again 
the  loadstone  is  dipped  in  and  the  iron  dust 
brushed  into  the  crucible,  till  nothing  remains 
that  it  will  attract.  Then  the  powdered  iron  is 
heated  together  with  halinitro  till  it  is  melted 
and  becomes  a  mass  of  iron.  Now  if  the  load¬ 
stone  picks  up  the  iron  dust  readily  and  easily, 
we  deem  the  ore  to  be  rich;  if  slowly,  the  ore  is 
poor;  if  the  loadstone  seems  quite  to  reject  it, 
the  ore  is  judged  to  have  little  or  no  iron.  By 
the  same  method,  iron  particles  may  be  sepa¬ 
rated  from  particles  of  any  other  metal.  And 
many  tricks  are  played  by  secretly  attracting 
bits  of  iron  to  light  bodies,  or  causing  a  con¬ 
cealed  loadstone  to  attract  the  iron;  to  persons 
who  know  not  the  cause,  the  movements  of  the 
objects  seem  amazing.  Any  ingenious  workman 
may  exhibit  a  great  number  of  such  tricks  for 
sport,  with  the  air  of  one  dealing  in  incantations 
and  magic. 

CHAPTER  38.  Of  the  attractioiis  of  other  bodies 

Philosophizers  of  the  vulgar  sort  and  mere 
copyists  oft  repeat,  from  others’  memoirs  on 
natural  philosophy,  opinions  and  errors  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  attractional  force  of  various  bodies. 
They  will  say,  for  example,  that  diamond  at¬ 
tracts  iron  and  pulls  it  away  from  loadstone; 


that  loadstones  differ,  some  attracting  gold,  oth¬ 
ers  silver,  copper,  lead — yea,  flesh,  water,  fish. 
The  flame  of  sulphur  is  said  to  seek  iron  and 
stones;  so  is  white  naphtha  said  to  draw  to  it¬ 
self  fire.  I  have  already  said  that  inanimate  nat¬ 
ural  bodies  in  no  other  wise  attract  or  are  at¬ 
tracted  on  this  terrestrial  globe,  save  either 
magnetically  or  electrically.  It  is  therefore  not 
true  that  there  are  loadstones  that  attract  gold 
or  other  metals;  for  a  magnetic  body  attracts 
only  a  magnetic  body.  Fracastorio  tells  of  having 
seen  a  loadstone  attracting  silver.  If  that  were 
true,  then  it  must  necessarily  have  been  be¬ 
cause  some  iron  had  been  artificially  mixed 
with  the  silver  and  lay  hidden  therein,  or  be¬ 
cause  nature  had  mixed  iron  with  the  silver  (as 
she  does  sometimes,  though  very  seldom);  for 
iron  is  now  and  then  mixed  with  silver  by  na¬ 
ture,  but  silver  with  iron  very  rarely  or  never. 
By  false  coiners  and  by  avaricious  princes,  when 
money  is  coined,  iron  is  mixed  with  silver;  an 
instance  of  this  we  have  in  Anthony’s  denarius, 
if  what  Pliny  declares  be  true.  So  Cardan  (led 
into  error,  perhaps,  by  others)  says  there  is  a 
certain  kind  of  loadstone  which  attracts  silver; 
and  he  adds  a  very  silly  test  of  the  thing:  “If,” 
says  he,  “a  thin  rod  of  silver  be  touched  with 
this  and  then  poised  in  equilibrium,  when  it 
comes  to  a  standstill  after  being  whirled,  it  will 
point  to  silver  (especially  a  large  quantity), 
though  the  same  be  buried  in  the  ground;  by 
this  means  anybody  may  easily  unearth  hidden 
treasures.”  He  adds  that  “the  stone  must  be  of 
the  best,”  and  that  he  never  saw  such  stone. 
Nor  will  he  or  anybody  else  ever  see  such  a 
stone  or  such  an  experiment.  Cardan  cites  an 
attraction,  improperly  so  called,  of  flesh,  which 
is  altogether  unlike  magnetic  attraction;  his 
magties  creagus  (or  flesh-attracting  loadstone,  so 
named  because  it  clings  to  the  lips)  must  be 
cast  out  of  the  company  of  loadstones  and  of 
the  whole  family  of  attractional  bodies.  Lemni- 
an  earth,  red  ochre,  and  sundry  minerals  have 
this  action,  but  it  were  absurd  to  say  that  they 
attract.  Cardan  imagines  another  loadstone,  a 
third  species  as  it  were;  if  a  needle  be  driven  in¬ 
to  this,  it  may  be  thrust  into  a  person’s  body 
afterward  without  being  felt.  But  what  has  at¬ 
traction  to  do  with  numbing  of  sense,  or  what 
is  there  in  common  between  stupefaction  and 
the  mind  of  a  philosopher  while  he  discourses 
of  attraction  Many  are  the  stones,  both  of 
natural  origin  and  artificially  compounded,  that 
possess  the  power  of  dulling  the  senses.  The 
flame  of  sulphur  is  by  some  said  to  attract  be¬ 
cause  that  it  consumes  certain  metals  by  reason 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


58 

of  its  penetrating  force.  So  does  naphtha  at¬ 
tract  flame  because  it  emits  and  exhales  inflam¬ 
mable  vapor,  and  hence  is  set  aflame  at  some 
distance;  even  as  the  smudge  of  a  candle  that 
has  just  been  extinguished  catches  fire  again 
from  another  flame;  for  fire  creeps  to  lire 
through  an  inflammable  medium.  Of  the  suck¬ 
ing-fish  or  remora,  and  how  it  stays  ships,  phi¬ 
losophers  have  discoursed  variously.  It  is  their 
custom  oft  to  account  with  their  reasonings  for 
this  and  many  other  fables,  before  ascertaining 
that  the  thing  is  so  in  fact.  Wherefore,  approv¬ 
ing  and  indorsing  the  absurdities  of  the  ancients 
they  published  the  most  blunderous  theories 
and  ridiculous  theses — e.g.,  that  there  are  rocks 
having  the  power  of  attraction  and  that  there 
the  remora  dwells;  and  they  postulate  of  the 
necessity  of  I  know  not  what  vacuum  or  how 
produced.  Pliny  and  Julius  Solinus  tell  of  the 
stone  cathochhes  2Sidi  affirm  that  it  attracts  flesh 
and  holds  one’s  hand,  as  loadstone  holds  iron 
and  amber  holds  chaff.  But  that  is  due  solely  to 
its  viscosity  and  its  natural  glutinousness,  for  it 
adheres  most  readily  to  a  warm  hand.  The  sag- 
da,  or  sagdo,  is  a  gem  of  leek-green  color  men¬ 
tioned  by  Pliny,  Solinus,  Albertus  Magnus,  and 
Euace,  who  themselves  make  up  or  from  others 
copy  the  story  that  this  stone  has  the  peculiar¬ 
ity  of  attracting  wood.  And  there  are  others  who 
utter  the  nonsense  that  the  wood  attracted 
cannot  be  pulled  off,  but  has  to  be  cutaway; 
while  some  tell  of  a  stone  of  this  kind  that  clings 
as  firmly  to  ships’  bottoms  as  do  the  barnacles 
gathered  on  a  long  voyage.  But  though  a  stone 
may  cling  to  a  surface,  it  does  not  therefore  at¬ 
tract;  and  if  it  did  attract,  surely  it  would  draw 
to  itself  chips  and  shavings  electrically.  A  stone 
of  this  sort  was  seen  by  Encelius  in  the  hands 
of  a  certain  seaman;  a  weak  stone,  it  was,  hardly 
able  to  attract  the  smallest  twigs;  and  its  color 
was  not  a  true  leek-green.  Diamond,  carbuncle, 
rock-crystal,  and  other  stones  attract  in  that 
way.  1  say  nothing  of  other  fabulous  stones,  of 
pantarbes  whereof  Philostratus  affirms  that  it 
attracts  to  itself  other  stones;  of  amphitane,  said 
to  attract  also  gold.  Pliny,  in  telling  of  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  glass,  makes  the  loadstone  attract 
glass  as  it  does  iron;  for  when  in  speaking  of  the 
mode  of  making  glass  he  describes  its  nature,  he 
adds  this  concerning  the  loadstone:  “In  time  the 
skill  of  the  workmen,  clear  sighted  and  resource¬ 
ful,  was  no  longer  content  with  mixing  in  na¬ 
tron;  loadstone  began  to  be  added  because  it  is 
believed  to  attract  to  itself  the  liquid  glass  even 
as  it  attracts  iron.”  Georgius  Agricola  asserts 
that  “A  portion  of  loadstone  is  added  to  the  in¬ 


gredients  of  glass  (sand  and  natron),  because  it 
is  believed  in  our  day  as  in  early  times  that  that 
force  (the  magnetic)  attracts  to  itself  the  mol¬ 
ten  glass  even  as  it  attracts  iron,  that  it  purifies 
it  when  attracted,  and  changes  it  from  green 
or  orange-yellow  to  clear  white;  but  afterward 
the  fire  consumes  the  loadstone.”  True  it  is  in¬ 
deed  that  loadstone  of  some  kind  (as  the  mag¬ 
nesia  employed  by  glass-makers,  which  has  no 
magnetic  powers)  is  sometimes  introduced  into 
and  mingled  with  the  material  of  glass,  yet 
not  because  that  it  attracts  glass.  But  a  red- 
hot  loadstone  does  not  attract  iron  at  all,  nor 
is  iron  at  white  heat  attracted  by  loadstone; 
and  the  loadstone  is  even  destroyed  by  very 
strong  heat  and  loses  its  power  of  attraction. 
Nor  is  this  work  of  purifying  the  function 
of  loadstone  alone  in  the  glass  furnace,  but 
also  of  certain  pyrites  and  of  readily  combus¬ 
tible  iron  ores;  and  these  alone  are  used  by 
such  of  our  glass-makers  as  make  clear,  fine 
glass.  These  materials  are  mixed  with  sand, 
ashes,  and  natron  (just  as  other  materials  are 
mixed  with  metals  when  they  are  smelted),  so 
that,  when  the  contents  of  the  furnace  become 
fluid  glass,  the  well-known  green  and  yellow 
color  may  be  purged  away  by  the  penetrant 
heat.  For  no  other  matter  reaches  such  degree 
of  heat  or  endures  fire  for  the  requisite  length 
of  time  that  the  material  of  the  glass  may  be¬ 
come  perfectly  fluid,  and  just  then  is  burnt  up 
by  the  strong  fire.  But  sometimes  it  happens 
that  on  account  of  the  magnetic  stone,  or  mag¬ 
nesia,  or  iron  ore,  or  pyrites,  the  glass  hath  a 
dusky  tinge,  these  substances  being  too  resist¬ 
ant  to  fire  and  hence  not  being  burnt  up,  or 
having  been  introduced  in  too  great  quantity. 
For  this  reason,  glass-makers  procure  the  right 
sort  of  stone  and  carefully  attend  to  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  ingredients  in  the  mixture.  Thus, 
then,  Georgius  Agricola  and  later  writers  are 
badly  led  astray  by  Pliny’s  stupid  philosophy 
when  they  declare  that  loadstone  is  needed  by 
glass-makers  for  its  magnetic  virtues  and  attrac¬ 
tive  force.  And  Scaliger  {De  subtil,  ad  Carda- 
num)  strays  far  from  truth  when,  in  treating  of 
magnetic  bodies,  he  speaks  of  diamond  attract¬ 
ing  iron;  unless  he  means  only  that  diamond 
electrically  attracts  iron  as  it  does  bits  of  wood, 
straws,  and  other  small  bodies  of  all  kinds.  Fal¬ 
lopius  thinks  that  quicksilver  attracts  metals  in 
virtue  of  an  occult  property,  just  as  the  load¬ 
stone  does  iron,  or  as  amber  attracts  chaff.  But 
there  is  no  attraction  properly  so  called  when 
quicksilver  enters  into  metals.  For  metals  im¬ 
bibe  quicksilver  as  clay  does  water,  but  not  un- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


less  the  substances  are  In  contact;  for  quick¬ 
silver  does  not  draw  to  itself  gold  or  lead  from 
a  distance,  but  remains  fixed  in  its  place. 

CHAPTER  39.  Of  mutually  repelleui  bodies 

Authors  who  have  treated  of  the  forces  of  at¬ 
tracting  bodies  have  discoursed  of  the  powers 
of  repellent  bodies  also;  and  in  particular  those 
who  have  classified  objects  in  nature  according 
to  sympathy  and  antipathy.  It  would  seem, 
therefore,  that  we  must  needs  say  something 
about  the  strife  of  bodies  among  themselves, 
lest  widespread  errors,  accepted  by  all  to  the 
ruin  of  true  philosophy,  should  extend  farther. 
They  tell  us  that  as  like  things  attract  for  con¬ 
servation’s  sake,  so  unlike  things  and  opposites 
repel  and  drive  each  other  away,  as  is  seen  in  the 
antiperistasis  (counteraction)  of  many  bodies; 
but  it  is  most  potent  in  plants  and  animals, 
which,  as  they  attract  things  in  affinity  and  of 
kin,  so  do  put  away  things  extreme  and  disad¬ 
vantageous  to  themselves.  But  in  other  bodies 
the  same  reason  does  not  exist  for  their  coming 
together  by  mutual  attraction  when  they  are 
separated.  Animals  take  food  (as  do  all  things 
that  live),  bring  it  into  their  inwards,  absorb 
their  nourishment  by  means  of  certain  organs 
(the  vital  principle  acting  and  operating).  Only 
things  set  before  them  and  adjoining  them  do 
they  enjoy  through  a  natural  instinct,  not  things 
placed  afar;  herein  there  is  no  exercise  of  force, 
no  movement  on  the  part  of  those  other  things; 
and  therefore  animals  neither  attract  bodies  nor 
repel.  Water  does  not  repel  oil,  as  some  do 
think,  for  oil  floats  on  water;  nor  does  water  re¬ 
pel  mud,  because  when  mixed  with  water  it 
settles  at  last.  This  is  a  separation  of  bodies  un¬ 
like  or  not  perfectly  mixed,  because  of  their 


matter;  but  after  they  have  been  separated, 
they  still  remain  in  conjunction  without  any 
natural  strife.  Thus,  in  the  bottom  of  a  vessel, 
muddy  sediment  rests  quiet,  and  oil  remains  on 
the  top  of  water,  nor  is  it  ordered  away.  A  drop 
of  water  remains  whole  on  a  dry  surface,  nor  is 
it  chased  away  by  the  dry.  Wrongly,  therefore, 
do  they  who  discourse  of  these  things  impart  an 
antipathy — antipathia  (/.e.,  a  power  of  repulsion 
through  opposite  passions);  for  neither  is  there 
in  them  any  repellent  force,  and  repulsion  comes 
of  action  not  of  passion.  But  these  people  dearly 
love  their  Greek  terms.  The  question  for  us  is 
whether  there  is  any  body  that  drives  another 
away  to  a  distance  without  material  impetus^ 
as  the  loadstone  attracts.  Now  a  loadstone  does 
repel  another  loadstone;  for  the  pole  of  one  is 
repelled  by  the  pole  of  another  that  does  not 
agree  naturally  with  it;  driving  it,  it  makes  it 
turn  round  so  that  they  may  come  together 
perfectly  according  to  nature.  But  if  a  weak 
loadstone  floating  freely  in  water  cannot,  on 
account  of  obstacles,  readily  turn  about,  then 
it  is  repelled  and  driven  farther  away  by  the 
other.  All  electrics  attract  objects  of  every  kind; 
they  never  repel  or  propel.  What  is  told  of  some 
plants  (^.g.,  of  the  cucumber,  which,  when  oil 
is  placed  beneath  it,  moves  away)  is  a  material 
change  from  neighbourhood,  not  a  hidden  sym¬ 
pathy.  But  when  they  show  you  a  candle’s  flame 
that  touches  a  cold  solid  (as  iron)  turning  to  one 
side,  and  pretend  that  here  is  antipathy,  they 
talk  nonsense.  The  reason  of  this  they  will  see 
clearer  than  light  when  we  come  to  treat  of  heat 
and  what  it  is.  As  for  Fracastorio’s  belief  that  a 
loadstone  may  be  found  that  shall  repel  iron, 
in  virtue  of  some  principle  latent  in  it  that  is 
opposed  to  iron,  it  is  without  any  foundation. 


BOOK  THIRD 


CHAPTER  1.  Of  direction 

L\  the  foregoing  books  it  has  been  shown  that 
a  loadstone  has  its  poles,  iron  also  poles,  and  ro¬ 
tation,  and  fixed  verticity,  and  finally  that  load¬ 
stone  and  iron  direct  their  poles  toward  the 
poles  of  the  earth.  But  now  we  have  to  set  forth 
the  causes  of  these  things  and  their  wonderful 
efficiencies  known  aforetime  but  not  demon¬ 
strated.  Of  these  rotations  all  the  writers  who 
went  before  us  have  given  their  opinions  with 
such  brevity  and  indefiniteness  that,  as  it  would 
seem,  no  one  could  be  persuaded  thereby,  while 
the  authors  themselves  could  hardly  be  con¬ 
tented  with  them.  By  men  of  intelligence,  all 
their  petty  reasonings — as  being  useless,  ques¬ 
tionable,  and  absurd,  and  based  on  no  proofs  or 
premises — are  rejected  with  the  result  that 
magnetic  science,  neglected  more  and  more  and 
understood  by  none,  has  been  exiled.  The  true 
south  pole,  and  not  the  north  (as  before  our 
time  all  believed),  of  a  loadstone  placed  on  its 
float  in  water  turns  to  the  north;  the  south  end 
of  a  piece  of  magnetized  and  of  unmagnetized 
iron  also  moves  to  the  north.  An  oblong  piece  of 
iron  of  three  or  four  finger- breadths,  properly 
stroked  with  a  loadstone,  quickly  turns  to  north 
and  south.  Therefore  artificers  place  such  a  bar, 
balanced  on  a  point,  in  a  compass-box  or  in  a 
sun-dial;  or  they  construct  a  versorium  out  of 
two  curved  pieces  of  iron  that  touch  at  their 
extremities  so  that  the  movement  may  be  more 
constant;  thus  is  constructed  the  mariner’s  com¬ 
pass,  an  instrument  beneficial,  salutary,  and  for¬ 
tunate  for  seamen,  showing  the  way  to  safety 
and  to  port.  But  it  is  to  be  understood  at  the 
threshold  of  their  argument,  before  we  proceed 
farther,  that  these  directions  of  loadstone  or  of 
iron  are  not  ever  and  always  toward  the  world’s 
true  poles,  that  they  do  not  always  seek  those 
fixed  and  definite  points,  nor  rest  on  the  line  of 
the  true  meridian,  but  that  at  places,  more  or 
less  far  apart,  they  commonly  vary  either  to  the 
east  or  to  the  west;  sometimes,  too,  in  certain 
regions  of  land  or  sea,  they  point  to  the  true 
poles.  This  discrepance  is  known  as  the  varia¬ 
tion  of  the  needle  and  of  the  loadstone;  and  as 


it  is  produced  by  other  causes  and  is,  as  it  were,  a 
sort  of  perturbation  and  depravation  of  the  true 
direction,  we  propose  to  treat  here  only  of  the 
true  direction  of  the  compass  and  the  magnetic 
needle,  which  would  all  over  the  earth  be  the 
same,  toward  the  true  poles  and  in  the  true 
meridian,  were  not  hindrances  and  disturbing 
causes  present  to  prevent:  in  the  book  next  fol¬ 
lowing  we  will  treat  of  its  variation  and  of  the 
cause  of  perturbation. 

They  who  aforetime  wrote  of  the  world  and 
of  natural  philosophy,  in  particular  those  great 
elementarian  philosophers  and  all  their  progeny 
and  pupils  down  to  our  day;  those,  I  mean,  who 
taught  that  the  earth  is  ever  at  rest,  and  is,  as  it 
were,  a  dead-weight  planted  in  the  centre  of  the 
universe  at  equal  distance  everywhere  from  the 
heavens,  of  simple  uncomplex  matter  possess¬ 
ing  only  the  qualities  of  dryness  and  cold — these 
philosophers  were  ever  seeking  the  causes  of 
things  in  the  heavens,  in  the  stars,  the  planets; 
in  fire,  air,  water,  and  in  the  bodies  of  com¬ 
pounds;  but  never  did  they  recognize  that  the 
terrestrial  globe,  besides  dryness  and  cold,  hath 
some  principal,  efficient,  predominant  poten¬ 
cies  that  give  to  it  firmness,  direction,  and 
movement  throughout  its  entire  mass  and  down 
to  its  inmost  depths;  neither  did  they  make  in¬ 
quiry  whether  such  things  were,  and,  for  this 
reason,  the  common  herd  of  philosophizers,  in 
search  of  the  causes  of  magnetic  movements, 
called  in  causes  remote  and  far  away.  Alartin- 
us  Cortesius,  who  would  be  content  with  no 
cause  whatever  in  the  universal  world,  dreamt  of 
an  attractive  magnetic  point  beyond  the  heav¬ 
ens,  acting  on  iron.  Petrus  Peregrinus  holds 
that  direction  has  its  rise  at  the  celestial  poles. 
Cardan  was  of  the  opinion  that  the  rotation  of 
iron  is  caused  by  the  star  in  the  tail  of  Ursa 
Major.  The  Frenchman  Bessard  thinks  that  the 
magnetic  needle  turns  to  the  pole  of  the  zodiac. 
Alarsilius  Ficinus  will  have  it  that  the  loadstone 
follows  its  Arctic  pole,  and  that  iron  follows  the 
loadstone,  and  chaff  follows  amber:  as  for  am¬ 
ber,  why,  that,  mayhaps,  follows  the  Antarctic 
pole:  emptiest  of  dreams!  Others  have  come 
down  to  rocks  and  I  know  not  what  “magnetic 


6o 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


mountains’’!  So  has  ever  been  the  wont  of  man¬ 
kind:  homely  things  are  vile;  things  from 
abroad  and  things  afar  are  dear  to  them  and  the 
object  of  longing.  As  for  us,  we  are  habitants  of 
this  very  earth,  and  study  it  as  cause  of  this 
mighty  effect.  Earth,  the  mother  of  all,  hath 
these  causes  shut  up  in  her  recesses:  all  mag¬ 
netic  movements  are  to  be  considered  with  re¬ 
spect  to  her  law,  position,  constitution,  vertici- 
ty,  poles,  equator,  horizon,  meridians,  centre, 
periphery,  diameter,  and  to  the  form  of  her 
whole  inward  substance.  So  hath  the  earth  been 
ordered  by  the  Supreme  Artificer  and  by  na¬ 
ture,  that  it  shall  have  parts  unlike  in  position, 
terminal  points  of  an  entire  and  absolute  body, 
and  such  points  dignified  by  distinct  functions, 
whereby  it  shall  itself  take  a  fixed  direction.  For 
like  as  a  loadstone,  when  in  a  suitable  vessel  it  is 
floated  on  water,  or  when  it  is  suspended  in  air 
by  a  slender  thread,  does  by  its  native  verticity, 
according  to  the  magnetic  laws,  conform  its 
poles  to  the  poles  of  the  common  mother,  so, 
were  the  earth  to  vary  from  her  natural  direc¬ 
tion  and  from  her  position  in  the  universe,  or 
were  her  poles  to  be  pulled  toward  the  rising  or 
the  setting  sun,  or  other  points  whatsoever  in 
the  visible  firmament  (were  that  possible),  they 
would  recur  again  by  a  magnetic  movement  to 
north  and  south,  and  halt  at  the  same  points 
where  now  they  stand.  But  why  the  terrestrial 
globe  should  seem  constantly  to  turn  one  of  its 
poles  toward  those  points  and  toward  Cynosura, 
or  why  her  poles  should  vary  from  the  poles  of 
the  ecliptic  by  23  deg.  29  min.,  with  some  vari¬ 
ation  not  yet  sufficiently  studied  by  astronomers, 
that  depends  on  the  magnetic  energy.  The  caus¬ 
es  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  and  of  the 
progression  of  the  fixed  stars,  as  well  as  of 
change  in  the  declinations  of  the  sun  and  the 
tropics,  are  traceable  to  magnetic  forces:  hence 
we  have  no  further  need  of  Thebit  Bencora’s 
“movement  of  trepidation,”  which  is  at  wide 
variance  with  observations.^  A  rotating  needle 
turns  to  conformity  with  the  situation  of  the 
earth,  and,  though  it  be  shaken  oft,  returns  still 
to  the  same  points.  For  in  far  northern  climes, 
in  latitude  70  to  80  deg.  (whither  in  the  milder 
season  our  seamen  are  wont  to  penetrate  with¬ 
out  injury  from  the  cold),  and  in  the  middle 
regions,  in  the  torrid  zone  under  the  equinoctial 
line,  as  also  in  all  maritime  regions  and  lands  of 
the  southern  hemisphere,  at  the  highest  lati¬ 
tudes  yet  known,  the  magnetic  needle  ever  finds 
its  direction  and  ever  tends  in  the  same  way 

^  Abu  r Hasan  Thabet  Ben  Korrah,  [Thebitius],  born 
in  Mesopotamia  a.  d.  835-836. 


61 

(barring  difference  of  variation)  on  this  side  of 
the  equator  where  we  dwell  and  in  the  other, 
the  southern  part,  which,  though  less  known, 
has  been  to  some  extent  explored  by  our  sail¬ 
ors:  and  the  lily  of  the  mariner’s  compass  ever 
points  north.  Of  this,  we  are  assured  by  the 
most  illustrious  navigators  and  by  many  intel¬ 
ligent  seamen.  The  same  was  pointed  out  to  me 
and  confirmed  by  our  most  illustrious  Neptune, 
Francis  Drake,  and  by  Thomas  Candish  [Cav¬ 
endish],  that  other  world-explorer. 

Our  terrella  teaches  the  same  lesson.  The 
proposition  is  demonstrated  on  a  spherical  load¬ 
stone.  Let  Ay  B  be  the  poles;  CD,  an  iron  wire 
placed  on  the  stone,  always  tends  direct  in  the 


meridian  to  the  poles  Ay  By  whether  the  centre 
of  the  wire  be  in  the  middle  line  or  equator  of 
the  stone,  or  whether  it  be  in  any  other  region 
between  equator  and  poles,  as  //,G,  F,  E.  So  the 
point  of  a  magnetized  needle  looks  north  on  this 
side  of  the  equator:  on  the  other  side  the  crotch 
is  directed  to  the  south;  but  the  point  or  lily 
does  not  turn  to  the  south  below  the  equator, 
as  somebody  has  thought.  Some  inexperienced 
persons,  however,  who,  in  distant  regions  be¬ 
low  the  equator,  have  at  times  seen  the  needle 
grow  sluggish  and  less  prompt,  have  deemed  the 
distance  from  the  Arctic  pole  or  from  the  mag¬ 
netic  rocks  to  be  the  cause.  But  they  are  very 
much  mistaken,  for  it  has  the  same  power  and 
adjusts  itself  as  quickly  to  the  meridian  as  the 
point  of  variation  in  southern  regions  as  in  nor¬ 
thern.  Yet  at  times  the  movement  appears  to 
be  slower,  the  point  on  which  the  compass 
needle  is  poised  becoming  in  time,  during  a 
long  voyage,  rather  blunt,  or  the  magnetized 
needle  itself  having  lost  somewhat  of  its  ac¬ 
quired  force  through  age  or  from  rusting.  This, 
too,  may  be  tested  experimentally  by  poising 
the  versorium  of  a  sun-dial  on  a  rather  short- 
pointed  needle  rising  perpendicularly  out  of 
the  surface  of  the  terrella.  The  magnetized 
needle  turns  to  the  poles  of  the  terrella,  and 
quits  the  earth’s  poles;  for  a  general  cause  that 
is  remote  is  overcome  by  a  particular  cause 
that  is  present  and  strong.  Magnetized  bodies 
incline  of  their  own  accord  to  the  earth’s  posi- 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


62 

tion,  and  they  conform  to  the  terrella.  Two 
loadstones  of  equal  weight  and  force  conform 
to  the  terrella  in  accordance  with  magnetic 
laws.  Iron  gets  force  from  the  loadstone  and  is 
made  to  conform  to  the  magnetic  movements. 
I'hercfore  true  direction  is  the  movement  of  a 
magnetized  body  in  the  line  of  the  earth’s  ver- 
ticity  toward  the  natural  position  and  unition 
of  both,  their  forms  being  in  accord  and  sup- 
pi)  ing  the  forces.  For  we  have,  after  many  ex¬ 
periments  in  various  ways,  found  that  the  dis¬ 
posing  and  ranging  of  the  magnetized  bodies 
depends  on  the  differences  of  position,  while  the 
force  that  gives  the  motion  is  the  one  form  com¬ 
mon  to  both;  also  that  in  all  magnetic  bodies 
there  is  attraction  and  repulsion.  For  both  the 
loadstone  and  the  magnetized  iron  conform 
themselves,  by  rotation  and  by  dip,  to  the  com¬ 
mon  position  of  nature  and  the  earth.  And  the 
earth's  energy,  with  the  force  inhering  in  it  as 
a  whole,  by  pulling  toward  its  poles  and  by  re¬ 
pelling,  arranges  in  order  all  magnetic  bodies 
that  arc  unattached  and  lying  loose.  For  in  all 
things  do  all  magnetic  bodies  conform  to  the 
globe  of  earth  in  accordance  with  the  same  laws 
and  in  the  same  ways  in  which  another  load¬ 
stone  or  any  magnetic  body  whatsoever  con¬ 
forms  to  the  terrella. 

CHAPTER  2.  Directive  {or ver serial)  force,  which  we 
call  verticity:  what  it  is;  how  it  resides  in  the  load¬ 
stone;  and  how  it  is  acquired  when  not  naturally  pro¬ 
duced 

The  directive  force,  which  by  us  is  also  called 
verticity,  is  a  force  distributed  by  the  innate 
energy  from  the  equator  in  both  directions  to 
the  poles.  That  energy,  proceeding  north  and 
south  to  the  poles,  produces  the  movement  of 
direction,  and  produces  also  constant  and  per¬ 
manent  station  in  the  system  of  nature,  and 
that  not  in  the  earth  alone  but  in  all  magnetic 
bodies  also.  Loadstone  occurs  either  in  a  special 
vein  or  in  iron  mines,  for,  being  a  homogenic 
earth-substance  possessing  and  conceiving  a  pri¬ 
mary  form,  it  becomes  converted  into  or  con¬ 
creted  with  a  stony  body  which,  in  addition  to 
the  prime  virtues  of  the  form,  derives  from  dif¬ 
ferent  beds  and  mines,  as  from  different  matri¬ 
ces,  various  dissimilitudes  and  differences,  and 
very  many  secondary  qualities  and  varieties  of 
its  substance.  A  loadstone  mined  in  this  debris 
of  the  earth’s  surface  and  of  its  projections, 
whether  it  be  (as  sometimes  found  in  China) 
entire  in  itself,  or  whether  it  be  part  of  a  con¬ 
siderable  vein,  gets  from  the  earth  its  form  and 
imitates  the  nature  of  the  whole.  All  the  inner 


parts  of  the  earth  are  in  union  and  act  in  har¬ 
mony,  and  produce  direction  to  north  and 
south.  Yet  the  magnetic  bodies  that  in  the  top¬ 
most  parts  of  the  earth  attract  one  another  are 
not  true  united  parts  of  the  whole,  but  are  ap¬ 
pendages  and  agnate  parts  that  copy  the  nature 
of  the  whole;  hence,  when  floating  free  on  wa¬ 
ter,  they  take  the  direction  they  have  in  the 
terrestrial  order  of  nature.  We  once  had  chisel¬ 
led  and  dug  out  of  its  vein  a  loadstone  20  pounds 
in  weight,  having  first  noted  and  marked  its  ex¬ 
tremities;  then,  after  it  had  been  taken  out  of 
the  earth,  we  placed  it  on  a  float  in  water  so  it 
could  freely  turn  about;  straightway  that  ex¬ 
tremity  of  it  which  in  the  mine  looked  north 
turned  to  the  north  in  water  and  after  a  while 
there  abode;  for  the  extremity  that  in  the  mine 
looks  north  is  austral  and  is  attracted  by  the 
north  parts  of  earth,  just  as  in  the  case  of  iron, 
which  takes  verticity  from  the  earth.  Of  these 
points  we  will  treat  later  under  the  head  of 
“Change  of  \^erticity.” 

But  different  is  the  verticity  of  the  inward 
parts  of  the  earth  that  are  perfectly  united  to 
it  and  that  are  not  separated  from  the  true  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  earth  by  interposition  of  bodies, 
as  are  separated  loadstones  situated  in  the  outer 
portion  of  the  globe,  where  all  is  defective, 
spoilt,  and  irregular.  Let  AB  be  a  loadstone 
mine,  and  between  it  and  the  uniform  earthen 
globe  suppose  there  are  various  earths  and  mix¬ 
tures  that  in  a  manner  separate  the  mine  from 
the  true  globe  of  the  earth.  It  is  therefore  in- 
formated  by  the  earth’s  forces  just  as  CD,  a  mass 
of  iron,  is  in  air;  hence  the  extremity  B  of  the 
mine  or  of  any  part  thereof  moves  toward  the 
north  pole  G,  just  as  does  C,  the  extremity  of 
the  mass  of  iron,  but  not  A  nor  D.  But  with  the 
part  EF,  which  comes  into  existence  continu¬ 
ous  with  the  whole  and  which  is  not  separated 
from  it  by  any  mixed  earthy  matter,  the  case 


is  different.  For  if  the  part  EF,  being  taken  out, 
were  to  be  floated,  it  is  not  E  that  would  turn 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


to  the  north  pole,  but  F,  Thus,  in  those  bodies 
which  acquire  verticity  in  the  air,  C  is  the  south 
extremity  and  is  attracted  by  the  north  pole  G. 
In  those  which  come  into  existence  in  the  de- 
trital  outermost  part  of  the  earth,  B  is  south, 
and  so  goes  to  the  north  pole.  But  these  parts 
which,  deep  below,  are  of  even  birth  with  the 
earth,  have  their  verticity  regulated  differently. 
For  here  F  turns  to  the  north  parts  of  the  earth, 
being  a  south  part;  and  E  to  the  south  parts  of 
the  earth,  being  a  north  part.  So  the  end  C  of 
the  magnetic  body  CD,  situate  near  the  earth, 
turns  to  the  north  pole;  the  end  B  of  the  agnate 
body  BA  to  the  north;  the  end  E  of  the  inborn 
body  EF  to  the  south  pole — as  is  proved  by  the 
following  demonstration  and  as  is  required  by 
all  magnetic  laws. 

Describe  a  terrella  with  poles  A,B;  from  its 
mass  separate  the  small  part  EF,  and  suspend 
that  by  a  fine  thread  in  a  cavity  or  pit  in  the 
terrella.  E  then  does  not  seek  the  pole  A  but 
the  pole  B,  and  F  turns  to  A,  behaving  quite 
differently  from  the  iron  bar  CD;  for,  there,  C, 
touching  a  north  part  of  the  terrella,  becomes 
magnetized  and  turns  to  A,  not  to  B.  But  here 
it  is  to  be  remarked  that  if  pole  A  of  the  terrella 
were  to  be  turned  toward  the  southern  part  of 
the  earth,  still  the  end  E  of  the  solitary  part  cut 


out  of  the  terrella  and  not  brought  near  the  rest 
of  the  stone  would  turn  to  the  south;  but  the 
end  C  of  the  iron  bar  would,  if  placed  outside 
the  magnetic  field,  turn  to  the  north.  Suppose 
that  in  the  unbroken  terrella  the  part  EF  gave 
the  same  direction  as  the  whole;  now  break  it 
off  and  suspend  it  by  a  thread,  and  E  will  turn 
to  B  and  F  to  A,  Thus  parts  that  when  joined 
with  the  whole  have  the  same  verticity  with  it, 
on  being  separated  take  the  opposite;  for  op¬ 
posite  parts  attract  opposite  parts,  yet  this  is  not 
a  true  opposition,  but  a  supreme  concordance 
and  a  true  and  genuine  conformance  of  mag¬ 
netic  bodies  in  nature,  if  they  be  but  divided 
and  separated;  for  the  parts  thus  divided  must 
needs  be  carried  away  some  distance  above  the 
whole,  as  later  will  appear.  Magnetic  bodies  seek 
formal  unity,  and  do  not  so  much  regard  their 


63 

own  mass.  Hence  the  part  FE  is  not  attracted 
into  its  pit,  but  the  moment  it  wanders  abroad 
and  is  away  from  it,  is  attracted  by  the  opposite 
pole.  But  if  the  part  FE  be  again  placed  in  its 
pit  or  be  brought  near  without  any  media  in¬ 


terposed,  it  acquires  the  original  combination, 
and,  being  again  a  united  portion  of  the  whole, 
co-operates  with  the  whole  and  readily  clings 
in  its  pristine  position,  while  E  remains  looking 
toward  A  and  F  toward  B,  and  there  they  rest 
unchanging. 

The  case  is  the  same  when  we  divide  a  load¬ 
stone  into  two  equal  parts  from  pole  to  pole. 
In  the  figure,  a  spherical  stone  is  divided  into 
two  equal  parts  along  the  axis  AB;  hence, 
whether  the  surface  AB  be  in  one  of  the  two 
parts  supine  (as  in  the  first  diagram),  or  prone 
in  both  (as  in  the  second),  the  end  A  tends  to  F. 
But  it  is  also  to  be  understood  that  the  point  B 
does  not  always  tend  sure  to  Ay  for,  after  the 
division,  the  verticity  goes  to  other  points,  for 
example  to  F,  G,  as  is  shown  in  Chapter  1 4  of 
this  Third  Book.  LM,  too,  is  now  the  axis  of 
the  two  halves,  and  AB  is  no  longer  the  axis; 
for,  once  a  magnetic  body  is  divided,  the  sever- 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


64 

al  parts  are  integral  and  magnetic,  and  have 
vertices  proportional  to  their  mass,  new  poles 
arising  at  each  end  on  division.  But  the  axis  and 
poles  ever  follow  the  track  of  a  meridian,  be¬ 
cause  the  force  proceeds  along  the  stone’s  meri¬ 
dian  circles  from  the  equinoctial  to  the  poles 
inv'ariably,  in  virtue  of  an  innate  energy  that 
belongs  to  matter,  owing  to  the  long  and  secular 
position,  and  bearings  toward  the  earth’s  poles, 
of  a  body  possessing  the  fit  properties;  and  such 
body  is  endowed  with  force  from  the  earth  for 
ages  and  ages  continuously,  and  has  from  its  first 
beginning  stood  firmly  and  constantly  turned 
toward  fixed  and  determinate  points  of  the 
same. 

CHAPTER  3.  How  iron  acquires  verticity  from  the 
loadstone^  and  how  this  verticity  is  lost  or  altered 

An  oblong  piece  of  iron,  on  being  stroked  with 
a  loadstone,  receives  forces  magnetic,  not  cor¬ 
poreal,  nor  inhering  in  or  consisting  with  any 
body,  as  has  been  shown  in  the  chapters  on 
coition.  Plainly,  a  body  briskly  rubbed  on  one 
end  with  a  loadstone,  and  left  for  a  long  time 
in  contact  with  the  stone,  receives  no  property 
of  stone,  gains  nothing  in  weight;  for  if  you 
weigh  in  the  smallest  and  most  accurate  scales 
of  a  goldsmith  a  piece  of  iron  before  it  is  touched 
by  the  loadstone  you  will  find  that  after  the 
rubbing  it  has  the  same  precise  weight,  neither 
less  nor  more.  And  if  you  wipe  the  magnetized 
iron  with  cloths,  or  if  you  rub  it  with  sand  or 
with  a  whetstone,  it  loses  naught  at  all  of  its 
acquired  properties.  For  the  force  is  diffused 
through  the  entire  body  and  through  its  in¬ 
most  parts,  and  can  in  no  wise  be  washed  or 
wiped  away.  Test  it,  therefore,  in  fire,  that 
fiercest  tyrant  of  nature.  Take  a  piece  of  iron  the 
length  of  your  hand  and  as  thick  as  a  goose- 
quill;  pass  it  through  a  suitable  round  piece  of 
cork  and  lay  it  on  the  surface  of  water,  and  note 
the  end  of  the  bar  that  looks  north.  Rub  that 
end  with  the  true  smooth  end  of  a  loadstone; 
thus  the  magnetized  iron  is  made  to  turn  to  the 
north.  Take  off  the  cork  and  put  that  magne¬ 
tized  end  of  the  iron  in  the  fire  till  it  just  begins 
to  glow;  on  becoming  cool  again  it  will  retain 
the  virtues  of  the  loadstone  and  will  show  ver¬ 
ticity,  though  not  so  promptly  as  before,  either 
because  the  action  of  the  fire  was  not  kept  up 
long  enough  to  do  away  all  its  force,  or  because 
the  whole  of  the  iron  was  not  made  hot,  for  the 
property  is  diffused  throughout  the  whole. 
Take  off  the  cork  again,  drop  the  whole  of  the 
iron  into  the  fire,  and  quicken  the  fire  with  bel¬ 
lows  so  that  it  becomes  all  alive,  and  let  the 


glowing  iron  remain  for  a  little  while.  After  it 
has  grown  cool  again  (but  in  cooling  it  must  not 
remain  in  one  position)  put  iron  and  cork  once 
more  in  water,  and  you  shall  see  that  it  has  lost 
its  acquired  verticity.  All  this  shows  how  diffi¬ 
cult  it  is  to  do  away  with  the  polar  property 
conferred  by  the  loadstone.  And  were  a  small 
loadstone  to  remain  for  as  long  in  the  same  fire, 
it  too  would  lose  its  force.  Iron,  because  it  is 
not  so  easily  destroyed  or  burnt  as  very  many 
loadstones,  retains  its  powers  better,  and  after 
they  are  lost  may  get  them  back  again  from  a 
loadstone;  but  a  burnt  loadstone  cannot  be  re¬ 
stored. 

Now  this  iron,  stripped  of  its  magnetic  form, 
moves  in  a  way  different  from  any  other  iron, 
for  it  has  lost  the  polar  property;  and  though 
before  contact  with  the  loadstone  it  may  have 
had  a  movement  to  the  north,  and  after  contact 
toward  the  south,  now  it  turns  to  no  fixed  and 
determinate  point;  but  afterward,  very  slowly, 
after  a  long  time,  it  turns  unsteadily  toward  the 
poles,  having  received  some  measure  of  force 
from  the  earth.  There  is,  I  have  said,  a  twofold 
cause  of  direction — one  native  in  the  loadstone 
and  in  iron,  and  the  other  in  the  earth,  derived 
from  the  energy  that  disposes  things.  For  this 
reason  it  is  that  after  iron  has  lost  the  faculty  of 
distinguishing  the  poles  and  verticity,  a  tardy 
and  feeble  power  of  direction  is  acquired  anew 
from  the  earth’s  verticity.  From  this  we  see 
how  difficultly,  and  how  only  by  the  action  of 
intense  heat  and  by  protracted  firing  of  the  iron 
till  it  becomes  soft,  the  magnetic  force  impres¬ 
sed  in  it  is  done  away.  When  this  firing  has  sup¬ 
pressed  the  acquired  polar  power,  and  the  same 
is  now  quite  conquered  and  as  yet  has  not  been 
called  to  life  again,  the  iron  is  left  a  wanderer, 
and  quite  incapable  of  direction. 

But  we  have  to  inquire  further  how  it  is  that 
iron  remains  possessed  of  verticity.  It  is  clear 
that  the  presence  of  a  loadstone  strongly  affects 
and  alters  the  nature  of  the  iron,  also  that  it 
draws  the  iron  to  itself  with  wonderful  prompt¬ 
ness.  Nor  is  it  the  part  rubbed  only,  but  the 
whole  of  the  iron,  that  is  affected  by  the  fric¬ 
tion  (applied  at  one  end  only),  and  therefrom 
the  iron  acquires  a  permanent  though  unequal 
power,  as  is  thus  proved. 

Rub  with  a  loadstone  a  piece  of  iron  wire  on 
one  end  so  as  to  magnetize  it  and  to  make  it 
turn  to  the  north;  then  cut  off  part  of  it,  and 
you  shall  see  it  move  to  the  north  as  before, 
though  weakly.  For  it  is  to  be  understood  that 
the  loadstone  awakens  in  the  whole  mass  of  the 
iron  a  strong  verticity  (provided  the  iron  rod 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


be  not  too  long),  a  pretty  strong  verticity  in 
the  shorter  piece  throughout  its  entire  length, 
and,  as  long  as  the  iron  remains  in  contact  with 
the  loadstone,  one  somewhat  stronger  still.  But 
when  the  iron  is  removed  from  contact  it  be¬ 
comes  much  weaker,  especially  in  the  end  not 
touched  by  the  loadstone.  And  as  a  long  rod, 
one  end  of  which  is  thrust  into  a  fire  and  made 
red,  is  very  hot  at  that  end,  less  hot  in  the  parts 
adjoining  and  midway,  and  at  the  farther  end 
may  be  held  in  the  hand,  that  end  being  only 
warm — so  the  magnetic  force  grows  less  from 
the  excited  end  to  the  other;  but  it  is  there  in 
an  instant,  and  is  not  introduced  in  any  in¬ 
terval  of  time  nor  successively,  as  when  heat 
enters  iron,  for  the  moment  the  iron  is  touched 
by  the  loadstone  it  is  excited  throughout.  For 
example,  take  an  unmagnetized  iron  rod,  4  or  5 
inches  long:  the  instant  you  simply  touch  with 
a  loadstone  either  end,  the  opposite  end  straight¬ 
way,  in  the  twinkling  of  the  eye,  repels  or  at¬ 
tracts  a  needle,  however  quickly  brought  to  it. 

CHAPTER  4.  Why  magnetized  iron  takes  opposite 
verticity;  and  why  iron  touched  by  the  true  north  side 
of  the  stone  moves  to  the  earth's  norths  and  when 
touched  by  the  true  south  side  to  the  earth's  south : 
iron  rubbed  with  the  north  point  of  the  stone  does 
not  turn  to  the  south,  nor  vice  versa,  as  all  writers 
on  the  loadstone  have  erroneously  thought 

It  has  already  been  shown  that  the  north  part 
of  a  loadstone  does  not  attract  the  north  part 
of  another  stone,  but  the  south  part,  and  that 
it  repels  the  north  end  of  another  stone  applied 
to  its  north  end.  That  general  loadstone,  the 
terrestrial  globe,  does  with  its  inborn  force 
dispose  magnetized  iron,  and  the  magnetic  iron 
too  does  the  same  with  its  inborn  force,  produc¬ 
ing  movement  and  determining  the  direction. 
For  whether  we  compare  together  and  experi¬ 
ment  on  two  loadstones,  or  a  loadstone  and  piece 
of  iron,  or  iron  and  iron,  or  earth  and  loadstone, 
or  earth  and  iron  conformated  by  the  earth  or 
deriving  force  from  the  energy  of  a  loadstone, 
of  necessity  the  forces  and  movements  of  each 
and  all  agree  and  harmonize  in  the  same  way. 

But  the  question  arises,  why  does  iron 
touched  with  loadstone  take  a  direction  of 
movement  toward  the  earth’s  opposite  pole  and 
not  toward  that  pole  of  earth  toward  which 
looked  the  pole  of  the  loadstone  with  which  it 
was  magnetized }  Iron  and  loadstone,  we  have 
said,  are  of  the  same  primary  nature:  iron  when 
joined  to  a  loadstone  becomes  as  it  were  one 
body  with  it,  and  not  only  is  one  extremity  of 
the  iron  altered,  but  the  rest  of  its  parts  are  af¬ 


65 

fected.  Let  A  be  the  north  pole  of  a  loadstone 
to  which  is  attached  the  tip  of  an  iron  pointer: 
the  tip  is  now  the  south  part  of  the  iron,  because 
it  is  contiguous  to  the  north  part  of  the  stone; 


the  crotch  of  the  pointer  becomes  north.  For 
were  this  contiguous  magnetic  body  separated 
from  the  pole  of  the  terrella  or  the  parts  nigh 
the  pole,  the  other  extremity  (or  the  end  which 
when  there  was  conjunction  was  in  contact 
with  the  north  part  of  the  stone)  is  south,  while 
the  other  end  is  north.  So,  too,  if  a  magnetized 
needle  be  divided  into  any  number  of  parts 
however  minute,  those  separated  parts  will  take 
the  same  direction  which  they  had  before  divi¬ 
sion.  Hence,  as  long  as  the  point  of  the  needle 
remains  at  A,  the  north  pole,  it  is  not  austral, 
but  is,  as  it  were,  part  of  a  whole;  but  when  it 
is  taken  away  from  the  stone  it  is  south,  be¬ 
cause  on  being  rubbed  it  tended  toward  the 
north  parts  of  the  stone,  and  the  crotch  (the 
other  end  of  the  pointer)  is  north.  The  load¬ 
stone  and  the  pointer  constitute  one  body:  B 
is  the  south  pole  of  the  whole  mass;  C  (the 
crotch)  is  the  north  extremity  of  the  whole. 
Even  divide  the  needle  in  two  at  E,  and  E  will 
be  south  as  regards  the  crotch,  E  will  also  be 
north  with  reference  to  B.  A  is  the  true  north 
pole  of  the  stone,  and  is  attracted  by  the  south 
pole  of  the  earth.  The  end  of  a  piece  of  iron 
touched  with  the  true  north  part  of  the  stone 
is  south,  and  turns  to  the  north  pole  of  the  stone 
A  if  it  be  near;  if  it  be  at  a  distance  from  the 
stone,  it  turns  to  the  earth’s  north.  So  when¬ 
ever  iron  is  magnetized  it  tends  (if  free  and  un¬ 
restrained)  to  the  portion  of  the  earth  opposite 
the  part  toward  which  inclines  the  loadstone 
at  which  it  was  rubbed.  For  verticity  always 
enters  the  iron  if  only  it  be  magnetized  at  either 


66 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


end.  Hence  all  the  needle  points  at  B  acquire 
the  same  verticity  after  being  separated,  but  it 
is  the  opposite  verticity  to  that  of  the  pole  B 
of  the  stone;  and  all  the  crotches  in  the  present 
figure  have  a  verticity  opposite  to  that  of  the 
pole  E,  and  are  made  to  move  and  are  seized 
by  E  when  they  are  in  suitable  position.  The 
case  is  as  in  the  oblong  stone  EH,  cut  in  two  at 
(7,  where  Fand  H,  whether  the  stone  be  whole 
or  be  broken,  move  to  opposite  poles  of  the 
earth,  and  O  and  P  mutually  attract,  one  being 
north,  the  other  south.  For  if  in  the  w  hole  stone 
H  was  south  and  F  north,  then  in  the  divided 
stone  P  w  ill  be  north  w  ith  respect  to  H  and  O, 
south  with  respect  to  P;  so,  too,  F  and  H  tend 
toward  connection  if  they  be  turned  round  a 
little,  and  at  length  they  come  together.  But  if 
the  division  be  made  meridionally,  /.e.,  along  the 
line  of  the  meridian  and  not  on  any  parallel  cir¬ 
cle,  then  the  tw'o  parts  turn  about  and  A  pulls 
B,  and  the  end  B  is  attracted  to  A,  until,  being 


turned  round,  they  form  connection  and  are 
held  together.  For  this  reason,  iron  bars  placed 
on  parallels  near  the  equator  of  a  terrella  whose 
poles  are  ABy  do  not  combine  and  do  not  co¬ 
here  firmly;  but  when  placed  alongside  on  a 


meridian  line,  at  once  they  become  firmly 
joined,  not  only  on  the  stone  and  near  it,  but  at 
any  distance  wfithin  the  magnetic  field  of  the 
controlling  loadstone.  Thus  they  are  held  fast 
together  at  E,  but  not  at  C  of  the  other  figure. 
For  the  opposite  ends  Cand  Pof  the  bars,  come 
together  and  cohere,  as  the  ends  A  and  B  of  the 
stone  did.  But  the  ends  are  opposite,  because 
the  bars  proceed  from  opposite  poles  and  parts 


of  the  terrella;  and  C  is  south  as  regards  the 
north  pole  Ay  and  Pis  north  as  regards  the  south 
pole  B,  Similarly,  too,  they  cohere  if  the  rod  C 
(not  too  long)  be  moved  further  toward  Ay  and 
the  rod  F  toward  By  and  they  will  be  joined  on 
the  terrella  just  as  A  and  B  of  the  divided  stone 
w’ere  joined.  But  now  if  the  magnetized  needle 
point  A  be  north,  and  if  with  this  you  touch 
and  rub  the  point  B  of  another  needle  that  ro¬ 
tates  freely  but  is  not  magnetized,  B  will  be 
north  and  will  turn  to  the  south.  But  if  with 
the  north  point  B  you  touch  still  another  new^ 
rotatory  needle  on  its  point,  that  point  again 
will  be  south,  and  will  turn  to  the  north:  a 
piece  of  iron  not  only  takes  from  the  loadstone, 
if  it  be  a  good  loadstone,  the  forces  needful  for 
itself,  but  also,  after  receiving  them,  infuses 
them  into  another  piece,  and  that  into  a  third, 
always  with  due  regard  to  magnetic  law% 

In  all  these  our  demonstrations  it  is  ever  to 
be  borne  in  mind  that  the  poles  of  the  stone  as 
of  the  iron,  w^hether  magnetized  or  not,  are  al¬ 
ways  in  fact  and  in  their  nature  opposite  to  the 
pole  tow^ard  which  they  tend,  and  that  they 
are  thus  named  by  us,  as  has  been  already  said. 
For,  everywhere,  that  is  north  wLich  tends  to 
the  south  of  the  earth  or  of  a  terrella,  and  that 
is  south  w  hich  turns  to  the  north  of  the  stone. 
Points  that  are  north  are  attracted  by  the 
south  part  of  the  earth,  and  hence  w  hen  floated 
they  tend  to  the  south.  A  piece  of  iron  rubbed 
with  the  north  end  of  a  loadstone  becomes 
south  at  the  other  end  and  tends  always 
(if  it  be  within  the  field  of  a  loadstone 
and  near)  to  the  north  part  of  the  load¬ 
stone,  and  to  the  north  part  of  the  earth 
if  it  be  free  to  move  and  stand  alone  at  a 
distance  from  the  loadstone.  The  north 
pole  A  of  a  loadstone  turns  to  the  south 
of  the  earth,  G;  a  needle  magnetized  on 
its  point  by  the  part  A  follow^s  Ay  because 
the  point  has  been  made  south.  But  the 
needle  C,  placed  at  a  distance  from  the 
loadstone,  turns  its  point  to  the  earth's 
north,  P,  for  that  point  w^as  made  south 
by  contact  with  the  north  part  of  the 
loadstone.  Thus  the  ends  magnetized  by 
the  north  part  of  the  stone  become  south,  or 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


are  magnetized  southerly,  and  tend  to  the 
earth’s  north;  the  ends  rubbed  with  the  south 
pole  become  north,  or  are  magnetized  norther¬ 
ly,  and  tend  to  the  earth’s  south. 

CHAPTER  5.  Of  magnetizing  stones  of  different 
shapes 

Of  a  magnetized  piece  of  iron  one  extemity  is 
north,  the  other  south,  and  midway  is  the  limit 
of  verticity:  such  limit,  in  the  globe  of  the  ter- 
rella  or  in  a  globe  of  iron,  is  the  equinoctial 
circle.  But  if  an  iron  ring  be  rubbed  at  one  part 
with  a  loadstone,  then  one  of  the  poles  is  at  the 
point  of  friction,  and  the  other  pole  at  the  op¬ 
posite  side;  the  magnetic  force  divides  the  ring 
into  two  parts  by  a  natural  line  of  demarkation, 
which,  though  not  in  form,  is  in  its  power  and 
effect  equinoctial.  But  if  a  straight  rod  be  bent 
into  the  form  of  a  ring  without  welding  and  uni- 
tion  of  the  ends,  and  it  be  touched  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  with  a  loadstone,  the  ends  will  be  both  of 
the  same  verticity.  Take  a  ring,  whole  and  un¬ 
broken,  rubbed  with  a  loadstone  at  one  point; 
then  cut  it  across  at  the  opposite  point  and 
stretch  it  out  straight:  again  both  ends  will  be  of 
the  same  verticity,  just  like  an  iron  rod  magne¬ 
tized  in  the  middle,  or  a  ring  not  cohering  at 
the  joint. 

CHAPTER  6.  What  seems  to  be  a  contrary  move¬ 
ment  of  magnetic  bodies  is  the  regtdar  tendance  to 
union 

In  magnetic  bodies  nature  ever  tends  to  union 
— not  merely  to  confluence  and  agglomeration, 
but  to  agreement,  so  that  the  force  that  causes 
rotation  and  bearing  toward  the  poles  may  not 
be  disordered,  as  is  shown  in  various  ways  in  the 
following  example.  Let  CD  be  an  unbroken 
magnetic  body,  \vith  C  looking  toward  B,  the 

B(C  E|F  D)A 


b[f  d)  (c  e|a 

earth’s  north,  B  and  D  toward  A,  the  earth’s 
south.  Now  cut  it  in  two  in  the  middle,  in  the 
equator,  and  then  E  will  tend  to  A  and  F  to  B. 
For,  as  in  the  whole,  so  in  the  divided  stone, 
nature  seeks  to  have  these  bodies  united;  hence 
the  end  E  properly  and  eagerly  comes  together 
again  with  F,  and  the  two  combine,  but  E  is 
never  joined  to  D  nor  F  to  C,  for,  in  that  case, 
C  would  have  to  turn,  in  opposition,  to  nature, 
to  Ay  the  south,  or  D  to  B,  the  north — which 


67 

were  abnormal  and  incongruous.  Separate  the 
halves  of  the  stone  and  turn  D  toward  C:  they 
come  together  nicely  and  combine.  For  D  tends 
to  the  south,  as  before,  and  C  to  the  north;  E  and 
B,  which  in  the  mine  were  connate  parts,  are 
now  greatly  at  variance,  for  they  do  not  come 
together  on  account  of  material  affinity,  but 
take  movement  and  tendence  from  the  form. 
Hence  the  ends,  whether  they  be  conjoined  or 
separate,  tend  in  the  same  way,  in  accordance 
with  magnetic  law,  toward  the  earth’s  poles  in 
the  first  figure  of  the  stone,  whether  unbroken 
or  divided  as  in  the  second  figure;  and  FE of  the 
second  figure,  when  the  two  parts  come  togeth¬ 
er  and  form  one  body,  is  as  perfect  a  magnetic 
mass  as  was  CD  when  first  produced  in  the  mine; 
and  FEy  placed  on  a  float,  turn  to  the  earth’s 
poles,  and  conform  thereto  in  the  same  way  as 
the  unbroken  stone. 

This  agreement  of  the  magnetic  form  is  seen 
in  the  shapes  of  plants.  Let  AB  be  a  branch  of 
osier  or  other  tree  that  sprouts  readily;  and  let 


A  be  the  upper  part  of  the  branch  and  B  the 
part  rootward.  Divide  the  branch  at  CD.  Now, 
the  extremity  CD,  if  skilfully  grafted  again  on 
Dy  begins  to  grow,  just  as  B  and  Ay  when  united 
become  consolidated  and  germinate.  But  if  D 
be  grafted  in  Ay  or  C  on  B,  they  are  at  variance 
and  grow  not  at  all,  but  one  of  them  dies  be¬ 
cause  of  the  preposterous  and  unsuitable  apposi¬ 
tion,  the  vegetative  force,  which  tends  in  a  fixed 
direction,  being  now  forced  into  a  contrary  one. 

CHAPTER  7.  A  determinate  verticity  and  a  directive 
power  mahe  magnetic  bodies  accordy  and  not  an  at- 
tractional  or  a  repidsative  forcey  tior  strong  coition 
alone  or  unition 

In  the  equinoctial  circle  A  there  is  no  coition 
of  the  ends  of  a  piece  of  iron  wire  with  the  ter- 
rella;  at  the  poles  the  coition  is  very  strong.  The 
greater  the  distance  from  the  equinoctial  the 
stronger  is  the  coition  with  the  terrella  itself, 
and  with  any  part  thereof,  not  with  the  pole 
only.  But  the  pieces  of  iron  are  not  made  to 
stand  because  of  any  peculiar  attracting  force 
or  any  strong  combined  force,  but  because  of 
the  common  energy  that  gives  to  them  direc¬ 
tion,  conformity,  and  rotation.  For  in  the  re- 


68 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


gion  B  not  even  the  minutest  bit  of  iron  that 
weighs  almost  nothing  can  be  reared  to  the  per¬ 
pendicular  by  the  strongest  of  loadstones,  but 
adheres  obliquely.  And  just  as  the  terrella  at¬ 
tracts  variously,  with  unlike  force,  magnetic 
bodies,  so,  too,  an  iron  hump  (or  protuberance 
— nastts)  attached  to  the  stone  has  a  different 
potency  according  to  the  latitude:  thus  the 
hump  L,  as  being  strongly  adherent,  will  carry" 
a  greater  weight  than  M,  and  M  a  heavier 
weight  than  N,  But  neither  does  the  hump  rear 
to  perpendicular  a  bit  of  iron  except  at  the 
poles,  as  is  shown  in  the  figure.  The  hump  L 
will  hold  and  lift  from  the  ground  two  ounces 
of  solid  iron,  yet  it  is  unable  to  make  a  piece 
of  iron  wire  weighing  two  grains  stand  erect; 
but  that  would  not  be  the  case  if  verticity  arose 
from  strong  attraction,  or  more  properly  coi¬ 
tion,  or  from  unition. 

CHAPTER  8.  Of  disagreements  between  pieces  of  iron 
on  the  same  pole  of  a  loadstone;  how  they  may  come 
together  and  be  conjoined 

If  two  pieces  of  iron  wire  or  two  needles  above 
the  poles  of  a  terrella  adhere,  when  about  to  be 
raised  to  the  perpendicular  they  repel  each  oth¬ 
er  at  their  upper  ends  and  present  a  furcate  ap¬ 
pearance;  and  if  one  end  be  forcibly  pushed  to¬ 
ward  the  other,  that  other  retreats  and  bends 
back  to  avoid  the  association,  as  shown  in  the 


A  B 


figure.  A  and  J5,  small  iron  rods,  adhere  to  the 
pole  obliquely  because  of  their  nearness  to  each 
other:  either  one  alone  would  stand  erect  and 
perpendicular.  The  reason  of  the  obliquity  is 
that  A  and  B,  having  the  same  verticity,  re¬ 
treat  from  each  other  and  fly  apart.  For  if  C  be 
the  north  pole  of  a  terrella,  then  the  ends  A  and 
B  of  the  rods  are  also  north,  while  the  ends  in 
contact  with  and  held  fast  by  the  pole  C  are 
both  south.  But  let  the  rods  be  rather  long  (say 
two  finger-breadths),  and  let  them  be  held  to¬ 
gether  by  force:  then  they  cohere  and  stand  to¬ 
gether  like  friends,  nor  can  they  be  separated 
save  by  force,  for  they  are  held  fast  to  each  oth¬ 
er  magnetically,  and  are  no  longer  two  distinct 
terminals  but  one  only  and  one  body,  like  a 
piece  of  wire  bent  double  and  made  to  stand 
erect. 

But  here  we  notice  another  curious  fact,  viz.^ 
that  if  the  rods  be  rather  short,  not  quite  a 
finger’s  breadth  in  length,  or  as  long  as  a  barley¬ 
corn,  they  will  not  unite  on  any  terms,  nor  will 
they  stand  up  together  at  all,  for  in  short  pieces 
of  wire  the  verticity  at  the  ends  farthest  from 
the  terrella  is  stronger  and  the  magnetic  strife 
more  intense  than  in  longer  pieces.  Therefore 
they  do  not  permit  any  association,  any  fellow¬ 
ship.  Again,  if  two  light  pieces  of  wire,  A  and 
B,  be  suspended  by  a  ver\^  slender  thread  of 


silk  filaments  not  twisted  but  laid  together,^ 
and  held  at  the  distance  of  one  barley-corn’s 
length  from  the  loadstone,  then  the  opposite 
ends,  A  and  B,  situate  within  the  sphere  of 
influence  above  the  pole,  go  a  little  apart  for 
the  same  reason,  except  when  they  are  very 
near  the  pole  C  of  the  stone:  in  that  position 
the  stone  attracts  them  to  the  one  point. 

^  Sec  Book  1, 12. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


69 


CHAPTER  9.  Directional  figures  showing  the  varie¬ 
ties  ofi  rotation 

Having  now  sufficiently  shown,  according  to 
magnetic  laws  and  principles  the  demonstrable 
cause  of  the  motion  toward  determinate  points, 
we  have  next  to  show  the  movements.  On  a 
spherical  loadstone  having  the  poles  A,  B, 
place  a  rotating  needle  whose  point  has  been 
magnetized  by  the  pole  A:  that  point  will  be 
directed  steadily  toward  A  and  attracted  by  A, 


<  o  4»< 


because,  having  been  magnetized  by  Ay  it  ac¬ 
cords  truly  and  combines  with  A  \  and  yet  it  is 
said  to  be  opposite  because  when  the  needle  is 
separated  from  the  stone  it  moves  to  the  oppo¬ 
site  part  of  earth  from  that  toward  which  the 
loadstone’s  pole  A  moves.  For  if  A  be  the  north 
pole  of  the  terrella,  the  point  of  the  needle  is  its 
south  end,  and  its  other  end,  the  crotch,  points 
to  B:  thus  B  is  the  loadstone’s  south  pole,  while 
the  crotch  of  the  needle  is  the  needle’s  north 
end.  So,  too,  the  point  is  attracted  by  EFGH 
and  by  every  part  of  a  meridian  from  the  equa¬ 
tor  to  the  pole,  because  of  the  power  of  direct¬ 
ing;  and  when  the  needle  is  in  those  places  on 
the  meridian  the  point  is  directed  toward  A ;  for 
it  is  not  the  point  A  but  the  whole  loadstone 
that  makes  the  needle  turn,  as  does  the  whole 
earth  in  the  case  of  magnetic  bodies  turning  to 
the  earth. 

The  figure  following  shows  the  magnetic  di¬ 
rections  in  the  right  sphere  of  a  loadstone  and 
in  the  right  sphere  of  the  earth,  also  the  polar 
directions  to  the  perpendicular  of  the  poles.  All 
the  points  of  the  versorium  have  been  magne¬ 
tized  by  pole  A,  All  the  points  are  directed  to¬ 
ward  A  except  the  one  that  is  repelled  by  B» 


The  next  figure  shows  horizontal  directions 
above  the  body  of  the  loadstone.  All  the  points 


that  have  been  made  south  by  rubbing  with  the 
north  pole  or  some  point  around  the  north  pole 
Ay  turn  to  the  pole  A  and  turn  away  from  the 
south  pole  By  toward  which  all  the  crotches  are 
directed. 

I  call  the  direction  horizontal  because  it  co¬ 
incides  with  the  plane  of  the  horizon;  for  nau¬ 
tical  and  horological  instruments  are  so  con¬ 
structed  that  the  needle  shall  be  suspended  or 
supported  in  equilibrium  on  a  sharp  point, 
which  prevents  the  dip  of  the  needle,  as  we  shall 
explain  later.  And  in  this  way  it  best  serves 
man’s  use,  noting  and  distinguishing  all  the 
points  of  the  horizon  and  all  the  winds.  Other¬ 
wise  in  every  oblique  sphere  (whether  terrella 
or  earth)  the  needle  and  all  magnetized  bodies 
would  dip  below  the  horizon,  and,  at  the  poles, 
the  directions  would  be  perpendicular,  as  ap¬ 
pears  from  our  account  of  the  dip. 

The  next  figure  shows  a  spherical  loadstone 
cut  in  two  at  the  equator;  all  the  points  of  the 
needles  have  been  magnetized  by  pole  A,  The 
points  are  directed  in  the  centre  of  the  earth  and 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


between  the  two  halves  of  the  terrella,  divided 
in  the  plane  of  the  equator  as  shown  in  the  dia¬ 
gram.  The  case  would  be  the  same  if  the  divi¬ 
sion  were  made  through  the  plane  of  a  tropic 
and  the  separation  and  distance  of  the  two  parts 
were  as  above,  with  the  division  and  separation 
of  the  loadstone  through  the  plane  of  the  equin¬ 
octial.  For  the  points  are  repelled  by  C,  attrac¬ 
ted  by  D,  and  the  needles  are  parallel,  the  poles 
or  the  verticity  at  both  ends  controlling  them. 

The  next  figure  shows  half  of  a  terrella  by  it¬ 
self,  and  its  directions  differing  from  the  direc¬ 
tions  gi\'en  by  the  two  parts  in  the  preceding 
figure,  which  were  placed  alongside.  All  the 


points  have  been  magnetized  by  .f;  all  the  crot¬ 
ches  below,  except  the  middle  one,  tend  not  in 
a  right  line  but  obliquely,  to  the  loadstone,  for 
the  pole  is  in  the  middle  of  the  plane  that  be¬ 
fore  was  the  plane  of  the  equinoctial.  All  points 
magnetized  by  parts  of  the  loadstone  away 
from  the  pole  move  to  the  pole  (just  as  though 
they  had  been  magnetized  by  the  pole  itself) 
and  not  to  the  place  of  friction,  wherever  that 
may  be  in  the  whole  stone  at  any  latitude  be¬ 
twixt  pole  and  equator.  And  for  this  reason 
there  are  only  two  differences  of  regions — they 
are  north  and  south  as  well  in  the  terrella  as  in 
the  great  globe  of  earth;  and  there  is  no  east, 
no  west  place,  no  regions  truly  eastern  or  west¬ 
ern,  but,  with  respect  to  each  other,  east  and 
west  are  simply  terms  signifying  toward  the 
east  or  west  part  of  the  heavens.  Hence  Ptolemy 
seems  in  the  Oiiadripartitum  to  err  in  laying  out 
eastern  and  western  divisions,  to  which  he  im¬ 
properly  annexes  the  planets;  he  is  followed  by 
the  rabble  of  philosophasters  and  astrologers. 

CHAPTER  10.  Of  the  mutation  of  verticity  and  mag¬ 
netic  propertieSy  or  of  the  alteration  of  the force  awa¬ 
kened  by  the  loadstone 

Iron  excited  by  the  magnetic  influx  has  a  ver¬ 
ticity  that  is  pretty  strong,  yet  not  so  stable  but 
that  the  opposite  parts  may  be  altered  by  the 
friction  not  only  of  a  stronger  but  of  the  same 
loadstone,  and  may  lose  all  their  first  verticity 


and  take  on  the  opposite.  Procure  a  piece  of 
iron  wire  and  with  the  self-same  pole  of  a  load¬ 
stone  rub  each  end  equally;  pass  the  wire 
through  a  suitable  cork  float  and  put  it  in  the 
water.  Then  one  end  of  the  wire  wiW  look  to¬ 
ward  a  pole  of  the  earth  whereto  that  end  of 
the  loadstone  does  not  look.  But  which  end  of 
the  wire?  It  will  be  just  the  one  that  was  rub¬ 
bed  last.  Now  rub  with  the  same  pole  the  other 
end  again,  and  straightway  that  end  will  turn 
in  the  opposite  direction.  Again  rub  the  end 
that  first  pointed  to  the  pole  of  the  loadstone, 
and  at  once  that,  having,  as  it  were,  obtained  its 
orders,  will  go  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the 
one  it  took  last.  Thus  you  will  be  able  to  alter 
again  and  again  the  property  of  the  iron,  and  the 
extremity  of  it  that  is  last  rubbed  is  master.  And 
now  merely  hold  for  a  while  the  north  end  of  the 
stone  near  the  north  end  of  the  wire  that  was 
last  rubbed,  not  bringing  the  two  into  contact, 
but  at  the  distance  of  one,  two,  or  even  three  fin¬ 
ger-breadths,  if  the  stone  be  a  powerful  one; 
again  the  iron  will  change  its  property  and  will 
turn  to  the  opposite  direction:  so  it  will,  too, 
though  rather  more  feebly,  if  the  loadstone  be 
four  finger-breadths  away.  The  same  results  are 
had  in  all  these  experiments  whether  you  employ 
the  south  or  the  north  part  of  the  stone.  Verti¬ 
city  can  also  be  acquired  or  altered  with  plates 
of  gold,  silver,  and  glass  between  the  loadstone 
and  the  end  of  the  piece  of  iron  or  wire,  provid¬ 
ed  the  stone  be  rather  powerful,  though  the 
plates  of  m^etal  be  touched  neither  by  the  stone 
nor  by  the  iron.  And  these  changes  of  verticity 
occur  in  cast-iron.  But  what  is  imparted  or  ex¬ 
cited  by  one  pole  of  the  loadstone  is  expelled  and 
annulled  by  the  other,  which  confers  new  force. 
Nor  is  a  stronger  loadstone  needed  to  make  the 
iron  put  off  the  weaker  and  sluggish  force  and  to 
put  on  a  new.  Neither  is  the  iron  “made  drunk¬ 
en”  {inebriatur')  by  equal  forces  of  loadstone,  so 
that  it  becomes  “undecided  and  neutral,”  as 
Baptista  Porta  maintains.  But  by  one  same  load¬ 
stone,  and  by  loadstones  endowed  with  equal 
power  and  strength,  the  force  is  altered,  changed, 
incited,  renewed,  driven  out.  The  loadstone 
itself,  however,  is  not  robbed,  by  friction  with 
another  bigger  or  stronger  stone,  of  its  property 
and  verticity,  nor  is  it  turned,  when  on  a  float, 
to  the  opposite  direction  or  to  another  pole  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  toward  which,  by  its  own  na¬ 
ture  and  verticity,  it  tends.  For  forces  that  are 
innate  and  long  implanted  inhere  more  closely, 
nor  do  they  easily  retire  from  their  ancient 
scats;  and  what  is  the  growth  of  a  long  period 
of  time  is  not  in  an  instant  reduced  to  nothing 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


unless  that  in  which  it  inheres  perishes.  Never¬ 
theless  change  conies  about  in  a  considerable 
interval  of  time,  e.g,,  a  year  or  two,  sometimes 
in  a  few  months — to  wit,  when  a  weaker  load¬ 
stone  remains  applied,  in  a  way  contrary  to  the 
order  of  nature,  to  a  stronger,  with  the 
north  pole  of  one  touching  the  north  pole  of  the 
other,  or  the  south  of  one  touching  the  other’s 
south.  Under  such  conditions,  in  the  lapse  of 
time  the  weaker  force  declines. 

CHAPTER  11.  Of friction  of  iron  with  the  mid  parts 
of  a  loadstone  between  the  poles,  and  at  the  equinoc¬ 
tial  circle  of  a  terrella 

Take  a  piece  of  iron  wire  not  magnetized,  three 
finger-widths  long  (’twill  be  better  if  its  ac¬ 
quired  verticity  be  ratherweakordeformated  by 
some  process);  touch  and  rub  it  with  the  equa¬ 
tor  of  the  terrella  exactly  on  the  equinoctial 
line  along  its  whole  tract  and  length,  only  one 
end,  or  both  ends,  or  the  whole  of  the  iron,  being 
brought  into  contact.  The  wire  thus  rubbed,  run 
through  a  cork  and  float  it  in  water.  It  will  go 
wandering  about  without  any  acquired  verticity, 
and  the  verticity  it  had  before  will  be  disordered. 
But  if  by  chance  it  should  be  borne  in  its  waver¬ 
ing  toward  the  poles,  it  will  be  feebly  held  still  by 
the  earth’s  poles,  and  finally  will  be  endowed 
with  verticity  by  the  energy  of  the  earth. 


the  causes  of  the  magnetic  virtue  existing  in 
manufactured  iron  not  magnetized  by  the  load¬ 
stone.  The  loadstone  and  iron  present  and  ex¬ 
hibit  to  us  wonderful  subtile  properties.  It  has 
already  oft  been  shown  that  iron  not  excited 
by  the  loadstone  turns  to  north  and  south;  fur¬ 
ther,  that  it  possesses  verticity,  i,e.,  distinct 
poles  proper  and  peculiar  to  itself,  even  as  the 
loadstone  or  iron  rubbed  with  the  loadstone. 
This  seemed  to  us  at  first  strange  and  incredible: 
the  metal,  iron,  is  smelted  out  of  the  ore  in  the 
furnace,  flows  out  of  the  furnace,  and  hardens 
in  a  great  mass;  the  mass  is  cut  up  in  great 
workshops  and  drawn  out  into  iron  bars,  and 
from  these  again  the  smith  fashions  all  sorts  of 
necessary  implements  and  objects  of  iron.  Thus 
the  same  mass  is  variously  worked  and  trans¬ 
formed  into  many  shapes.  What,  then,  is  it  that 
preserves  the  verticity,  or  whence  is  it  derived } 
First  take  a  mass  of  iron  as  produced  in  the  first 
iron-works.  Get  a  smith  to  shape  a  mass  weigh¬ 
ing  two  or  three  ounces,  on  the  anvil,  into  an 
iron  bar  one  palm  or  nine  inches  long.  Let  the 
smith  stand  facing  the  north,  with  back  to  the 
south,  so  that  as  he  hammers  the  red-hot  iron 
it  may  have  a  motion  of  extension  northward; 
and  so  let  him  complete  the  task  at  one  or  two 
heatings  of  the  iron  (if  needed) ;  but  ever  while 
he  hammers  and  lengthens  it,  have  him  keep  the 


CHAPTER  12.  How  verticity  exists  in  all  smelted 
iron  not  excited  by  the  loadstone 

Hitherto  we  have  declared  the  natural  and 
innate  causes  and  the  powers  acquired  through 
the  loadstone;  but  now  we  are  to  investigate 


same  point  of  the  iron  looking  north,  and  lay 
the  finished  bar  aside  in  the  same  direction.  In 
this  way  fashion  two,  three,  or  more,  yea  one 
hundred  or  four  hundred  bars:  it  is  plain  that 
all  the  bars  so  hammered  out  toward  the  north 
and  so  laid  down  while  cooling  will  rotate 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


72 

round  their  centres  and  when  afloat  (being 
passed  through  suitable  pieces  of  cork)  will 
move  about  in  water,  and,  when  the  end  is  duly 
reached,  will  point  north.  And  as  an  iron  bar 
takes  verticity  from  the  direction  in  which  it 
lies  while  being  stretched,  or  hammered,  or 
pulled,  so  too  \\  ill  iron  wire  when  drawn  out  to¬ 
ward  any  point  of  the  horizon  between  east  and 
south  or  between  south  and  west,  or  conversely. 
Nevertheless,  when  the  iron  is  directed  and 
stretched  rather  to  a  point  east  or  west,  it  takes 
almost  no  verticity,  or  a  ver>'  faint  verticity. 
This  verticity  is  acquired  chiefly  through  the 
lengthening.  But  when  inferior  iron  ore,  in 
which  no  magnetic  properties  are  apparent,  is 
put  in  the  fire  (its  position  with  reference  to 
the  world’s  poles  being  noted)  and  there  heated 
for  eight  or  ten  hours,  then  cooled  away  from 
the  fire  and  in  the  same  position  with  regard  to 
the  poles,  it  acquires  verticity  according  to  its 
position  during  heating  and  cooling. 

Let  a  bar  of  iron  be  brought  to  a  white  heat 
in  a  strong  fire,  in  which  it  lies  meridionally, 
i.e,y  along  the  track  of  a  meridian  circle;  then 
take  it  out  of  the  fire  and  let  it  cool  and  return 
to  the  original  temperature,  lying  the  while  in 
the  same  position  as  before:  it  will  come  about 
that,  through  the  like  extremities  having  been 
directed  toward  the  same  poles  of  the  earth,  it 
will  acquire  verticity;  and  that  the  extremity 
that  looked  north  when  the  bar,  before  the 
firing,  was  floated  in  water  by  means  of  a  cork, 
if  now  the  same  end  during  the  firing  and  the 
cooling  looked  southward,  will  point  to  the 
south.  If  perchance  the  turning  to  the  pole 
should  at  any  time  be  weak  and  uncertain,  put 
the  bar  in  the  fire  again,  take  it  out  when  it  has 
reached  white  heat,  cool  it  perfectly  as  it  lies 
pointing  in  the  direction  of  the  pole  from  which 
you  wish  it  to  take  verticity,  and  the  verticity 
will  be  acquired.  Let  it  be  heated  again,  lying 
in  the  contrary  direction,  and  while  yet  white- 
hot  lay  it  down  till  it  cools;  for,  from  the  posi¬ 
tion  in  cooling  (the  earth’s  verticity  acting  on 
it),  verticity  is  infused  into  the  iron  and  it  turns 
toward  points  opposite  to  the  former  verticity. 
So  the  extremity  that  before  looked  north  now 
turns  to  the  south.  For  these  reasons  and  in 
these  ways  does  the  north  pole  of  the  earth  give 
to  that  extremity  of  the  iron  which  is  turned 
toward  it  south  verticity;  hence,  too,  that  ex¬ 
tremity  is  attracted  by  the  north  pole.  And 
here  it  is  to  be  observed  that  this  happens  with 
iron  not  only  when  it  cools  lying  in  the  plane  of 
the  horizon,  but  also  at  any  inclination  thereto, 
even  almost  up  to  perpendicular  to  the  centre 


of  the  earth.  Thus  heated  iron  more  quickly 
gets  energy  (strength)  and  verticity  from  the 
earth  in  the  very  process  of  returning  to  sound¬ 
ness  in  its  renascence,  so  to  speak  (wherein  it  is 
transforma  ted),  than  when  it  simply  rests  in  po¬ 
sition.  This  experiment  is  best  made  in  winter 
and  in  a  cold  atmosphere,  when  the  metal  re¬ 
turns  more  surely  to  the  natural  temperature 
than  in  summer  and  in  warm  climates. 

Let  us  see  also  what  position  alone,  without 
fire  and  heat,  and  what  mere  giving  to  the  iron 
a  direction  toward  the  earth’s  poles  may  do. 
Iron  bars  that  for  a  long  time — twenty  years  or 
more — have  lain  fixed  in  the  north  and  south 
position,  as  bars  are  often  fixed  in  buildings  and 
in  glass  windows — such  bars,  in  the  lapse  of 
time,  acquire  verticity,  and  whether  suspended 
in  air  or  floated  by  corks  on  water  turn  to  the 
pole  toward  which  they  used  to  be  directed, 
and  magnetically  attract  and  repel  iron  in  equi¬ 
librium;  for  great  is  the  effect  of  long-continued 
direction  of  a  body  toward  the  poles.  This, 
though  made  clear  by  plain  experiment,  gets 
confirmation  for  what  we  find  in  a  letter  written 
in  Italian  and  appended  to  a  work  by  Master 
Philip  Costa,  of  Mantua,  also  in  Italian,  Of  the 
Compounding  of  Antidotes^  which,  translated,  is 
as  follows:  “At  Mantua,  an  apothecary  showed 
to  me  a  piece  of  iron  completely  turned  to  load¬ 
stone,  so  attracting  other  iron  that  it  might  be 
compared  to  a  loadstone.  But  this  piece  of  iron, 
after  it  had  for  a  long  time  supported  a  terra¬ 
cotta  ornament  on  the  tower  of  the  church  of 
San  Agostino  at  Rimini,  was  at  last  bent  by  the 
force  of  the  winds  and  so  remained  for  ten  years. 
The  friars,  wishing  to  have  it  restored  to  its 
original  shape,  gave  it  to  a  blacksmith,  and  in 
the  smithy  Master  Giulio  Cesare,  prominent 
surgeon,  discovered  that  it  resembled  loadstone 
and  attracted  iron.  The  effect  was  produced  by 
long-continued  lying  in  the  direction  of  the 
poles.  It  is  well,  therefore,  to  recall  what  has  al¬ 
ready  been  laid  down  with  regard  to  alteration 
of  verticity,  r/xr.,  how  that  the  poles  of  iron  bars 
are  changed  when  a  loadstone  simply  presents 
its  pole  to  them  and  faces  them  even  from  some 
distance.  Surely  in  a  like  way  does  that  great 
loadstone  the  earth  affect  iron  and  change  ver¬ 
ticity.  For  albeit  the  iron  does  not  touch  the 
earth’s  pole  nor  any  magnetic  portion  of  the 
earth,  still  the  verticity  is  acquired  and  altered 
— not  that  the  earth’s  pole,  that  identical  point 
lying  thirty-nine  degrees  of  latitude,  so  great  a 
number  of  miles,  away  from  this  City  of  Lon¬ 
don,  changes  the  verticity,  but  that  the  entire 
deeper  magnetic  mass  of  the  earth  which  rises 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


between  us  and  the  pole,  and  over  which  stands 
the  iron — that  this,  with  the  energy  residing 
within  the  field  of  the  magnetic  force,  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  the  entire  orb  conspiring,  produces  ver- 
ticity  in  bodies.  For  everywhere  within  the 
sphere  of  the  magnetic  force  does  the  earth’s 
magnetic  effluence  reign,  everywhere  does  it 
alter  bodies.  But  those  bodies  that  are  most  like 
to  it  and  most  closely  allied,  it  rules  and  con¬ 
trols,  as  loadstone  and  iron.  For  this  reason  it  is 
not  altogether  superstitious  and  silly  in  many  of 
our  affairs  and  businesses  to  note  the  positions 
and  configurations  of  countries,  the  points  of 
the  horizon  and  the  locations  of  the  stars.  For 
as  when  the  babe  is  given  forth  to  the  light 
from  the  mother’s  womb  and  gains  the  power 
of  respiration  and  certain  animal  functions,  and 
as  the  planets  and  other  heavenly  bodies,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  positions  in  the  universe  and 
according  to  their  configuration  with  the  hori¬ 
zon  and  the  earth,  do  then  impart  to  the  new¬ 
comer  special  and  peculiar  qualities;  so  a  piece 
of  iron,  while  it  is  being  wrought  and  length¬ 
ened,  is  affected  by  the  general  cause,  the  earth, 
to  wit;  and  while  it  is  coming  back  from  the 
fiery  state  to  its  original  temperature  it  be¬ 
comes  imbued  with  a  special  verticity  accord¬ 
ing  to  its  position.  Long  bars  have  sometimes 
the  same  verticity  at  both  ends,  and  hence  they 
have  a  wavering  and  ill-regulated  motion  on 
account  of  their  length  and  of  the  aforesaid 
manipulations,  just  as  when  an  iron  wire  four 
feet  long  is  rubbed  at  both  ends  with  one  same 
pole  of  a  loadstone. 

CHAPTER  13.  JV/iy  no  other  bodies  save  the  mag- 
netic  are  imbued  with  verticity  by  friction  with  a  load' 
stone;  and  why  no  body  not  magnetic  can  impart  and 
awabpn  that  force 

Wood  floating  on  water  never  turns  by  its  own 
forces  toward  the  poles  of  the  world  save  by 
chance:  so  neither  threads  of  gold,  silver,  cop¬ 
per,  zinc,  lead,  nor  glass,  when  passed  through 
cork  and  floated,  have  ever  sure  direction;  and, 
therefore,  when  rubbed  with  a  loadstone  they 
show  neither  poles  nor  points  of  variation;  for 
bodies  that  do  not  of  their  own  accord  turn  to¬ 
ward  the  poles  and  are  not  obedient  to  the  earth 
are  in  no  wise  governed  by  the  loadstone’s 
touch;  neither  has  the  energy  of  the  loadstone 
entrance  into  their  interior,  nor  are  their  forms 
excited  magnetically;  nor,  if  the  energy  did  en¬ 
ter  in,  could  it  effect  aught,  for  the  reason  that 
there  are  no  primary  qualities  in  such  bodies, 
mixed  as  they  are  with  a  variety  of  efflorescent 
humours  and  degenerate  from  the  primal  prop¬ 


erty  of  the  globe.  On  the  other  hand  the  prop¬ 
erties  of  iron  which  are  primal  are  awakened  by 
approach  of  a  loadstone:  like  brute  animals  and 
men  when  awakened  out  of  sleep,  the  proper¬ 
ties  of  iron  now  move  and  put  forth  their 
strength. 

Here  we  must  express  wonder  at  a  manifest 
error  of  Baptista  Porta,  who,  though  he  prop¬ 
erly  refuses  assent  to  the  inveterate  falsehood 
about  a  force  the  opposite  of  the  magnetic,  im¬ 
parts  a  still  falser  opinion,  to  wit  that  iron 
rubbed  with  diamond  turns  to  the  north.  “If,”  he 
writes,  “we  rub  an  iron  needle  on  diamond,  and 
then  put  it  in  a  boat  or  on  a  straw  or  suspend  it 
properly  with  a  thread,  at  once  it  turns  to  the 
north  like  iron  rubbed  on  a  loadstone,  or  per¬ 
haps  a  little  more  sluggishly.  Nay — and  this  is 
worthy  of  remark — the  opposite  part,  like  the 
loadstone  itself  at  its  south  end,  repels  iron,  and 
when  we  experimented  with  a  multitude  of 
small  iron  rods  in  water,  they  all  stood  at  equal 
distances  apart  and  pointed  north.”  Now  this 
is  contrary  to  our  magnetic  rules;  and  hence 
we  made  the  experiment  ourselves  with  seven¬ 
ty-five  diamonds  in  presence  of  many  witnesses, 
employing  a  number  of  iron  bars  and  pieces  of 
wire,  manipulating  them  with  the  greatest  care 
while  they  floated  in  water,  supported  by  corks; 
yet  never  was  it  granted  me  to  see  the  effect 
mentioned  by  Porta.  He  was  led  astray  by  the 
verticity  of  the  iron  in  the  bars  or  wires  got 
from  the  earth  (as  shown  above);  the  iron  of 
itself  tended  toward  its  determinate  pole,  and 
Porta,  ignorant  of  this,  supposed  the  thing  was 
done  by  the  diamond.  But  let  searchers  of  the 
things  of  nature  beware  lest  they  be  further 
deluded  by  their  own  faultily  observed  experi¬ 
ments,  and  lest,  with  errors  and  blunders,  they 
throw  into  confusion  the  republic  of  letters. 
Diamond  is  sometimes  called  siderite,  not  be¬ 
cause  it  is  ferruginous  or  that  it  attracts  iron, 
but  on  account  of  its  glister,  like  that  of  shin¬ 
ing  iron;  this  brilliance  is  possessed  by  the  finest 
diamonds.  On  account  of  this  confusion  of 
names  many  effects  are  credited  to  diamond 
that  in  fact  belong  to  the  loadstone  siderite.^ 

CHAPTER  14.  The  position  of  a  loadstone,  now 
above,  anon  beneath,  a  magnetic  body  suspended  in 
equilibrium,  alters  neither  the  force  nor  the  verticity 
of  the  magnetic  body 

This  point  we  may  not  rightly  pass  by,  because 
we  must  correct  an  error  that  has  lately  arisen 
out  of  a  faulty  observation  of  Baptista  Porta; 
out  of  this  erroneous  judgment.  Porta,  by  vain 
^  See  Book  i .  2. 


74 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


repetition,  makes  three  chapters, the  eighth, 
the  thirty-first,  and  the  sixty-second.  Now,  if 
a  loadstone  or  a  piece  of  iron  suspended  in 
equilibrium  or  floating  in  water  is  attracted  or 
controlled  by  another  piece  of  iron  or  another 
loadstone  held  above  it,  the  stone  or  the  iron 
docs  not  turn  to  the  opposite  direction  when 
you  apply  the  second  iron  or  stone  beneath;  on 
the  contrary,  the  ends  of  the  floating  loadstone 
or  of  the  floating  iron  will  ever  turn  to  the  same 
points  of  the  stone,  however  the  loadstone  or 
the  iron  may  be  suspended  in  equilibrium  or 
whether  they  be  mounted  on  a  point  so  that 
they  may  revolve  freely.  Porta  was  led  into 
error  by  the  uneven  shape  of  some  loadstone  or 
by  the  fact  that  he  did  not  manage  the  experi¬ 
ment  aright.  Thus  he  is  badly  mistaken,  think¬ 
ing  it  fair  to  infer  that,  as  the  loadstone  has  a 
north  and  a  south  pole,  it  has  also  an  east  and  a 
west,  a  superior  and  an  inferior,  pole.  So  do 
many  vain  imaginations  arise  out  of  mistakes 
committed  and  accepted  as  true  judgments. 

CHAPTER  15.  The  poles,  equator,  centre,  are  per¬ 
manent  and  stable  in  the  imhroken  loadstone;  when 
it  is  reduced  in  size  and  a  part  taken  away,  they  vary 
and  occupy  other  positions 

Let  AB  be  a  terrella,  E  its  centre,  DF  its  di¬ 
ameter  (and  also  its  equinoctial  circle).  If  you 
cut  out  a  piece  (for  instance  along  the  Arctic 
circle)  GH,  it  is  evident  that  the  pole  which  be¬ 
fore  was  at  A  now  has  its  seat  at  /.  But  the  centre 


and  the  equinoctial  circle  recede  only  toward  B, 
so  as  always  to  be  in  the  middle  of  the  mass 
that  remains  between  the  plane  of  the  Arctic 
circle  GIH  and  the  Antarctic  pole  B.  Thus  the 
segment  of  the  terrella  between  the  plane  of 
the  former  equinoctial  circle  DEF  (that  is  of 
the  equinoctial  circle  which  existed  before  the 
part  was  cut  away)  and  the  newly  acquired 
equator  MLN  will  always  be  equal  to  one  half 
of  the  part  cut  off,  GIHA,  But  if  the  part  be 


cut  from  the  side  CD  then  the  poles  and  the 
axis  will  not  be  in  the  line  AB  but  in  EF\  and 
the  axis  is  changed  in  the  same  proportion  as 


E  A 


the  equator  in  the  previous  figure.  For  these 
points  of  forces  and  of  energy,  or  rather  these 
terminals  of  forces  that  flow  from  the  entire 
form,  are  moved  forward  by  change  of  mass  or 
of  figure;  as  all  these  points  result  from  the  joint 
action  of  the  whole  and  of  all  the  parts  united, 
and  verticity  or  polarity  is  not  a  property  in¬ 
nate  in  the  part  or  in  any  fixed  point,  but  a 
tendency  of  the  force  to  such  part.  And  as  a  ter- 
rclla  dug  out  of  the  earth  has  no  longer  the  poles 
and  the  equator  of  the  earth  but  special  poles 
and  equator  of  its  own,  so,  too,  if  the  terrella 
be  cut  in  two  again,  these  points  and  distinctions 
of  its  forms  and  powers  migrate  to  other  parts. 
But  if  the  loadstone  be  in  any  way  divided 
either  on  the  parallels  or  on  the  meridians  so 
that  in  consequence  of  the  change  of  its  shape 
either  the  poles  or  the  equator  migrate  to  other 
seats,  then  if  the  part  that  has  been  cut  ofl'  be 
but  set  in  its  natural  position  and  conjoined  to 
the  rest,  though  they  be  not  cemented  or  other¬ 
wise  fastened  together,  the  terminal  points  go 
back  again  to  the  former  places  as  though  no 
part  of  the  body  had  been  cut  away.  When  the 
body  is  whole  the  form  remains  whole;  but 
when  the  mass  of  the  body  is  reduced,  a  new 
whole  results,  and  a  new  wholeness  necessarily 
arises  in  each  minutest  piece  of  loadstone,  even 
in  magnetic  gravel  and  fine  sand. 

CH.  VPTER  16.  If  the  south  part  of  a  loadstone  have 
a  part  hroltpn  off,  someivhat  of  power  is  tal;en  away 
from  the  north  part  also 

For  though  the  south  part  of  magnetic  iron  is 
attracted  by  the  north  part  of  the  loadstone, 
still  the  south  part  of  the  stone  does  not  reduce 
but  increases  the  power  of  the  north  part. 
Hence  if  a  loadstone  be  cut  and  divided  at  the 
Arctic  circle,  or  at  the  tropic  of  Cancer,  or  at 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


the  equator,  the  south  part  does  not  so  power¬ 
fully  attract  at  its  pole  as  before;  for  a  new 
whole  arises  and  the  equator  leaves  its  former 
place  and  advances  poleward,  because  of  the 
division  of  the  stone.  In  the  former  state,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  the  opposite  part  of  the  stone  be¬ 
yond  the  plane  of  the  equator  increases  the 
mass,  it  also  strengthens  the  verticity  and  the 
force  and  the  movement  toward  unition. 

CHAPTER  17.  Of  the  use  of  rotary  needles  and  their 
advantages;  how  the  directive  iron  rotary  needles  of 
sundials  and  the  needles  of  the  mariner  s  compass  are 
to  be  rubbed  with  loadstotie  in  order  to  acquire 
stronger  verticity 

Magnetized  versoriums  (or  magnetized  rotary 
needles)  serve  so  many  purposes  in  the  life  of 
man,  that  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  show  the 
best  process  for  rubbing  and  magnetically  ex¬ 
citing  them  and  the  proper  method  of  apply¬ 
ing  the  process.  With  the  aid  of  a  small  bar  of 
iron  magnetically  prepared  and  suspended  in 
equilibrium,  rich  iron  ores  and  those  contain¬ 
ing  most  metal  are  recognized,  and  magnetic 
stones,  clays,  and  earths,  whether  crude  or  pre¬ 
pared,  are  distinguished.  A  little  iron  bar — that 
soul  of  the  mariner’s  compass,  that  wonderful 
director  in  sea-voyages,  that  finger  of  God,  so 
to  speak — points  the  way  and  has  made  known 
the  whole  circle  of  earth,  unknown  for  so  many 
ages.  Spaniards  (and  Englishmen  too)  have 
again  and  again  circumnavigated  the  whole 
globe  on  a  vast  circle  by  the  help  of  the  mari¬ 
ner’s  compass.  They  who  travel  on  land  or  who 
remain  at  home  have  sun-dial  horologes.  The 
magnetic  needle  pursues  and  searches  for  veins 
of  iron  in  mines:  with  its  help  mines  are  driven 
when  cities  are  besieged;  cannons  and  military 
engines  are  trained  at  night  in  the  desired  di¬ 
rections.  The  needle  is  of  use  for  topography, 
for  determining  the  areas  and  position  of  build¬ 
ings,  and  in  constructing  underground  aque¬ 
ducts.  On  it  depend  the  instruments  invented 
for  investigating  its  own  dip  and  its  own  varia¬ 
tion.  When  iron  is  to  be  quickened  by  the  load¬ 
stone,  let  it  be  clean  and  neat,  not  disfigured 
by  rust  or  dirt,  and  have  it  of  the  best  steel.  Let 
the  stone  be  wiped  dry  so  that  there  shall  be  no 
moisture,  and  scrape  it  gently  with  some  well- 
polished  iron  tool.  But  beating  it  with  a  ham¬ 
mer  is  of  no  avail.  And  let  the  naked  iron  be 
applied  to  the  naked  stone  and  rubbed  at  it  in 
such  a  way  that  they  may  come  into  closer  con¬ 
tact — not  in  order  that  the  corporeal  matter  of 
the  stone  may  be  joined  to  the  stone  and  stick 
to  it,  but  the  two  are  slightly  worn  away  by  the 


friction,  and  (useless  parts  being  ground  off) 
are  united  closely:  hence  arises  in  the  excited 
iron  a  grander  force.  In  the  figure,  A  shows  the 
best  mode  of  applying  the  versorium  to  the 
stone— its  point  touches  the  pole  and  is  directed 
toward  the  pole — B  is  a  passable  mode,  for 
though  it  is  at  a  little  distance  from  the  pole  it 
is  directed  toward  it;  so,  too,  G  is  only  a  passa¬ 


ble  mode,  the  point  being  turned  away  from 
the  pole;  D  Is  a  worse  mode  on  account  of  the 
greater  distance  from  the  pole;  Fis  a  bad  mode 
because  it  lies  on  a  parallel  across  the  stone;  the 
magnetic  needle  L  that  is  rubbed  on  the  equa¬ 
tor  is  of  no  value  and  plainly  is  negative  and 
forceless;  the  oblique  indirect  mode  G  and  the 
oblique  indirect  averse  H  are  both  bad. 

The  purpose  of  all  this  is  to  show  the  differ¬ 
ent  powers  of  a  globular  loadstone.  But  the  ar¬ 
tificers  often  use  a  stone  rather  tending  toward 
the  conical  form,  and,  therefore,  more  power¬ 
ful,  its  topmost  projection  being  the  pole,  at 
which  they  rub  the  needles.  Sometimes,  also, 
the  stone  has  at  the  top  and  above  the  very  pole 
an  artificial  cap  or  snout  of  steel  to  give  more 
strength;  on  this  cap  iron  versoriums  are 
rubbed,  and  thereafter  they  turn  to  that  same 
pole  as  though  they  had  been  magnetized  at 
that  part  without  the  cap. 

The  stone  should  be  of  good  size  and  strong; 
the  versorium,  even  if  it  be  long,  must  be  pretty 
thick,  not  too  thin,  with  moderate-sized  point, 
not  too  sharp,  though  the  energy  is  not  in  the 
point  itself  but  in  the  whole  needle.  Any  pow¬ 
erful,  large  loadstone  serves  well  for  rubbing 
versoriums,  though  sometimes,  owing  to  its 
powerfulness,  it  causes,  when  the  needle  is  long, 
some  dip  and  perturbation,  so  that  the  needle, 
that  before  friction  stood  in  equilibrium  in  the 
plane  of  the  horizon,  now,  after  friction  and 
excitation,  dips  with  one  end  as  low  as  the  ful¬ 
crum  on  which  it  is  supported  permits.  Hence 
in  the  case  of  a  long  versorium  the  end  that  is 


76  WILLIAM 

to  be  north  should  be,  before  friction,  a  little 
lighter  than  the  other  end,  so  that  it  may  remain 
in  exact  equipoise  after  friction.  But  a  versori- 
um  so  prepared  performs  its  function  poorly  at 
any  considerable  distance  from  the  equinoctial 
circle. 

When  the  versorium  has  been  magnetized, 
put  it  back  in  its  box,  and  do  not  let  it  come  in 
contact  with  other  magnetic  bodies,  nor  re¬ 
main  in  close  neighborhood  with  them,  lest  it 
become  unsteady  and  sluggish  through  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  opposite  forces,  whether  potent  or  fee¬ 
ble.  And  if  you  rub  the  other  end  of  the  needle 
at  the  opposite  pole  of  the  stone,  the  needle  will 
act  with  more  steadiness,  especially  if  it  be  ra¬ 
ther  long.  Iron  rubbed  with  loadstone  keeps 
constant  and  strong,  even  for  several  centuries, 
the  magnetic  power  awakened  in  it,  if  it  be 
laid  in  the  natural  position,  meridionally,  not 
on  a  parallel,  and  is  not  spoilt  by  rust  or  any 
external  ill  coming  from  the  ambient  medium. 

Porta  seeks  amiss  a  ratio  between  loadstone 
and  iron:  a  small  mass  of  iron,  saith  he,  cannot 
hold  a  great  measure  of  power,  for  it  is  wasted 
by  the  mighty  energy  of  the  loadstone.  Clearly, 
the  iron  takes  to  the  full  its  own  virtue,  though 
it  weigh  only  one  scruple  and  the  mass  of  the 
loadstone  more  than  loo  lbs.  It  is  vain  also  to 
make  the  versorium  rather  flat  at  the  end  that 
is  rubbed  in  order  that  it  may  become  a  better 
and  stronger  magnetic  body,  and  that  it  may 
better  seize  and  hold  certain  magnetic  particles, 
but  few  of  which  can  adhere  to  a  sharp  point; 
for  it  was  Porta’s  belief  that  the  energy  is  trans¬ 
mitted  and  retained  by  adhesion  of  particles  of 
the  loadstone,  like  hairs,  whereas  these  particles 
are  simply  scrapings  detached  by  the  iron  from 
the  softer  stone;  besides,  the  magnetized  iron 
points  steadily  north  and  south  if,  after  friction, 
it  be  scoured  with  sand  or  emery  or  other  ma¬ 
terial,  and  even  though  by  long-continued  fric¬ 
tion  its  outer  parts  be  ground  down  and  worn 
away.  In  stroking  the  loadstone  with  a  verso¬ 
rium  each  stroke  should  terminate  at  one  end 
of  the  versorium,  else,  if  the  stroke  is  made  to¬ 
ward  the  middle,  a  less  degree  of  verticity,  or 
none  at  all,  or  very  little  is  excited  in  the  iron. 
For  where  the  contact  ends  there  is  the  pole  and 
the  point  of  verticity.  To  produce  stronger,  ver¬ 
ticity  in  iron  by  friction  with  a  loadstone,  it  is 
necessary  in  northern  latitudes  to  turn  the  load¬ 
stone’s  true  north  pole  toward  the  zenith;  on 
such  pole  that  end  of  the  versorium  is  to  be 
rubbed  which  afterward  will  turn  to  the  earth’s 
north;  the  other  end  of  the  versorium  must  be 


GILBERT 

rubbed  on  the  south  pole  of  the  terrella  turned 
toward  the  earth;  so  excited,  it  will  incline 
to  the  south.  In  southern  latitudes,  below  the 
equator,  the  case  is  different,  and  the  cause  of 
the  difference  is  given  in  Book  ii.  34,  where  is 
shown  (by  means  of  a  combination  of  earth  and 
terrella)  why  the  poles  of  a  loadstone  are,  for 
diverse  reasons,  one  stronger  than  the  other. 

If  between  the  ends  of  two  loadstones  in  con¬ 
junction  and  equal  in  power,  shape,  and  mass, 
you  rub  a  versorium,  it  acquires  no  property. 


Ay  B  are  two  loadstones  conjoined  naturally  at 
their  opposite  ends;  C,  the  point  of  a  versorium, 
touched  simultaneously  by  both,  is  not  excited, 
if  the  loadstones  be  equal  (though  the  load¬ 
stones  are  connected  with  it  in  the  natural  way) ; 
but  if  the  loadstones  be  unequal,  force  is  gained 
from  the  stronger. 

In  magnetizing  a  versorium  with  a  loadstone 
begin  at  its  middle  and  so  draw  it  over  the  stone 
that  one  end  quits  the  stone  last;  finally  let  the 
application  be  continued  by  a  gentle  stroking 
of  the  stone  with  the  end  of  the  needle  for  a 
while,  say  one  or  two  minutes.  The  movement 
from  middle  to  end  must  not,  as  is  the  wont, 
be  repeated,  for  so  the  verticity  is  spoilt.  Some 
delay  is  needed,  for  though  the  energy  is  in¬ 
fused  and  the  iron  is  excited  instantaneously, 
still  the  verticity  is  more  steady  and  endures 
more  surely  in  the  iron  when  the  versorium  is 
left  near  the  loadstone  and  abandoned  at  rest 
for  a  proper  length  of  time;  although  an  armed 
stone  lifts  a  greater  weight  of  iron  than  an  un¬ 
armed,  still  a  versorium  is  not  more  powerfully 
magnetized  by  the  armed  than  by  the  unarmed 
stone.  Take  two  pieces  of  iron  wire,  of  equal 
length,  cut  off  the  same  coil  of  wire,  and  let  one 
be  excited  by  the  armed  end,  the  other  by  the 
unarmed  end:  it  will  be  found  that  they  begin 
to  move  and  make  a  perceptible  inclination  to¬ 
ward  the  loadstone  at  the  same  distances:  this 
can  be  ascertained  by  measurement  with  a  long 
rod.  But  objects  powerfully  excited  turn  quick¬ 
ly  to  the  pole;  those  that  are  feebly  excited  turn 
slowly  and  only  when  brought  nearer:  the  ex¬ 
periment  is  made  in  water  with  corks  of  equal 
size. 


BOOK  FOURTH 


CHAPTER  1.  Of  variation 

So  far  we  have  been  treating  of  direction  as  if 
there  were  no  such  thing  as  variation;  for  we 
chose  to  have  variation  left  out  and  disregarded 
in  the  foregoing  natural  history,  just  as  if  in  a 
perfect  and  absolutely  spherical  terrestrial  globe 
variation  could  not  exist.  But  inasmuch  as  the 
magnetic  direction  of  the  earth,  through  some 
fault  and  flaw,  does  depart  from  the  right  track 
and  the  meridian,  the  occult  and  hidden  cause 
of  variance  which  has  troubled  and  tormented, 
but  to  none  effect,  the  minds  of  many  has  to  be 
brought  to  light  by  us  and  demonstrated.  They 
whohitherto  have  written  of  the  magnetic  move¬ 
ments  have  recognized  no  difference  between 
direction  and  variation,  but  hold  that  there  is  one 
only  movement  of  the  magnetized  needle.  But 
the  true  direction  is  a  movement  of  the  mag¬ 
netic  body  to  the  true  meridian,  and  continu¬ 
ance  therein,  with  the  ends  pointing  to  the  re¬ 
spective  poles.  Yet  very  oft  it  happens,  afloat 
and  ashore,  that  a  magnetic  needle  does  not  look 
toward  the  true  pole,  but  is  drawn  to  a  point 
in  the  horizon  nigh  to  the  meridian,  and  that 
there  is  a  deflection  not  only  of  the  needle  and 
magnetized  iron  in  general  and  of  the  mariner’s 
compass,  but  also  of  a  terrella  on  its  float,  of 
iron  ore  and  ironstone,  and  of  magnetic  clays 
artificially  treated;  for  they  often  look  with 
their  poles  toward  points  different  from  the  mer¬ 
idian.  The  variation,  then,  as  observed  with  the 
aid  of  instruments  or  of  the  mariner’s  compass, 
is  an  arc  of  the  horizon  between  the  intersection 
of  the  horizon  by  the  meridian  and  the  term  of 
the  deflection  on  the  horizon,  or  the  range  of 
deviation  of  the  magnetized  body.  This  arc  var¬ 
ies  and  is  different  according  to  locality.  So  the 
terminus  of  the  variation  is  commonly  assigned 
to  a  great  circle — the  circle  of  variation,  as  it  is 
called  — and  a  magne  tic  me  ridian  passing  th  rough 
the  zenith  and  the  point  of  variation  on  the 
horizon. 

In  northern  terrestrial  latitudes  this  variation 
takes  place  either  in  the  direction  from  north 
toward  east,  or  from  north  toward  west;  in 
southern  latitudes,  in  like  manner,  it  is  from 


south  toward  east,  or  south  toward  west.  Hence 
in  northern  latitudes  we  must  heed  the  end  of 
the  needle  that  tends  north,  and  in  southern 
latitudes  the  end  looking  south:  this  navigators 
and  sciolists  seldom  understand,  for  on  both  sides 
of  the  equator  they  note  only  the  north  point 
terminal  of  the  compass,  or  the  one  that  looks 
north.  As  we  have  already  said,  every  move¬ 
ment  of  loadstone  and  needle,  every  turn  and 
dip,  and  their  standing  still,  are  effects  of  the 
magnetic  bodies  themselves  and  of  the  earth, 
mother  of  all,  which  is  the  fount  and  source  and 
producer  of  all  these  forces  and  properties.  Thus, 
then,  the  earth  is  the  cause  of  this  variation  and 
tendence  to  a  different  point  in  the  horizon;  but 
we  have  to  inquire  further  how  and  by  what 
potencies  it  acts. 

Here  we  must  first  reject  the  common  opin¬ 
ion  of  modern  writers  concerning  magnetic 
mountains  or  a  certain  magnetic  rock  or  a  dis¬ 
tant  phantom  pole  of  the  world  controlling  the 
movement  of  the  compass  or  of  the  versorium. 
This  opinion  Fracastorio  adopted  and  developed 
after  it  had  been  broached  by  others;  but  it  does 
not  agree  with  the  experiments  at  all.  For,  if  it 
were  correct,  in  different  places  on  land  and  sea 
the  variation  point  would  in  geometrical  ratio 
change  to  east  or  to  west,  and  the  versorium 
would  always  regard  the  magnetic  pole;  but  ex¬ 
perience  teaches  that  there  is  no  determinate 
pole,  no  fixed  terminus  of  variation  in  the  globe. 
For  the  arc  of  variation  changes  in  different 
ways  erratically,  so  that  in  different  meridians 
and  even  in  the  same  meridian,  and  when,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  opinion  of  recent  writers,  the 
magnetized  needle  would  deviate  toward  east, 
suddenly,  on  a  trifling  change  of  place,  it  goes 
from  north  toward  west,  as  in  the  northern  re¬ 
gions  near  Nova  Zembla.^  In  southern  latitudes 
also,  and  at  sea,  far  away  from  the  equator  and 
toward  the  Antarctic,  and  not  in  northern  lati¬ 
tudes  near  those  magnetic  mountains,  is  varia¬ 
tion  frequent  and  great. 

But  still  more  vain  and  silly  are  the  imagina¬ 
tions  of  other  writers — Cortesius,  for  example, 
who  speaks  of  a  motive  force  beyond  the  far- 

^  See  Book  iv.  i6. 


77 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


78 

thest  heavens;  Marsilius  Ficinus,  wlio  finds  the 
cause  of  variation  in  a  star  of  Ursa;  Petrus  Per- 
egrinus,  who  finds  it  in  the  pole  of  the  world; 
Cardan,  referring  it  to  the  rising  of  a  star  in  the 
tail  of  Ursa;  the  Frenchman  Bessard,  to  the  pole 
of  the  zodiac;  Livius  Sanutus,  to  a  certain  mag¬ 
netic  meridian;  Franciscus  Maurolycus,  to  a 
magnetic  island;  Scaliger,  to  the  heavens  and  to 
mountains;  the  Englishman  Robert  Norman, 
to  the  “respective  point. 

Quitting,  therefore,  those  opinions  that  are 
at  odds  wath  every-day  experience,  or  that  at 
least  are  by  no  means  proven,  let  us  look  for  the 
true  cause  of  variation.  7"he  Great  Loadstone, 
or  the  terrestrial  globe,  gives,  as  I  have  said,  to 
iron  a  north  and  south  direction;  magnetized 
iron  readily  conforms  itself  to  those  points.  But 
as  the  globe  of  earth  is  at  its  surface  broken  and 
uneven,  marred  by  matters  of  diverse  nature, 
and  hath  elevated  and  convex  parts  that  rise  to 
the  height  of  some  miles  and  that  are  uniform 
neither  in  matter  nor  in  constitution  but  oppo¬ 
site  and  different,  it  comes  about  that  this  entire 
earth-energy  turns  magnetic  bodies  at  its  peri¬ 
phery  tow'ard  stronger  massive  magnetic  parts 
that  are  more  powerful  and  that  stand  above  the 
general  level.  Wherefore  at  the  outmost  super¬ 
ficies  of  the  earth  magnetic  bodies  are  turned  a 
little  away  from  the  true  meridian.  And  since 
the  earth’s  surface  is  diversified  by  elevations  of 
land  and  depths  of  seas,  great  continental  lands, 
ocean,  and  seas  differing  in  every  way — while 
the  force  that  produces  all  magnetic  movements 
comes  from  the  constant  magnetic  earth-sub¬ 
stance,  which  is  strongest  in  the  most  massive 
continent  and  not  where  the  surface  is  water  or 
fluid  or  unsettled — it  follows  that  toward  a  mas¬ 
sive  body  of  land  or  continent  rising  to  some 
height  in  any  meridian  (passing  wdiether  through 
islands  or  seas)  there  is  a  measurable  magnetic 
leaning  from  the  true  pole  toward  east  or  west, 
t.e,y  toward  the  more  powerful  or  higher  and 
more  elevated  magnetic  part  of  the  earth’s  globe. 
For  as  the  earth’s  diameter  is  more  than  1700 
German  miles,  these  continents  may  rise  above 
the  general  superficies  to  a  height  equal  to  the 
depth  of  the  ocean  bed,  or  more  than  four  miles, 
and  yet  the  earth  keep  the  spherical  shape,  albe¬ 
it  slightly  uneven  at  the  top.  For  this  reason  a 
magnetic  body  under  the  action  of  the  wLole 
earth  is  attracted  toward  a  great  elevated  mass 
of  land  as  toward  a  stronger  body,  so  far  as 
the  perturbed  verticity  permits  or  abdicates  its 
right.  Yet  the  variation  takes  place  not  so  much 
because  of  these  elevated  but  less  perfect  parts 
^  See  Book  i.  1 ;  Book  111.  1 ;  Book  iv.  6. 


of  the  earth  and  these  continental  lands,  as 
because  of  the  inequality  of  the  magnetic 
globe  and  of  the  true  earth-substance  which 
projects  farther  in  continents  than  beneath 
sea-depths.  We  have  therefore  to  inquire  how 
the  demonstration  of  this  new  natural  philo¬ 
sophy  may  be  drawn  from  unquestionable  ex¬ 
periments. 

From  the  coast  of  Guinea  to  Cape  Verde,  the 
Canaries,  and  the  frontier  of  the  empire  of  Mo¬ 
rocco,  thence  along  the  coasts  of  Spain,  France, 
England,  Holland,  Germany,  Denmark,  Nor¬ 
way,  the  land  on  the  right  and  to  the  east  is  all 
continent,  vast  regions  forming  one  mass;  on 
the  left,  immense  seas  and  the  mighty  ocean  ex¬ 
tend  far  and  wide:  now  we  should  expect  that 
(as  has  in  fact  been  observed  by  diligent  investi¬ 
gators)  magnetic  bodies  would  deflect  a  little 
eastward  from  the  true  pole  toward  those  more 
powerful  and  extraordinary  elevations  of  the 
terrestrial  globe.  Very  different  is  the  case  on 
the  east  coasts  of  North  America,  for,  from  the 
region  of  Florida  through  Virginia  and  Norum- 
bega^  to  Cape  Race  and  away  to  the  north,  the 
needle  turns  to  the  west.  But  in  the  mid  spaces, 
so  to  speak,  for  example  in  the  western  Azores, 
it  regards  the  true  pole.  But  it  is  not  on  account 
of  that  meridian  or  of  the  coincidence  of  the 
meridian  with  any  magnetic  pole,  as  the  philos- 
ophastric  crew  suppose,  that  a  magnetic  body 
turns  in  like  manner  to  the  same  regions  of  the 
world ;  neither  does  the  variation  take  place  along 
the  entire  meridian,  for  on  the  same  meridian 
near  Brazil  the  case  is  very  different,  as  later  we 
will  show. 

Other  things  equal,  variation  is  less  along  the 
equator,  greater  in  high  latitude,  save  quite  nigh 
the  very  pole.  Hence  is  it  greater  off  the  coast  of 
Norway  and  Holland  than  off  Morocco  or  Guni- 
ea;  greater,  too,  at  Cape  Race  than  in  the 
ports  of  Norumbega  or  of  Virginia.  In  the  Guinea 
littoral,  the  magnetized  needle  inclines  to  the 
east  one-third  part  of  a  point;  in  the  Cape  Verde 
Islands  two  thirds;  in  England,  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Thames,  one  point;  the  higher  the  latitude 
the  stronger  the  moving  force,  and  the  masses 
of  land  toward  the  pole  exert  most  influence: 
all  this  is  easily  seen  in  a  terrella.  For  just  as, 
when  the  direction  is  true,  magnetic  bodies  tend 
toward  the  pole  (/.e.,  the  greater  force  and  the 
entire  earth  co-operating),  so  do  they  tend  a 
little  toward  the  more  powerful  elevated  parts 

2  Norumbega,  “the  lost  city  of  New  England,”  Its  site 
was  indicated  as  on  the  bank  of  the  Penobscot,  tlie  prov¬ 
ince  of  that  name  extending  from  the  Kennebec  River  to 
the  St.  Croix  River. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 

under  the  action  of  the  whole  and  in  virtue 
of  the  concurrent  action  of  their  iron. 


79 


CHAPTER  2.  That  variation  is  due  to  inequality 
among  the  earth's  elevations 

This  very  thing  is  clearly  demonstrated  on  the 
terrella  thus:  take  a  spherical  loadstone  imper- 
feet  in  any  part  or  decayed  (I  once  had  such  a 
stone  crumbled  away  at  a  part  of  its  surface  and 
so  having  a  depression  comparable  to  the  Atlan¬ 
tic  sea  or  great  ocean) ;  lay  on  it  bits  of  iron  wire 
two  barley-corns  in  length,  as  in  the  figure.  AB 
is  a  terrella  imperfect  in  parts  and  of  unequal 
power  on  the  circumference;  the  needles  E,  V 
do  not  vary  but  regard  the  pole  straight,  for 
they  are  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  sound  and 
strong  part  of  the  terrella  at  a  distance  from  the 
decayed  part :  the  surface  that  is  dotted  and  that 
is  marked  with  cross-lines  is  weaker.  Neither 
does  the  needle  O  vary  because  it  is  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  line  of  the  decayed  part,  but  turns  to  the 
pole  just  as  off  the  western  Azores,  ll  and  L 
vary,  for  they  incline  toward  the  sound  parts. 


And  as  this  is  shown  on  a  terrella  whose  surface 
has  sensible  imperfections,  so,  too,  in  terrellas 
that  are  whole  and  perfect,  for  often  one  part  of 
a  stone  is  of  greater  strength  on  the  out¬ 
side  than  another,  though  no  difference 
is  plain  to  sense.  With  such  a  terrella 
variation  is  demonstrated  and  the  strong 
points  are  discovered  in  the  following 
way:  Here  A  is  the  pole,  B  the  place  of 
variation,  C  the  more  powerful  region. 

The  horizontal  needle  at  B  varies  from 
the  pole  C-ward.  So  is  the  variation  shown  and 
the  regions  of  greater  force  recognized.  The 
more  powerful  surface  is  found  also  by  means  of 
a  slender  iron  wire  two  barley-corns  long:  for 


though  it  will  stand  upright  on  the  pole  of  the 
terrella  and  in  other  parts  will  lean  toward  the 
equator,  still  if  on  the  same  parallel  circle  it 
stands  more  nearly  erect  at  one  point  than  at 
another,  the  terrella’s  surface  has  more  power 
where  the  needle  is  the  more  erect;  and  also 


when  a  piece  of  iron  wire  laid  on  the  pole  in¬ 
clines  more  to  one  side  than  the  other.  For  ex¬ 


periment  take  a  piece  of  iron  wire  three  finger- 
widths  long,  resting  on  the  pole  A  so  that  its 
middle  lies  over  the  pole.  One  of  the  ends  turns 
toward  G  and  will  not  rest  in  position  toward 
B\  yet,  in  a  terrella  that  is  flawless  and  even  all 
over,  it  will  be  at  rest  on  the  pole  no  matter  to¬ 
ward  what  point  of  the  equator  it  be  directed. 
Or  make  another  experiment:  Suppose  two 
meridians  meeting  at  the  poles  A,  B  in  equal 
arcs  DA  and  C^;  at  their  extremities  D,  and  C, 
let  pieces  of  iron  wire  be  reared:  at  D  (which  is 
the  region  of  greater  force)  the  wire  will  be 
reared  more  near  perpendicular  than  at  C,  the 


region  of  less  force.  Thus  can  we  discern  the 
stronger  and  more  powerful  part  of  a  loadstone, 
else  not  recognizable  by  the  senses.  In  a  terrella 
that  is  perfect,  even,  and  alike  in  all  its  parts, 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


8o 

there  is  at  equal  distances  from  the  pole 
no  variation. 

Variation  may  be  shown  by  means  of  a  ter- 
rella  having  a  considerable  part  of  its  surface 

P 


projecting  a  little  above  the  rest:  such  terrella, 
though  not  decayed  nor  spoilt,  attracts  out  of 
the  true  direction,  its  whole  mass  operating.  The 
figure  shows  a  terrella  with  uneven  surface.  The 
demonstration  is  made  with  small  bars  or  short 
needles  placed  on  the  terrella:  they  turn  from 
the  terrella  toward  the  projecting  mass  and  the 
great  eminences.  In  this  way  is  verticity  dis¬ 
turbed  on  the  earth  by  the  great  continents 
which  mostly  rise  above  the  beds  of  the  seas 
and  which  at  times  cause  the  needle  to  deviate 
from  the  straight  track,  from  the  true  me¬ 
ridian.  The  tip  of  the  versorium  A  does  not 
point  toward  the  pole  P  if  there  be  a  large  pro¬ 
jection  B  on  the  terrella;  so,  too,  the  point  G 
varies  from  the  pole  because  of  the  projection 
F,  Midway  between  the  two  eminences,  the 
needle  G  points  to  the  true  pole,  because,  being 
equidistant  from  both  projections  B  and  P,  it 
deviates  to  neither  but  keeps  the  true  meridian, 
particularly  when  the  energy  of  the  projections 
is  equal.  But  elsewhere,  at  Ny  the  needle  varies 
from  the  pole  M  toward  the  eminence  //,  nor 
is  hindered  nor  stayed  nor  checked  by  the  small 
eminence  D  on  the  terrella,  which  is  like  some 
island  of  the  earth  in  the  ocean.  But  L  unhin¬ 
dered  tends  poleward. 

In  another  mode  may  variation  be  shown, 
whether  in  a  terrella  or  on  the  earth.  Let  A  be 
the  earth’s  pole;  Pits  equator;  Ca  parallel  circle 
at  latitude  30  degrees;  D  an  eminence  reaching 
poleward;  E  another  eminence  stretching  from 
the  pole  equatonvard.  Evidently  the  versorium 
F  in  the  middle  line  of  D  does  not  vary;  but  G 
deflects  very  much,  C  very  little  as  being  more 
remote  from  D,  So,  too,  the  needle  7,  placed 


directly  toward  P,  does  not  deflect  from  the 
pole:  but  L  and  M  turn  from  the  pole  toward 
the  eminence  E. 

CHAPTER  3.  Variation  is  constant  at  a  given  place 

As  the  needle  hath  ever  inclined  toward  east 
or  toward  west,  so  even  now  does  the  arc  of  vari¬ 
ation  continue  to  be  the  same  in  whatever  place 
or  region,  be  it  sea  or  continent;  so,  too,  will  it 
be  forevermore  unchanging,  save  there  should 
be  a  great  break-up  of  a  continent  and  annihila¬ 
tion  of  countries,  as  of  the  region  Atlantis,  where¬ 
of  Plato  and  ancient  writers  tell. 

The  constancy  of  the  variation  and  the  re¬ 
gard  of  the  versorium  toward  a  fixed  point  of 
the  horizon  in  each  region  is  shown  by  laying  a 
very  small  versorium  on  a  terrella  of  uneven 
surface:  the  needle  always  diverges  from  the  me¬ 
ridian  over  an  equal  arc.  It  is  shown  also  by  the 
inclination  of  the  needle  toward  a  second  load¬ 
stone,  though  in  truth  this  is  done  by  a  changed 
direction  of  all  within  the  earth  and  the  terrella. 
Lay  upon  a  plane  surface  a  versorium  with  its 
point  looking  toward  A,  north;  bring  alongside 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


the  loadstone,  B  at  such  distance  as  to  make  the 
versorium  turn  to  C  and  no  further.  Move  the 
needle  of  the  versorium  as  often  as  you  will  (yet 
without  stirring  either  its  case  or  the  loadstone) 
and  the  needle  will  ever  surely  return  to  the 
point  C.  Thus  if  you  so  hold  the  stone  as  to 
make  the  needle  turn  to  E,  its  point  ever  returns 
to  E  and  not  to  any  other  point  of  the  compass. 
Just  so,  by  reason  of  the  position  of  countries 
and  the  differing  nature  of  the  uppermost  parts 
of  the  earth’s  globe  (certain  more  magnetic  pro- 
j  ec  tions  of  the  ter  rest  rial  sphere  prevailing) ,  va  ri- 
ation  is  ever  fixed  in  a  given  place,  but  it  differs 
and  is  unequal  between  one  place  and  another, 
for  the  true  and  polar  direction,  having  its  birth 
in  the  entire  globe  of  earth,  is  slightly  diverted 
toward  particular  eminences  of  great  magnetic 
force  on  the  broken  surface. 

CHAPTER  4.  The  arc  of  variation  does  not  differ  ac¬ 
cording  to  distance  between  places 

On  the  broad  ocean,  while  a  ship  is  borne  by 
favouring  wind  along  the  same  parallel,  if  the 
variation  be  reduced  just  one  degree  in  a  voyage 
of  too  miles,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  next  loo 
miles  will  reduce  it  another  degree.  For  the 
needle  varies  according  to  the  position  and  con¬ 
formation  of  the  land  and  the  magnetic  force; 
also  according  to  distance.  For  example,  when  a 
ship  from  the  Scilly  Islands  bound  for  New¬ 
foundland  has  proceeded  so  far  that  the  compass 
points  to  the  true  magnetic  pole,  then,  as  she 
sails  on,  the  borrholybic  variation  begins,  but 
faintly  and  with  small  divergence.  But  after  a 
while  the  arc  increases  in  a  higher  ratio  as  equal 
distances  are  traversed,  till  the  ship  comes  nigh 
the  continent,  when  the  variation  is  very  great. 
Yet  before  she  comes  quite  to  land  or  enters 
port,  while  at  some  distance  away,  the  arc  is 
again  lessened  a  little.  But  if  the  ship  in  her 
course  departs  much  from  that  parallel,  either  to 
north  or  south,  the  needle  will  vary  more  or  less 
according  to  the  position  of  the  land  and  the 
latitude  of  the  region;  for, other  things  equal,  the 
higher  the  latitude  the  greater  the  variation. 

CHAPTER  5.  An  island  in  ocean  does  not  alter  the 
variation;  neither  do  mines  of  loadstone 

Islands,  albeit  they  are  more  magnetic  than 
the  seas,  still  do  not  alter  magnetic  direction  nor 
variation.  For  direction  being  a  movement  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  energy  of  the  entire  earth,  and  not 
due  to  the  attractive  force  of  any  prominence 
but  to  the  controlling  power  and  verticity  of 
the  whole  mass,  therefore  variation  (which  is  a 
perturbation  of  the  directive  force),  is  a  wan¬ 


8i 

dering  from  the  true  verticity  and  arises  out  of 
the  great  inequalities  of  the  earth,  by  reason  of 
which  the  earth  itself,  when  very  large  and  pow¬ 
erful  magnetic  bodies  are  present,  has  but  little 
power  of  turning  away  magnetic  bodies  that  re¬ 
volve  freely.  As  for  the  wonders  that  some  do 
report  about  the  island  of  Elba :  loadstones  do 
there  abound,  but,  nevertheless,  the  versorium 
(or  the  mariner’s  compass)  makes  no  special  in¬ 
clination  toward  it  when  ships  sail  by  in  the  Tyr¬ 
rhenian  Sea.  The  reasons  already  given  suffi¬ 
ciently  account  for  this;  but,  furthermore,  a 
reason  may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  energy 
of  minor  loadstones  reaches  of  itself  but  little  be¬ 
yond  their  own  site;  for  variation  is  not  pro¬ 
duced  by  a  pulling  to,  as  they  would  make  it 
who  have  thought  out  magnetic  poles.  Besides, 
mines  of  loadstone  are  only  agnate,  not  innate, 
in  the  true  earth-substance,  and,  therefore,  the 
globe  as  a  whole  does  not  heed  them;  neither  are 
magnetic  bodies  borne  toward  them,  as  is  proved 
in  the  diagram  of  prominences. 

CHAPTER  6.  That  variation  and  direction  are  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  controlling  force  of  the  earth  and  the  ro¬ 
tatory  magnetic  nature,  not  by  an  attraction  or  a  coi¬ 
tion,  or  by  other  occult  cause 

Inasmuch  as  the  loadstone  is  deemed  by  the 
philosophizers  of  the  vulgar  sort  to  seize  and 
snatch  objects  away,  as  it  were,  and  pretenders 
to  science  have,  in  fact,  noticed  no  other  prop¬ 
erties  save  this  much-lauded  force  of  attraction, 
therefore  they  have  supposed  that  the  whole 
movement  to  north  and  south  is  produced  by 
some  natural  force  soliciting  bodies.  But  the  Eng¬ 
lishman  Robert  Norman  first  strove  to  show  that 
this  is  not  done  by  attraction;  he,  therefore, 
originated  the  idea  of  the  “respective  point” 
looking,  as  it  were,  toward  hidden  principles, 
and  held  that  toward  this  the  magnetized  needle 
ever  turns,  and  not  toward  any  attractional 
point;  but  he  was  greatly  in  error,  albeit  he  ex¬ 
ploded  the  ancient  false  opinion  about  attrac¬ 
tion.  Norman  proves  his  theory  as  follows:  take 
a  round  vessel  full  of  water;  on  the  mid  surface 
of  the  water  float  a  small  bit  of  iron  wire  sup- 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


82 

ported  by  just  so  much  cork  as  u  ill  keep  it  afloat 
while  the  water  is  in  equilibrium;  the  wire  must 
have  been  first  magnetized  so  as  to  show  plainly 
the  variation  point  D.  Let  it  remain  in  the  water 
for  a  while.  Clearly  the  wire  with  its  cork  does 
not  move  toward  the  rim  D  of  the  vessel,  as  it 
would  do  if  attraction  came  to  the  iron  from  D, 
and  the  cork  would  move  from  its  place.  This 
assertion  of  the  Englishman  Robert  Norman  is 
demonstrable,  and  it  does  seem  to  do  away  w  ith 
attraction,  inasmuch  as  the  iron  remains  in  the 
still  water  both  in  the  direction  toward  the  very 
pole  (if  the  direction  be  true)  and  in  variation 
and  irregular  direction;  and  it  revolves  on  its 
iron  centre,  and  is  not  borne  toward  the  vessel’s 
rim.  Yet  the  direction  is  not  produced  by  at¬ 
traction,  but  by  a  disposing  and  conversory  pow¬ 
er  existing  in  the  earth  as  a  whole,  not  in  a  pole 
or  any  attrahent  part  of  the  stone,  neither  in 
any  mass  projecting  beyond  the  circle  of  the 
periphery,  so  that  the  variation  should  result 
because  of  the  attraction  of  that  mass.  Besides, 
the  directive  force  of  the  stone  and  of  iron,  and 
their  natural  power  of  revolving  on  their  centre, 
produce  the  movement  of  direction  and  of  colli- 
mation,  in  which  is  included  also  the  motion  of 
dip  or  inclination.  Nor  does  the  earth’s  pole  at¬ 
tract  as  though  the  force  of  the  globe  resided  in 
the  pole  only:  the  magnetic  force  exists  in  the 
whole,  but  in  the  pole  it  is  preeminent  and  sur¬ 
passing.  Therefore  that  the  cork  abides  quietly 
in  the  midst,  and  that  the  magnetic  needle  does 
not  move  toward  the  rim  of  the  vessel,  is  a  fact 
in  accord  and  agreement  with  the  loadstone’s 
nature,  as  is  shown  with  the  aid  of  a  terrella. 
Here  a  little  iron  bar,  placed  on  the  stone  at  C, 
clings  there,  nor  is  it  pulled  farther  away  by  the 
pole  A  or  by  the  parts  near  the  pole.  So,  too,  it 
continues  at  D  and  takes  direction  toward  the 
pole  A,  but  it  sticks  at  Z),  and  dips  also  toward 


D  in  virtue  of  its  power  of  rotation  whereby  it 
conforms  itself  to  the  terrella.  On  this  point  we 
shall  treat  further  when  we  consider  inclination 
or  the  dip  of  the  compass. 


CHAPTER  7.  Why  the  variation  due  to  this  lateral 
cause  is  not  greater  than  hitherto  it  has  been  observed 
to  be,  seldom  appearing  to  amount  to  two  points  of 
the  compass,  except  near  the  pole 

The  earth,  by  reason  of  lateral  elevations  of  the 
more  energic  globe,  causes  iron  and  loadstone  to 
diverge  a  few  degrees  from  the  true  pole  or  true 
meridian.  For  example,  here  in  England,  at  Lon¬ 
don,  it  varies  1 degrees;  in  some  other  places 
the  variation  is  somewhat  greater,  yet  in  no  re¬ 
gion  does  the  end  of  the  needle  diverge  very 
many  degrees  more  from  the  meridian.  For  as 
the  needle  always  gets  its  direction  from  the  true 
verticity  of  the  earth,  so  the  polar  nature  of  a 
continent  tends  poleward,  even  as  does  that  of 
the  whole  globe  of  earth;  and  though  the  mass 
of  a  continent  may  turn  magnetic  bodies  away 
from  the  meridian,  still  the  verticity  of  that  same 
land  (as  of  the  whole  earth  also)  controls  and  d.- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


rects  those  bodies  so  that  they  shall  not  turn 
eastward  in  too  large  an  arc.  It  were  not  easy  to 
determine  according  to  any  general  method  how 
great  the  arc  of  variation  is  in  every  place,  nor 
how  many  degrees  and  minutes  it  covers  on  the 
horizon,  because  it  becomes  greater  or  less  ac¬ 
cording  to  divers  causes.  For  we  must  take  ac¬ 
count  of  the  force  of  true  verticity  of  each  place 
and  of  the  elevated  regions,  also  of  the  distances 
of  those  regions  from  the  place  under  considera¬ 
tion  and  from  the  world’s  poles;  and  these  dis¬ 
tances  are  to  be  compared — a  thing  that  cannot 
be  done  with  precision.  Still,  by  our  method, 
the  variation  is  ascertained  in  such  way  that  no 
serious  error  is  left  to  perturb  the  course  of  a 
sea-voyage.  Were  the  positions  of  masses  of  land 
uniform,  if  the  land  lay  on  a  meridian  line,  and 
did  not  present  a  broken  and  indented  contour, 
the  variations  near  the  land  would  be  without 
complexity,  as  in  the  figure. 

This  is  demonstrated  with  the  aid  of  a  long 
loadstone  whose  poles  are  at  the  ends  /I,  B:  the 
middle  of  the  loadstone  and  the  equinoctial  is 
CD;  and  the  lines  GH  and  EF  are  meridians  on 
which  are  arranged  versoriums,  the  deviations 
of  which  are  greater  the  greater  their  distance 
from  the  equator.  But  the  inequalities  of  the 
seaboard  parts  of  the  habitable  globe,  the  great 
promontories,  the  wide  gulfs,  the  mountainous 
and  the  more  elevated  regions,  and  the  more  un¬ 
even  and  precipitous  regions  make  the  varia¬ 
tions  more  difficult  of  determination,  and  in  high 
latitudes  less  certain  and  more  irregular. 

CHAPTER  8.  Of  the  construction  of  the  common  mar- 
iner's  compass,  and  of  the  different  compasses  of var¬ 
ious  nations 

In  a  round  wooden  box  (bowl),  having  its  top 
covered  over  with  glass,  a  fly-card  (versorium) 
rests  on  a  pretty  long  pin  fixed  in  the  middle. 
The  glass  cover  keeps  out  wind  and  draughts  of 
air  produced  by  outer  causes.  All  that  is  within 
can  be  distinctly  seen  through  the  glass.  The 
versorium  (rotating  part)  is  circular,  made  of 
light  material,  as  pasteboard,  to  the  under  side 
of  which  is  attached  the  magnetized  iron  or  nee¬ 
dle.  On  the  upper  side  32  spaces  (points  as  they 
are  called)  are  distributed  to  as  many  mathe¬ 
matical  intervals  in  the  horizon,  or  winds,  which 
are  distinguished  by  certain  marks  and  by  a  lily 
indicating  the  north.  The  compass-box  is  sus¬ 
pended  in  equilibrium  in  the  plane  of  the  hori¬ 
zon,  within  a  ring  of  brass,  which  is  also  pivoted 
(equilibrated)  in  another  ring  suspended  in  a 
roomy  stand,  a  leaden  weight  being  attached  to 
the  box  so  that  it  shall  remain  in  the  plane  of 


83 

the  horizon  though  the  ship  may  be  tossed  by 
the  sea  in  all  directions.  There  are  either  two 
magnetized'iron  bars  (with  ends  united)  or  one 
piece  of  a  rather  oval  shape  with  the  ends  pro¬ 
jecting:  this  style  is  the  surer  and  quicker  of  the 
two  in  performing  its  function.  This  is  to  be  so 
fitted  to  the  pasteboard  disk  (or  card  of  the  com¬ 
pass)  that  the  centre  of  the  disk  shall  be  in  the 
middle  of  the  magnetized  iron.  But  as  variation 
begins  in  the  horizon  from  the  point  where  the 
meridian  intersects  it  at  right  angles,  therefore, 
on  account  of  the  variation,  instrument  makers 
in  different  countries  and  cities  inscribe  the  com¬ 
pass  variously,  and  have  different  ways  of  at¬ 
taching  the  magnetized  iron  to  the  card  where¬ 
on  are  marked  the  bounds  of  the  32  spaces  or 
points. 

There  are  in  general  use  in  Europe  four  differ¬ 
ent  constructions  and  forms  of  compass.  First, 
the  form  adopted  throughout  the  Mediterran¬ 
ean,  and  in  Sicily,  Genoa,  and  the  Venetian  re¬ 
public.  In  all  of  these  compasses  the  pieces  of 
iron  are  so  attached  beneath  to  the  rotating  card 
that  (where  there  is  no  variation)  they  turn  to 
the  true  points  of  north  and  south.  Hence  the 
mark  for  north,  designated  by  a  lily,  always  in¬ 
dicates  exactly  the  point  of  variation:  for  the 
point  of  the  lily  on  the  card,  together  with  the 
ends  of  the  pieces  of  magnetized  iron  beneath, 
come  to  a  standstill  at  the  point  of  variation. 
Another  form  of  compass  is  that  of  Danzig,  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  Baltic  Sea  and  in  the  Netherlands. 
Here  the  magnetized  iron  underneath  diverges 
three-fourths  of  one  point  eastward  from  the 
lily;  for  a  voyage  to  Russia  the  divergence  (rec¬ 
ognized  difference)  is  two-thirds.  But  the  com¬ 
passes  made  at  Seville,  Lisbon,  La  Rochelle,  Bor¬ 
deaux,  Rouen,  as  well  as  throughout  all  England, 
have  an  interval  of  one-half  of  a  point. 

Out  of  these  diflerences  have  grown  very  se¬ 
rious  errors  in  seafaring  and  in  the  science  of 
navigation.  For,  after  the  directional  positions 
of  sea-coasts,  of  promontories,  ports,  islands,  have 
been  found  by  the  aid  of  the  compass,  and  the 
tides  of  the  seas  or  the  times  of  full  sea  have  been 
determined  from  the  moon’s  position  above  one 
or  another  point  of  the  compass  (as  the  phrase 
is),  we  have  still  to  inquire  in  what  country  or 
according  to  what  country’s  usage  the  compass 
was  constructed  by  which  the  directions  of  said 
places  and  the  times  of  the  marine  tides  were 
observed  and  determined.  For  the  mariner,  who, 
using  British  compass,  should  follow  the  direc¬ 
tions  of  the  Mediterranean  marine  charts,  must 
needs  stray  far  from  his  true  course;  so,  one  who 
should  use  an  Italian  compass  in  the  North  Sea, 


84  WILLIAM 

the  German  Sea,  or  the  Baltic,  in  connection 
with  the  marine  charts  commonly  used  in  those 
parts,  would  oft  stray  from  the  right  direction. 
These  differences  were  introduced  by  reason  of 
the  unlike  variations,  that  navigators  might  es- 
cape  grave  errors  in  those  parts  of  the  world. 
Yet  Petrus  Nonius  seeks  the  meridian  with  a 
mariner’s  compass  or  versorium  (the  Spaniards 
call  it  a  needle),  taking  no  account  of  variation; 
and  he  brings  forward  many  geometric  proofs 
that  rest  on  utterly  vicious  foundations:  for  he 
had  small  acquaintance  or  experience  of  things 
magnetic.  In  like  manner  Pedro  de  Medina,  who 
does  not  accept  variation,  has  with  many  errors 
disgraced  the  art  of  navigation. 

CHAPTER  9.  Whether  terrestrial  longitude  can  be 
found  from  variation 

That  were  a  welcome  service  to  mariners  and 
would  advance  geography  very  much.  But  Pot' 
ta  (vii.  38)  is  deluded  by  a  vain  hope  and  by  a 
baseless  theory.  For  he  thinks  that,  in  moving 
along  a  meridian,  the  needle  observes  order  and 
proportion,  so  that  the  nearer  it  is  to  east  the 
more  it  will  deviate  eastward,  and,  according  as 
you  advance  west,  the  needle  takes  a  westerly 
direction:  all  of  which  is  false  as  false  can  be. 
Porta  thinks  he  has  found  a  true  index  of  longi- 
tude;  but  he  is  mistaken.  Taking,  however,  and 
assuming  for  true  these  premises,  he  constructs 
a  large  compass  showing  degrees  and  minutes  for 
observing  these  proportional  changes  of  the  nee¬ 
dle.  But  his  principles  are  erroneous  and  illogi- 
cally  taken  and  very  poorly  studied;  for  a  ver¬ 
sorium  does  not  vary  more  to  the  east  because 
it  is  carried  to  the  east;  and  though  in  the  coun¬ 
tries  of  western  Europe  and  the  seas  adjoining 
the  variation  is  to  the  east,  and  beyond  the  Azores 
it  is  changed  a  little  toward  the  west,  neverthe¬ 
less  variation  is  in  divers  ways  ever  uncertain, 
both  because  of  latitude  and  longitude  and  be¬ 
cause  of  approach  to  great  masses  of  land,  also 
because  of  the  altitude  of  dominant  terrestrial 
elevation;  but  it  does  not  follow  the  rule  of  any 
meridian,  as  we  have  already  shown.  Livius  San- 
utus  sorely  tortures  himself  and  his  readers  with 
like  vanities.  As  for  the  opinion  of  the  common 
run  of  philosophizers  and  mariners,  that  the  me¬ 
ridian  which  passes  through  the  Azores  is  the 
limit  of  variation,  so  that  on  the  opposite  side 
of  that  meridian  a  magnetic  body  will  point  to 
the  poles  exactly  as  at  the  Azores — an  opinion 
held  also  by  Joannes  Baptista  Benedictus  and 
sundry  other  writers  on  the  art  of  navigation 
— it  is  in  no  wise  true.  Stevinus  (quoted  by 
Hugo  Grotius),  in  his  Porttium  inveniendarum 


GILBERT 

ratione^  distinguishes  variation  according  to  mer¬ 
idians.  “In  the  island  of  Corvo,”^  says  he,  “the 
magnetic  pointer  indicates  the  true  north,  but  the 
farther  one  advances  thence  toward  the  east  the 
more  will  he  see  the  needle  ‘easting’,  till  he  comes 
to  within  one  mile  of  Plymouth  on  theeast,  where 
the  variation,  reaching  maximum,  is  13  deg.  24 
min.  Then  theanatolism  (easting)  begins  to  grow 
less  as  far  as  Helmshud,  which  place  is  not  far 
from  North  Cape  in  Finmark:  there  the  north 
is  pointed  to  again.  There  are  60  degrees  of  long¬ 
itude  between  Corvo  and  Helmshud,  but  the 
variation  is  greatest  at  Plymouth,  whose  longi¬ 
tude  is  30  degrees.”  But  though  these  statements 
are  in  part  true,  still  along  the  entire  meridian 
of  the  island  of  Corvo  the  compass  does  by  no 
means  point  due  north.  Neither  in  the  whole 
meridian  of  Plymouth  at  other  places  is  the  var¬ 
iation  13  deg.  24  min.,  nor  in  other  parts  of  the 
meridian  of  Helmshud  does  the  needle  point  to 
the  true  pole.  For,  on  the  meridian  passing 
through  Plymouth  at  lat.  60  deg.,  the  north  by 
east  variation  is  greater;  in  lat.  40  deg.  it  is  much 
less;  in  lat.  20  deg.  it  is  very  small  indeed.  On 
the  meridian  of  Corvo,  though  the  variation 
near  the  island  is  nil,  yet  in  lat.  55  deg.  the  vari¬ 
ation  north  by  west  is  about  y^\  in  lat.  20  deg. 
the  variation  is  ^  of  a  point  toward  the  east. 
Hence  the  bounds  of  variation  are  not  properly 
defined  by  great  meridian  circles,  and  far  less  are 
the  ratios  of  increase  or  decrease  toward  a  given 
region  of  the  heavens  investigated  by  that  meth¬ 
od.  Therefore  the  rules  of  clattumen  (declining) 
or  auxanomen  (increasing) ,  anatolism  (easting)  or 
dysism  (westing),  cannot  possibly  be  found  by 
that  device.The  groundsof  variation  in  the  south¬ 
ern  regions  of  the  earth,  which  Stevinus  there¬ 
after  searches  into  in  the  same  way,  are  utterly 
vain  and  absurd;  they  have  been  put  forth  by 
some  Portuguese  mariners,  but  they  do  not  agree 
with  investigations :  equally  absurd  are  sundry 
observations  wrongly  accepted  as  correct.  But 
the  method  of  finding  the  port  on  long  voyages  to 
distant  parts  by  means  of  accurate  knowledge  of 
the  variation  (a  method  invented  by  Stevinus 
and  recorded  by  Grotius)  is  of  great  importance, 
if  only  fit  instruments  be  at  hand  wherewith  the 
deviation  may  positively  be  ascertained  at  sea. 

CHAPTER  10.  Why  invarious  places  near  the  pole  the 

variations  are  much  ampler  than  in  lower  latitudes 

On  the  equator  or  near  it,  the  variation  of  a 
needle  is  often  trifling;  not  unusually  it  is  null. 
In  higher  latitudes,  as  60,  70,  80  degrees,  the 

'  One  of  the  Azores,  the  northernmost  of  the  whole 
group,  lying  ten  miles  north  of  Flores. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


variations  are  not  infrequently  very  great.  The 
reason  of  this  is  found  partly  in  the  nature  of 
the  earth,  partly  in  the  position  of  the  versori- 
um.  The  earth  causes  magnetic  bodies  to  rotate 
and  directs  them  poleward  strongly  at  the  equa¬ 
tor;  at  the  poles  there  is  no  direction,  but  only 
fast  coition  of  terminals  that  agree.  Hence  direc¬ 
tion  is  weaker  at  the  poles,  because  the  versori- 
um,  by  reason  of  its  tendency  to  turn  to  the 
pole,  dips  greatly,  and  is  but  feebly  directed*; 
but  the  force  of  the  lands  and  eminences  is 
strong,  with  an  energy  proceeding  from  the  en¬ 
tire  earth,  and,  besides,  the  causes  of  variation 
are  nearer:  therefore  the  versorium  deflects 
more  to  those  eminences.  It  must  be  known 
also  that  the  direction  of  a  versorium  poised 
on  a  needle  toward  the  plane  of  the  horizon  is 
much  stronger  at  the  equator  than  anywhere 
else  by  reason  of  the  lie  of  the  vers¬ 
orium;  and  in  proportion  as  latitude  in¬ 
creases  the  direction  is  less  strong,  for  at 
the  equator  the  versorium  is  directed 
naturally  toward  the  plane  of  the  hori¬ 
zon,  but  in  other  places  it  is  forced  to  be 
in  equilibrium  and  remains  in  equilibri¬ 
um  because  of  an  external  force:  by  its 
nature  it  dips  under  the  horizon  as  the 
latitude  increases,  as  will  be  shown  in  the 
Book  on  Inclination  or  Dip.  Wherefore 
direction  becomes  weaker  and  at  the  pole 
itself  is  null.  For  this  reason  a  weak  di¬ 
rection  is  easily  overcome  by  powerful 
causes  of  variation,  and  near  the  pole  the 
needle  deflects  more  from  the  meridian. 

This  is  demonstrated  with  a  terrella,  on 
which  is  put  an  iron  wire  of  two  finger- 
breadths:  the  wire  is  quickly  and  strong¬ 
ly  directed  toward  the  poles  on  a  meri¬ 
dian,  but  in  the  intervals  between  equa¬ 
tor  and  pole  it  is  directed  weakly; 
herein  we  may  see  the  great  tendency 
to  variation  near  the  poles. 

CHAPTER  11.  Cardan's  error  in  seeling  to 
determine  the  distance  of  the  earth's  centre 
from  the  centre  of  the  world  by  means  of  the 
loadstone  (in  his  De  proportionibus,  v) 

How  very  easy  it  is  to  make  mistakes 
and  errors  in  the  absence  of  trustworthy 
experiments,  while  investigating  the  hid¬ 
den  causes  of  things,  is  well  shown  by  a 
gross  blunder  of  Cardan,  who  thinks  he 
has  discovered  the  distances  of  the  cen¬ 
tres  of  the  earth  and  the  world  through 
the  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle 
over  nine  degrees;  for  he  believed  that 


85 

the  variation  point  in  the  horizon  is  everywhere 
distant  eastward  nine  degrees  from  due  north: 
on  this  basis  he  establishes  a  demonstrative  ratio 
of  the  different  centres. 

CHAPTER  12.  Of  finding  the  amount  of  the  varia^ 
tion;  what  the  quantity  is  of  the  arc  of  the  horizon 
from  its  arctic  or  antarctic  intersection  by  a  meridian 
to  the  point  toward  which  the  needle  turns 

The  true  meridian  is  the  principal  basis  of  the 
whole  question;  when  that  is  surely  known  it  is 
easy,  with  the  mariner’s  compass  (when  you 
know  its  construction  and  how  the  iron  bars  are 
fixed  in  it),  or  with  any  large  horizontal  versori¬ 
um,  to  show  the  arc  of  variation  on  the  horizon. 
A  variation  compass  of  good  size,  after  you  have 
made  two  observations  of  the  sun  before  and 
after  noon,  shows  the  variation  by  the  shadow: 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


86 

the  sun's  altitude  is  observed  with  a  radius^  or 
with  a  large  quadrant.  On  account  of  the  great¬ 
er  si/e  of  the  instrument,  there  is  an  easier  and 
surer  way  of  finding  the  variation  on  shore.  Get 
a  thick  plank  of  suitable  timber,  two  feet  long, 
sixteen  inches  broad;  on  it  describe  several  semi¬ 
circles,  as  in  the  accompanying  plate,  but  more 
numerous.  In  the  centre  erect  perpendicularly 
a  brass  stilus;  let  there  be  also  a  rotatory  pointer 
reaching  from  the  centre  to  the  outermost  semi¬ 
circle,  and  a  magnetized  versorium  in  a  box  with 
glass  cover.  Then  when  the  plank  is  placed  ac¬ 
curately  to  the  level  of  the  horizon  by  the  plane 
instrument  with  its  perpendicular,  turn  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  the  pointer  toward  the  north,  so  that 
the  versorium  shall  rest  just  on  the  midline  of  its 
case,  which  regards  the  point  of  variation  in  the 
horizon.  After\vards,  at  some  convenient  hour 
in  the  morning — 8  or  9  o’clock — observe  the 
point  of  the  shadow  cast  by  the  stilus  when  it 
reaches  the  nearest  semicircle,  and  mark  with 
chalk  or  ink  the  place  of  the  shadow’s  point; 
now  bring  the  pointer  round  to  that  mark  and 
note  with  another  mark  the  number  of  the  de¬ 
gree  in  the  horizon  shown  by  the  pointer.  In  the 
afternoon,  see  when  the  extremity  of  the  shad¬ 
ow  again  reaches  the  periphery  of  the  same  semi¬ 
circle,  and,  bringing  the  pointer  around  to  the 
tip  of  the  shadow,  find  the  degree  at  the  other 
side  of  the  lily.  From  the  difference  in  degrees, 
you  find  the  variation:  the  less  being  substracted 
from  the  greater,  the  half  of  the  remainder  is 
the  arc  of  variation.  The  amount  of  variation  is 
sought  to  be  determined  with  many  other  in¬ 
struments  and  in  many  other  ways,  in  conjunc¬ 
tion  with  the  mariner’s  compass — by  means  of  a 
globe,  number,  and  by  the  ratio  of  triangles  and 
of  sines,  the  latitude  being  known  and  one  ob¬ 
servation  of  the  altitude  of  the  sun  being  made. 
But  these  methods  and  means  are  of  little  ad¬ 
vantage,  for  it  is  useless  to  seek  in  roundabout 
ways  and  by  intricate  paths  what  you  may  find 
more  quickly  and  more  surely  by  taking  a  short¬ 
er  road.  The  whole  trick  consists  in  proper  use 
ot  the  instruments  by  which  the  sun’s  position 
is  ascertained  readily  and  quickly  (as  the  sun 
docs  not  stand  still  but  moves  on),  for  either 
the  hand  trembles,  or  the  eyesight  is  defective, 
or  the  instrument  does  not  work  aright.  Besides, 
to  observe  the  sun’s  altitude  on  both  sides  of 
the  meridian,  is  as  easy  as  to  observe  it  on  one 
side  only  and  at  the  same  time  to  ascertain  the 
elevation  of  the  pole.  And  he  v  ho  can  take  one 

^  Radius  astronomiciis — measuring- rod,  same  as  radio¬ 
meter.  An  old  instrument  for  measuring  angles;  the  cross- 
staff;  Jacob’s-staff;  a  kind  of  astrolabe. 


altitude  with  an  instrument  can  take  another, 
and  if  the  one  is  doubtful,  the  whole  work  with 
globe,  number,  sines,  and  triangles  is  thrown 
away.  Nevertheless,  these  exercises  of  mathe¬ 
matical  minds  are  praiseworthy.  It  is  easy  for 
anyone  who  stands  on  the  land,  by  means  of  ac¬ 
curate  observations  and  with  the  use  of  fit  in¬ 
struments,  to  ascertain  the  variation,  especially 
in  a  rather  right  sphere;  but  at  sea,  in  view  of 
the  motion  and  the  turning  of  the  waters,  ex¬ 
periments  cannot  be  made  with  exactness  as  to 
degrees  and  minutes,  and,  in  fact,  with  the  in¬ 
struments  in  common  use,  hardly  within  one 
third  or  one  half  of  a  point,  particularly  in  high 
latitude:  hence  so  many  incorrect  and  faulty 
records  of  observations  by  navigators.  As  for  us, 
w  e  have  contrived  a  method  of  finding  the  vari¬ 
ation,  by  means  of  a  convenient,  handy  instru¬ 
ment,  from  the  rising  of  certain  stars,  the  rising 
or  setting  of  the  sun,  in  northern  regions,  from 
the  pole-star;  for,  at  sea,  wdten  the  ship  is  tossed 
by  the  weaves,  even  the  skilled  observer  deter¬ 
mines  the  variation  more  surely  w  ith  the  aid  of 
a  simple  instrument  and  one  of  no  great  preci¬ 
sion,  Such  an  instrument  is  constructed  as  fol¬ 
lows  : 

After  the  pattern  of  a  true  and  meridional 
mariner's  compass  (w  ith  a  bare  versorium  or  wfith 
a  versorium  fastened  to  a  card  circle),  make  an 
instrument  at  least  one  foot  in  diameter;  divide 
its  rim  into  four  quarters,  each  subdivided  into 
90  degrees.  Let  the  movable  compass-box  be 
balanced  below^  {suhtiis  libniUt)  with  a  heavy 
weight  of  16  pounds.  On  the  edge  of  the  sus¬ 
pended  box  at  beginnings  opposite  quadrants, 
a  semicircle  rising  in  the  middle  to  a  point  [cou' 
uni)  is  to  be  erected  (the  feet  of  the  semicircle 
at  both  sides  being  fastened  in  holes  on  the  mar¬ 
gin)  so  that  the  top  of  the  conum  shall  be  per¬ 
pendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  compass;  on  its 
top  a  rule  sixteen  digits  long  is  to  be  fastened  at 
its  middle  over  the  central  axis,  as  it  w^re  (of 
the  compass-box),  like  the  beam  of  a  balance, 
with  such  a  joint  that  it  may  move.  At  the  ends 
of  the  rule  are  small  sights  with  holes  through 
w'hich  WT  may  observe  the  sun  and  stars.  By 
means  of  the  rising  or  the  setting  sun  at  the 
equinoxes,  the  variation  can  be  taken  very  w^ell 
and  very  readily  with  this  instrument.  When 
the  sun  is  in  other  parts  of  the  zodiac,  the  varia¬ 
tion  can  also  be  determined  wLen  w^e  have  the 
altitude  of  the  pole:  that  knowm,  any  one  may 
find,  w'ith  a  globe,  or  maps,  or  wdth  the  instru¬ 
ment,  the  amplitude  (of  the  sun  or  star)  on  the 
horizon  and  the  distance  from  the  true  east  as 
well  of  the  sun  as  of  the  following  fixed  stars. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


^7 


Then,  having  counted  the  degrees  and 
minutes  of  the  ortive  amplitude  (time  of 
rising)  from  the  true  east,  we  readily  find 
the  variation.  Observe  the  foremost  star 
of  the  three  in  Orion’s  belt  when  first  it 
appears  on  the  horizon;  direct  the  instru¬ 
ment  toward  it,  and  observe  the  verso- 
rium,  for  as  that  star  rises  in  the  true  east, 
generally  one  degree  toward  the  south, 
we  can  see  how  far  the  versorium  diverges 
from  the  meridian,  allowance  made  for 
that  one  degree.  You  may  also  observe 
the  Artie  pole-star  when  it  is  on  the  meri¬ 
dian  or  at  greatest  distance  from  the  meri¬ 
dian  (about  3  degrees:  according  to  the 
obser\^ations  of  Tycho  Brahe  the  pole-star 
is  2  deg.  55  min.  from  the  pole),  and  with 
the  aid  of  the  instrument  you  may  deter¬ 
mine  the  variation  scientifically,  by  add¬ 
ing  or  subtracting  the  due  prostaphderesis^ 
of  the  star’s  distance  from  the  meridian 
(if  it  is  not  in  the  meridian).  You  will  find 
when  the  pole-star  is  in  the  meridian,  the 
sun’s  place  and  the  hour  of  the  night 
being  known:  even  the  practised  observer 
will  easily  know  that  without  much  error, 
by  the  visible  inclination  of  the  asterism 
— as  we  do  not  care  for  a  matter  of  a  few 
minutes,  as  some  do,  who  while  striving 
to  get  at  the  minutes  at  sea  often  miss  by 
a  whole  point.  The  experienced  observer 
will  allow  somewhat  for  refraction  in  not¬ 
ing  the  rise  of  the  sun  or  stars,  so  that 
his  calculation  may  be  more  exact. 

^  Prostaphicresis  (Gr.  previous  subtraction),  (i) 
The  reduction  to  bring  the  apparent  place  of  a  pla¬ 
net  or  moving  point  to  the  mean  place.  (2)  A  me¬ 
thod  of  computing  by  means  of  a  table  of  natural 
trigonometrical  functions  without  multiplying. 


L/V/  of  bright^  brilliant  stars  not  far  from  the  equator^  that  can  be  observed  in  rising  or  in 
setting  from  the  altitude  of  the  pole  and  the  declination  of  the  stars,  the  ortive  amplitude  on 
the  horizon  being  ascertained  on  a  globe,  or  map,  or  the  instrument  whence  the  variation  is 
determined  by  artful  calculation. 


Right  Asc  ension  Declination 
deg.  min.  deg.  min. 


Aldebaran 

Eye  of  Taurus 

62 

55 

15 

53 

N. 

Bella  trix 

Left  shoulder  of  Orion 

7- 

24 

4 

5 

N. 

Betelgeuze 

Right  shoulder  of  Orion 

83 

30 

6 

19 

N. 

Mintaka 

Foremost  star  in  belt  of  Orion 

77 

46 

I 

16 

S. 

Sirius 

Canis  Major 

97 

10 

15 

55 

S. 

Procyon 

Canis  Minor 

109 

41 

5 

55 

N. 

Alphard 

Bright  star  in  Hydra 

^37 

10 

5 

3 

S. 

Pollux 

South  head  of  Gemini 

1 10 

21 

28 

30 

N. 

Castor 

North  head  of  Gemini 

107 

4 

32 

10 

N. 

Regulus 

Heart  of  Leo 

146 

8 

13 

47 

N. 

Denebola 

Tail  of  Leo 

171 

38 

16 

30 

N. 

Spica 

Spica  Virginis 

195 

44 

8 

34 

S. 

88 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


Arcturus  and  Bootae 

Altair  Heart  of  Aquila 

An  instrument  for  finding  the  ortive  amplitude 
on  the  horizon.  Describe  the  periphery  of  a  circle 
and  divide  it  into  quarters  by  two  diameters  in¬ 
tersecting  at  right  angles.  One  of  the  diameters 
indicates  the  equinoctial  circle,  the  other  the 
axis  of  the  world.  Divide  the  four  quarters  in 
the  usual  way,  each  into  90  degrees,  and  to  every 
fifth  or  every  tenth  degree  from  each  end  of  the 
two  diameters  in  both  directions  assign  numbers 
on  the  two  margins  (outside  of  this  periphery) 
provided  for  the  purpose.  Then  from  each  degree 
draw  a  right  line  parallel  to  the  equator.  Next 
make  a  rule,  or  alidade,  of  the  same  length  as 
the  diameter  of  the  circle  and  divided  into  the 
same  parts  exactly  as  the  diameter  which  repre¬ 
sents  the  axis  of  the  world.  In  the  middle  of  this 
rule  let  a  small  projecting  piece  be  left  attached 
whereby  the  middle  of  the  linea  fiducialis^  of  the 
rule  may  be  connected  with  the  centre  of  the 


Eight  Ascension 
deg.  min. 

29  13 

291  56 


Declination 
deg.  min. 

21  54  N. 

7  35  N. 


circle;  and  to  each  fifth  or  tenth  part  of  the  rule 
give  a  number,  beginning  in  the  middle  and 
numbering  right  and  left.  The  circle  represents 
the  plane  of  the  meridian;  its  centre  represents 
the  very  point  of  rising  or  setting,  /.<?.,  the  inter¬ 
section  of  horizon  and  equator.  All  these  lines 
equidistant  from  the  equator,  represent  paral¬ 
lels  of  the  sun  and  stars;  the  linea  fiducialis  of 
the  rule  or  alidade  represents  the  horizon,  and 
its  parts  degrees  of  the  horizon,  beginning  at  the 
point  of  rising  or  setting.  Therefore,  if  to  the 
given  latitude  of  the  place,  as  numbered  at  each 
end  of  the  diameter  that  represents  the  axis  of 
the  world,  the  linea  fiducialis  of  the  rule  be  ap- 
^  Fiducial  line:  (i)  The  straight  edge  of  the  alidade  of 
a  plane  table.  (2)  The  initial  line  of  a  graduated  circle  or 
vernier.  (3)  Any  line  which  is  intended  to  be  taken  as  a 
standard  straight  line.  The  term  fiducial,  in  physics^  de¬ 
notes  a  fixed  position  or  character,  and  hence  is  used  as  a 
basis  of  reference  or  comparison. 


fTTTTTTTfri 

TTTTTTTr 

TTFinr 

iru'ITirmin 

0  >  2|o  1  1 

0  *  <) 

1>  1  ajo  •  z\o  t  3 

0  1  4 

0 1 5 

0 

i  r  o  T  !^ 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


plied;  and  if  the  given  declination  (less  the  com¬ 
plement  of  the  latitude  of  the  station)  of  sun  or 
any  star  from  the  equator  be  found  on  the  rim 
of  the  instrument,  then  a  section  of  a  parallel 
drawn  from  the  point  of  this  declination  in  the 
horizon,  or  in  the  linea  Jiducialis,  will  show  the 
ortive  amplitude  of  the  given  star  or  of  the  sun 
at  the  stated  latitude  of  the  place. 

CHAPTER  13.  Observations  made  by  seamen  com¬ 
monly  vary  and  are  untrustworthy^  partly  through 
mistakes  and  ivant  of  knowledge  and  the  imperfect¬ 
ness  of  the  instruments,  and  partly  because  the  sea 
is  seldom  so  calm  but  shadows  or  lights  may  rest  on 
the  instruments 

From  the  time  when  first  the  variation  of  the 
needle  was  noticed,  many  alert  navigators  have 
in  sundry  ways  striven  to  investigate  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  direction  of  the  mariner’s  compass; 
but  this  has  not  been  done  with  the  exactness 
that  was  requisite,  much  to  the  disadvantage  of 
the  art  of  navigation.  For,  either,  being  un¬ 
learned,  they  knew  of  no  sure  method,  or  they 
used  ill-constructed  and  unsuitable  instruments, 
or  they  adopted  some  conjecture  based  merely 
on  the  false  hypothesis  of  some  prime  meridian 
or  magnetic  pole;  while  many  copy  others’  writ¬ 
ings  and  pass  off  for  their  own  the  observations 
of  earlier  writers:  and  these  early  authors,  how¬ 
ever  stupid  the  writings  in  which  they  entered 
their  observations,  are  held  in  high  respect  just 
because  of  their  antiquity;  and  their  posterity 
hold  it  to  be  not  safe  to  differ  from  them.  Hence 
on  long  voyages,  especially  to  the  East  Indies, 
the  inexact  records  of  variation  of  the  compass 
kept  by  the  Portuguese  are  prized;  but  who¬ 
ever  reads  what  the  Portuguese  have  written 
will  quickly  see  that  in  very  many  respects  they 
are  mistaken,  and  that  they  did  not  rightly  un¬ 
derstand  the  construction  and  the  use,  in  taking 
the  variation  of  the  compass  of  Portugal  (in 
which  the  lily  points  one-half  point  west  from  the 
magnetized  needle).  Hence  while  they  exhibit 
the  variation  of  the  compass  in  different  places, 
it  is  not  certain  whether  they  measure  the  devi¬ 
ation  with  a  true  meridional  compass  or  with 
some  other  kind,  in  which  the  magnetized  iron 
points  away  from  the  lily.  The  Portuguese  (as 
is  seen  in  their  writings)  employ  the  compass  of 
Portugal,  in  which  the  magnetized  iron  is  one- 
half  of  a  point  to  the  east  of  the  lily. 

Even  expert  navigators  find  it  very  difficult 
to  observe  the  variation  at  sea  on  account  of  the 
ship’s  motions  and  her  tossing  in  every  direction, 
though  they  may  employ  the  best  instruments 
yet  devised  and  in  use.  Hence  have  arisen  vari¬ 


89 

ous  opinions  about  magnetic  deviation.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  the  Portuguese  navigator  Roderigues  de 
Lazos  takes  it  to  be  one-half  point  off  the  island 
of  St.  Helena;  the  Dutch,  in  their  nautical  jour¬ 
nal,  make  it  one  point  there;  Kendall,  an  expert 
English  navigator,  makes  it  only  one-sixth  of  a 
point,  using  a  true  meridional  compass.  Diego 
Alfonso  finds  no  variation  at  a  point  a  little 
southeast  of  Cape  Agulhas,^  and  by  the  astro¬ 
labe  shows  that  the  compass  stands  in  the  true 
meridian;  but  Roderigues  declares  that  the  com¬ 
pass  points  due  north  and  south  at  Cape  Agul¬ 
has  if  it  be  of  the  Portuguese  style,  in  which  the 
variation  is  one-half  point  to  the  southeast. There 
is  the  same  degree  of  confusion,  carelessness,  and 
falsity  in  most  of  the  other  records. 

CHAPTER  14.  Of  the  variation  under  the  equinoctial 
line  and  near  by 

In  northern  regions  the  compass  varies  because 
of  the  northern  eminences;  in  southern  regions 
because  of  the  southern  eminences;  on  the  equa¬ 
tor,  if  the  eminences  on  both  sides  were  equal, 
there  would  be  no  variation.  But  because  this 
seldom  happens,  therefore  oftimes  variation  is 
observed  under  the  equator;  and  even  at  some 
distance  from  the  equator,  three  or  four  degrees, 
variation  may  be  produced  by  austral  emi¬ 
nences,  if  extensive  and  potent  austral  conti¬ 
nents  lie  near  on  one  side. 

CHAPTER  15.  The  variation  of  the  magnetized 
needle  in  the  great  sea,  Ethiopicand  American,  beloto 
the  equator 

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  mode  and  reason 
of  variation  in  the  great  Altantic  Sea;  but  below 
the  equator,  on  the  east  coast  of  Brazil,  the  nee¬ 
dle  swerves  toward  the  continent;  with  the  end 
that  looks  south:  thus,  at  that  end,  it  declines 
from  the  true  meridian,  toward  the  west;  this  is 
noticed  by  navigators  as  a  movement  of  the 
point  of  the  needle,  and  so  they  think  that  the 
variation  is  to  the  east.  But,  over  the  whole 
route  from  the  first  eastern  promontory  of  Bra¬ 
zil,  past  Cape  Sao  Agostino  to  Cape  Frio  and  as 
far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  the 
variation  is  always  from  south  to  west,  the  crotch 
of  the  needle  tending  to  the  Antartic  pole.  For 
it  always  turns  with  the  proper  end  toward  a 
continent.  Yet  the  variation  takes  place  not  only 
on  the  coast  itself,  but  at  some  distance  from  the 
land — over  a  space  of  50  or  60  German  miles  or 
more. 

But  at  a  great  distance  from  the  land  the  arc 
begins  to  grow  less,  for  the  needle  turns  less  to- 
^  Southernmost  point  of  Africa. 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


90 

ward  distant  prominences;  and  it  is  not  made  to 
diverge  much  by  such  prominences  when  preS' 
ent  and  on  the  spot,  for  it  then  shares  with  them. 
On  the  island  of  St.  Helena  (whose  longitude  is 
less  than  it  is  usually  given  in  maps)  the  com- 
pass  varies  one  or  perhaps  two  degrees.  The  Por^ 
tugucse,  and  others  who  have  learnt  of  them,  in 
sailing  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  I  lope  to  the 
Indies,  in  order  to  have  favorable  winds,  shape 
their  course  toward  the  islands  of  Tristan  de 
Cunha,  and  on  the  first  half  of  the  voyage  find 
no  considerable  difference  of  variation;  but  near 
those  islands  the  difference  is  greater  than  any¬ 
where  else  in  the  entire  voyage.  For  the  great 
promontory  of  the  southerly  continent  which 
lies  to  the  southwest  pulls  and  solicits  that  end 
of  the  versorium  which  points  south  (and  at 
that  end  is  the  principal  cause  of  the  variation). 
But  as  the  ship  approaches  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  the  variation  grows  steadily  less.  In  the 
prime  meridian,  at  latitude  45  degrees,  the  nee¬ 
dle  points  southeast  by  south;  and  so,  too,  he 
who  sails  along  the  coast  from  Manicongo  to  the 
tropic  and  a  little  beyond  will  find  the  needle 
tending  from  the  south  to  the  southeast,  but 
not  much.  At  Cape  Agulhas  it  still  keeps  a  little 
of  the  variation  it  showed  near  the  islands  of 
Tristan  de  Cunha,  but  it  is  much  diminished 
owing  to  the  remoteness  from  the  cause  of  the 
variation;  and  the  south  end  of  the  needle  does 
not  yet  point  due  south. 

CHAPTER  16.  Of  the  variation  in  Nova  Zembla 

The  variations  are  greatest  in  regions  nigh  to 
the  poles,  as  has  been  proved,  and  there,  too,  the 
changes  of  variation  are  sudden,  as  Dutch  ob¬ 
servers  noted  some  years  ago,  though  their  ob¬ 
servations  were  not  exact;  yet  the  inexactitude 
can  be  excused,  for,  with  the  ordinary  instru¬ 
ments,  it  is  hard  to  get  at  the  truth  in  such  high 
latitudes — about  80  degrees.  But  now  the  vari¬ 
ation  of  the  compass  gives  the  clear  evidence  of 
the  existence  of  an  open  passage  eastward  through 
the  North  Sea — Arctic  Ocean — for,  since  the 
compass  has  so  great  an  arc  of  variation  to  the 
west,  it  is  evident  that  no  continent  stretches 
for  any  great  distance  along  that  whole  route 
eastward.  Therefore  we  can  strive  and  explore 
more  hopefully  for  a  passage  to  the  Moluccas 
by  the  northeast  than  by  the  northwest. 

CHAPTER  17.  Variation  in  the  South  Sea 

After  passing  through  the  Strait  of  Magellan, 
the  variation  off  the  Peruvian  coast  is  to  the 
southeast;  and  a  like  deflection  continues  all 
along  the  coast  of  Peru  to  the  equator.  In  higher 


latitude,  up  to  45  degrees,  the  variation  is  great¬ 
er  than  near  the  equator;  and,  just  as  on  the 
eastern  coast  of  South  America,  the  deflection 
was  from  south  toward  west,  so  now  it  is  to  the 
southeast.  From  the  equator  northward  the  va¬ 
riation  is  very  small  or  null  till  you  reach  New 
Galicia;  thence  along  the  whole  coast  as  far  as 
Quivira  the  inclination  is  from  the  north  to  the 
east. 

CHAPTER  18.  Of  the  variation  in  the  Mediterranean 
Sea 

Sicilian  and  Italian  mariners  declare  that  in 
the  Sicilian  sea  and  eastward  to  the  meridian  of 
Peloponnesus  (as  Francis  Maurolycus  relates) 
the  needle  grecizes,  />.,  is  diverted  from  the 
pole  toward  the  wind  called  Graecus  (Greek), 
or  north  wind;  that  on  the  coast  of  Peloponne¬ 
sus  it  points  to  the  true  pole;  but  that  when  you 
proceed  farther,  then  it  mistralizes,  inclining 
from  the  pole  to  the  mistral  or  northwest  wind: 
this  is  in  accordance  with  our  rule  of  the  varia¬ 
tion.  For,  as  the  Mediterranean  Sea  stretches 
away  from  that  meridian  toward  the  west,  so, 
on  the  side  toward  the  east,  there  is  open  sea  as 
far  as  Palestine,  and  toward  the  north  and  east 
is  the  whole  archipelago,  and  hard  by  the  Black 
Sea.  From  Peloponnesus  to  the  north  pole,  that 
meridian  passes  through  the  largest  and  most 
elevated  regions  of  all  Europe:  through  Achaia, 
Macedonia,  Hungary,  Transylvania,  Lithuania, 
Livonia,  Novgorod,  Karelia,  and  Biarmia.^ 

CHAPTER  19.  The  variation  in  the  interior  of  the 
great  continents 

Great  seas  usually  have  great  variations;  in  some 
parts,  however,  there  is  no  variation,  but  true 
direction  poleward.  On  the  continents,  too,  the 
needle  often  deflects  from  the  meridian,  as  on 
the  margin  of  the  land  and  the  confines,  but  the 
arc  of  variation  is  wont  to  be  small:  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  regions  of  great  continents  there  is  no  varia¬ 
tion.  Hence  in  the  heart  of  northern  Europe  and 
of  Asia,  in  the  interior  of  Africa,  Peru,  and  of 
North  or  Mexican  America,  the  versorium  rests 
in  the  meridian. 

CHAPTER  20.  The  variation  in  the  Eastern  Ocean 

The  variation  in  the  Eastern  Ocean,  all  the  way 
to  Goa  and  the  Moluccas,  is  noted  by  the  Portu¬ 
guese,  but  they  are  mistaken  in  very  many  points, 
for  they  follow  the  first  observers  who  set  down 
the  variations  for  sundry  places,  ascertained  by 

^  The  name  given  by  Scandinavian  writers  to  that  sec¬ 
tion  of  northeastern  Russia  bordering  upon  the  White 
Sea. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


the  use  of  unfit  instruments,  or  by  inaccurate 
observations,  or  by  conjecture.  Thus  in  the  is¬ 
land  of  Brando*  they  make  the  compass  vary  22 
degrees  to  the  northwest.  Now,  in  no  region,  in 
no  place  on  earth  that  has  not  a  higher  latitude 
than  that,  is  the  variation  so  much  as  22  de¬ 
grees:  in  fact  the  deviation  on  that  island  is  tri¬ 
fling.  So,  when  they  say  that  in  Mozambique 
the  compass  varies  to  the  northwest  one  point, 
they  are  in  error  even  though  the  compass  they 
use  is  that  of  Portugal;  for,  without  a  doubt,  the 
needle  varies  in  Mozambique  to  the  southwest 
one  quarter  of  a  point  or  more.  Again,  they  are 
all  wrong  in  holding  that  beyond  the  equator, 
on  the  route  toward  Goa,  the  compass 
varies  westward  one  point  and  one  half; 
better  had  they  said  that  in  the  first 
part  of  the  route  the  compass  of  Port¬ 
ugal  inclines  one  point,  but  that  a  true 
or  meridional  compass  varies  only 
one-half  point.  Yet  to  determine  the 
amount  of  the  variation  in  the  Eastern 
Ocean  according  to  our  rules,  we  need  a 
more  exact  and  correct  reconnoissance 
of  the  austral  continent,  which 
stretches  farther  from  the  south  to¬ 
ward  the  equinoctial  than  it  is  described 
in  current  charts  and  globes. 

CHAPTER  21.  How  the  deviation  of  the 
needle  is  greater  or  less  according  to  the  dis¬ 
tances  of  places 

In  the  heart  of  great  continents  there  is 
no  variation;  so,  too,  in  the  midst  of  great  seas. 
On  the  edge  of  such  lands  and  seas  the  variation 
is  often  large,  but  not  as  great  as  it  is  a  little  out  at 
sea :  thus  off  Cape  Sao  Agostino  there  is  variation, 
but  50  miles  away  to  the  east  there  is  a  larger 
variation ;  still  larger  80  miles  away  and  1 00  miles 
away.  But  from  too  miles  distance  the  reduc¬ 
tion  of  the  deviation  is  slower  as  you  approach 
the  continent  than  from  the  distance  of  80  miles, 
and  from  80  miles  than  from  50;  for  the  devia¬ 
tion  is  changed  and  reduced  somewhat  more 
quickly  as  you  come  toward  the  shore  from  anear 
then  from  afar.  So,  for  mariners  approaching 
Newfoundland,  the  change  of  the  variation  is 
quicker  (?>.,  a  degree  of  variation  is  lost  in  a  less 
arc  of  the  route  on  a  parallel)  when  they  are  not 

^  Brando  lies  in  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia,  close  to  the  east 
coast  of  Sweden. 


91 

far  from  land  than  when  they  are  100  miles 
away;  but  when  they  journey  inland  the  changes 
are  more  tardy  at  first  than  when  they  come 
farther  into  the  interior. 

The  figure  shows  the  ratio  of  the  arcs  on  a 
parallel  circle  while  a  versorium  is  brought  to¬ 
ward  a  continent  that  reaches  to  the  pole;  the 
ratio  answers  to  the  degrees  of  the  variation. 
Let  A  be  the  pole,  B  the  elevation  of  a  great 
mass  of  land.  At  C  there  is  no  variation  caused 
by  By  which  is  too  distant;  at  D  the  variation  is 
greatest,  because  there  the  needle  is  attracted  or 
is  made  by  the  whole  earth  to  turn  to  the  pro¬ 
jecting  land  B\  nor  is  the  needle  hindered,  nor 

A® 


checked,  nor  led  toward  the  pole  by  the  vertic- 
ity  of  this  land,  but,  tending  to  the  pole,  it  is 
nevertheless  deflected  therefrom,  because  of  the 
site  or  position  and  convenient  distance  of  the 
overmastering  elevations  of  land. 

But,  now,  from  C  to  D  the  variation  grows, 
yet  the  versorium  does  not  deviate  so  quickly 
in  the  first  stages  as  it  does  when  near  Z).  But 
you  sail  more  miles  on  the  parallel  circle  CD  as 
long  as  you  are  near  C,  to  register  one  degree  of 
variation,  than  you  sail  when  near  D\  so,  too,  in 
travelling  from  D  toward  E  you  must  make  a 
greater  number  of  miles  when  near  D  than  when 
near  E.  Thus  there  are  equal  deviations  for  un¬ 
equal  distances  sailed,  both  for  rising  and  falling 
variation,  yet  it  falls  within  a  less  space  than  it 
rises.  There  are,  however  several  other  inciden¬ 
tal  cases  that  confuse  this  ratio. 


BOOK  FIFTH 


CHAPTER  1.  Of  the  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle 

We  come  at  last  to  that  fine  experiment,  that 
wonderful  movement  of  magnetic  bodies  as 
they  dip  beneath  the  horizon  in  virtue  of  their 
natural  verticity;  after  we  have  mastered  this, 
the  wondrous  combination,  harmony,  and  con¬ 
cordant  interaction  of  the  earth  and  the  load¬ 
stone  (or  magnetized  iron),  being  made  mani¬ 
fest  by  our  theory,  stand  revealed.  This  motion 
we  have  so  illustrated  and  demonstrated  with 
many  experiments,  and  purpose  in  what  follows 
so  to  point  out  the  causes  and  reasons,  that  no 
one  endowed  with  reason  and  intelligence  may 
justly  contemn,  or  refute,  or  dispute  our  chief 
magnetic  principles.  Direction,  as  also  variation, 
is  demonstrated  on  the  plane  of  the  horizon 
whenever  a  magnetic  needle  poised  in  equilib¬ 
rium  comes  to  a  rest  in  any  fixed  point  of  it. 
But  inclination  (dip)  is  seen  to  be  the  motion 
of  the  iron  bar,  first  balanced  on  its  axis  and 
then  excited  by  a  loadstone,  from  that  point  in 
the  horizon,  one  end  or  pole  tending  toward 
the  earth  s  centre.  And  we  have  found  that  this 
inclination  differs  in  the  ratio  of  the  latitude  of 
each  region.  Now  this  movement  is  produced 
not  by  any  motion  away  from  the  horizon  to¬ 
ward  the  earth’s  centre,  but  by  the  turning  of 
the  whole  of  the  magnetic  body  to  the  whole  of 
the  earth,  as  later  \ve  will  show.  Nor  does  the 
needle  descend  below  the  horizon  in  the  ratio 
of  the  degrees  of  the  elevation  of  the  pole  in  the 
given  region,  and  with  an  equal  arc  of  the  quad¬ 
rant  in  any  oblique  sphere,  as  later  will  be  seen. 
But  how  much  the  needle  dips  in  every  horizon 
can  now  first  be  ascertained  by  means  of  an  in¬ 
strument  (which,  however,  is  not  very  easily 
constructed),  just  as  in  sun-dials  when  the  nee¬ 
dle  returns  to  points  in  the  horizon,  or  as  in  the 
mariner’s  compass.  Get  a  circular  planed  board 
with  diameter  at  least  six  finger-lengths,  which 
is  to  be  fastened  to  one  face  of  an  upright  square 
post  and  to  rest  on  a  wooden  base.  Divide  the 
periphery  of  the  instrument  into  four  quad¬ 
rants,  and  then  each  quadrant  into  ninety  de¬ 
grees.  In  the  centre  of  the  instrument  drive  a 
brass  nail,  and  in  the  centre  of  its  head  bore  a 


small  hole  well  reamed  and  smoothed.  Adjust 
to  the  instrument  a  circle  or  ring  of  brass  about 
two  finger-breadths  wide,  with  a  transverse 
plate  or  flat  bar  of  the  same  metal  fastened 
across  the  middle  of  the  ring  and  serving  for 
horizon.  In  the  middle  of  this  horizon  bar  bore 
another  hole  which  shall  be  exactly  opposite 
to  the  centre  of  the  instrument,  in  which  a  hole 
was  already  bored.  Next  get  a  steel  wire  such  as 
is  used  for  compass  needles,  and  at  the  exact 
middle  of  it  and  at  right  angles  to  it  pass  a  very 
thin  iron  axis  through  it  so  that  the  middle  of 
the  axis  and  the  middle  of  the  needle  shall  ex¬ 
actly  meet;  let  this  inclination  (dipping)  needle, 
the  ends  of  the  axis  having  been  inserted  into 
the  holes,  be  suspended  so  that  it  may  move 
freely  and  evenly  on  itself  in  most  exact  equi¬ 
librium,  and  so  accurately  that  it  may  not  turn 
away  from  any  one  degree  or  point  marked  on 
the  circumference  more  than  from  any  other, 
but  may  rest  easily  at  any  one  point.  Have  the 
instrument  fastened  upright  to  the  face  of  the 
post,  and  on  the  edge  of  the  base  set  a  veiy^  small 
magnetized  versorium.  The  needle  thus  nicely 
balanced,  now  rub  skilfully  at  both  ends  with 
the  opposite  poles  of  a  loadstone,  but  do  this 
with  the  greatest  care  lest  the  wire  be  in  the 
least  bent;  for  unless  you  do  all  this  with  great 
skill  and  dexterity,  you  will  reach  no  result. 
Next  get  a  second  brass  ring,  a  little  larger  than 
the  first,  so  as  to  go  round  it,  and  to  one  rim  fit 
a  cover  of  glass  or  of  very  thin  mica;  this,  when 
placed  over  the  other  ring,  encloses  the  whole 
space,  and  the  needle  is  protected  from  dust  and 
currents  of  air.  The  instrument  being  now  com¬ 
plete,  set  it  up  perpendicularly  with  the  small 
versorium  on  the  base,  so  that  when  thus  erect¬ 
ed  exactly  upright  it  may  tend  to  the  true 
point  of  the  magnetic  direction.  Then  that  one 
of  the  needle’s  ends  which  in  northern  latitudes 
looks  to  the  north  dips  below  the  horizon;  but 
in  southern  latitudes  the  end  of  the  needle  that 
looks  south  tends  toward  the  earth’s  centre  in  a 
certain  ratio  (after\vard  to  be  explained)  of  the 
latitude  of  the  region  in  question  from  the 
equator  on  either  side.  But  the  needle  must  be 
rubbed  with  a  powerful  loadstone,  else  it  does 


92 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


93 


Dip  instrument 


not  dip  at  the  true  point  or  goes  beyond  it  and  is 
not  always  at  rest  in  it.  A  larger  instrument  can 
also  be  employed,  often  or  twelve  finger-lengths 
diameter,  but  in  that  case  there  is  more  trouble 
in  balancing  the  needle  exactly.  Care  must  be 
taken  to  have  the  needle  of  steel,  also  that  it  be 
straight,  and  that  the  sharp  points  of  the  axis 
on  both  ends  be  at  right  angles  with  the  needle 
itself,  and  that  it  pass  through  the  very  centre. 

As  in  other  magnetic  movements  there  is 
strict  agreement  and  a  clearly  visible,  sensible 
accordance  between  the  earth  and  the  loadstone 
in  our  demonstration,  so  in  this  inclination  is 
the  accordance  of  the  globe  of  the  earth  and 
the  loadstone  positive  and  manifest.  The  true 
and  definite  cause  of  this  great  and  hitherto 
unknown  effect  is  as  follows:  The  loadstone 


moves  and  revolves  until  one  of  its  poles,  being 
impelled  toward  the  north,  comes  to  rest  in  its 
predetermined  point  on  the  horizon;  the  pole 
that  comes  to  a  stand  looking  north  is  (as  ap¬ 
pears  from  the  foregoing  rules  and  demonstra¬ 
tions)  southern,  not  northern,  though  till  now 
every  one  has  supposed  it  to  be  northern  be¬ 
cause  it  turns  to  the  north.  An  iron  wire  or  ver- 
sorium  touched  with  this  pole  of  the  stone  turns 
south,  and  is  made  northern  because  rubbed  at 
the  south  end  of  the  stone;  just  as  when  the 
point  of  a  versorium  is  magnetized  in  that  way 
it  will  be  directed  toward  the  earth’s  south 
pole  and  to  that  will  turn,  while  the  other  end, 
the  crotch,  will  be  southern  and  will  turn  to  the 
northern  regions  of  the  earth  (the  earth  itself 
causing  the  motion),  for  thus  does  direction  re- 


B 


A 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


94 

suit  from  the  bearings  of  the  stone  and  the  nee¬ 
dle,  and  from  the  earth's  verticity.  But  inclina¬ 
tion  (dip)  is  when  the  needle  turns  to  the  body 
of  the  earth,  its  south  end  pointed  to  the  north, 
in  any  latitude  away  from  the  equator.  For  it 
is  a  fixed  and  unchanging  law  that  exactly  be¬ 
neath  the  celestial  equator,  or  rather  on  the 
equator  of  the  terrestrial  globe,  the  magnetic 
inclination  or  dip  of  the  needle  is  nil;  and  in 
whatever  way  it  may  have  been  excited  or 
rubbed,  it  rests  exactly  on  the  plane  of  the  ho¬ 
rizon  in  the  inclination  instrument,  provided  it 
be  first  duly  balanced.  The  reason  of  this  is,  that 
the  needle,  being  at  equal  distance  from  the  two 
poles,  does  not  in  its  rotation  dip  toward  either, 
but  stands  balanced,  pointing  to  the  level  of 
the  equator,  as  it  does  when  mounted  on  a 
sharp  point  or  floating  free  and  unhindered  on 
water. 

But  when  the  needle  is  in  any  latitude  from 
the  equator,  or  when  one  of  the  earth’s  poles 
is  raised  (I  do  not  say  raised  above  the  visible 
horizon,  like  what  is  commonly  reputed  to  be 
the  pole  of  the  revolving  world  in  the  heavens, 
but  raised  above  the  horizon  of  the  centre  or 
above  its  own  diameter,  equidistant  from  the 
plane  of  the  visible  horizon,  which  is  the  true 
elevation  of  the  earth’s  pole),  then  inclination 
appears  and  the  needle  dips  in  its  meridian  to¬ 
wards  the  body  of  the  earth.  Thus,  let  AB  be  the 
visible  horizon  of  a  region;  CD  the  earth’s  hori¬ 
zon,  dividing  the  earth  into  equal  parts;  EV  the 
earth’s  axis;  G  a  place  within  the  region:  plainly 
the  north  pole  E  rises  above  the  point  C  by  as 
much  as  G  is  distant  from  the  equator;  there¬ 
fore,  since  at  E  the  magnetized  needle  is  raised 
to  perpendicular  just  by  its  turning  (to  the 
north),  as  has  already  been  shown,  so  now  at 
G  there  is  a  sort  of  beginning  of  such  a  turning, 
proportioned  to  the  latitude  (the  magnetized 
body  departing  from  the  plane  of  the  horizon), 
and  the  needle  intersects  at  unequal  angles  the 
horizon  and  shows  dip  beneath  the  horizon;  for 
this  reason,  if  the  dipping  needle  be  placed  at 


G 


Gy  its  south  end  (that  which  points  north)  de¬ 
scends  below  the  plane  of  the  visible  horizon 
AB.  Thus  there  is  very  great  difference  between 
a  right  and  a  polar  or  parallel  sphere,  in  which 
the  pole  is  in  the  true  zenith.  For  in  a  right 
sphere  the  needle  is  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the 
horizon.  But  when  the  celestial  pole  is  in  the 
vertical  point,  or  when  the  earth’s  pole  is  itself 
the  place  in  question,  then  the  needle  is  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  horizon.  This  is  shown  on  a  ter- 
rella;  suspend  in  air,  like  the  beam  of  a  balance, 
a  small  dip  needle  of  only  two  fingers-width 
rubbed  at  a  loadstone,  and  carefully  bring  the 
terrella  under  it,  and  first  let  the  terrella  stand 
properly  as  in  a  right  sphere,  and,  as  in  the  first 
of  the  figures  following,  the  needle  will  now  re¬ 
main  in  equilibrium.  But  in  an  oblique  position 
of  the  terrella,  as  in  an  oblique  sphere  and  in 
the  second  figure,  the  needle  dips  at  one  end 
obliquely  toward  the  neighbouring  pole,  but  does 
not  rest  on  the  pole,  nor  is  its  dip  governed  by 
the  pole,  but  by  the  whole  body  and  mass;  for 
the  dipping  needle  in  a  higher  latitude  sinks — 
passes — beyond  the  pole.  But  in  the  third  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  terrella  the  needle  is  perpendicular, 
because  the  pole  of  the  stone  is  uppermost,  and 
the  needle  tending  straight  toward  the  body 
attains  the  pole.  The  crotch  in  the  foregoing 
figures  always  turns  toward  the  north  pole  of 
the  terrella,  having  been  touched  with  its  north 
pole;  the  point  having  been  touched  by  the 
south  pole  of  the  terrella  tends  toward  its  south 


95 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


pole.  Thus  may  we  see  the  level,  the  oblique, 
and  the  perpendicular  position  of  the  needle 
on  a  terrella. 

CHAPTER  2.  Diagram  showing  dip  of  the  mag¬ 
netic  needle  in  different  positions  of  a  sphere  and 
horizons  of  the  earth  in  which  there  is  no  variation 
of  dip 

Let  AB  be  the  equator,  G  the  Arctic  and  D  the 
Antarctic  pole,  E,  G  dipping  needles  in  north¬ 
ern  regions,  and  //,  F  in  southern  regions  of  the 
earth  or  the  terrella.  All  the  needles  have  been 
touched  with  the  true  Arctic  pole  of  the  terrel¬ 
la. 

The  figure  shows  the  needles  in  horizontal 
position  at  A  and  B,  the  earth’s  and  the  terrel- 
la’s  equator;  they  are  perpendicular  at  the  poles 
C  and  D\  but  in  the  mid  spaces,  at  distances  of 
45  degrees,  the  crotches  dip  toward  the  south, 
but  the  points  look  toward  the  north  at  the 
same  angle. 


Diagram  showing  the  direction  and  dip  of  a  ter- 
rella  representing  the  earth  relative  to  the  stand' 
ard  representation  of  the  globe  of  the  earthy  at 
north  latitude  50  degrees, 

A  is  the  north  pole  of  the  earth  or  of  the  large 
terrella;  B  its  south  pole,  C  is  the  smaller  terrel¬ 
la,  and  E  the  south  pole  of  the  smaller  terrella 
that  dips  toward  the  north  region  (of  the  larg- 
er).  Its  centre  C  is  placed  on  the  superficies  of 
the  larger  terrella,  because  the  smaller  terrella 
varies  a  little  on  account  of  the  length  of  the 
axis,  but  in  the  earth  the  variation  is  very  little. 
As  the  needle  dips  in  the  latitude  of  a  region  of 
50  degrees,  so,  too,  the  axis  of  the  stone — which 
is  spherical — is  depressed  beneath  the  horizon, 
and  its  south  pole,  which  is  within  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  larger  terrella  dips,  while  in  the 
south  (of  the  larger  terrella)  its  (the  smaller 
terrella’s)  north  pole  is  raised  toward  the  zenith. 
And  a  flat  circular  piece  of  iron  carefully  mag¬ 


netized  at  opposite  points  of  its  circumference 
acts  in  the  same  way;  but  these  magnetic  exper¬ 
iments  are  less  striking  because  in  iron  disks  the 
magnetic  force  is  rather  sluggish.  The  figure  be¬ 
low  shows,  with  bits  of  iron,  the  differences  in 
dip  at  various  latitudes  in  the  terrella. 

Below  is  shown  the  dip  of  the  needle  on  a  ter¬ 
rella  by  means  of  a  number  of  bits  of  iron  wire 
of  equal  size,  one  barley-corn  in  length,  and 
placed  in  a  meridian.  At  the  equator  the  bits  of 
iron  are  directed  toward  the  poles,  and  lie  upon 
the  body  of  the  terrella  in  the  plane  of  its  hori¬ 
zon.  The  nearer  they  are  placed  to  the  poles  the 
more  do  they  rise  from  the  horizontal  by  rea¬ 
son  of  their  turning  poleward;  at  the  poles  they 
tend  straight  to  the  centre.  But  bits  of  iron  will 
not  stand  up  aright,  save  on  a  good  loadstone, 
if  they  be  too  long. 


96 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


CHAPTER  3.  An  instrument  for  showing  by  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  a  loadstone  the  degree  of  dip  below  the  hori¬ 
zon  in  any  latitude 

Description  of  the  instrument;  its  uses 
Make  a  perfectly  round  terrella  of  a  superior 
strong  loadstone,  one  homogeneous  through¬ 
out,  not  injured  anywhere  by  decay  or  corro¬ 
sion,  of  proper  size,  so  that  its  diameter  shall  be 
six  or  seven  finger-breadths.  Having,  by  the 
method  heretofore  given,  found  the  poles,  mark 
them  with  some  iron  instrument,  also  mark  the 
equinoctial  circle.  Next,  in  a  squared  block  of 
wood,  one  foot  in  diameter,  make  a  hemispheri¬ 
cal  cavity  to  hold  half  of  the  terrella,  so  that 


just  one  half  of  the  terrella  shall  rise  above  the 
block.  Where  the  limb  of  the  terrella  is  nearest 
the  rim  of  this  cavity  draw  a  circle  around  it 
for  a  meridian,  and  then  divide  it  into  four  equal 
parts  or  quadrants,  and  the  quadrants  each  into 
90  degrees.  Let  one  end  of  the  quadrants  on  the 
limb  be  near  the  centre  of  a  quadrant  on  the 
block,  and  divide  this  also  into  90  degrees.  At 
that  centre,  place  a  small  short  versorium  hav¬ 
ing  one  of  its  ends  sharp  and  longer  than  the 
other,  for  use  as  a  pointer,  and  let  it  be  poised 
on  a  fitting  sharp  fulcrum.  Evidently,  whenever 
the  poles  of  the  terrella  are  at  the  beginnings 
(zero)  of  the  quadrants,  then  the  versorium  will 
lie  in  a  right  line  on  the  terrella  as  in  equilibri- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


um.  But,  if  the  terrella  be  moved  so  that  one  of 
the  poles  rises  on  the  left,  then  the  needle  ele¬ 
vates  itself  in  the  meridian  according  to  the  lat¬ 
itude,  just  as  a  piece  of  magnetized  iron  rises; 
and  the  needle  indicates  upon  the  quadrant  de¬ 
scribed  on  the  block  the  degrees  of  the  dip.  The 
rim  of  the  cavity  in  the  block  represents  a  mer¬ 
idian  circle,  and  to  it  answers  some  meridian 
circle  of  the  terrella,  for  the  poles  on  both  sides 
are  upon  the  inner  circumference  of  the  rim. 
This  is  precisely  what  takes  place  on  the  earth 
itself  where  there  is  no  variation;  but  when 
there  is  variation  either  of  direction  or  of  dip, 
i.e.^  a  disordering  of  the  proper  magnetic  revo¬ 
lution  for  causes  later  to  be  set  forth,  then  there 
is  some  difference.  The  quadrant  described  on 
the  block  must  be  near  the  limb  of  the  terrella, 
or  its  centre  must  be  at  the  limb  itself,  and  the 
needle  must  be  very  short  so  as  not  to  touch 
the  terrella;  for  there  is  error  when  the  needle 
is  long  or  placed  at  a  distance,  as  it  has  a  truly 
proportionate  movement  only  at  the  superfi¬ 
cies  of  the  terrella.  But  w’ere  the  quadrant — be¬ 
ing  remote  from  the  terrella — to  be  moved  into 
its  sphere  of  influence  toward  the  pole  on  a  cir¬ 
cle  concentric  with  the  terrella,  then  the  needle 
would  indicate  on  the  quadrant  the  degrees  of 
dip  in  ratio  and  symmetry  with  that  circle,  not 
with  the  terrella. 

CHAPTER  A.  Of  a  suitable  length  of  needle  on  the 
terrella  for  showing  the  dip 

When  it  is  sought  to  define  the  dip  by  means 
of  a  dip-indicating  instrument  on  the  earth 
itself,  we  may  use  either  a  short  versorium  or 
one  ever  so  long,  provided  only  the  magnetic 
property  of  the  loadstone  with  which  it  has  been 
stroked  is  able  to  pervade  its  whole  substance 
and  length.  For  the  greatest  length  of  a  ver¬ 
sorium,  as  compared  with  the  earth's  diameter, 
is  insignificant  and  has  no  ratio  perceptible  by 
sense.  But  on  a  terrella,  or  on  a  plane  nigh  a 
meridian  of  a  terrella,  a  short  needle  is  required, 
one  barley-corn’s  length;  for  longer  versoria 
(because  they  reach  farther),  in  the  first  degrees 
of  dip,  descend  suddenly  and  irregularly,  and 
turn  to  the  body  of  the  terrella.  For  example. 


as  soon  as  the  long  versorium  in  the  figure  is 
moved  onward  from  the  equator  A  to  C,  it  lays 
hold  of  the  stone  with  its  point  C  as  though 
with  a  long  outspread  wing,  when  the  point 
reaches  the  parts  around  F,  which  give  it  a 
greater  revolution  than  those  at  C.  And  the 
ends  of  rather  long  pieces  of  wire  or  little  rods 
are  also  made  to  rotate  irregularly,  just  as  pieces 
of  iron  wire  and  iron  balls  and  other  spherical 
loadstones  are  made  to  rotate  irregularly  by  an 
oblong  loadstone  not  rounded  into  a  ball.  Yet 
magnetic  bodies  or  pieces  of  iron  on  the  surface 
of  a  terrella  should  not  have  a  long  but  a  very 
short  axis,  so  that  they  may  dip  true  and  nat¬ 
urally;  for  a  long  versorium  situated  near  a  ter¬ 
rella  does  not  easily  stand  in  a  right  sphere  on 
the  horizon,  and  wavers  and  suddenly  dips  to 
one  side  or  the  other,  especially  its  magnetized 
end,  or,  if  both  ends  are  magnetized,  then  the 
end  magnetized  last. 

CHAPTER  5.  That  dip  is  not  caused  by  the  attraction 
of  a  loadstone,  but  by  its  power  of  giving  direction 
and  rotation 

Throughout  nature  we  have  to  recognize  that 
wondrous  work  of  the  Maker  whereby  the  prin¬ 
cipal  bodies  are  restricted  within  particular  lo¬ 
calities  and,  as  it  were,  hedged  round  with  fences, 
nature  so  ordering.  Hence  it  is  that  heavenly 
bodies  do  not  get  confused  in  their  motions  and 
in  their  progressions  beyond  each  other.  Simi¬ 
larly  are  the  magnetic  revolutions  produced  by 
the  force  of  a  greater  and  dominant  body  as  well 
as  by  that  of  a  lesser  and  subject  body,  though 
that  be  of  very  small  volume.  For  the  work  is 
not  done  by  attraction  but  by  incitation  on  the 
part  of  both,  and  that  with  a  proportionate 
movement  toward  fixed  points  beyond  which 
there  is  no  further  motion.  For  did  the  versori¬ 
um  dip  under  the  action  of  an  attractive  force, 
then  a  terrella  fashioned  out  of  a  very  powerful 
loadstone  would  pull  it  to  itself  more  than 
would  one  made  of  an  indifferent  loadstone,  and 
iron  stroked  by  a  strong  loadstone  would  have 
greater  dip;  but  that  is  never  so.  Further,  a 
piece  of  iron  attached  to  and  projecting  from 
the  terrella  at  any  latitude  does  not  cause  a  lit¬ 
tle  iron  bar  to  rise  more  to  perpendicular  than 
does  the  unarmed  stone,  though  when  so  armed 
the  stone  does  seize  and  lift  far  heavier  weights. 
But  if  a  loadstone  be  somewhat  fashioned  to  a 
point  at  one  end,  and  rather  obtuse  at  the  other, 
the  acute  end  or  pole  solicits  with  greater  force 
magnetized  iron,  the  obtuse,  thick  end  makes 
the  iron  turn  to  itself  more  powerfully;  but  a 
spherical  stone  makes  it  turn  to  itself  power- 


98  WILLIAM 

fully  and  in  true  direction  according  to  mag¬ 
netic  laws  and  the  form  of  spheres;  while  a 
loadstone  of  some  length  from  pole  to  pole 
stirs  the  versorium  unequally,  for  in  such  a  stone 
the  pole  of  the  versorium  always  is  pointed  to¬ 
ward  the  pole  of  the  loadstone  itself.  So,  too,  if 
the  loadstone  take  a  disk  shape,  with  the  poles 
in  the  circumference,  but  with  the  body  plane 
and  not  spherical,  when  the  plane  is  brought 
near  to  the  versorium,  the  versorium  does  not 
move  with  the  regular  magnetic  movement  as 
with  a  terrella,  but  turns  round  always  pointing 
toward  the  pole  of  the  loadstone  situated  in  the 
circumference  of  the  plane.  Besides,  if  the  stone 
caused  the  versorium  to  revolve  by  attraction, 
then  in  the  first  degrees  of  latitude  it  would  at¬ 
tract  toward  the  mass  of  the  terrella  itself  the  end 
of  a  short  versorium;  but  it  does  not  so  attract 
as  to  bring  the  two  together  and  into  coition — 
the  versorium  simply  revolves  so  far  as  nature 
demands,  as  is  shown  in  the  following  instance. 


For  here  the  point  of  a  versorium  in  a  low 
latitude  neither  touches  the  stone  nor  comes  in¬ 
to  coition  with  it,  only  inclines  toward  it.  Fur¬ 
ther,  when  the  versorium  rotates  as  it  dips,  the 
pole  of  the  versorium  is  not  stayed  nor  held  by 
the  pole  of  the  earth  or  the  terrella,  but  revolves 
regularly,  nor  remains  in  any  point  or  terminus 
nor  looks  straight  to  the  pole  toward  which  the 
centre  of  the  versorium  advances,  save  at  the 
pole  itself,  and  that  only  once  between  the  pole 
and  the  equator;  but  the  inclination  goes  on 
according  as  the  change  in  the  site  of  the  centre 
produces  a  dip  in  conformity  to  magnetic  laws. 
The  dip  of  the  needle  in  water,  demonstrated 
in  the  sequel,  is  also  constant:  the  needle  does 
not  dip  toward  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  but 
stands  in  mid  direction  poised  on  its  centre  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  due  dip;  yet  this  would  not  be 
the  case  if  the  earth  or  its  poles  by  attraction 
made  the  extremity  of  the  needle  to  dip. 

CHAPTER  6.  Of  the  ratio  of  dip  to  latitude  and  the 
causes  thereof 

We  have  spoken  of  the  construction  of  the  in¬ 
strument  for  determining  the  dip,  of  the  causes 
and  modes  of  the  dip,  and  of  the  different  in¬ 


GILBERT 

clinations  of  the  needle  for  different  localities; 
of  the  inclination  of  the  loadstone,  too,  and  of  an 
instrument  for  showing  the  power  of  the  stone 
at  any  latitude,  as  well  as  of  the  demonstrated 
rotation  (by  erection)  of  pieces  of  iron  on  a 
meridian  of  the  stone,  according  to  latitude.  We 
have  now  to  treat  more  at  length  of  the  causes 
of  this  proportionate  inclination.  A  loadstone 
and  a  piece  of  iron  wire,  when  moved  in  a  me¬ 
ridian  from  the  equator  to  the  pole,  turn  toward 
a  spherical  loadstone,  and  toward  the  earth  also, 
with  a  circular  motion.  In  a  right  horizon  (as 
also  upon  the  equinoctial  circle  of  the  stone) 
the  axis  of  the  iron,  which  is  its  middle,  is  a  line 
parallel  with  the  earth’s  axis.  When  that  axis 
reaches  the  pole,  which  is  its  centre,  it  stands 
still  in  the  same  right  line  with  the  earth’s  axis. 
The  same  end  of  the  iron  that  at  the  equator 
points  south  turns  to  the  north;  for  it  is  not  a 
movement  of  centre  to  centre,  but  of  one  mag¬ 
netic  body  to  another,  and  a  natural  turning  of 
the  axis  of  the  body  to  the  axis  of  the  terrella, 
not  caused  by  the  pole’s  attraction,  so  that  the 
iron  should  regard  the  earth’s  polar  point.  On 
the  equator  the  magnetic  iron  stands  in  hori¬ 
zontal  equilibrium,  but  toward  the  pole  on  ei¬ 
ther  side  of  the  equator,  at  every  latitude  from 
the  beginning  of  the  first  degree  even  to  the 
90th,  it  dips;  yet,  not  in  ratio  to  the  number  of 
degrees  or  the  arc  of  the  latitude  does  the  mag¬ 
netic  needle  dip  so  many  degrees  or  over  a  like 
arc ;  but  over  a  very  different  one,  for  this  move¬ 
ment  is  in  truth  not  a  dipping  movement,  but 
really  a  revolution  movement,  and  it  describes 
an  arc  of  revolution  proportioned  to  the  arc  of 
latitude.  Hence  the  magnetic  body  while  it 


passes  round  the  earth,  or  an  earthkin  or  terrel¬ 
la,  from  the  equinoctial  circle  G  toward  B  (the 
pole),  rotates  on  its  centre,  and,  midway  in  its 
progress  from  the  equator  to  pole  B,  points  to 
the  equator  F  as  the  mean  of  the  two  poles: 
therefore  ought  the  versorium  to  rotate  much 
more  quickly  than  the  centre  travels  in  order 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


to  regard  the  point  F  in  a  right  line  by  rotating. 
For  this  reason  the  movement  of  this  rotation  is 
quick  in  the  first  degrees  from  the  equator,  from 
A  to  L,  but  slower  in  the  subsequent  degrees, 
from  L  to  B,  that  is,  with  reference  to  the  equa¬ 
torial  point  F,  toward  C.  But  were  dip  equal  to 
the  latitude,  i,e,,  always  so  many  degrees  from 
the  horizon  as  the  centre  of  the  versorium  has 
gone  away  from  the  equator,  then  the  magnetic 
needle  would  obey  the  potency  and  the  peculiar 
virtue  of  the  centre  as  a  point  operating  of  it¬ 
self;  but  it  obeys  the  whole  and  its  mass  and 
outer  limits,  the  powers  of  both  co-operating, 
to  wit,  those  of  the  magnetized  versorium  and 
of  the  earth. 

CHAPTER  7.  Explanation  of  the  diagram  of  the  ro¬ 
tation  of  fnagnetized  iron 

Let  ACDL  be  the  body  of  the  earth  or  of  a  ter- 
rella,  M  the  centre,  AD  the  equator,  CL  the 
axis,  AB  the  horizon,  which  changes  according 
to  the  locality.  From  the  point  Fin  the  horizon, 

B  F  A 


G 

at  a  distance  from  the  equator  A  equal  to  the 
semi-diameter  CM  of  earth  or  terrella,  is  de¬ 
scribed  an  arc  to  H  as  terminus  of  the  quadrants 
of  dip:  for  all  quadrants  of  dip  that  belong  {in' 
servinnt)  to  the  parts  between  and  C  begin  at 
that  arc  and  terminate  in  the  earth’s  centre,  M. 
The  semi-diameter  of  this  arc  is  a  chord  drawn 
from  the  equator  A  to  the  pole  C.  And  a  line 
equal  to  that  chord,  drawn  in  the  horizon  to  B, 


99 

gives  the  starting  point  of  the  arc  of  the  termini 
of  the  arcs  of  revolution  and  rotation,  which  arc 
is  continued  on  to  G.  For  as  the  quadrant  of  a 
circle  around  the  earth’s  centre  (the  starting- 
point  of  it  being  in  the  horizon,  at  a  distance 
from  the  equator  equal  to  the  earth’s  semi¬ 
diameter)  is  the  terminus  of  all  the  quadrants  of 
dip  produced  from  every  horizon  to  the  centre, 
so  a  circle  round  the  centre  from  the  starting 
point  of  the  first  arc  of  rotation  B  to  G  is  the 
terminus  of  the  arcs  of  rotation.  Between  the 
arc  of  rotation  BL  and  BG  are  intermediate 
arcs  of  revolution  and  rotation  of  the  magnetic 
needle.  The  centre  of  the  arc  is  the  region  or 
place  where  the  observation  is  obtained;  the 
beginning  of  the  arc  is  taken  from  the  circle 
that  is  terminus  of  the  revolutions,  and  it  ends 
at  the  opposite  pole,  as  from  O  to  L,  in  45  de¬ 
grees  latitude.  Divide  any  arc  of  revolution  into 
90  equal  parts  from  the  terminus  of  the  arcs  of 
revolution  to  the  pole;  for  whatever  the  degree 
of  latitude  of  the  place,  that  part  of  the  arc  of 
revolution  is  to  be  reckoned  as 
cognominal  to  it  which  the  mag¬ 
netic  pole  in  rotating  upon  or 
around  terrella  or  earth  regards: 
in  the  large  diagram  that  fol¬ 
lows,  this  is  indicated  by  the 
right  lines.  In  the  middle  lati¬ 
tude  of  45  degrees  the  magnetic 
rotation  is  directed  to  the  equa¬ 
tor,  and  there  also  the  arc  from 
its  terminus  to  the  pole  is  the 
quadrant  of  a  circle;  but  at  lati¬ 
tudes  above  this  (i.e.^  nearer  the 
equator)  all  the  arcs  of  revolu¬ 
tion  are  greater  than  a  quadrant ; 
in  latitudes  below  this  (/.^., 
higher,  farther  from  the  equa¬ 
tor)  they  are  less:  in  the  former 
the  needle  rotates  quickly;  in 
the  latter  it  gradually  rotates 
more  slowly.  Each  region  has  its 
own  arc  of  revolution,  in  which 
is,  according  to  the  number  of 
the  degree  of  latitude  of  the 
place,  the  terminus  toward 
which  the  needle  turns;  so  that  a  right  line  drawn 
from  the  region  to  a  point  in  that  arc  cognomi¬ 
nal  to  the  number  of  the  degree  of  latitude  in¬ 
dicates  the  magnetic  direction,  and  shows  the 
degree  of  the  inclination  at  the  intersection  of 
the  quadrant  of  dip  that  belongs  to  the  given 
region.  Take  away  the  arc  of  the  quadrant  of 
dip  from  the  centre  to  the  line  of  magnetic  di¬ 
rection,  and  what  remains  is  the  arc  of  dip  be- 


100 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


neath  the  horizon.  Thus,  in  the  rotation  of  the 
versorium  Ny  whose  line  of  magnetic  direction 
extends  to  D,  take  away  from  the  quadrant  of 
dip  SM  its  arc  RMy  and  what  remains  will  be 
the  arc  of  dip,  that  is,  it  shows  how  much  the 
needle  dips  in  latitude  45  degrees. 

CHAPTER  8.  Diagram  of  the  rotation  of  magnet¬ 
ized  irony  showing  the  magnetic  dip  in  all  latitudeSy 
and  showing  the  latitude  from  the  rotation  and  dip 

In  the  foregoing  diagram,  around  the  body  of 
the  earth  or  of  the  terrella  are  drawn  a  circle  of 
rotation  and  a  circle  of  dip,  together  with  a 
first,  a  last,  and  a  middle  arc  of  rotation  and  dip. 
Now  from  each  one  fifth  part  of  that  arc  which 
terminates  all  the  arcs  of  rotation  (and  each  of 
which  also  is  supposed  to  be  divided  into  90 


equal  parts)  are  drawn  arcs  to  the  pole,  and  from 
every  fifth  degree  of  the  arc  terminating  the 
quadrants  of  dip  are  drawn  quadrants  to  the 
centre,  and  at  the  same  time  is  drawn  a  spiral 
line  indicating  (by  the  aid  of  a  movable  quad¬ 
rant)  the  dip  in  every  latitude.  Right  lines  of 
magnetic  direction  are  drawn  from  the  degrees 
marked  on  the  meridian  of  earth  or  terrella  to 
their  proper  arcs  and  to  the  parts  answering  to 
those  arcs. 

How  to  ascertain  the  elevation  of  the  pole,  or 
the  latitude  of  any  placey  by  means  of  the  follow- 
ing  diagram y  turned  into  a  magnetic  instrument y  in 
any  part  of  the  worldy  without  the  help  of  the  heav¬ 
enly  hodieSy  suny  planetSy  or fixed  starSy  and  in  fog¬ 
gy  weather  as  well  as  in  darkness 


06 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


We  can  see  how  far  from  idle  is  the  magnetic 
philosophy;  on  the  contrary,  how  delightful, 
how  beneficial,  how  divine!  Seamen  tossed  by 
the  waves  and  vexed  with  incessant  storms, 
while  they  cannot  learn  even  from  the  heaven¬ 
ly  luminaries  aught  as  to  where  on  earth  they 
are,  may  with  the  greatest  ease  gain  comfort 
from  an  insignificant  instrument,  and  ascertain 
the  latitude  of  the  place  where  they  happen  to 
be.  With  a  dip  instrument  an  observation  is 
taken  of  the  degree  of  the  needle’s  dip  beneath 
the  horizon;  that  degree  is  noted  on  the  inside 


arc  of  the  quadrant,  and  the  quadrant  is  turned 
round  at  the  centre  of  the  instrument  until  that 
degree  on  the  quadrant  touches  the  spiral  line : 
then  in  the  open  space  B,  at  the  centre  of  the 
quadrant,  the  latitude  of  the  region  on  the  pe¬ 
riphery  of  the  globe  is  found  by  the  linea  fiduciss 
AB.  Draw  the  diagram  on  a  suitable  planed 
board,  and  to  its  centre  attach  the  centre  of  the 
angle  of  the  quadrant  Ay  so  that  the  quadrant 
may  rotate  on  that  centre.  But  it  must  be  re¬ 
membered  also  that  in  some  places  there  is  var¬ 
iation  in  dip  for  the  causes  aforesaid  (albeit  the 
variation  is  not  great):  this  variation  also  it  will 
be  well  to  study,  and  to  account  for  on  some 
probable  hypothesis,  and  it  will  be  of  very  great 
interest  to  observe  it  in  different  localities,  for 
this  variation  of  dip  seems  to  present  more  diffi¬ 
culty  than  the  variation  of  direction;  but  it  is 
readily  understood  with  dip  instruments  when 


lOI 

it  disagrees  either  by  plus  or  by  minus  with  the 
diagram. 

Observing  the  magnetic  dip  at  sea 

Place  the  dip  instrument  upon  our  variation 
instrument,  a  wooden  ball  being  put  between 
the  round  movable  compass'box  and  the  dip 
instrument;  but  first  remove  the  versorium, 
lest  it  interfere  with  the  dip  instrument.  In  this 
way,  when  the  sea  is  in  commotion  the  com¬ 
pass-box  will  remain  erect  on  the  level  of  the 
horizon.  The  dip  compass  is  to  be  directed,  by 
means  of  a  small  versorium  at  its  base, 
to  the  point  of  the  variation,  to  the 
greater  circle  of  which  (commonly 
called  the  magnetic  meridian)  the 
plane  of  the  upright  compass  con¬ 
forms;  thus  the  dip  instrument,  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  its  property  of  rotating,  shows 
the  degree  of  the  dip. 

In  a  dip  instrument  the  magnetic  nee' 
die  which  when  on  a  meridian  circle  de' 
scendsy  hangs  perpendicular  when  it  lies 
on  a  parallel. 

The  magnetic  needle,  in  due  posi¬ 
tion,  while  it  conforms  itself  to  the 
earth  in  virtue  of  its  rotatory  property, 
dips  in  an  oblique  sphere  to  a  certain 
extent.  But  when  the  plane  of  the  in¬ 
strument  is  removed  from  the  plane 
of  the  meridian,  the  needle  (which 
tends  poleward)  no  longer  remains  in 
the  degree  of  its  dip,  but  inclines  more 
toward  the  centre,  for  the  directional 
force  is  greater  than  that  of  the  dip; 
and  all  power  of  dip  is  taken  away  if  the 
plane  of  the  instrument  be  on  a  parallel.  For  then 
the  needle,  its  axis  being  transverse,  cannot  take 
its  due  position,  and  so  tends  perpendicular  to 
earth,  and  remains  only  in  its  own  meridian, 
or  in  what  is  commonly  called  the  magnetic 
meridian. 

CHAPTER  9.  Demonstration  of  directiony  or  of  vari¬ 
ation  from  the  true  directiony  together  with  dipy 
simply  by  the  movement  in  watery  due  to  the  power  of 
controlling  and  rotating 

Pass  through  a  round  cork  three  finger- breadths 
of  thin  iron  wire,  so  that  the  cork  may  support 
the  iron  in  water.  Let  the  water  be  contained  in 
a  vase  or  large  goblet  of  glass.  With  a  very  sharp 
knife  pare  the  cork  away  gradually  (still  pre¬ 
serving  its  rotundity)  till  it  will  stand  a  finger- 
breadth  or  two  under  the  surface  motionless, 
with  the  wire  evenly  balanced.  Then  stroke  one 


102 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


end  of  the  wire  on  the  north  pole  of  a  loadstone, 
the  other  end  on  the  south  pole  (very  carefully, 
so  that  the  cork  may  not  be  moved  ever  so  little 
out  of  its  place),  and  put  the  instrument  again 
in  the  water.  The  wire  will  dip  with  a  circular 
movement  on  its  centre  below  the  plane  of  the 
horizon,  according  to  the  latitude  of  the  place, 
and  even  as  it  dips  will  show  (the  true  direction 
being  disordered)  the  point  of  variation.  The 
loadstone  with  which  it  is  rubbed  should  be  a 
powerful  one,  such  as  is  required  in  all  magnetic 
demonstrations.  When  the  wire  having  been  thus 
put  in  the  water,  and  treated  with  the  load' 
stone,  comes  to  a  standstill  in  the  line  of  the  dip, 
its  lower  end  remains  in  the  point  of  variation 
in  an  arc  of  a  great  circle,  or  meridian,  passing 
through  the  zenith  and  the  point  of  variation  in 
the  horizon,  and  through  that  lowermost  point 
of  the  heavens  called  nadir:  all  this  is  demon¬ 
strated  by  bringing  a  rather  long  magnetized 
needle  near  the  vessel  on  one  side.  This  is 
a  demonstration  of  the  absolute  conforming 
of  a  magnetic  body  to  unity  with  the  earth’s 
body;  here  in  the  natural  way  is  manifested 
direction  with  variation  thereof  and  dip.  But 
it  is  to  be  understood  that  delicate  and  diffi¬ 
cult  as  this  experiment  is,  so  it  does  not  con¬ 
tinue,  for  the  apparatus  does  not  remain  in 
the  midst  of  the  water,  but  at  last  sinks  to  the 
bottom  when  the  cork  has  taken  in  too  much 
water. 


CHAP'I’ER  10.  Of  variation  of  dip 

We  have  already  spoken  of  direction  and  of  va¬ 
riation  as  a  sort  of  derangement  of  direction. 
Now  we  observe  a  like  irregular  movement  in 
the  dip,  when  it  descends  beneath  the  limits  or 
when,  as  sometimes  happens,  it  does  not  reach 
its  due  bounds.  Thus  the  variation  of  the  dip  is 
an  arc  of  the  magnetic  meridian  betwixt  the 
true  and  the  apparent  dip.  For  as,  because  of 
elevations  of  the  earth  magnetized  bodies  are 
pulled  to  one  side,  so,  too,  the  needle  (its  rota¬ 
tion  being  a  little  increased)  dips  beyond  the 
due  measure.  And  as  variation  is  a  deviation  in 
direction,  so,  for  the  same  reason,  there  is  some 
error  of  dip,  albeit  usually  a  trifling  one.  Some¬ 
times,  too,  though  there  be  no  variation  of  di¬ 
rection  on  the  horizon,  there  may  nevertheless 
be  a  variation  of  the  dip,  to  wit,  when  either  in 
a  direct  meridian  line,  on  the  meridian  it¬ 
self,  there  projects  some  magnetically  powerful 
earthmass,  or  when  such  elevations  have  less 
force  than  is  called  for  by  the  general  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  globe,  or  when  the  energy  is  over¬ 
concentrated  in  one  part,  and  in  another  is  dif¬ 
fused,  as  we  may  see  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  And 
this  discrepancy  of  constitution,  this  variance  of 
effect,  we  easily  recognize  in  certain  parts  of 
every  spherical  loadstone.  The  inequality  of  force 
in  the  various  regions  of  a  terrella  is  shown  by 
the  conclusive  experiment  described  in  Chapter 
2  of  this  Book.  And  the  effect  is  clearly  shown 
by  the  demonstrational  instrument,  an  account 
of  which  is  contained  in  Chapter  2  of  the  same 
Book. 

CHAPTER  11.  Of  the  formal  magnetic  act  spherical- 
ly  effzised 

Repeatedly  we  have  spoken  of  the  poles  of 
earth  and  terrella  and  of  the  equinoctial  circle; 
last  we  treated  of  the  dip  of  magnetized  bodies 
earthward  and  terrellaward,  and  the  causes 
thereof.  But  having  with  divers  and  manifold 
contrivances  laboured  long  and  hard  to  get  at  the 
cause  of  this  dip,  we  have  by  good  fortune  dis¬ 
covered  a  new  and  admirable  science  of  the 
spheres  themselves — a  science  surpassing  the 
marvels  of  all  the  virtues  magnetical.  For  such 
is  the  property  of  magnetic  spheres  that  their 
force  is  poured  forth  and  diffused  beyond  their 
superficies  spherically,  the  form  being  exalted 
above  the  bounds  of  corporeal  nature;  and  the 
mind  that  has  diligently  studied  this  natural 
philosophy  will  discover  the  definite  causes  of 
the  movements  and  revolutions.  The  potencies 
of  a  terrella,  too,  are  of  the  same  kind  through- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


out  the  whole  sphere  of  its  influence,  and  the 
spheres  (of  influence)  themselves,  at  whatever 
distance  from  the  body  of  the  terrella,  have,  in 
the  ratio  of  their  diameter  and  the  quantity  of 
their  superficies,  termini  of  their  forces,  or,  in 
other  words,  there  are  points  whereat  magnetic 
bodies  turn  toward  them;  and  these  bodies  do 
not  regard  the  same  part  or  point  of  the  terrella 
at  every  distance  whatever  therefrom  (unless 
they  be  in  the  axis  of  the  spheres  and  the  terrel¬ 
la),  but  ever  do  tend  toward  those  points  of  the 
spheres  (of  influence)  which  are  equal  arcs  dis¬ 
tant  from  their  common  axis.  Thus  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  diagram  we  show  the  body  of  a  terrella. 


103 

the  air  or  water  took  them  on  or  were  by  them 
informated;  for  the  forms  are  only  effused  and 
really  subsist  when  magnetic  bodies  are  present: 
hence  the  magnetic  body  within  the  forces  and 
limits  of  the  spheres  is  taken  hold  of,  and  in  the 
several  spheres  magnetic  bodies  control  other 
bodies  magnetical  and  excite  them  even  as 
though  the  spheres  of  influence  were  solid  ma- 
teriate  loadstones;  for  the  magnetic  force  does 
not  proceed  through  the  whole  of  the  medium, 
nor  exists  really  as  in  a  continuous  body;  and  so 
the  spheres  are  magnetical,  and  yet  are  not  real 
spheres  existing  by  themselves. 

AB  is  the  axis  of  a  terrella  and  its  spheres;  CD 


C 


with  its  poles  and  equator;  also  a  magnetic  nee¬ 
dle  in  three  other  concentric  spheres  around  the 
terrella  and  at  some  distance  therefrom.  In  these 
spheres  (and  they  may  be  imagined  as  infinite) 
the  magnetic  needle  or  versorium  regards  its 
own  sphere  in  which  it  is  placed  and  its  diameter, 
poles,  and  equator,  not  those  of  the  terrella;  and 
it  is  by  these  and  in  accordance  with  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  these  that  it  is  made  to  rotate  and  is 
directed,  both  while  its  centre  stands  still  and 
while  it  advances  in  any  arc  whatever  of  that 
sphere.  Still  we  do  not  mean  that  the  magnetic 
forms  and  spheres  exist  in  the  air,  or  water,  or 
any  other  medium  not  magnetical,  as  though 


the  equator.  In  all  the  spheres,  as  on  the  terrella, 
at  the  equator  the  versorium  lies  in  the  plane  of 
the  horizon;  in  the  axis  it  everywhere  regards 
the  centre  perpendicularly;  in  the  mid  spaces, 
E  regards  Z),  and  G  regards  //,  not  F,  which  is 
regarded  by  the  versorium  L  on  the  superficies 
of  the  terrella.  But  as  is  the  proportion  of  L  to 
F  on  the  terrella’s  superficies,  such  is  that  of  G 
to  H  in  its  own  sphere,  and  of  E  to  Z)  in  its  own 
sphere;  so  all  the  revolutions  in  the  spheres  to 
the  termini  of  the  spheres  are  such  as  are  the 
revolutions  at  the  surface  of  the  terrella  or  to 
its  termini.  But  if  in  the  more  distant  spheres 
there  is  now  and  then  some  error,  that  is  to  be 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


104 

charged  to  the  inertia  of  the  loadstone  or  to 
weakened  power,  because  of  the  too  great  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  spheres  from  the  terrella. 

Demonstration 

Upon  the  instrumental  diagram  above  de¬ 
scribed,  place  a  small  board  or  a  strong  disk  of 
brass  or  tin  on  which  are  inscribed  the  magnetic 
spheres,  as  in  the  diagram;  and  in  the  middle 
make  a  hole  proportioned  to  the  size  of  the  ter¬ 
rella,  so  that  the  board  may  lie  evenly  on  the 
middle  of  it  along  the  meridian  circle  above  the 
wood.  Then  in  one  of  the  spheres  of  influence 
place  a  small  versorium  one  barley-corn  long; 
the  \’ersorium,  as  it  there  moves  into  various 
positions  in  the  same  circle,  will  always  have  re¬ 
gard  to  the  dimensions  of  that  sphere  and  not 
those  of  the  terrella,  as  is  seen  in  the  diagram  of 
the  effused  magnetic  forms.  While  some  writers 
posit  as  causes  of  the  wonderful  effects  of  the 
loadstone  occult  and  recondite  virtues  of  things, 
and  others  regard  a  property  of  the  loadstone’s 
substance  as  the  cause,  we  have  discovered  the 
primary  substantial  form  not  in  some  more  or 
less  probable  foreshadowing  of  truth  or  in  rea¬ 
sons  that  admit  of  controversy;  but  as  in  many 
other  demonstrations,  so  in  this  most  indisputa¬ 
ble  diagram  of  the  forces  magnetical  effused  by 
the  form,  we  grasp  the  true  efficient  cause.  And 
this  (the  form),  though  it  is  subject  to  none  of 
our  senses  and  is  therefore  less  perceptible  to  the 
intellect,  now  appears  manifest  and  visible  be¬ 
fore  our  very  eyes  through  this  formal  act,  which 
proceeds  from  it  as  light  proceeds  from  a  source 
of  light.  And  here  it  is  to  be  noted  that  a  mag¬ 
netic  needle  moved  over  the  earth,  or  over  a 
terrella,  or  over  the  effused  spheres,  rotates  com¬ 
pletely  twice  in  one  circuit  of  its  centre,  like  an 
epicycle  round  its  circle. 

CHAPTER  12.  The  magnetic  force  is  animate^  or 
imitates  a  soul;  in  many  respects  it  surpasses  the  hu¬ 
man  soul  while  that  is  united  to  an  organic  body 

Wonderful  is  the  loadstone  shown  in  many  ex¬ 
periments  to  be,  and,  as  it  were,  animate.  And 
this  one  eminent  property  is  the  same  which  the 
ancients  held  to  be  a  soul  in  the  heavens,  in  the 
globes,  and  in  the  stars,  in  sun  and  moon.  For 
they  deemed  that  not  without  a  divine  and  ani¬ 
mate  nature  could  movements  so  diverse  be  pro¬ 
duced,  such  vast  bodies  revolve  in  fixed  times, 
or  potencies  so  wonderful  be  infused  into  other 
bodies;  whereby  the  whole  world  blooms  with 
most  beautiful  diversity  through  this  primary 
form  of  the  globes  themselves.  The  ancient  phi¬ 
losophers,  as  Thales,  Heraclitus,  Anaxagoras 


Archelaus,  Pythagoras,  Empedocles,  Parmeni¬ 
des,  Plato  and  all  the  Platonists — nor  Greek 
philosophers  alone,  but  also  the  Egyptian  and 
Chaldean — all  seek  in  the  world  a  certain  uni¬ 
versal  soul,  and  declare  the  whole  world  to  be 
endowed  with  a  soul.  Aristotle  held  that  not  the 
universe  is  animate,  but  the  heavens  only;  his 
elements  he  made  out  to  be  inanimate;  but  the 
stars  were  for  him  animate.  As  for  us,  we  find 
this  soul  only  in  the  globes  and  in  their  homo- 
genic  parts,  and  albeit  this  soul  is  not  in  all  globes 
the  same  (for  that  in  the  sun  or  in  certain  stars 
is  much  superior  to  that  in  other  less  noble 
globes).  Still  in  very  many  globes  the  souls  agree 
in  their  powers.  Thus,  each  homogenic  part  tends 
to  its  own  globe  and  inclines  in  the  direction 
common  to  the  whole  world,  and  in  all  globes 
the  effused  forms  reach  out  and  are  projected  in 
a  sphere  all  round,  and  have  their  own  bounds — 
hence  the  order  and  regularity  of  all  the  mo¬ 
tions  and  revolutions  of  the  planets,  and  their 
circuits,  not  pathless,  but  fixed  and  determinate, 
wherefore  Aristotle  concedes  to  the  spheres  and 
heavenly  orbs  (which  he  imagines)  a  soul,  for 
the  reason  that  they  are  capable  of  circular  mo¬ 
tion  and  action  and  that  they  move  in  fixed, 
definite,  tracks.  And  I  wonder  much  why  the 
globe  of  earth  with  its  effluences  should  have 
been  by  him  and  his  followers  condemned  and 
driven  into  exile  and  cast  out  of  all  the  fair  order 
of  the  glorious  universe,  as  being  brute  and  soul¬ 
less.  In  comparison  with  the  whole  creation  ’tis 
a  mere  mite,  and  amid  the  mighty  host  of  many 
thousands  is  lowly,  of  small  account,  and  de¬ 
formate.  And  to  it  the  Aristotelians  add  allied 
elements  that  by  like  ill-fortune  are  also  beggar¬ 
ly  and  despicable.  Thus  Aristotle’s  world  would 
seem  to  be  a  monstrous  creation,  in  which  all 
things  are  perfect,  vigorous,  animate,  while  the 
earth  alone,  luckless  small  fraction,  is  imperfect, 
dead,  inanimate,  and  subject  to  decay.  On  the 
other  hand,  Hermes,  Zoroaster,  Orpheus,  rec¬ 
ognize  a  universal  soul.  As  for  us,  we  deem  the 
whole  world  animate,  and  all  globes,  all  stars, 
and  this  glorious  earth,  too,  we  hold  to  be  from 
the  beginning  by  their  own  destinate  souls  gov¬ 
erned  and  from  them  also  to  have  the  impulse 
of  self-preservation.  Nor  are  the  organs  required 
for  organic  action  lacking,  whether  implanted 
in  the  homogenic  nature  or  scattered  through 
the  homogenic  body,  albeit  these  organs  are  not 
made  up  of  viscera  as  animal  organs  are,  nor 
consist  of  definite  members;  indeed  in  some 
plants  and  shrubs  the  organs  are  hardly  recog¬ 
nizable,  nor  are  visible  organs  essential  for  life 
in  all  cases.  Neither  in  any  of  the  stars,  nor  in 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


the  sun,  nor  in  the  planets  that  are  most  operant 
in  the  world,  can  organs  be  distinguished  or  im¬ 
agined  by  us;  nevertheless,  they  live  and  endow 
with  life  small  bodies  at  the  earth’s  elevated 
points.  If  there  is  aught  of  which  man  may  boast, 
that  of  a  surety  is  soul,  is  mind;  and  the  other 
animals,  too,  are  ennobled  by  soul;  even  God, 
by  whose  rod  all  things  are  governed,  is  soul. 
But  who  shall  assign  organs  to  the  divine  intel¬ 
lects,  seeing  that  they  are  superior  to  all  organ- 
structure,  nor  are  comprised  in  material  organs? 
But  in  the  bodies  of  the  several  stars  the  inborn 
energy  works  in  ways  other  than  in  that  divine 
essence  which  presides  over  nature;  and  in  the 
stars,  the  sources  of  all  things,  in  other  ways 
than  in  animals;  finally,  in  animals  in  other  ways 
than  in  plants.  Pitiable  is  the  state  of  the  stars, 
abject  the  lot  of  earth,  if  this  high  dignity  of 
soul  is  denied  them,  while  it  is  granted  to  the 
worm,  the  ant,  the  roach,  to  plants  and  morels; 
for  in  that  case  worms,  roaches,  moths,  were 
more  beauteous  objects  in  nature  and  more  per¬ 
fect,  inasmuch  as  nothing  is  excellent,  nor  pre¬ 
cious,  nor  eminent,  that  hath  not  soul.  But  since 
living  bodies  spring  from  earth  and  sun  and  by 
them  arc  animate,  and  since  in  the  earth  herb¬ 
age  springs  up  without  sowing  of  seeds  (e.g., 
when  soil  is  taken  out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth 
and  carried  to  some  great  elevation  or  to  the  top 
of  a  lofty  tower  and  there  exposed  to  the  sun¬ 
shine,  after  a  little  while  a  miscellaneous  herb¬ 
age  springs  up  in  it  unbidden),  it  is  not  likely 
that  they  (sun  and  earth)  can  do  that  which  is 
not  in  themselves;  but  they  awaken  souls,  and 
consequently  are  themselves  possessed  of  souls. 
Therefore  the  bodies  of  the  globes,  as  being  the 
foremost  parts  of  the  universe,  to  the  end  they 
might  be  in  themselves  and  in  their  state  en¬ 
dure,  had  need  of  souls  to  be  conjoined  to  them, 
for  else  there  were  neither  life,  nor  prime  act, 
nor  movement,  nor  unition,  nor  order,  nor  co¬ 
herence,  nor  conactus,  nor  sympathia,  nor  any 
generation,  nor  alternation  of  seasons,  and  no 
propagation;  but  all  were  in  confusion  and  the 
entire  world  lapse  into  chaos,  and,  in  fine,  the 
earth  were  void  and  dead  and  without  any  use. 
But  only  on  the  superficies  of  the  globes  is  plain¬ 


ly  seen  the  host  of  souls  and  of  animate  exist¬ 
ences,  and  in  their  great  and  delightful  diversity 
the  Creator  taketh  pleasure.  But  the  souls  (in 
the  interior  of  the  globes)  confined,  as  it  were, 
by  prison  bars  send  not  forth  their  effused  im¬ 
material  forms  beyond  the  limits  of  the  body, 
nor  are  bodies  put  in  motion  by  them  without 
labour  and  exertion;  a  breath  carries  and  bears 
them  forth ;  but  if  that  breath  be  fouled  or  stilled 
by  mischance,  the  bodies  lie  like  the  world’s  rec¬ 
rement  or  as  the  waste  matter  of  the  globes.  But 
the  globes  themselves  remain  and  endure,  ro¬ 
tate  and  move  in  orbits,  and  without  wasting 
or  weariness  run  their  courses.  The  human  soul 
uses  reason,  sees  many  things,  investigates  many 
more;  but,  however  well  equipped,  it  gets  light 
and  the  beginnings  of  knowledge  from  the  outer 
senses,  as  from  beyond  a  barrier — hence  the  very 
many  ignorances  and  foolishnesses  whereby  our 
judgments  and  our  life-actions  are  confused,  so 
that  few  or  none  do  rightly  and  duly  order  their 
acts.  But  the  earth’s  magnetic  force  and  the 
formate  soul  or  animate  form  of  the  globes,  that 
are  without  senses,  but  without  error  and  with¬ 
out  the  injuries  of  ills  and  diseases,  exert  an  un¬ 
ending  action,  quick,  definite,  constant,  direc¬ 
tive,  motive,  imperant,  harmonious,  through  the 
whole  mass  of  matter;  thereby  are  the  genera¬ 
tion  and  the  ultimate  decay  of  all  things  on  the 
superficies  propagated.  For  if  it  were  not  for  the 
movement  whereby  the  daily  revolution  is  ac¬ 
complished,  all  things  here  on  earth  were  wild 
and  disordered,  and  worse  than  desert  and  un¬ 
used  would  they  ever  remain.  Yet  these  move¬ 
ments  in  nature’s  founts  are  not  produced  by 
thoughts  or  reasonings  or  conjectures,  like  hu¬ 
man  acts,  which  are  contingent,  imperfect,  and 
indeterminate,  but  connate  in  them  are  reason, 
knowledge,  science,  judgment,  whence  proceed 
acts  positive  and  definite  from  the  very  founda¬ 
tions  and  beginnings  of  the  world:  these,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  weakness  of  our  soul,  we  cannot 
comprehend.  Wherefore,  not  without  reason, 
Thales,  as  Aristotle  reports  in  his  book  On  the 
Soul,  declares  the  loadstone  to  be  animate,  a 
part  of  the  animate  mother  earth  and  her  be¬ 
loved  offspring. 


BOOK  SIXTH 


CHAPTER  1.  Of  the  globe  of  earth  as  a  loadstone 

Hitherto  we  have  spoken  of  the  loadstone  and 
magnetic  bodies,  how  they  conspire  together 
and  act  on  each  other,  and  how  they  conform 
themselves  to  the  terrella  and  to  the  earth.  Now 
we  have  to  treat  of  the  globe  of  earth  itself  sep¬ 
arately.  All  the  experiments  that  are  made  on 
the  terrella,  to  show  how  magnetic  bodies  con¬ 
form  themselves  to  it,  may— at  least  the  prin¬ 
cipal  and  most  striking  of  them — be  shown  on 
the  body  of  the  earth;  to  the  earth,  too,  all  mag¬ 
netized  bodies  are  associate.  And  first,  on  the 
terrella  the  equinoctial  circle,  the  meridians, 
parallels,  the  axis,  the  poles,  are  natural  limits: 
similarly  on  the  earth  these  exist  as  natural  and 
not  merely  mathematical  limits.  As  on  the  pe¬ 
riphery  of  a  terrella  a  loadstone  or  the  magnetic 
needle  takes  direction  to  the  pole,  so  on  the 
earth  there  are  revolutions  special,  manifest, 
and  constant,  from  both  sides  of  the  equator: 
iron  is  endowed  with  verticity  by  being 
stretched  toward  the  pole  of  the  earth  as  to¬ 
ward  the  pole  of  a  terrella;  again,  by  being  laid 
down  and  suffered  to  grow  cool  lying  toward 
the  earth’s  pole,  after  its  prior  verticity  has  been 
destroyed  by  fire,  it  acquires  new  verticity  con¬ 
formed  to  the  position  earthward.  And  iron  rods 
that  have  for  a  long  time  lain  in  the  poleward 
direction  acquire  verticity  simply  by  regard¬ 
ing  the  earth;  just  as  the  same  rods,  if  they  be 
pointed  toward  the  pole  of  a  loadstone,  though 
not  touching  it,  receive  polar  force.  There  is  no 
magnetic  body  that  draws  nigh  in  any  way  to 
a  loadstone  which  does  not  in  like  manner  obey 
the  earth.  As  a  loadstone  is  more  powerful  at 
one  end  and  at  one  side  of  the  equator,  so  the 
same  thing  is  shown  with  a  small  terrella  on  a 
large  one.  According  to  the  difference  in  amount 
and  mode  of  friction  in  magnetizing  a  piece  of 
iron  at  a  terrella,  it  will  be  powerful  or  weak  in 
performing  its  functions.  In  movements  toward 
the  body  of  the  earth,  just  as  on  a  terrella,  vari¬ 
ation  is  produced  by  unlikeness  and  inequality 
of  prominences  and  by  imperfections  of  the  sur¬ 
face;  and  all  v'ariation  of  the  versorium  or  the 
mariner’s  compass  all  over  the  earth  and  ever)^- 


where  at  sea— a  thing  that  has  so  bewildered 
men’s  minds — is  found  and  recognized  through 
the  same  causes.  The  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle 
(that  wonderful  turning  of  magnetic  bodies  to 
the  body  of  the  terrella  by  formal  progression) 
is  seen  also  in  the  earth  most  clearly.  And  that 
one  experiment  reveals  plainly  the  grand  mag¬ 
netic  nature  of  the  earth,  innate  in  all  the  parts 
thereof  and  diffused  throughout.  The  magnetic 
energy,  therefore,  exists  in  the  earth  just  as  in 
the  terrella,  which  is  a  part  of  the  earth  and 
homogenic  in  nature  with  it,  but  by  art  made 
spherical  so  it  might  correspond  to  the  spheri¬ 
cal  body  of  the  earth  and  be  In  agreement  with 
the  earth’s  globe  for  the  capital  experiments. 

CHAPTER  2.  The  magnetic  axis  of  the  earth  remains 
invariable 

The  earth’s  magnetic  axis,  just  as  it  passed 
through  the  midearth  in  the  very  beginnings  of 
the  moving  world,  so  to-day  tends  through  the 
centre  to  the  same  points  of  the  superficies,  the 
equinoctial  line  and  plane  also  persisting  the 
same.  For  not,  save  with  a  vast  demolition  of 
the  terrestrial  mass,  may  these  natural  bounds 
be  altered,  as  is  easily  shown  by  magnetic  dem¬ 
onstrations.  Wherefore  the  opinion  held  by 
Dominicus  Maria  of  Ferrara,  a  man  of  rare  abil¬ 
ity,  and  who  was  the  preceptor  of  Nicolaus 
Copernicus,  is  to  be  rejected.  It  was  based  on 
certain  observ'ations,  and  was  as  follows:  “Some 
years  ago,”  he  writes,  “while  considering  Ptol¬ 
emy’s  geography,  I  found  the  elevations  of  the 
north  pole  given  by  him  for  the  several  regions 
to  fall  short  by  one  degree  and  ten  minutes  of 
what  they  are  in  our  time,  which  difference  can 
by  no  means  be  referred  to  an  error  of  the  table, 
for  it  is  not  credible  that  the  whole  book  should 
be  throughout  equally  wrong  in  the  figures  con¬ 
tained  in  the  tables;  therefore  we  must  suppose 
the  north  pole  brought  toward  the  vertical 
point.  Thus  a  protracted  observ^ation  began  to 
disclose  to  us  things  hid  from  our  ancestors — 
not  through  any  sloth  on  their  part,  but  be¬ 
cause  they  lacked  observation  of  a  long  perkxl 
by  their  predecessors.  For  very  few  places  be¬ 
fore  Ptolemy’s  time  were  observed  in  elevations 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


of  the  pole,  as  he  himself  testifies  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  his  Cosmographia\  ‘Hipparchus  alone,’ 
he  writes,  ‘hath  handed  down  to  us  the  lati¬ 
tudes  of  a  few  places;  but  many  latitudes  of  dis¬ 
tances,  especially  of  distances  to  east  and  west, 
have  been  fixed  on  a  basis  of  general  tradition, 
and  this  is  not  from  any  indolence  of  writers, 
but  because  they  were  unacquaint  with  a  more 
accurate  mathematic.’  Hence  it  is  no  wonder  if 
our  predecessors  have  not  noted  the  very  slow 
movement,  seeing  that  in  1700  years  it  has  ad¬ 
vanced  about  one  degree  toward  the  uttermost 
point  of  human  habitation.  This  is  shown  at  the 
Straits  of  Gibraltar,  where  in  Ptolemy’s  day 
the  north  pole  was  raised  36^  degrees  above 
the  horizon,  while  now  it  is  37  V5  degrees.  A  like 
difference  is  shown  by  Leucopetra  (Capo  dell’ 
Armi)  in  Calabria  and  sundry  other  places  in 
Italy,  namely,  places  that  have  not  changed 
from  Ptolemy’s  time  to  ours.  Thus,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  this  movement,  places  that  now  are 
inhabited  will  one  day  be  deserted,  while  those 
that  now  are  scorched  by  the  tropic  sun  will, 
albeit  after  a  long  time,  be  reduced  to  our  tem¬ 
perature.  For  this  very  slow  movement  will  be 
completed  in  395,000  years.” 

Thus,  according  to  Dominicus  Maria’s  obser¬ 
vations,  the  north  pole  is  raised  higher  and  the 
latitudes  of  places  are  greater  now  than  in  the 
past:  from  this  he  infers  a  change  of  latitudes. 
But  Stadius,  holding  the  directly  opposite  opin¬ 
ion,  proves  by  observations  that  the  latitudes 
have  grown  less.  “The  latitude  of  Rome,”  says 
he,  “is  given  in  the  Geographica  of  Ptolemy  as 
degrees;  and  lest  any  one  should  say  that 
some  error  has  crept  into  the  text  of  Ptolemy, 
Pliny  relates,  and  Vitruvius  in  his  Ninth  Book 
testifies,  that  at  Rome  on  the  day  of  the  equinox 
the  ninth  part  of  the  gnomon’s  shadow  is  lack¬ 
ing.  But  recent  observation  (as  Erasmus  Rhein- 
hold  states)  gives  the  latitude  of  Rome  in  our 
age  as  4^/5  degrees;  so  that  you  are  in  doubt 
whether  one  half  of  a  degree  has  been  lost  in 
the  centre  of  the  world,  or  whether  it  is  the  re¬ 
sult  of  an  obliquation  of  the  earth.”  From  this 
we  may  see  how,  on  the  basis  of  inexact  obser¬ 
vations,  men  conceive  new  and  contrary  opin¬ 
ions  as  to  the  earth’s  mechanism,  and  postulate 
absurd  motions.  For,  as  Ptolemy  simply  took 
from  Hipparchus  a  few  latitudes  and  did  not 
himself  observe  them  in  many  places,  it  is  likely 
that,  knowing  the  position  of  the  countries,  he 
made  a  conjectural  estimate  of  the  latitude  of 
cities,  and  set  such  conjectures  down  in  his  tables. 
So,  here,  in  Britain,  the  latitudes  of  cities  vary 
two  or  three  degrees,  as  we  know  by  experience. 


Hence  no  new  movement  is  to  be  postulated  on 
the  ground  of  these  miscalculations,  nor  is  the 
grand  magnetic  nature  of  the  earth  to  be  de¬ 
formed  for  the  sake  of  a  judgment  so  rashly  ar¬ 
rived  at.  And  these  errors  have  crept  into  ge¬ 
ography  all  the  more  easily  because  the  mag¬ 
netic  force  was  quite  unknown  to  authors.  Be¬ 
sides,  observations  of  latitudes  cannot  be  made 
with  exactitude  save  by  experts,  with  the  help 
of  large  instruments,  and  by  taking  account  of 
refraction  of  lights. 

CHAPTER  3.  Of  the  daily  magnetic  revolution  of  the 
globes,  as  against  the  time-honored  opinion  of  a 
primum  mobile:  a  probable  hypothesis 

Among  the  ancients,  Heraclides  of  Pontus,  and 
Eephantus,  the  Pythagoreans  Nicetas  of  Syra¬ 
cuse  and  Aristarchus  of  Samos,  and,  as  it  seems, 
many  others,  held  that  the  earth  moves,  that 
the  stars  set  through  the  interposition  of  the 
earth,  and  that  they  rise  through  the  earth’s 
giving  way:  they  do  give  the  earth  motion,  and 
the  earth  being,  like  a  wheel,  supported  on  its 
axis,  rotates  upon  it  from  west  to  east.  The 
Pythagorean  Philolaus  would  have  the  earth  to 
be  one  of  the  stars,  and  to  turn  in  an  oblique 
circle  toward  the  fire,  just  as  the  sun  and  moon 
have  their  paths:  Philolaus  was  an  illustrious 
mathematician  and  a  very  experienced  investi¬ 
gator  of  nature.  But  when  philosophy  had  come 
to  be  handled  by  many,  and  had  been  given  out 
to  the  public,  then  theories  adapted  to  the  ca¬ 
pacity  of  the  vulgar  herd  or  supported  with 
sophistical  subtleties  found  entrance  into  the 
minds  of  the  many,  and,  like  a  torrent,  swept 
all  before  them,  having  gained  favor  with  the 
multitude.  Then  were  many  fine  discoveries  of 
the  ancients  rejected  and  discredited — at  the 
least  were  no  longer  studied  and  developed. 
First,  therefore,  Copernicus  among  moderns  (a 
man  most  worthy  of  the  praise  of  scholarship) 
undertook,  with  new  hypotheses,  to  illustrate 
the  phdenomena  of  bodies  in  motion;  and  these 
demonstrations  of  reasons,  other  authors,  men 
most  conservent  with  all  manner  of  learning, 
either  follow,  or,  the  more  surely  to  discover 
the  alleged  “symphony”  of  motion,  do  observe. 
Thus  the  suppositions  and  purely  imaginary 
spheres  postulated  by  Ptolemy  and  others  for 
finding  the  times  and  periods  of  movements, 
are  not  of  necessity  to  be  accepted  in  the  physi¬ 
cal  lectures  of  philosophers. 

It  is  then  an  ancient  opinion,  handed  down 
from  the  olden  time,  but  now  developed  by 
great  thinkers,  that  the  whole  earth  makes  a 
diurnal  rotation  in  the  space  of  twenty-four 


io8  WILLIAM 

hours.  But  since  we  see  the  sun,  the  moon,  and 
the  other  planets,  and  the  whole  heavenly  host, 
within  the  term  of  one  day  come  and  depart, 
then  either  the  earth  whirls  in  daily  motion 
from  west  to  east,  or  the  whole  heavens  and  all 
the  rest  of  the  universe  of  things  necessarily 
speeds  about  from  east  to  west.  But  in  the  first 
place,  it  is  not  probable  that  the  highest  heaven 
and  all  those  visible  splendors  of  the  fixed  stars 
are  swept  round  in  this  rapid  headlong  career. 
Besides,  what  genius  ever  has  found  in  one  same 
(Ptolemaic)  sphere  those  stars  which  we  call 
fixed,  or  ever  has  given  rational  proof  that  there 
are  any  such  adamantine  spheres  at  all  ?  No  man 
hath  shown  this  ever;  nor  is  there  any  doubt 
that  even  as  the  planets  are  at  various  distances 
from  earth,  so,  too,  are  those  mighty  and  mul¬ 
titudinous  luminaries  ranged  at  various  heights 
and  at  distances  most  remote  from  earth:  they 
are  not  set  in  any  sphaeric  framework  or  firma¬ 
ment  (as  is  supposed),  nor  in  any  vaulted  struc¬ 
ture.  As  for  the  intervals  (between  the  spheres) 
imagined  by  some  authors,  they  are  matters  of 
speculation,  not  of  fact;  those  other  intervals 
do  far  surpass  them  and  are  far  more  remote; 
and,  situated  as  they  are  in  the  heavens,  at  vari¬ 
ous  distances,  in  thinnest  aether,  or  in  that  most 
subtile  fifth  essence,  or  in  vacuity— how  shall 
the  stars  keep  their  places  in  the  mighty  swirl 
of  these  enormous  spheres  composed  of  a  sub¬ 
stance  of  which  no  one  knows  aught?  Astrono¬ 
mers  have  observed  1022  stars;  besides  these, 
innumerable  other  stars  appear  minute  to  our 
senses;  as  regards  still  others,  our  sight  grows 
dim,  and  they  are  hardly  discernible  save  by  the 
keenest  eye;  nor  is  there  any  man  possessing 
the  best  power  of  vision  that  will  not,  while  the 
moon  is  below  the  horizon  and  the  atmosphere 
is  clear,  feel  that  there  are  many  more  indeter¬ 
minable  and  vacillating  by  reason  of  their  faint 
light,  obscured  because  of  the  distance.  Hence, 
that  these  are  many  and  that  they  never  can 
be  taken  in  by  the  eye,  we  may  well  believe. 
What,  then,  is  the  inconceivably  great  space 
between  us  and  these  remotest  fixed  stars  ?  and 
what  is  the  vast  immeasurable  amplitude  and 
height  of  the  imaginary  sphere  in  which  they 
are  supposed  to  be  set  ?  How  far  away  from  earth 
are  those  remotest  of  the  stars:  they  are  beyond 
the  reach  of  eye,  or  man’s  devices,  or  man’s 
thought.  What  an  absurdity  is  this  motion  (of 
spheres). 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  all  the  heavenly 
bodies,  being,  as  it  were,  set  down  in  their  des¬ 
tined  places,  in  them  arc  conglobed  whatever 
elements  bear  to  their  own  centres,  and  around 


GILBERT 

them  are  assembled  all  their  parts.  But  if  they 
have  a  motion,  it  will  be  motion  of  each  round 
its  proper  centre,  like  the  earth’s  rotation;  or  it 
will  be  by  a  progression  in  an  orbit,  like  that  of 
the  moon;  in  so  multitudinous  a  scattered  flock 
there  will  be  no  circular  motion.  And  of  the 
stars,  those  situate  nigh  the  equator  would  seem 
to  be  borne  around  with  greatest  rapidity,  while 
others  nigher  the  pole  have  a  rather  less  rapid 
movement;  and  others  still,  as  though  motion¬ 
less,  have  but  a  small  revolution.  Yet  no  differ¬ 
ences  in  the  light,  the  mass,  or  the  colors  of  the 
light  are  perceptible  for  us;  for  they  are  as  bril¬ 
liant,  as  clear,  as  resplendent,  or  as  faint  (som¬ 
bre, /w^ra?)  toward  the  poles  as  nigh  the  equator 
and  the  zodiac;  and  in  their  seats  do  they  re¬ 
main  and  there  are  they  placed,  nor  are  they 
suspended  from  aught,  nor  fastened  nor  secured 
in  any  vault.  Far  more  extravagant  yet  is  the 
idea  of  the  whirling  of  the  supposititious  prim- 
um  mobile,  which  is  still  higher,  deeper,  more 
immeasurable;  and  yet  this  incomprehensible 
primiim  mobile  would  have  to  be  of  matter,  of 
enormous  altitude,  and  far  surpassing  all  the 
creation  below  in  mass,  for  else  it  could  not 
make  the  whole  universe  down  to  the  earth  re¬ 
volve  from  east  to  west,  and  we  should  have  to 
accept  a  universal  force,  an  unending  despot¬ 
ism,  in  the  governance  of  the  stars,  and  a  hate¬ 
ful  tyranny.  This  primiim  mobile  presents  no 
visible  body,  is  in  no  wise  recognizable;  it  is  a 
fiction  believed  in  by  some  philosophers,  and 
accepted  by  weaklings  who  wonder  more  at 
this  terrestrial  mass  here  than  at  those  distant 
mighty  bodies  that  baffle  our  comprehension. 

But  there  cannot  be  diurnal  motion  of  infin¬ 
ity  or  of  an  infinite  body,  nor,  therefore,  of  this 
immeasurable 7nobile.  The  moon,  neigh¬ 
bor  of  earth,  makes  her  circuit  in  twenty-seven 
days;  Mercury  and  Venus  have  a  tardy  move¬ 
ment;  Mars  completes  his  period  in  two  years, 
Jupiter  in  twelve,  Saturn  in  thirty.  And  the 
astronomers  who  ascribe  motion  to  the  fixed 
stars  hold  that  it  is  completed,  according  to 
Ptolemy,  in  36,000  years,  or,  according  to  Co¬ 
pernicus’  observations,  in  25,816  years;  thus  in 
larger  circles  the  motion  and  the  completion  of 
the  course  are  ever  more  slow;  and  yet  this  prim- 
urn  mobile,  surpassing  all  else  in  height  and 
depth,  immeasurable,  has  a  diurnal  revolution. 
Surely  that  is  superstition,  a  philosophic  fable, 
now'  believed  only  by  simpletons  and  the  un¬ 
learned;  it  is  beneath  derision;  and  yet  in  times 
past  it  was  supported  by  calculation  and  com¬ 
parison  of  movements,  and  w'as  generally  ac¬ 
cepted  by  mathematicians,  while  the  importu- 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


nate  rabble  of  philophasters  egged  them  on. 

The  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  of 
the  planets)  seem  all  to  be  eastward,  and  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  succession  of  the  zodiacal  signs; 
and  mathematicians  and  philosophers  of  the 
vulgar  sort  do  also  believe  that  the  fixed  stars 
progress  in  the  same  way  with  a  very  slow  move¬ 
ment:  to  these  stars  they  must  needs,  through 
their  ignorance  of  the  truth,  add  a  ninth  sphere. 
But  ROW  this  inadmissible  primum  mobile^  this 
fiction,  this  something  not  comprehensible  by 
any  reasoning  and  evidenced  by  no  visible  star, 
but  purely  a  product  of  imagination  and  math¬ 
ematical  hypothesis,  accepted  and  believed  by 
philosophers,  and  reared  into  the  heavens  and 
far  beyond  all  the  stars,  this  must  needs  by  a 
contrary  incitation  wheel  from  east  to  west, 
counter  to  the  tendence  of  all  the  rest  of  the 
universe. 

Whatever  in  nature  moves  naturally,  the 
same  is  impelled  by  its  own  forces  and  by  a  con¬ 
sentient  compact  of  other  bodies.  Such  is  the 
motion  of  the  parts  to  a  whole,  of  the  globes  and 
stars  throughout  the  universe  with  each  other 
accordant;  such  is  the  circular  propulsion  of  the 
planets*  bodies,  each  the  other’s  career  observ¬ 
ing  and  inciting.  But  as  regards  this  primum 
mobile  with  its  contrary  and  most  rapid  career, 
where  are  the  bodies  that  incite  it,  that  propel 
it  ?  Where  is  the  nature  conspiring  with  it }  and 
what  mad  force  lies  beyond  the  primum  mobile? 
— for  the  agent  force  abides  in  bodies  them¬ 
selves,  not  in  space,  not  in  the  interspaces. 

But  he  who  supposes  that  all  these  bodies  are 
idle  and  inactive,  and  that  all  the  force  of  the 
universe  pertains  to  those  spheres,  is  as  foolish 
as  the  one  who,  entering  a  man’s  residence, 
thinks  it  is  the  ceilings  and  the  floors  that  govern 
the  household,  and  not  the  thoughtful  and  prov¬ 
ident  good-man  of  the  house.  So,  then,  not 
by  the  firmament  are  they  borne,  not  from  the 
firmament  have  they  movement  or  position; 
and  far  less  are  those  multitudes  of  stars  whirled 
round  en  masse  by  the  primum  mobile,  and  taken 
up  at  random  and  swept  along  in  a  reversed  di¬ 
rection  at  highest  velocity. 

Ptolemy  of  Alexandria,  it  seems  to  me,  was 
over-timid  and  scrupulous  in  apprehending  a 
break-up  of  this  nether  world  were  earth  to 
move  in  a  circle.  Why  does  he  not  apprehend 
universal  ruin,  dissolution,  confusion,  conflagra¬ 
tion,  and  stupendous  celestial  and  supercelestial 
calamities  from  a  motion  that  surpasses  all  imag¬ 
ination,  all  dreams  and  fables  and  poetic  li¬ 
censes — a  motion  ineffable  and  inconceivable  ? 
So,  then,  we  are  borne  round  and  round  by  the 


earth’s  daily  rotation — a  more  congruous  sort 
of  motion;  and  as  a  boat  glides  over  the  water, 
so  are  we  whirled  round  with  the  earth,  the 
while  we  think  we  stand  still  and  are  at  rest. 
This  seems  to  some  philosophers  wonderful  and 
incredible,  because  of  the  ingrained  belief  that 
the  mighty  mass  of  the  earth  makes  an  orbital 
movement  in  twenty-four  hours:  it  were  more 
incredible  that  the  moon  should  in  the  space  of 
twenty-four  hours  traverse  her  orbit  or  com¬ 
plete  her  course;  more  incredible  that  the  sun 
and  Mars  should  do  so;  still  more  that  Jupiter 
and  Saturn;  more  than  wonderful  would  be  the 
velocity  of  the  fixed  stars  and  firmament;  and 
let  them  imagine  as  best  they  may  the  wonders 
that  confront  them  in  the  ninth  sphere.  But 
it  is  absurd  to  imagine  a  primum  mobile,  and, 
when  imagined,  to  give  to  it  a  motion  that  is 
completed  in  twenty-four  hours,  denying  that 
motion  to  the  earth  within  the  same  space  of 
time.  For  a  great  circle  of  earth,  as  compared  to 
the  circuit  of  the  primum  mobile  is  less  than  a 
stadium^  as  compared  to  the  whole  earth.  And 
if  the  rotation  of  the  earth  seems  headlong  and 
not  to  be  permitted  by  nature  because  of  its  ra¬ 
pidity,  then  worse  than  insane,  both  as  regards 
itself  and  the  whole  universe,  is  the  motion  of 
the  primum  mobile,  as  being  in  harmony  or  pro¬ 
portion  with  no  other  motion.  Ptolemy  and  the 
Peripatetics  think  that  all  nature  must  be 
thrown  into  confusion,  and  the  whole  structure 
and  configuration  of  this  our  globe  destroyed  by 
the  earth’s  so  rapid  rotation.  The  diameter  of 
the  earth  is  1718  German  miles;  the  greatest 
elongation  of  the  new  moon  is  65,  the  least  55, 
semi-diameters  of  the  earth;  but  probably  its 
orbit  is  still  larger.  The  sun  at  his  greatest  ec¬ 
centricity  is  distant  1142  semi-diameters  from 
earth;  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  as  they  are  slow 
in  movement,  so  are  far  more  distant  from  the 
earth.  The  best  mathematicians  regard  the  dis¬ 
tances  of  the  firmament  and  the  fixed  stars  as 
indeterminable;  to  say  nothing  of  the  ninth 
sphere,  if  the  convexity  of  the  primum  mobile  be 
fairly  estimated  in  its  proportion  to  the  rest,  it 
must  travel  over  as  much  space  in  one  hour  as 
might  be  comprised  within  three  thousand 
great  circles  of  the  earth,  for  on  the  convexity 
of  the  firmament  it  would  travel  over  more  than 
eighteen  hundred  such  circles:  but  what  struc¬ 
ture  of  iron  can  be  imagined  so  strong,  so  tough, 
that  it  would  not  be  wrecked  and  shattered  to 
pieces  by  such  mad  and  unimaginable  velocity  ? 

^  Ancient  measure  of  length,  equal  to  600  Greek  or  625 
Roman  feet,  or  125  Roman  paces,  or  to  606  feet  9  inches 
English. 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


no 

The  Chaldees  believed  the  heavens  to  be  light. 
But  in  light  there  is  no  such  firmness,  neither  in 
the  fire-firmament  of  Plotinus,  nor  in  the  fluid 
or  watery  heavens  of  God-inspired  Moses,  nor 
in  the  supremely  tenuous  and  transparent  firm¬ 
ament  that  stands  between  our  eye  and  the 
lights  of  the  stars,  but  does  not  intercept  the 
same.  Hence  we  must  reject  the  deep-seated 
error  about  this  mad,  furious  velocity,  and  this 
forceful  retardation  of  the  rest  of  the  heavens. 
Let  the  theologues  reject  and  erase  these  old 
wives"  stories  of  a  so  rapid  revolution  of  the 
heavens  which  they  have  borrowed  from  certain 
shallow  philosophers.  The  sun  is  not  swept 
round  by  Mars’  sphere  (if  sphere  he  have)  and 
its  motion,  nor  Mars  by  Jupiter’s  sphere,  nor 
Jupiter  by  Saturn’s:  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars 
too,  seems  moderate  enough,  save  that  move¬ 
ments  are  attributed  to  the  heavens  that  really 
are  earth  movements,  and  these  produce  a  cer¬ 
tain  change  in  the  phenomena.  The  higher  do 
not  tyrannize  over  the  lower,  for  the  heaven 
both  of  the  philosopher  and  of  the  divine  must 
be  gentle,  happy,  tranquil,  and  not  subject  to 
changes;  neither  will  the  violence,  fury,  velo¬ 
city,  and  rapidity  of  the  primum  mobile  bear 
sway.  That  fury  descends  through  all  the  ce¬ 
lestial  spheres  and  heavenly  bodies,  enters  the 
elements  of  the  philosophers,  sweeps  the  fire 
along,  whirls  the  air  around,  or  at  least  the 
greater  part  thereof;  leads  in  its  train  the  uni¬ 
versal  ether,  and  causes  it  to  whirl  round  as 
though  it  were  a  solid  and  firm  body,  whereas 
it  is  a  most  tenuous  substance,  that  neither  of¬ 
fers  resistance  nor  is  ductile;  and  leads  captive 
the  fires  of  the  upper  heavens.  O  wondrous 
steadfastness  of  the  globe  of  earth,  that  alone  is 
unconquered!  And  yet  the  earth  is  holden  nor 
stayed  in  its  place  by  any  chains,  by  no  heavi¬ 
ness  of  its  own,  by  no  contiguity  of  a  denser  or 
a  more  stable  body,  by  no  weights.  The  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  terrestrial  globe  withstands  and 
resists  universal  nature. 

Aristotle  imagines  a  philosophy  of  motions 
simple  or  complex,  holds  that  the  heavens  move 
with  a  simple  circular  motion,  and  his  elements 
with  motion  in  a  right  line;  that  the  parts  of  the 
earth  tend  to  the  earth  in  right  lines;  that  they 
impinge  upon  it  at  the  superficies  at  right  angles 
and  seek  its  centre,  and  there  always  rest;  and 
that  hence  the  whole  earth  stands  in  its  place, 
held  together  and  compacted  by  its  own  weight. 
This  coherence  of  parts  and  this  consolidation  of 
matter  exists  in  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  planets, 
the  fixed  stars — in  short,  in  all  those  spherical 
bodies  whose  parts  cohere  and  seek  their  sev¬ 


eral  centres;  else  would  the  heavens  rush  to  de¬ 
struction  and  their  grand  order  disappear.  But 
these  heavenly  bodies  have  a  circular  motion, 
and  hence  the  earth,  too,  may  have  its  motion, 
for  this  motion  is  not,  as  some  suppose,  adverse 
to  cohesion  nor  to  production.  For,  inasmuch 
as  this  motion  is  intrinsic  in  the  earth  and  natu¬ 
ral,  and  as  there  is  nothing  without  that  may 
convulse  it  or  with  contrary  motions  impede  it, 
it  revolves  untroubled  by  any  ill  or  peril;  it 
moves  on  under  no  external  compulsion;  there 
is  nought  to  make  resistance,  nothing  to  give 
way  before  it,  but  the  path  is  open.  For  since  it 
revolves  in  a  space  void  of  bodies,  the  incorpore¬ 
al  sether,  all  atmosphere,  all  emanations  of  land 
and  water,  all  clouds  and  suspended  meteors, 
rotate  with  the  globe:  the  space  above  the 
earth’s  exhalations  is  a  vacuum;  in  passing 
through  vacuum  even  the  lightest  bodies  and 
those  of  least  coherence  are  neither  hindered 
nor  broken  up.  Hence  the  entire  terrestrial 
globe,  with  all  its  appurtenances,  revolves  pla¬ 
cidly  and  meets  no  resistance.  Causelessly, 
therefore,  and  superstitiously,  do  certain  faint¬ 
hearts  apprehend  collisions,  in  the  spirit  of  Lu¬ 
cius  Lactantius,  who,  like  the  most  unlearned 
of  the  vulgar,  or  like  an  uncultured  bumpkin, 
treats  with  ridicule  the  mention  of  antipodes 
and  of  a  round  globe  of  earth. 

From  these  arguments,  therefore,  we  infer, 
not  with  mere  probability,  but  with  certainty, 
the  diurnal  rotations  of  the  earth;  for  nature 
ever  acts  with  fewer  rather  than  with  many 
means;  and  because  it  is  more  accordant  to  rea¬ 
son  that  the  one  small  body,  the  earth,  should 
make  a  daily  revolution  than  that  the  whole 
universe  should  be  whirled  around  it.  I  pass  by 
the  earth’s  other  movements,  for  here  we  treat 
only  of  the  diurnal  rotation,  whereby  it  turns  to 
the  sun  and  produces  the  natural  day  (of  twenty- 
four  hours)  which  we  call  nycthemeron.  And,  in¬ 
deed,  nature  would  seem  to  have  given  a  motion 
quite  in  harmony  with  the  shape  of  the  earth, 
for  the  earth  being  a  globe,  it  is  far  easier  and 
far  more  fitting  that  it  should  revolve  on  its 
natural  poles,  than  that  the  whole  universe, 
whose  bounds  we  know  not  nor  can  know, 
should  be  whirled  round;  easier  and  more  fit¬ 
ting  than  that  there  should  be  fashioned  a 
sphere  of  the  primum  mobile — a  thing  not  re¬ 
ceived  by  the  ancients,  and  which  even  Aris¬ 
totle  never  thought  of  or  admitted  as  existing 
beyond  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars;  finally, 
which  the  holy  Scriptures  do  not  recognize,  as 
neither  do  they  recognize  a  revolution  of  the 
whole  firmament. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


CHAPTER  4.  That  the  earth  hath  a  circular  motion 

And  now,  though  philosophers  of  the  vulgar  sort 
imagine,  with  an  absurdity  unspeakable,  that 
the  whole  heavens  and  the  world’s  vast  magni¬ 
tude  are  in  rotation,  it  remains  that  the  earth 
daily  makes  one  revolution;  for  in  no  third  mode 
can  the  apparent  revolutions  be  accounted  for. 
The  day,  therefore,  which  we  call  the  natural 
day  is  the  revolution  of  a  meridian  of  the  earth 
from  sun  to  sun.  And  it  makes  a  complete  revo¬ 
lution  from  a  fixed  star  to  the  same  fixed  star 
again.  Bodies  that  by  nature  move  with  a  mo¬ 
tion  circular,  equable,  and  constant,  have  in  their 
different  parts  various  metes  and  bounds.  Now 
the  earth  is  not  a  chaos  nor  a  chance  medley 
mass,  but  through  its  astral  property  has  limits 
agreeable  to  the  circular  motion,  to  wit,  poles 
that  are  not  merely  mathematical  expressions, 
an  equator  that  is  not  a  mere  fiction,  meridians, 
too,  and  parallels;  and  all  these  we  find  in  the 
earth,  permanent,  fixed,  and  natural;  they  are 
demonstrated  with  many  experiments  in  the 
magnetic  philosophy.  For  in  the  earth  are  poles 
set  at  fixed  points,  and  at  these  poles  the  vertic- 
ity  from  both  sides  of  the  plane  of  the  equator 
is  manifested  with  greatest  force  through  the 
co-operation  of  the  whole;  and  with  these  poles 
the  diurnal  rotation  coincides.  But  no  revolu¬ 
tions  of  bodies,  no  movements  of  planets,  show 
any  sensible,  natural  poles  in  the  firmament  or 
in  any  primum  mobile;  neither  does  any  argu¬ 
ment  prove  their  existence;  they  are  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  imagination.  We,  therefore,  having  di¬ 
rected  our  inquiry  toward  a  cause  that  is  mani¬ 
fest,  sensible,  and  comprehended  by  all  men,  do 
know  that  the  earth  rotates  on  its  own  poles, 
proved  by  many  magnetical  demonstrations  to 
exist.  For  not  in  virtue  only  of  its  stability  and 
its  fixed  permanent  position  does  the  earth  pos¬ 
sess  poles  and  verticity;  it  might  have  had  an¬ 
other  direction,  as  eastward  or  westward,  or  to¬ 
ward  any  other  quarter.  By  the  wonderful  wis¬ 
dom  of  the  Creator,  therefore,  forces  were  im¬ 
planted  in  the  earth,  forces  primarily  animate, 
to  the  end  the  globe  might,  with  steadfastness, 
take  direction,  and  that  the  poles  might  be  op-  E 
posite,  so  that  on  them,  as  at  the  extremities  of 
an  axis,  the  movement  of  diurnal  rotation  might 
be  performed.  Now  the  steadfastness  of  the  poles 
is  controlled  by  the  primary  soul.  Thus  it  is  for 
the  good  of  the  earth  that  the  collimations  of 
the  verticities  do  not  continually  regard  a  fixed 
point  in  the  firmament  and  in  the  visible  heav¬ 
ens.  For  the  changes  of  the  equinoxes  are  caused 
by  a  certain  inflection  of  the  earth’s  axis,  yet  in 


III 

this  inflection  the  earth  hath  from  her  own  forces 
a  steadfastness  in  her  motion.  In  her  rotation  the 
earth  bears  on  her  own  poles;  for  since  the  ver¬ 
ticity  is  fixed  in  A  and  B,  and  the  axis  horizon¬ 
tal,  at  C  and  D  (equinoctial  line)  the  parts  are 
free,  all  the  forces  being  diffused  on  both  sides 


from  the  plane  of  the  equator  toward  the  poles 
in  the  aether,  which  is  without  resistance,  or  in 
vacuum;  and,  A  and  B  remaining  constant,  C 
revolves  toward  D  both  by  natural  conformity 
and  fitness,  as  also  for  the  sake  of  a  necessary 
good  and  avoidance  of  ill,  but  most  of  all  because 
the  effused  spheres  of  solar  influence  and  of  solar 
light  do  impel.  And  it  revolves  not  in  a  new 
track  or  one  assigned  from  without,  but,  in  the 
general  trend  of  all  the  rest  of  the  planets,  tends 
from  west  to  east.  For  all  planets  have  a  like 
movement  to  the  east,  in  accordance  with  the 
succession  of  the  zodiacal  signs,  whether  it  be 
Mercury  or  Venus  within  the  sun’s  orbit,  or 
whether  they  revolve  round  the  sun.  That  the 


C 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


II2 

earth  is  fitted  for  circular  movement  is  proved 
by  its  parts,  which,  when  separated  from  the 
whole,  do  not  simply  travel  in  a  right  line,  as 
the  Peripatetics  taught,  but  rotate  also.  A  load¬ 
stone  placed  in  a  wooden  vessel  is  put  in  water 
so  that  it  may  float  freely,  rotate,  and  move 
about.  If  the  pole  B  of  the  loadstone  be  made  to 
point,  unnaturally,  toward  the  south  F,  the  ter- 
rella  revolves  round  its  centre  in  a  circular  mo¬ 
tion  on  the  plane  of  the  horizon  toward  the 
north  Ey  where  it  comes  to  a  rest,  and  not  at  C 
or  at  D.  So  acts  a  small  stone  weighing  only  four 
ounces;  and  a  powerful  loadstone  of  loo  pounds 
will  make  the  same  movement  as  quickly;  and 
the  largest  mountain  of  loadstone  would  revolve 
in  the  same  way  were  it  to  be  set  afloat  on  a  wide 
stream  or  in  the  deep  sea;  and  yet  a  magnetic 
body  is  far  more  hindered  by  water  than  is  the 
whole  earth  by  the  air.  The  whole  earth  would 
act  in  the  same  way,  were  the  north  pole  turned 
aside  from  its  true  direction;  for  that  pole  would 
go  back,  in  the  circular  motion  of  the  whole, 
toward  Cynosura. 

Yet  this  motion  is  nothing  by  that  circular 
motion  wherewith  the  parts  naturally  tend  to 
their  own  places.  The  whole  earth  regards  Cyn¬ 
osura  by  its  steadfast  nature;  and  similarly  each 
true  part  of  the  earth  seeks  a  like  place  in  the 
world,  and  turns  with  circular  motion  to  that 
position.  The  natural  movements  of  the  whole 
and  of  the  parts  are  alike:  hence,  since  the  parts 
move  in  a  circle,  the  whole,  too,  hath  the  power 
of  circular  motion.  A  spherical  loadstone,  when 
floated  in  water,  moves  circularly  on  its  centre 
to  become  (as  it  seems)  conformed  to  the  earth 
on  the  plane  of  the  equator.  Thus,  too,  would  it 
move  on  any  other  great  circle  if  it  were  free  to 
move,  so  that  in  the  dip  compass  there  is  circu¬ 
lar  movement  on  the  meridian  (if  there  be  no 
variation),  or,  if  there  is  variation,  on  a  great 
circle  drawn  from  the  zenith  through  the  varia¬ 
tion  point  in  the  horizon.  And  this  circular  move¬ 
ment  of  the  loadstone  to  its  true  and  natural 
position  shows  that  the  whole  earth  is  fitted, 
and  by  its  own  forces  adapted  for  a  diurnal  cir¬ 
cular  motion.  I  omit  what  Petrus  Peregrinus  so 
stoutly  affirms,  that  a  terrella  poised  on  its  poles 
in  the  meridian  moves  circularly  with  a  com¬ 
plete  revolution  in  twenty-four  hours.  We  have 
never  chanced  to  see  this:  nay,  we  doubt  if  there 
is  such  movement,  both  because  of  the  weight 
of  the  stone  itself,  and  also  because  the  whole 
earth,  as  it  moves  of  itself,  so  is  propelled  by  the 
other  stars;  but  this  does  not  occur  proportion¬ 
ately  in  any  part  of  the  earth,  a  terrella  for  ex¬ 
ample.  The  earth  moves  by  its  primary  form 


and  natural  desire,  for  the  conservation,  per¬ 
fecting,  and  beautifying  of  its  parts,  toward  the 
more  excellent  things :  this  is  more  probable  than 
that  those  fixed  luminous  orbs,  and  the  planets 
and  the  sun,  foremost  of  all  and  divine,  while 
they  get  no  aid  of  any  sort  from  earth,  no  re¬ 
freshment,  no  force  whatever,  should  vainly  cir¬ 
cle  round  it,  and  that  the  whole  host  of  heaven 
should  make  everlasting  rounds  about  the  earth, 
without  any  profit  whatever  to  those  stars 
themselves. 

The  earth  therefore  rotates,  and  by  a  certain 
law  of  necessity,  and  by  an  energy  that  is  innate, 
manifest,  conspicuous,  revolves  in  a  circle  to¬ 
ward  the  sun;  through  this  motion  it  shares  in 
the  solar  energies  and  influences;  and  its  vertic- 
ity  holds  it  in  this  motion  lest  it  stray  into  every 
region  of  the  sky.  The  sun  (chief  inciter  of  ac¬ 
tion  in  nature),  as  he  causes  the  planets  to  ad¬ 
vance  in  their  courses,  so,  too,  doth  bring  about 
this  revolution  of  the  globe  by  sending  forth  the 
energies  of  his  spheres — his  light  being  effused. 

And  were  not  the  earth  to  revolve  with  diur¬ 
nal  rotation,  the  sun  would  ever  hang  w  ith  its 
constant  light  over  a  given  part,  and,  by  long 
tarrying  there,  w^ould  scorch  the  earth,  reduce 
it  to  pow  der,  and  dissipate  its  substance,  and  the 
uppermost  surface  of  earth  would  receive  griev¬ 
ous  hurt:  nothing  of  good  would  spring  from 
earth,  there  would  be  no  vegetation;  it  could  not 
give  life  to  the  animate  creation,  and  man  would 
perish.  In  other  parts  all  would  be  horror,  and 
all  things  frozen  stiff'  with  intense  cold:  hence 
all  its  eminences  would  be  hard,  barren,  inac¬ 
cessible,  sunk  in  e^'erlasting  shadow*  and  unend¬ 
ing  night.  And  as  the  earth  herself  cannot  en¬ 
dure  so  pitiable  and  so  horrid  a  state  of  things 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


on  either  side,  with  her  astral  magnetic  mind 
she  moves  in  a  circle,  to  the  end  there  may  be, 
by  unceasing  change  of  light,  a  perpetual  vicis- 
situde,  heat  and  cold,  rise  and  decline,  day  and 
night,  morn  and  even,  noonday  and  deep  night. 
So  the  earth  seeks  and  seeks  the  sun  again,  turns 
from  him,  follows  him,  by  her  wondrous  mag- 
netical  energy. 

And  not  only  from  the  sun  would  ill  impend, 
were  the  earth  to  stand  still  and  be  deprived  of 
the  benefit  of  his  rays;  from  the  moon  also  great 
dangers  would  threaten.  For  we  see  how  the 
ocean  swells  and  comes  to  flood  under  certain 
positions  of  the  moon.  But  if  by  the  daily  rota¬ 
tion  of  the  earth  the  moon  did  not  quickly  pass, 
the  sea  would  rise  unduly  at  some  parts  and 
many  coasts  would  be  overwhelmed  by  mighty 
tides.  Lest  the  earth,  then,  should  in  divers  ways 
perish  and  be  destroyed,  she  rotates  in  virtue  of 
her  magnetic  and  primary  energy.  And  such  are 
the  movements  in  the  rest  of  the  planets,  the 
motion  and  light  of  other  bodies  especially  urg¬ 
ing.  For  the  moon  also  turns  round  during  its 
menstrual  circuit  that  it  may  on  all  its  parts  suc¬ 
cessively  receive  the  sun’s  light,  which  it  enjoys, 
with  which  it  is  refreshed  like  the  earth  itself; 
nor  could  the  moon  without  grave  ill  and  sure 
destruction  stand  the  unceasing  incidence  of  the 
light  on  one  of  its  sides  only. 

Thus  each  of  the  moving  globes  has  circular 
motion,  either  in  a  great  circular  orbit  or  on  its 
own  axis  or  in  both  ways.  But  that  all  the  fixed 
stars,  and  the  planets,  and  all  the  higher  heav¬ 
ens,  still  revolve  simply  for  the  earth’s  sake  is 
for  the  mind  of  a  philosopher  a  ridiculous  sup¬ 
position.  The  earth  then  revolves,  and  not  the 
whole  heavens;  and  this  movement  brings  growth 
and  decay,  gives  occasion  for  the  generation  of 
animated  things,  and  arouses  the  internal  heat 
to  productiveness.  Hence  does  matter  vegetate 
to  receive  forms,  and  from  this  primary  revolu¬ 
tion  of  the  earth  natural  bodies  have  prime  in¬ 
citation  and  original  act.  The  motion  of  the 
whole  earth,  therefore,  is  primary,  astral,  circu¬ 
lar  about  its  poles,  whose  verticity  rises  on  both 
sides  from  the  plane  of  the  equator,  and  the  en¬ 
ergy  is  infused  into  the  opposite  ends,  so  that 
the  globe  by  a  definite  rotation  might  move  to 
the  good,  sun  and  stars  inciting.  But  the  simple 
right-downward  motion  assumed  by  the  Peri¬ 
patetics  is  the  movement  of  weight,  of  coacerva- 
tion,  of  separated  parts,  in  the  ratio  of  their  mat¬ 
ter,  by  right  lines  toward  the  earth’s  centre, 
these  tending  to  the  centre  by  the  shortest  route. 
The  motions  of  separate  magnetical  parts  of  the 
earth  are,  besides  that  of  coacervation,  those  of 


coition,  revolution,  and  direction  of  the  parts  to 
the  whole,  into  harmony  and  agreement  of  the 
form. 

CHAPTER  5.  Arguments  of  those  who  deny  the 
earth's  motion;  and  refutation  thereof 

It  will  not  be  superfluous  to  weigh  also  the  argu¬ 
ments  of  those  who  deny  that  the  earth  moves, 
to  the  end  we  may  the  better  satisfy  the  herd  of 
philosophers  who  deem  the  steadfastness  and  im¬ 
mobility  of  the  globe  to  be  proved  by  incontro¬ 
vertible  arguments.  Aristotle  does  not  allow  that 
the  earth  moves  circularly,  for,  says  he,  then 
every  part  thereof  would  take  the  same  motion; 
but  inasmuch  as  all  separated  parts  tend  to  the 
middle  point  in  right  lines,  that  circular  motion 
were  something  imposed  by  force,  were  contrary 
to  nature,  were  not  perpetual.  But  we  have  al¬ 
ready  proven  that  all  true  parts  of  the  earth  do 
move  circularly,  and  that  all  magnetic  bodies 
(when  fitly  arranged)  are  borne  round  in  a  cir¬ 
cle.  But  they  tend  to  the  earth’s  centre  in  a  right 
line  (if  the  way  is  open)  by  the  motion  of  coacer¬ 
vation,  as  to  their  origin;  they  move  with  vari¬ 
ous  motions  to  conformation  of  the  whole;  a 
terrella  moves  circularly  by  its  inborn  forces. 
“Besides,”  says  Aristotle,  “all  things  that  move 
in  a  circle  seem  afterward  to  lose  the  first  move¬ 
ment  and  to  be  carried  on  by  several  motions 
other  than  the  first.  The  earth,  too,  whether 
situate  in  the  middle  or  near  the  middle  of  the 
world,  must  needs  have  two  movements;  and 
were  that  the  case  there  must  needs  be  progres¬ 
sions  and  retrogressions  of  -the  fixed  stars:  no 
such  thing  is  seen,  however,  but  evermore  the 
same  stars  are  rising  and  setting  in  the  same 
places.”  Yet  it  by  no  means  follows  that  a  two¬ 
fold  motion  is  attributed  to  the  earth.  And  if 
there  be  but  the  one  diurnal  motion  of  the  earth 
round  its  poles,  every  one  sees  that  the  stars 
must  always  rise  and  set  in  the  same  way,  at  the 
same  points  of  the  horizon,  even  though  there 
be  another  movement  for  which  we  are  not  con¬ 
tending;  because  the  changes  in  the  smaller 
sphere  produce  in  the  fixed  stars  no  variation  of 
aspect  on  account  of  the  great  distance,  unless 
the  earth’s  axis  changes  position:  of  this  we 
treat  in  the  chapter  treating  of  the  cause  of  the 
precession  of  the  equinoxes. 

In  this  reasoning  (of  Aristotle’s)  are  many 
flaws.  For  if  the  earth  rotates,  that,  as  we  have 
shown,  must  be  due  not  to  the  action  of  the  first 
sphere,  but  to  its  own  native  forces.  And  if  the 
motion  were  produced  by  the  first  sphere,  there 
would  be  no  alternations  of  days  and  nights,  for 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


114 

with  \\\!tprimwn  mobile.  And  it  does  not  follow, 
because  the  rest  of  the  heavenly  bodies  move 
with  a  twofold  motion,  that  the  earth  has  a  two¬ 
fold  motion  when  it  rotates  round  its  centre. 
I'hen,  too,  Aristotle  does  not  clearly  apprehend 
the  reason  of  the  case,  nor  do  his  translators  ei¬ 
ther:  TOVTOV  deavjipaivoPTOSy  avayKa'lov  yiyvea- 
6ai  jrapodovs  /cat  rpoiras  Tcbv  kpSedepevcov  acrpoiv 
{On  the  HeavenSy  Ch.  14) — i.e.y  if  that  be  so, 
there  must  needs  be  mutations  and  regressions 
of  the  fixed  stars.  Some  translate  rpoiras  “regres¬ 
sions”  or  “retrogressions,”  others  “diversions”: 
these  terms  can  in  no  wise  be  understood  of  axial 
motion  unless  Aristotle  means  that  the  earth  is 
whirled  by  the  primum  mobile  round  other  poles 
different  even  from  those  of  the  first  sphere— 
which  is  quite  absurd. 

More  recent  writers  hold  that  the  Eastern 
Ocean  must  needs,  in  consequence  of  this  mo¬ 
tion,  so  be  driven  toward  the  regions  to  the  west 
that  parts  of  the  earth  which  are  dry  and  water¬ 
less  would  of  necessity  be  daily  submerged  be¬ 
neath  the  waters.  But  the  ocean  gets  no  impul¬ 
sion  from  this  motion,  as  there  is  no  resistance, 
and  even  the  whole  atmosphere  is  carried  round 
also;  for  this  reason,  in  the  rapid  revolution  of 
the  earth,  things  in  the  air  around  are  not  left 
behind  nor  do  they  have  the  appearance  of  mov¬ 
ing  westward;  the  clouds  stand  motionless  in  the 
atmosphere,  save  when  impelled  by  the  force  of 
the  winds;  and  objects  thrown  up  into  the  air 
fall  back  again  to  their  places.  But  they  are  dul¬ 
lards  who  think  that  steeples,  churches,  and  other 
edifices  must  necessarily  be  shaken  and  topple 
down  if  the  earth  moves:  antipodes  might  fear 
lest  they  should  slip  over  to  the  other  side  of  the 
globe;  navigators  might  dread  lest  in  making 
the  circle  of  the  whole  globe  they  might,  once 
they  had  descended  below  the  plane  of  our  hori¬ 
zon,  drop  down  into  the  opposite  part  of  the 
sky.  But  these  are  old-wives*  imaginings  and 
ravings  of  philosophasters  who,  when  they  un¬ 
dertake  to  discourse  of  great  things  and  the  fab¬ 
ric  of  the  world  and  attempt  aught,  are  unable 
to  understand  hardly  anything  ultra  crepidam. 
The  earth  they  hold  to  be  the  centre  of  a  circle 
and  to  stand  motionless  in  the  general  revolu¬ 
tion.  But  the  stars  or  the  planetary  globes  do 
not  move  in  a  circle  round  the  centre  of  the 
earth ;  nor  is  the  earth  the  centre — if  it  be  in  the 
centre — but  a  body  around  the  centre. 

And  it  is  inconsistent  that  the  Peripatetics* 
heavenly  bodies  should  re5>t  on  so  frail,  so  per¬ 
ishable,  a  thing  as  the  earth*s  centre. 

Now  generation  results  from  motion,  and 
without  motion  all  nature  would  be  torpid.  The 


sun’s  motions,  the  moon’s  motions,  produce 
changes;  the  earth’s  motion  awakens  the  inner 
life  of  the  globe;  animals  themselves  live  not 
without  motion  and  incessant  working  of  the 
heart  and  the  arteries.  As  for  the  single  motion 
in  a  right  line  to  the  centre,  that  this  is  the  only 
movement  in  the  earth,  and  that  the  movement 
of  an  individual  body  is  one  and  single,  the  argu¬ 
ments  for  it  have  no  weight,  for  that  motion  in 
a  right  line  is  but  the  inclination  toward  their 
origin,  not  only  of  the  earth,  but  also  of  the 
parts  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  all  the  other 
globes;  but  these  move  in  a  circle  also.  Joannes 
Costeus,  who  is  in  doubt  as  to  the  cause  of  the 
earth’s  motion,  regards  the  magnetic  energy  to 
be  intrinsic,  active,  and  controlling;  the  sun  he 
holds  to  be  an  extrinsic  promovent  cause;  nor  is 
the  earth  so  mean  and  vile  a  body  as  it  is  com¬ 
monly  reputed  to  be.  Hence,  according  to  him, 
the  diurnal  motion  is  produced  by  the  earth,  for 
the  earth’s  sake  and  for  the  earth’s  behoof. 

They  (if  such  there  be)  who  assert  that  this 
movement  of  the  earth  takes  place  not  only  in 
longitude  but  also  in  latitude,  speak  nonsense; 
for  nature  has  set  in  the  earth  definite  poles  and 
has  established  definite  and  not  confused  revo¬ 
lutions.  Thus  the  moon  turns  round  to  the  sun 
in  its  monthly  course,  the  while  ever  regarding 
with  definite  poles  definite  parts  of  the  heavens. 
It  were  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  atmosphere 
moves  the  earth;  for  the  air  is  but  exhalation 
and  the  effluvium  of  the  earth  given  out  in  every 
direction;  winds,  too,  are  only  motions  of  the 
exhalation  here  and  there  along  the  earth’s  sur¬ 
face;  the  depth  of  the  air  current  is  trifling,  and 
there  are  in  every  region  various  winds  from 
different  and  opposite  points.  Some  authors,  not 
finding  the  cause  of  the  revolution  in  the  earth’s 
matter— for  there  they  say  they  find  only  solid¬ 
ity  and  consistence — maintain  that  it  is  not  to 
be  found  in  the  form,  and  will  admit  as  qualities 
of  the  earth  only  cold  and  dryness,  which  can¬ 
not  produce  the  earth’s  motion.  The  Stoics  at¬ 
tribute  to  the  earth  a  soul,  and  hence  they  de¬ 
clare,  amid  the  derision  of  the  learned,  that  the 
earth  is  an  animal.  This  magnetical  form,  be  it 
energy  or  be  it  soul,  is  astral.  Let  the  learned 
lament  and  weep  for  that  neither  the  early  Peri¬ 
patetics,  nor  the  common  run  of  philosophasters, 
nor  Joannes  Costeus,  who  mocks  at  this  sort  of 
thing,  were  capable  of  appreciating  this  grand 
and  most  extraordinary  fact  of  nature.  As  for 
the  objection  that  the  superficial  unevenness 
produced  by  mountains  and  valleys  would  pre¬ 
vent  diurnal  revolution,  it  is  of  no  weight;  for 
mountains  do  not  mar  the  rotundity  of  the  earth 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


— as  compared  with  the  entire  earth,  mountains 
are  but  trifling  excrescences:  besides,  the  earth 
does  not  rotate  without  carrying  along  with  it 
its  effluences.  Beyond  the  effluences  there  is  no 
resistance.  The  earth’s  motion  is  performed  with 
as  little  labor  as  the  motions  of  the  other  heav- 
enly  bodies:  neither  is  it  inferior  in  dignity  to 
some  of  these.  To  say  that  it  is  folly  to  suppose 
the  earth  is  more  eager  for  the  face  of  the  sun 
than  the  sun  for  the  face  of  the  earth,  is  mere 
wilfulness  and  ignorance.  Of  the  cause  of  the 
rotation  I  have  oft  spoken.  If  any  one  were  to 
look  for  the  cause  of  the  rotation  or  any  other 
tendency  of  the  earth  on  the  globe-encircling 
ocean,  or  in  the  movement  of  the  atmosphere, 
or  in  the  heaviness  of  the  earth’s  mass,  he  would 
reason  as  stupidly  as  do  those  who  obstinately 
cling  to  an  opinion  because  it  was  held  by  the 
ancients.  Ptolemy’s  arguments  are  of  no  account: 
for  our  true  principles  once  laid  down,  the  truth 
is  visible,  and  it  is  useless  to  refute  Ptolemy.  So 
let  Costeus  and  the  philosophers  recognize  how 
unprofitable  and  vain  a  thing  it  is  to  take  their 
stand  on  the  doctrines  and  unproved  theories  of 
certain  ancient  writers.  Many  persons  cannot 
see  how  it  is  (if  the  earth  rotates)  that  a  ball  of 
iron  or  lead  dropped  from  a  very  high  tower 
falls  exactly  on  the  spot  right  below;  or  how 
cannon-balls  fired  from  a  large  culverin  with 
equal  charges  of  gunpowder  of  the  same  quality, 
and  with  the  gun  pointed  at  the  same  angle  with 
the  horizon,  have  exactly  the  same  range  to  east¬ 
ward  and  to  westward,  the  earth  moving  to  the 
east.  But  they  who  urge  such  arguments  are  mis¬ 
taken  through  not  understanding  the  nature  of 
primary  globes  and  the  combination  of  parts 
with  their  globes,  albeit  not  conjoined  thereto 
with  bonds  of  solid  matter.  But  the  earth  in  its 
diurnal  revolution  does  not  so  move  that  its 
more  solid  circumference  is  separated  from  the 
bodies  circumfused;  on  the  contrary,  all  the  cir- 
cumfused  effluences,  and  all  heavy  bodies  there¬ 
in,  howsoever  shot  thereinto,  advance  simulta¬ 
neously  and  uniformly  with  the  earth  because 
of  the  general  coherence.  This  is  the  case  in  all 
primary  bodies — the  sun,  moon,  earth — the 
parts  betaking  themselves  to  their  origin  and 
founts,  whereunto  they  are  attached  with  the 
same  appetence  with  which  what  we  call  heavy 
bodies  are  attached  to  earth.  Thus  lunar  bodies 
tend  to  the  moon,  solar  to  the  sun,  within  the 
respective  spheres  of  their  effluences.  These  ef¬ 
fluences  cohere  through  continuity  of  substance ; 
and  heavy  bodies,  too,  are  united  to  earth  by 
their  heaviness  and  advance  with  it  in  the  gen¬ 
eral  movement,  especially  when  no  resistance 


of  bodies  hinders.  And,  for  this  reason,  the  di¬ 
urnal  revolution  of  the  earth  does  not  sweep 
bodies  along  nor  retard  them:  they  neither  out¬ 
strip  the  earth’s  motion  nor  fall  behind  when 
shot  with  force,  whether  to  east  or  to  west.  Let 
EFG  be  the  earth,  A  the  centre,  LE  the  ascend- 

L 


ing  effluences.  As  the  sphere  of  the  effluences 
moves  with  the  earth,  so  the  part  of  the  sphere 
on  the  right  line  LE  proceeds  undisturbed  in 
the  general  rotation.  In  LE  the  heavy  body  M 
falls  perpendicularly  to  E,  the  shortest  route 
centreward;  nor  is  this  right  motion  of  M  a  com¬ 
posite  motion,  />,,  resultant  of  a  motion  of  co- 
acervation  and  a  circular  motion,  but  simple 
and  direct,  never  going  out  of  the  line  LE.  And 
an  object  shot  with  equal  force  from  E  toward 
F,  and  from  E  toward  G,  has  the  same  range  in 
both  directions,  though  the  diurnal  rotation  of 
the  earth  goes  on — even  as  twenty  steps  taken 
by  one  man  cover  the  same  distance  eastward 
as  westward.  Hence  the  diurnal  revolution  of 
the  earth  is  not  at  all  refuted  by  the  illustrious 
Tycho  Brahe  through  such  arguments  as  these. 

The  tendence  to  its  centre  (called  by  philos¬ 
ophers,  weight)  works  no  resistance  to  the  di¬ 
urnal  revolution,  neither  does  it  give  direction 
to  the  earth,  nor  keep  in  place  the  parts  of  the 
earth,  which  have  no  weight  when  resting  in  the 
earth’s  solid  substance:  there  they  have  no  long¬ 
er  any  tendence,  but  are  at  rest  in  its  mass.  If 
there  be  a  flaw  in  the  mass,  a  cavity  of  looo  fath¬ 
oms  for  example,  a  homogenic  part  of  the  earth 
or  compacted  terrestrial  matter  descends 
through  that  space,  be  it  filled  with  water  or 
with  air,  to  a  more  definite  centre  than  air  or 
water,  and  seeks  the  solid  globe.  But  the  centre 
of  the  earth,  as  also  the  whole  earth  itself,  has  no 
weight:  separated  parts  tend  to  thtir pnndpiumf 
and  this  tendence  we  call  weight :  parts  in  union 


ii6  WILLIAM 

are  at  rest,  and  even  if  they  had  weight,  they 
would  cause  no  impediment  to  the  diurnal  revo¬ 
lution.  For  if  around  the  axis  AB  a  weight  be  at 
C,  it  is  balanced  by  E:  at  F  it  is  balanced  by  G; 


if  at  Hy  by  L  And,  similarly,  if  it  is  at  L,  it  is 
balanced  by  M.  Thus  the  whole  globe,  having  a 
natural  axis,  is  balanced  in  equilibrium  and  is  set 
in  motion  easily  by  the  slightest  cause,  but  chiefly 
for  the  reason  that  the  earth,  in  its  own  place,  is 
in  no  wise  heavy  nor  needs  any  balancing.  Hence 
no  weight  hinders  the  diurnal  revolution,  and  no 
weight  gives  to  the  earth  direction  or  continu¬ 
ance  in  its  place.  It  is  therefore  plain  that  no  argu¬ 
ment  of  sufficient  force  has  yet  been  formed  by 
philosophers  to  refute  the  earth's  motion. 

CHAPTER  6.  Of  the  came  of  the  definite  time  of  the 
total  revolution  of  the  earth 

The  causes  of  the  diurnal  motion  are  to  be  found 
in  the  magnetic  energy  and  in  the  alliance  of 
bodies:  that  is  to  say,  why  a  revolution  of  the 
earth  is  performed  in  the  term  of  24  hours.  For 
no  ingenious  artifice,  whether  of  clepsydra,  or 
of  hour-glasses,  or  of  time-pieces  with  toothed 
wheels  and  driven  by  the  tension  of  a  steel  plate, 
can  show  any  difference  of  time.  But  the  diurnal 
revolution  once  accomplished  comes  on  again. 
Now  we  will  take  a  day  to  mean  a  complete  rev¬ 
olution  of  a  meridian  of  the  earth  from  sun  to 
sun.  This  is  a  little  less  than  the  total  revolu¬ 
tion;  for  in  365^  turnings  of  a  meridian  to  the 
sun  a  year  is  completed.  Because  of  this  fixed  and 
constant  motion  of  the  earth  the  number  and 
time  of  365  days  5  hours  55  minutes  are  always 
fixed  and  settled,  barring  that  for  other  causes 
there  are  certain  trifling  difierences.  Thus  the 
earth  revolves,  not  fortuitously  nor  by  chance, 
nor  with  a  headlong  motion,  but  evenly,  with  a 
certain  high  intelligence  and  with  a  wonderful 
steadiness,  even  like  the  rest  of  the  movable  stars 
which  have  fixed  periods  for  their  movements. 

Thus,  inasmuch  as  the  sun  itself  is  the  mover 
and  inciter  of  the  universe,  the  other  planets 


GILBERT 

that  are  situate  within  the  sphere  of  his  forces, 
being  impelled  and  set  in  motion,  do  also  with 
their  own  forces  determine  their  own  courses 
and  revolve  in  their  own  periods,  according  to 
the  amplitude  of  their  greater  rotation  and  the 
differences  of  the  forces  efi^used  and  the  percep¬ 
tion  of  a  greater  good.  Hence  it  is  that  Saturn, 
having  a  greater  course  to  run,  revolves  in  a 
longer  time,  while  Venus  revolves  in  nine 
months,  and  Mercury  in  80  days,  according  to 
Copernicus;  and  the  moon  makes  the  circuit  of 
the  earth  in  29  days,  12  hours,  44  minutes.  We 
have  asserted  that  the  earth  turns  on  its  centre, 
making  one  day  in  its  revolution  sunward.  The 
moon  goes  round  the  earth  in  a  monthly  course, 
and  when  after  its  prior  conjunction  with  the 
sun  it  comes  to  conjunction  again,  it  constitutes 
one  month,  or  one  lunar  day.  The  mean  distance 
of  the  moon's  orbit,  according  to  the  calcula¬ 
tions  of  Copernicus  and  other  later  astronomers, 
is  distant  from  the  earth’s  centre  about  295/6  di¬ 
ameters  of  the  earth.  A  solar  revolution  of  the 
moon  in  her  orbit  takes  29  days  12  hours  44 
minutes.  We  reckon  her  periodic  time  by  her 
return  to  the  same  position  relatively  to  the  sun, 
making  the  moon’s  solar  revolution,  not  by  her 
return  to  the  same  absolute  position,  making 
the  complete  or  stellar  revolution,  just  as  one 
day  on  earth  is  reckoned  as  the  planets  return  to 
the  same  position  relatively  to  the  sun,  and  not 
absolutely;  because  the  sun  is  the  cause  of  both 
the  earth's  and  the  moon's  motions.  Also,  be¬ 
cause  (as  more  recent  astronomers  suppose)  the 
month,  as  measured  between  solar  conjunctions, 
is  really  the  full  period  of  revolution,  because  of 
the  earth’s  motion  in  her  great  orbit.  Diameters 
bear  a  constant  ratio  to  circumferences.  And  the 
moon’s  orbit  is  a  little  more  than  twice  29^ 
times  the  length  of  great  circles  on  the  earth. 

Thus  the  moon  and  the  earth  agree  in  a  t\vo- 
fold  ratio  of  motion,  and  the  earth  rotates  in  its 
diurnal  motion  in  the  space  of  24  hours;  because 
the  moon  has  a  motion  proportioned  to  the  earth, 
and  the  earth  has  a  motion  agreeing  in  a  two¬ 
fold  proportion  with  the  moon’s  motion.  There 
is  some  difference  in  minutes,  for  the  distances 
of  the  stars  are  not  sufficiently  determined  in 
minutes,  nor  are  astronomers  agreed  thereupon. 
So,  then,  the  earth  rotates  in  the  space  of  24 
hours,  even  as  the  moon  does  in  her  monthly 
course,  by  a  magnetical  compact  of  both,  the 
globes  being  impelled  forward  according  to  the 
ratio  of  their  orbits,  as  Aristotle  admits  {On  the 
HeavenSy  ii.  10).  “Itcomesabout,”sayshe,  “that 
the  motions  of  each  are  performed  in  a  ratio,  to 
wit,  in  the  same  interv^als  whereby  some  are 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


quicker,  others  slower/’  But  as  between  the 
moon  and  the  earth,  it  is  more  reasonable  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  they  are  in  agreement,  because,  being 
neighbor  bodies,  they  are  very  like  in  nature  and 
substance,  and  because  the  moon  has  a  more 
manifest  effect  on  the  earth  than  have  any  of 
the  other  stars,  except  the  sun;  also  the  moon 
alone  of  all  planets  directs  its  movements  as  a 
whole  toward  the  earth’s  centre,  and  is  near  of 
kin  to  earth,  and  as  it  were  held  by  ties  to  earth. 

Such,  then,  is  the  symmetry  and  harmony  of 
the  moon’s  and  the  earth’s  movements,  very 
different  from  the  oft -mentioned  harmony  of 
the  celestial  motions,  which  requires  that  the 
nearer  any  sphere  is  to  the  primum  mobile  and 
to  the  imaginary  and  fictitious  rapid  first  mo¬ 
tion,  the  less  it  opposes  it  and  the  more  slowly  it 
is  borne  by  its  own  motion  from  west  to  east; 
but  that  the  farther  it  is  away  the  more  rapidly 
and  the  more  freely  it  performs  its  motion,  and 
hence  that  the  moon  (being  farthest  from  the 
primum  mobile')  revolves  with  greatest  rapidity. 
These  absurdities  have  been  accepted  for  the 
sake  of  the  primum  mobile^  and  so  that  it  might 
seem  to  have  some  effect  in  retarding  the  move¬ 
ments  of  the  nether  heavens;  as  though  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  stars  was  due  to  retardation,  and  was 
not  inborn  and  natural  to  them,  and  as  though 
the  rest  of  the  heavens  {the,  primum  mobile  dXone 
excepted)  were  ever  driven  by  a  mighty  force 
with  a  mad  impulsion.  Far  more  probable  is  it 
that  the  stars  revolve  symmetrically,  with  a  cer¬ 
tain  mutual  concert  and  harmony. 

CHAPTER  7.  Of  the  earth's  primary  magnetic  na¬ 
ture  whereby  her  poles  are  made  different  from  the 
poles  of  the  ecliptic 

Having  shown  the  nature  and  causes  of  the 
earth’s  diurnal  revolution,  produced  partly  by 
the  energy  of  the  magnetic  property  and  partly 
by  the  superiority  of  the  sun  and  his  light,  we 
have  now  to  treat  of  the  distance  of  the  earth’s 
poles  from  those  of  the  ecliptic — a  condition 
very  necessary  for  man’s  welfare.  For  if  the  poles 
of  the  world  or  the  earth  were  fixed  at  the  poles 
of  the  zodiac,  then  the  equator  would  lie  exactly 
under  the  line  of  the  ecliptic,  and  there  would 
be  no  change  of  seasons — neither  winter,  nor 
summer,  nor  spring,  nor  fall — but  the  face  of 
things  would  persist  forever  unchanging.  Hence 
(for  the  everlasting  good  of  man)  the  earth’s 
axis  declined  from  the  pole  of  the  zodiac  just 
enough  to  suffice  for  generation  and  diversifica¬ 
tion.  Thus  the  declination  of  the  tropics  and  the 
inclinations  of  the  earth’s  pole  always  stand  in 
the  24th  degree,  but  is  at  present  only  23  deg. 


28  min.,  or,  according  to  others,  29  minutes; 
but  formerly  the  declination  was  23  deg.  52 
min.,  and  that  is  the  uttermost  limit  of  declina¬ 
tion  so  far  observed.  This  has  been  wisely  or¬ 
dered  by  nature  and  settled  by  the  earth’s  pri¬ 
mary  eminency.  For  were  those  poles — those  of 
the  earth  and  the  ecliptic— to  be  much  farther 
apart,  then  as  the  sun  approached  the  tropic  all 
things  would  be  waste  and  ruin,  in  any  high  lati¬ 
tude  of  the  other  and  neglected  portion  of  the 
globe,  because  of  the  protracted  absence  of  the 
sun.  But  now  all  things  are  so  disposed  that  the 
entire  globe  of  earth  has  its  own  changes  in  due 
succession,  its  own  fitting  and  needful  seasons, 
either  through  a  more  direct  radiation  from  over¬ 
head  or  by  a  longer  tarrying  of  the  sun  above 
the  horizon. 

Around  these  poles  of  the  ecliptic  the  bearing 
of  the  earth’s  poles  rotates,  and  because  of  this 
motion  we  have  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes. 

CHAPTER  8.  Of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  by 
reason  of  the  magnetic  movement  of  the  earth's  poles 
in  the  arctic  and  antarctic  circle  of  the  zodiac 

The  early  astronomers,  not  noting  the  inequal¬ 
ity  of  years,  made  no  distinction  between  the 
equinoctial  or  solstitial  revolving  year  and  the 
year  determined  from  a  fixed  star.  They  also 
deemed  the  Olympian  years,  which  were  reck¬ 
oned  from  the  rising  of  the  Dog  Star,  or  Sirius 
to  be  the  same  as  those  reckoned  from  the  sol¬ 
stice.  Hipparchus  the  Rhodian  was  the  first  to 
notice  that  there  is  a  difference  between  the  two, 
and  found  another  year,  calculated  from  fixed 
stars,  of  greater  length  than  the  equinoctial  or 
solstitial:  hence  he  supposed  that  the  stars  too 
have  a  consequent  motion,  though  a  very  slow 
one,  nor  readily  noticeable.  After  Hipparchus, 
Menelaus,  a  Roman  geometer,  then  Ptolemy, 
and  along  time  afterward,  Machometes  Aracen- 
sis  and  several  others,  in  all  their  writings  have 
held  that  the  fixed  stars  and  the  whole  firmament 
have  a  consequent  fonvard  movement  {in  consc' 
quentia  procedere)^  for  they  contemplated  the 
heavens  and  not  the  earth,  and  knew  nothing  of 
the  magnetic  inclination.  But  we  will  prove  that 
this  motion  proceeds  from  a  certain  revolution 
of  the  earth’s  axis,  and  that  the  eighth  sphere, 
so  called,  the  firmament,  or  aplanes^  with  its  or¬ 
nament  of  innumerable  globes  and  stars  (the 
distances  of  which  from  earth  have  never  been 
by  any  man  demonstrated,  nor  ever  can  be), 
does  not  revolve.  And  surely  it  must  seem  more 
probable  that  the  appearances  of  the  heavens 
should  be  produced  by  a  deflection  and  inclina¬ 
tion  of  the  small  body,  the  earth,  than  by  a 


ii8 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


whirling  of  the  whole  system  of  the  universe — 
especially  as  this  movement  is  ordered  for  the 
good  of  the  earth  alone,  and  is  of  no  benefit  at 
all  to  the  fixed  stars  or  the  planets.  For  by  this 
motion  the  rising  and  setting  of  stars  in  all  hori¬ 
zons  are  changed,  as  also  their  culminations  in 
the  zenith,  so  that  stars  that  once  were  vertical 
are  now  some  degrees  distant  from  the  zenith. 
Provision  has  been  made  by  nature  for  the  earth’s 
soul  or  its  magnetic  energy — just  as  in  attemper¬ 
ing,  receiving,  and  diverting  the  sun’s  rays  and 
light  in  fitting  seasons,  it  was  necessary  that  the 
Ix’arings  of  the  earth’s  pole  should  be  23  degrees 
and  more  distant  from  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic; 
so  that  now  in  regulating  and  in  receiving  in  due 
order  and  succession  the  luminous  rays  of  the 
fixed  stars,  the  earth’s  poles  should  revolve  at 
the  same  distance  from  the  ecliptic  in  the  arctic 
circle  of  the  ecliptic,  or  rather  that  they  should 
creep  with  slow  gait,  because  the  actions  of  the 
stars  do  not  always  persist  in  the  same  parallel 
circles,  but  have  a  slower  change;  for  the  influ¬ 
ences  of  the  stars  are  not  so  powerful  that  the 
desired  course  should  be  more  rapid.  So  the  axis 
is  inflected  slowly,  and  the  rays  of  the  stars  are 
changed  in  such  length  of  time  as  the  diameter 
of  the  arctic  or  polar  circle  extends;  hence  the 
star  in  the  extremity  of  the  tail  of  Cynosura, 
which  once  in  the  time  of  Hipparchus)  was 
12  degrees  24  minutes  distant  from  the  pole  of 
the  world  or  from  the  point  which  the  earth’s 
pole  regarded,  now  is  distant  from  it  only  2  de-- 
grees  52  minutes;  hence  from  its  nearness  to  the 
pole  it  is  called  by  the  moderns  the  Pole  Star. 
It  will  not  be  only  ^2  degree  from  the  pole,  but 
thereafter  will  begin  to  recede  till  it  reaches  a 
distance  of  48  degrees;  that,  according  to  the 
Prutenic  tables,^  will  be  a. d.  i  5,000.  So  the  bright 
star  (which  for  us  here,  in  southern  Britain,  now 
almost  culminates)  will  in  time  come  within  five 
degrees  of  the  world’s  pole.  Thus  do  all  the  stars 
change  their  light  rays  at  the  earth’s  surface,  be¬ 
cause  of  this  admirable  magnetic  inflection  of 
the  earth’s  axis.  Hence  the  ever  new  changes  of 
the  seasons;  hence  are  regions  more  or  less  fruit¬ 
ful,  more  or  less  sterile;  hence  changes  in  the 
character  and  the  manners  of  nations,  in  govern¬ 
ments  and  in  laws,  according  to  the  power  of  the 
fixed  stars,  the  strength  thence  derived  or  lost, 
and  according  to  the  individual  and  specific  na¬ 
ture  of  the  fixed  stars  as  they  culminate;  or  the 

^  Tiie  Prulenic  (Prussian)  Astronomical  Tables  based 
upon  the  observations  of  Copernicus,  I  lipparchus,  and 
Ptolemy,  were  the  result  of  seven  years’  labour  on  part  of 
the  German  astronomer  Erasmus  Rcinhold,  who  named 
the  work  after  his  benefactor,  Albert,  Duke  of  Prussia. 


effects  may  be  due  to  their  risings  and  settings 
or  to  new  conjunctions  in  the  meridian. 

The  precession  of  the  equinoxes  from  the  equal 
motion  of  the  earth’s  pole  in  the  zodiacal  circle 
is  here  demonstrated.  Let  A  BCD  be  the  eclip- 


- - 1 - 

B 

tic;  lEG  the  Arctic  zodiacal  circle.  Now  if  the 
earth’s  pole  looks  toward  E,  then  the  equinoxes 
are  at  £),  G,  Suppose  this  to  be  in  the  time  of 
Metho,^  when  the  horns  of  .\ries  were  in  the 
equinoctial  colure.*"^  But  if  the  earth’s  pole  has 
advanced  to  7,  then  AT,  L  will  be  the  equinoxes, 
and  stars  in  the  ecliptic  C  will  seem  to  have 
moved  forward  over  the  whole  arc  ATC,  follow¬ 
ing  the  signs;  L  advances  by  precession  over  the 
arc  DL,  counter  to  the  order  of  the  signs;  but 
the  opposite  would  be  the  case  if  the  point  G 
were  to  regard  the  earth’s  poles,  and  the  motion 
be  from  E  toward  G;  for  then  A/,  AAvould  be  the 
equinoxes,  and  the  fixed  stars  would  anticipate 
at  Cand  Z),  counter  to  the  order  of  the  signs. 

CHAPTER  9.  Of  the  anomaly  of  the  precession  of  the 

equinoxes  and  of  the  obliquity  of  the  zodiac 

The  change  in  the  equinoxes  is  not  always  equal, 
but  becomes  sometimes  more  rapid,  sometimes 
more  slow;  for  the  earth’s  poles  travel  unequally 

2  The  celebrated  astronomer  Melon  flourished  at  Ath* 
ens  432-430  B.  c.  The  mean  length  of  the  Metonic  Cycle, 
or  Metonic  year,  was  6939^  days,  which  coincides  with 
19  Julian  Years  and  nearly  corresponds  to  235  lunations. 
An  improvement  on  the  Metonic  Cycle  was  proposed  by 
Calippus  of  Cyzicus,  a  disciple  of  Plato.  The  Calippic  Per¬ 
iod  consisted  of  76  years,  representing  four  Metonic  Cy¬ 
cles,  or  about  940  complete  lunations,  1020  nodal  and 
1016  complete  sidereal  revolutions. 

3  The  colure  is  one  of  two  great  circles  which  intersect 
at  right  angles  in  the  poles  of  the  equator. 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


in  the  Arctic  and  in  the  Antarctic  zodiacal  circle, 
and  recede  from  the  middle  line  on  both  sides; 
hence  the  obliquity  of  the  zodiac  seems  to  change 
to  the  equator.  And  when  this  became  known 
through  protracted  observations,  it  was  appar¬ 
ent  that  the  true  equinoctial  points  were  elon¬ 
gated  from  the  mean  equinoctial  points  70  min¬ 
utes  to  one  side  or  the  other  in  the  greatest  pro' 
staphd£resi\  while  the  solstices  either  approach 
the  equator  equally  by  12  minutes  or  recede  to 
the  same  extent;  so  that  the  nearest  approach  is 
23  deg.  28  min.  and  the  greatest  elongation  23 
deg.  52  min.  Astronomers  in  accounting  for  this 
inequality  of  precession  and  of  declination  of 
the  tropics  have  offered  various  theories.  Thebi- 
tius,^  to  establish  a  law  for  these  great  inequali¬ 
ties  in  the  movements  of  the  stars,  held  that  the 
eighth  sphere  does  not  advance  by  continued 
motion  from  west  to  east,  but  that  it  has  a  sort 
of  tremulous  motion  whereby  the  leading  stars 
in  Aries  and  in  Libra  of  the  eighth  heavens  de¬ 
scribe  around  the  leading  stars  of  Aries  and  Lib¬ 
ra  of  the  ninth  sphere  certain  small  circles  with 
diameters  equal  to  about  nine  degrees.  But  as 
this  “motion  of  trepidation”  is  full  of  absurdities 
and  impossible  motions,  this  movement  has  gone 
out  of  fashion.  Other  astronomers,  therefore, 
are  compelled  to  ascribe  motion 
to  the  eighth  sphere,  and  atop  of 
this  to  construct  a  ninth  heaven, 
nay  a  tenth  and  an  eleventh.  We 
must  pardon  slips  in  mathemati¬ 
cians,  for  one  may  be  permitted  in 
the  case  of  movements  difficult  to 
account  for  to  offer  any  hypothe¬ 
ses  whatever  in  order  to  establish 
a  law  and  to  bring  in  a  rule  that 
will  make  the  facts  agree.  But  the 
philosopher  never  can  admit  such 
enormous  and  monstrous  celestial 
constructions. 

Now  though  we  see  in  all  this 
how  loath  these  mathematicians 
are  to  ascribe  any  motion  to  the 
earth,  which  is  a  very  small  body, 
nevertheless  they  drive  and  whirl 
the  heavens,  which  are  vast  and 
immense  beyond  human  compre¬ 
hension  and  human  imagination: 
they  construct  three  heavens,  pos¬ 
tulate  three  inconceivable  mon¬ 
strosities,  to  account  for  a  few  un¬ 
explained  motions.  Ptolemy, com¬ 
paring  with  his  own  observations 
those  of  Timochares  and  Hippar- 
*  See  note,  Book  in,  i. 


I19 

chus,  of  whom  the  one  lived  260  years  before  his 
day  and  the  other  460  years,  deemed  this  to  be 
the  motion  of  the  eighth  sphere  and  of  the  whole 
firmament,  and  proved  it  with  many  phenome¬ 
na  on  the  poles  of  the  zodiac;  and,  still  thinking 
its  motion  to  be  equal,  he  held  that  the  fixed 
stars  in  100  years  travel  only  one  degree  beneath 
the  primum  mobile.  Seven  hundred  and  fifty 
years  after  him,  Abitegnius  found  that  one  de¬ 
gree  is  travelled  over  in  66  years,  so  that  the 
whole  period  would  be  23,760  years.  Alphonsus 
would  have  this  motion  still  slower — i  degree  28 
minutes  in  200  years;  and  thus  would  the  course 
of  the  fixed  stars  proceed,  but  unequally.  At  last 
Copernicus,  through  his  own  observations  and 
those  of  Timochares,  Aristarchus  the  Samian, 
Menelaus,  Ptolemy,  Machometes  Aracensis  and 
Alphonsus,  discovered  the  anomalies  of  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  earth’s  axis;  though  I  have  no  doubt 
that  other  anomalies  also  will  appear  some  cen¬ 
turies  hence,  for  it  is  difficult,  save  in  periods  of 
many  ages,  to  note  so  slow  a  movement,  where¬ 
fore  we  still  are  ignorant  of  the  mind  of  nature, 
what  she  is  aiming  at  through  this  inequality  of 
motion.  Let  A  be  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic,  BC 
the  ecliptic,  D  the  equator;  when  the  earth’s 
pole  regards  the  point  M  near  the  arctic  circleof 


G 


WILLIAM  GILBERT 


the  zodiac  let  the  anomaly  of  the  precession  of 
the  equinox  be  at  E,  but  when  it  regards  iV,  let 
the  anomaly  of  the  precession  be  at  E,  So  long 
as  it  regards  I  directly  there  is  observed  the 
maximum  obliquity  G  in  the  solstitial  colure; 
but  while  it  regards  L,  then  there  is  minimum 
obliquity  H  in  the  colure  of  the  solstices. 

Copernicus's  intorta  corolla 


and  of  the  anomaly  of  the  precessions,  and  of 
obliquity.  The  period  of  the  precession  of  the 
equinoxes  is  25,816  Egyptian  years;  the  period 
of  the  obliquity  of  the  zodiac  is  3434  years  and 
a  little  more;  the  period  of  the  anomaly  of  the 
precession  of  the  equinoxes  is  1717  years  and  a 
little  more.  If  we  divide  the  whole  time  of  the 
in  the  arctic  zodiacal  circle 


B 


FGB  is  one  half  of  an  arctic  circle  described 
around  the  pole  of  the  zodiac;  ABC  is  the  colure 
of  the  solstices;  A  the  pole  of  the  zodiac;  DE 
the  anomaly  of  longitude  140  minutes  on  either 
side,  with  twofold  terminus  {diiplici  termin6)\ 
BG  anomaly  of  obliquity,  24  minutes;  B  the 
greater  obliquity,  23  degrees  52  minutes;  D  the 
mean  obliquity,  23  degrees  40  minutes;  G  the 
minimum  obliquity,  23  degrees  28  minutes. 


motion  from  a  to  i  into  eight  equal  parts,  in  the 
first  eighth  part  the  pole  travels  faster  from  a  to 
b\  in  the  second  more  slowly  from  b  to  c\  in  the 
third,  with  the  same  slowness  from  c  to  d\  in  the 
fourth,  more  rapidly  again  from  d  to  e\  in  the 
fifth,  with  equal  rapidity  from  e  to /;  again  more 
slowly  from/ to  g\  with  the  same  slowness  from 
g  to  /j;  in  the  last  eighth  again  more  rapidly  from 
h  to  /,  and  this  is  Copernicus’s  intorta  corolla^ 


True  movement  and  natural  axis  (or  poles)  of  the  earth 
directed  toward  the  arctic  circle  of  the  zodiac 


Let  ai  be  part  of  the  arctic  circle  of  the 
zodiac  in  which  is  performed  one  period  of  the 
obliquity.  From  aioe  'is  the  period  of  the  anom¬ 
aly  or  variation  of  the  precession  of  the  equi¬ 
noxes.  ai  is  the  curved  line  described  by  the 
earth’s  pole  in  a  true  motion  made  up  of  three 
motions,  />.,  of  the  motion  of  the  precessions. 


with  mean  motion  fused  into  a  curved  line,  which 
is  the  true  path  of  the  motion.  And  so  the  pole 
^  Copernicus,  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres^  66, 67: 
the  intorta  corolla  is  not  an  inverted  but  an  irregular 
crown:  a  figure  representing  the  successive  positions  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  projection  of  the  earth’s  pole  upon  the  stel¬ 
lar  sphere,  resembling  a  crown,  but  distorted  by  the  ir¬ 
regularities  of  motion. 


I2I 


ON  THE  LOADSTONE 


reaches  the  extreme  limit  of  variation  of  the 
precession  of  the  equinoxes  twice,  but  the  limit 
of  inclination  or  obliquity  once  only.  Thus  do 
the  moderns,  and  in  particular  Copernicus,  re- 
storer  of  astronomy,  describe  the  variations  of 
the  movement  of  the  earth’s  axis,  so  far  as  the 
same  is  made  possible  by  the  observations  of  the 
ancients  down  to  our  day ;  but  we  still  lack  many 
and  more  exact  observations  to  fix  anything  pos¬ 
itively  as  to  the  anomaly  of  the  movement  of 
the  precessions,  as  also  of  the  obliquity  of  the 


zodiac.  For  since  the  time  when  in  various  ob¬ 
servations  this  anomaly  was  first  noted,  only 
one  half  of  a  period  of  obliquity  has  passed. 
Hence  all  these  points  touching  the  unequal 
movement  of  precession  and  obliquity  are  un¬ 
decided  and  undefined,  and  so  we  cannot  assign 
with  certainty  any  natural  causes  for  the  mo¬ 
tion. 

Wherefore  we  here  bring  to  an  end  and  con¬ 
clusion  our  arguments  and  experiments  magnet- 
ical. 


V 


mortmhOii  mrriyto 


r:  IP 

.«i*  ^  timf 

|ilk»iih««i<>*«l4  M^tWoocfc  «i(b*»do6iiin'W  i3av»?r«  •  .s-hnii-r,  -xli  UiC(iaii#j|M , 

jffiupiW®^ -Uwlq  »»  ‘U«t.flqp  .*^wiEti,.l|to5i  ^  <iotj*n|hpiilb 

,V^pyn.  .r.l«  ^<lfafoud^ tttemi  tjtniitroUiifqiaP ’be:  u 

iila«*T«ni  jbiwtoinjwj  o'.  ,'i  :(■■: 

jaiU;*»h4 oi I'j 

iawbm«Ji4idicKkiiUx^  :r.<i 


V  HU»  bo4  bm  ujrW  gfuid  9133  wlbmft/  jliudivufixaoi  2CKuim3i4^«3i|§!3Fi<i^ 

3iU  lo  y tKriv>n6  mIi  ai  lui  X^3V0i 
‘  *  I  3d)  lo  oeb  aft  .^ru>ta99si||  ad) 


lorr^mh^cfitd  w 


•}r 

liJ  s 

*  l*! 

.-r  --d#  hj}J  tiriir 

f  iMfe  %►  Ju  ►t4tt<T 

iti  »*»e  »*:  aC^t<i(Sn- » 

.rbc  TaiBusw^Vt^ 

>ide,  5ritii  twofold  teirnttHTr 
SC  li  ekfa{vvy,  )aimt<»:  i( 

2^  tlcjipiM  <S!)t  i0it»Mt»;  /I  »S« 
;’  >5  4k’f,ht$  4«,ftvia^r  i;  0 

flww'mww * jnlejircT mi6*rtw  , 


(T.MlbOk 

1^?,.  C».,*.th5jr#!d>e  |wl?  fiv^v  {lOQ^  t9- 
4h,M  liir  iKvviftj  iwwi  wi^ax  0^ 

t*p  Ht  viuV 
icKMiK  «»'>» 

U^K,  iifirticquatap^ify  tea>#  wj!; 

i4<TwJy,fiWD/fO  mate  , 

f  tff  A:  t»<hjs  U‘t«lEiW>  sj^^i©  <*4w%J5d^ 

4  dlk  ^;a«a  ^  *•  O/grmfcyi’i  pMsnU^ftf^f^' 


iiM/w  t<  »r<  i»  lAt  enaX 

^^jftKttd'  hKttitJ  4jr  4*K*n«r  * 


is 


*  M  *1#  jbi^  I 

«mUM;'^i  '•tiliTO'if  cfrt-  x.  =««.  fr>w  pfiW llr  ,fa  theifW  ^iBWrj^^oa jOthc  0^« 

,  )*,  -  H'  .{  ^aM  1^  tM. 

cnnK  ..  .  l'v«  ^Inr  Tint  — lin^^t  i  '11T~  *“* 

•  r.'bM  rtfilprifiiBtt^ion*,  wtiMMlW«  UiB*^  ,  'V  r*C'' 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Galileo,  i‘y6^-i6/\.2. 


Galileo  Galilei  was  born  at  Pisa,  February 
15,  1564,  the  eldest  of  seven  children.  His 
father,  who  belonged  to  a  noble  but  impover¬ 
ished  Florentine  family,  was  a  cloth  merchant 
highly  reputed  for  his  skill  in  mathematics  and 
music.  At  the  age  of  twelve  or  thirteen  Galileo 
was  sent  to  school  at  the  monastery  of  Vallom- 
brosa,  where  he  studied  the  Latin  classics  and 
acquired  a  fair  command  of  Greek.  He  seems 
to  have  been  a  novice  for  a  short  time,  but  his 
father  then  withdrew  him  from  the  charge  of 
the  monks. 

In  1581  Galileo  was  sent  to  the  University  of 
Pisa  to  study  medicine.  His  father  apparently 
hoped  to  prevent  him  from  following  either 
mathematics  or  music,  whose  unremunerative 
character  he  had  experienced.  The  young  Gali¬ 
leo  was  already  known  for  his  proficiency  in 
music;  his  judgment  in  painting  was  highly 
esteemed,  and  Ludovico  Cigoli  accredited  him 
with  the  success  of  his  paintings;  but  mathemat¬ 
ics  soon  had  an  overwhelming  attraction  for 
him.  In  his  first  year  at  the  university  Galileo 
discovered  the  isochronism  of  the  pendulum,  to 
which  his  attention  had  been  drawn  by  a  swing¬ 
ing  lamp  in  the  cathedral,  and  he  applied  the 
principle  in  a  machine  for  measuring  the  pulse 
known  as  the  pulsilogia.  Although  compelled  to 
leave  school  in  1585  for  want  of  funds,  Galileo 
continued  his  investigations.  He  shortly  after¬ 
wards  published  an  essay  describing  his  inven¬ 
tion  of  the  hydrostatic  balance.  During  1587 
and  1588  he  delivered  two  papers  before  the 
Florentine  Academy  on  the  site  and  dimen¬ 
sions  of  Dante’s  Inferno.  A  treatise  written  at 
this  time  on  the  center  of  gravity  in  solids  won 
him  the  title  of  “the  Archimedes  of  his  time.” 

Despite  his  growing  fame,  Galileo  was  un¬ 
able  to  find  a  means  of  earning  his  living  until 
1589.  He  tried  several  times  unsuccessfully  to 
obtain  a  teaching  position,  and  he  had  even 
planned  to  seek  his  fortune  in  the  East  before 
he  was  called  to  the  honorable  but  not  lucra¬ 
tive  post  of  mathematical  lecturer  at  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Pisa.  During  the  ensuing  two  years, 
1589-91,  he  conducted  experiments  on  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  falling  bodies.  His  lectures  on  the  im¬ 


port  of  his  discoveries  alienated  the  Aristotelian 
members  of  the  faculty,  and  he  further  aroused 
the  anger  of  the  authorities  by  a  burlesque  in 
which  he  ridiculed  the  university  regulations. 
In  1591  Galileo  found  it  prudent  to  resign,  and 
shortly  afterwards,  he  secured  the  chair  of 
mathematics  at  the  University  of  Padua. 

Galileo  taught  at  Padua  for  eighteen  years, 
from  1592  to  1610,  and  during  that  time  estab¬ 
lished  a  European  reputation  as  a  scientist  and 
inventor.  His  lectures,  which  were  attended  by 
persons  of  the  highest  distinction  from  all  parts 
of  Europe,  proved  so  popular  they  were  given 
in  a  hall  that  held  two  thousand  persons.  He 
wrote  numerous  treatises,  which  were  circulat¬ 
ed  among  his  pupils,  dealing  with  military  ar¬ 
chitecture,  gnomonics,  the  sphere,  accelerated 
motion,  and  special  problems  in  mechanics.  His 
more  notable  inventions  at  Padua  included  a 
machine  for  raising  water,  a  geometrical  com¬ 
pass,  and  an  air  thermometer.  But  perhaps  his 
most  famous  discovery  came  in  1609,  when, 
upon  learning  that  the  Dutch  were  beginning 
to  manufacture  magnifying  glasses,  he  put  to¬ 
gether  a  telescope  and  turned  it  for  the  first 
time  towards  the  heavens.  In  his  Sidereus  Ntm- 
ciusy  published  early  in  1610,  Galileo  gave  the 
first  results  of  this  new  method  of  investiga¬ 
tion;  he  noted  the  mountainous  surface  of  the 
moon,  the  fact  that  the  Milky  Way  consists  of 
stars,  and  the  observation  of  four  of  Jupiter’s 
satellites,  which  he  named  the  “Medicean 
Stars”  in  honor  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany. 
Almost  immediately,  Galileo  was  nominated 
philosopher  and  mathematician  extraordinary 
to  the  grand  duke  at  a  large  salary  and  with  un¬ 
limited  leisure  for  research. 

Galileo  did  not  actively  defend  the  Coperni- 
can  doctrine  until  after  he  had  begun  to  use  the 
telescope.  Although  he  wrote  Kepler  as  early  as 
1597  that  he  had  “become  a  convert  to  the 
opinions  of  Copernicus  many  years  ago,”  he 
continued  to  teach  the  Ptolemaic  system 
throughout  his  stay  at  Padua.  But  with  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  moons  of  Jupiter  and  the  phases 
of  Venus  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  “all  my 
life  and  being  henceforth  depends”  on  the  es- 


125 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


126 

tablishment  of  the  new  theory.  Galileo’s  astro¬ 
nomical  discoveries  brought  him  great  honor, 
and  in  1611  he  traveled  to  Rome,  where  he 
gave  a  highly  successful  demonstration  of  the 
telescope  to  the  ecclesiastical  authorities.  But 
as  soon  as  he  tried  to  maintain  that  the  Coper- 
nican  theoiy^  could  be  reconciled  with  Scrip¬ 
tures,  he  began  to  encounter  opposition  from 
the  theologians. 

The  first  ecclesiastical  attack  upon  Galileo 
occurred  in  1614  when  he  was  denounced  from 
tlie  pulpit  in  Florence  for  holding  the  new  as¬ 
tronomical  doctrine.  Galileo  replied  by  issuing 
his  Letter  to  the  Grand  Duchess  Christine  of  Lor¬ 
raine,  in  which  he  strongly  supported  the  words 
of  Cardinal  Baronius  that  the  “Holy  Spirit  in¬ 
tended  to  teach  us  in  the  Bible  how  to  go  to 
Heaven,  not  how  the  heavens  go.”  This  letter 
was  at  once  laid  before  the  Inquisition,  and  in 

1615  Galileo  was  informed  by  an  ecclesiastical 
friend  in  Rome:  “You  can  write  as  a  mathema¬ 
tician  and  hypothetically,  as  Copernicus  is  said 
to  have  done,  and  you  can  write  freely  so  long 
as  you  keep  out  of  the  sacristy.”  But  early  in 

1616  the  Holy  Office  condemned  two  funda¬ 
mental  Copernican  propositions  selected  from 
Galileo’s  work  On  the  Sun  Spots ^  and  he  was 
summoned  before  Cardinal  Bellarmine  and 
warned  not  to  hold  or  defend  the  Copernican 
theory.  Dismayed  by  the  slanders  regarding 
him,  Galileo  obtained  from  the  Cardinal  a  cer¬ 
tificate  explaining  that  he  had  not  been  made 
to  abjure  his  opinions  nor  enjoined  to  perform 
salutary  penance. 

Galileo  maintained  silence  until  1627.  In  that 
year  he  published  11  Saggiatore,  in  which  he  con¬ 
tended  that  the  new  astronomical  discoveries 
were  more  in  accord  with  the  Copernican  than 
the  Ptolemaic  system;  he  added  that,  since]  the 
one  theory  was  condemned  by  the  Church  and 
the  other  by  reason,  a  third  system  would  have 
to  be  sought.  The  book  was  dedicated  to  Urban 
VIII.  It  was  well  received  by  both  ecclesiastical 
and  scientific  authorities,  and  in  the  course  of 
two  months  Galileo  had  six  audiences  with  the 


pope.  Encouraged  by  this  reception,  he  de¬ 
voted  the  next  eight  years  to  writing  his  Dia¬ 
logue  of  the  Tivo  Principal  Systems  of  the  World 
(1632).  Upon  its  publication  Galileo  was  de¬ 
nounced  by  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  and 
summoned  for  trial  before  the  Holy  Office. 
He  was  accused  on  three  charges:  that  he  had 
broken  his  agreement  of  1616,  that  he  had 
taught  the  Copernican  theory  as  a  truth  and 
not  a  hypothesis,  and  that  he  inwardly  be¬ 
lieved  the  truth  of  a  doctrine  condemned  by 
the  Church.  In  the  trial  of  1633  he  was  found 
guilty  on  the  first  two  charges,  but  on  his  as¬ 
sertion  that  it  was  never  his  intention  to  believe 
the  truth  of  the  Copernican  doctrine  after  its 
condemnation,  he  was  denounced  only  as  “vehe¬ 
mently  suspected  of  heresy”  and  sentenced  to 
punishment  at  the  will  of  the  court.  Galileo 
submitted  and  made  the  required  recantation. 

On  being  allowed  to  leave  Rome,  Galileo 
went  to  Siena  and  resided  for  several  months  in 
the  house  of  the  archbishop.  In  December, 
1633,  he  was  permitted  to  return  to  his  villa  at 
Arcetri,  near  Florence,  where  he  spent  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  his  life  in  retirement  according  to 
the  conditions  of  his  release.  Here  he  completed 
the  Dialogue  of  the  Two  New  Sciences,  in  which 
he  turned  back  to  the  scientific  investigations 
of  his  youth.  The  work,  which  was  printed  by 
the  Elzevirs  at  Leyden  in  1638,  was  considered 
by  Galileo  to  be  “superior  to  everything  else  of 
mine  hitherto  published.”  His  last  telescopic 
discovery— that  of  the  moon’s  diurnal  and 
monthly  librations — was  made  in  1637,  ^ 

few  months  before  he  became  blind.  But  blind¬ 
ness  was  not  allowed  to  interrupt  his  scientific 
correspondence  and  investigation.  He  worked 
out  the  application  of  the  pendulum  to  the 
clock,  which  Huygens  was  to  apply  successfully 
several  years  later,  and  was  engaged  in  dictat¬ 
ing  to  his  disciples,  Viviani  and  Torricelli,  his 
latest  ideas  on  the  theory  of  impact  when  he 
was  seized  with  fever.  He  died  January  8,  1642, 
and  was  buried  in  the  chapel  of  Santa  Croce  in 
Florence. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note  125 

L  First  New  Science,  Treating  of  the  Resistance  which 

Solid  Bodies  Offer  to  Fracture.  First  Day  129 

11.  Concerning  the  Cause  of  Cohesion.  Second  Day  178 

III.  Second  New  Science,  Treating  of  Motion.  Third  Day  197 

Uniform  Motion  197 

Naturally  Accelerated  Motion  200 

IV.  Violent  Motions.  Projectiles.  Fourth  Day  238 


127 


3f" 

f  ■ 


of  (beomGo^oi  iilt|h 

flomiril  itifcpiNaMf  him  wtt^  hofidli 

^aoid  in  i(^ii  he  mvtied  rtJi  Hr«3^  he- 
j|  b^y'fiicm  denict^tril^  ^ 
^4clcia>pe  ty^  rhe  e^lci4a<lkiJ  aiilTi^V^r  Hni 
^srifm  be  tmJ'iiMo^llKit#^  t\m  M 
Biaiii  fhcoiiy  teuW  he  itethw^i 
ita^  he  tgM 

the ‘Ihoohi^ibKPK* 

isne  atSis^iiM  hcfack  upoa  Gtlik^) 
«K:c«;ne<i  29  ffc^rjiincisd  fttmu 

ebr  pii|4t*ftj  'w*  im  (uakiL^  iRc  iic^  4r 
‘  iatmoir^  ,  ^1  riini; 

fa  which  tl^^[rofidymppr*ii  V 


BIOGI?  AI«CAI  f  ^ 

R^-.  Kn<fMDi|i«}  rccejifc  be^  - 1 

VQiod  tlf^:fle(Ld;^t  y«a«*  (•  «i'atW Ki  /^GT'  . 

bgnit^MtTffit  hincM  ^idaei^^fiiteJJVA/ 
Upon  i(»  puWkaoiDn  I  «a*;de* 
nooAM  rccleuaMkai  ’«v  hozidtf'*^ 

1?  i’  fi»r  tziai  bdtrx  iHs,  IWy  0(H«, 

.  ceniod  ob-'tbcec  linijef:  liirtjite  had 
b:(%;  kk  ^rcewoit  «b*f 'be  hid 

>a«g!n  Ciperaior  itwoirby*  •  4:01(11  oodf 
MK  «'iypnxlteib.  «n^  tliif(;lifi.  kiaaidfy.  be* 
iitvcii  t&i’:ti  >1: 'ly't  .1  '''>•’' 'Aoc  sooifK^td' -in' 
iot 

h-<r  an  (lir^^yt  r\jf  ttk  o» 

-rY  a:  tf  v:f  ^ 


Codbid  Ovroaiun  iisc  kMy  Spicit  4n<  iS^rmiiaiwo, I>p«widrMunc^  oai/W Vcliei|;> ' 
ttfKlRi  ^  M  tbt  Vi^jlOmniig'inijii^^  wntenredr^^.' 

wt^T*, "pox  bow  tht  he***tt-  .nJ."  Tbk  lentt  n'lroduncar  <.i  i.r  'in  of  *?«:  <000.  GjIUm 

wkA.Ttt  Vlin'knMirr V*  ofl#WW3T wLff  ttn«ry^wS?>-;JLII 


'  wiuat  enct  fMQ'bnp£r  'iaBikd/  Id  gadd»iui9eniMa&m(<{rtnqr«2nW  foolQtiUin^ 

ti*>5.C«It)ep  »»T^(nif*a;^  jby  ^«<kh»aitkd  Ott>  lelujiialtoM^diltiltbiKc  Kpme,  CawiR'" 

<^J  m  9miu^  w  jar»11Sa6«®faie»i#-  ,MiiioW<  ■dbrtid^*»vCTd-'tK«ib»ar^ 

/JIfku wV  ^1-'  9i  tWv:UvdvbRtk)p.'b''-OM9nrik7,  ‘ 


bMr  ontkfi.'’  fttt  .  4»«-  o 


iMy  f^U&w  \V>W  fvK>\M 

mgntiil  CafterricAo  p(opPNr««|p 
Gddeoy  wntk  f>»  Stm  Sftkh  «tMi  he  •« 


yi  v>  bli  s 

k-  ’}wA,iifc.||cf« 


AObrK^dVnsBF/^.V 

'•^wsa/.  «•«/  (“-toae^ss*  w««*  <  ,  _  ,_  . ,  _  „  , 

Xlhi«clir.«i(  bw^kie  m  attkpemmt  •edKOiM.ji^d 
Ae  «ai(Mftfj0fc>B£te^ty^<-.  Hwnt  '  -  <np)lkM^  , 


suomohcii  befote  Cattfijial  Bc&nniac  aid  .  h«.  twrned  back  tD>li^  >ck>i«i&:  men'^au^ 
wanted .iu< k>  haM orJeCcod  ibe  Copesaioio  *••  *  ■'-*  '■•  ••  •  -  ••  ' 


tfacocyjt  iJinmyr::  ly  -ihe  tbnkxf  recaidk^ 
tan.  nMd«*  fjkiuittie  tOMi»  MeC^KhnM  ieef' 

Weft 

y  m  nhWte  'iM  apwtijiw  u»  jjadfatf* 

>■  MtoMiy  pe******' 

' .  *  ‘Oiiiaft  NutWiMAdl  fa*  dwir 

yet»  hsptfiCAiM  />  f  irt  »ji^  twoon> 

t«ktk(l..th^^  due  (&^ven^ 

,iiTo:)U}<e>iBJKt6ird  wfik  tIutCupuMcui  dka 
tW  FsMcMiaiejyatemt  WWhM  rbMi.’jdWdthc'. 
•be  dte^wai  (wiMle«M>cd  by  ihc  C^rcb  atM ' 
die  otWriby  (tiaMu  « thud  vyatein  wmU 
-to  be  icMihiv  TW  bonh  b*i  dl^icattd  wUiWiri 
y?Ili  I<  «wr  vmU  sceeWiif  by  .tojieewliMiWteil 

I«e  flicwtdk  GM&b  bkiJn  WiftKcr  with  (W 


at.  oirnca  hktk  oa  ioc  >cjeo(w>:.  ai>aunsau(^  ^ 

rfhjj  youtL  tbe  Wotk.  which 
tJic  Rizeidjr>«(Loy^Jib  ' 'tSutet^  •-  1 

by  tniillco  t»by,  ‘W^tWir-to  •m^ythi.-i*  ctaeof  • 
m&€f-  IMmm  piitikiwM.'*  ^Hi»  tan 
daowfeity— -thw  'of  .tW  .'iiomal*’ 


■  --  --_  -  -  —  ,,  — , 

Lbw fibiaucaew-  -•  «WW id  x6 jl 
paewJh*  tw^w  WWtwsb  'idb^t6flifbtbiid-''  '■ 


-thtf  of  .tW 
eiewLby  ftbwunaa,- 

WWesow 

aJknac<.«  vyburrf^iwdciflix^  ' 
<x>rnEN|KitaSrafee'iu)cf  (•v^fOgwiM),  f^.^voiid^  j 
aat  'iht  afyiUaitiAa  af  (he  peaduhmr  lo  |Jio  j 
<ll|{^wbieaHoyguw»iat«bppiy(da<ij>>^(U)^  '  ^ 
■ntnl  ycsi*  (Mvrk  tnd  k-w* 

'b%  to  to  dbcipkt,  VWbnt  ato  iotiic(l|irto1uM 
iKMrif^s  oa  the -th«ei>  of  inipoei  tvh^lie  i 
wMIriliMt  vdth  (tyen  He  dW  tonbbyi^rtdliar’ , 
bad  Mn  totired  la  dMt  elri|el  •£  tona  jpAblkk^ 
F'loMb*^  -  ••-  ■■■  ‘•'^‘  '■’■  ■ 


■*  r  ■•itf. 

'.  V  .■I  K'S.,  i  •< 


■-  vv^' v'-  ■- „ 

»'  •  •  ■':  ■  X -'-'i  ■  •  ■ ' ^' 

■•_>•.  t  -j-  * 

■  \  \'''  '•  r.f ':  '■  ',■■  ”‘V.  ■•'  k  _i,-e<C  -:.'  1 

tr'-’i?-''  ■  ■■•  ,';#»-.>.‘i^  .  ,1. ■'  y;.  ■  ■  ■  •  -o,_  ^  A  -  ‘  1 

f  v'  *!%!■• 


yi 


#  ^ 


ll. 


Dialogues  Concerning  the 
Two  New  Sciences 


To  THE  MOST  ILLUSTRIOUS  LORD  CoUNT  OF  NoAILLES 
COUNSELLOR  OF  HIS  MOST  CHRISTIAN  MAJESTY,  KNIGHT  OF  THE  ORDER  OF 
THE  HOLY  GHOST,  FIELD  MARSHAL  AND  COMMANDER,  SENESCHAL  AND 
GOVERNOR  OF  ROUERGUE,  AND  HIS  MAJESTY’ S  LIEUTENANT  IN 
AUVERGNE,  MY  LORD  AND  WORSHIPFUL  PATRON 


Most  Illustrious  Lord: 

In  the  pleasure  which  you  derive  from  the 
possession  of  this  work  of  mine,  I  recognize  your 
Lordship’s  magnanimity.  The  disappointment 
and  discouragement  I  have  felt  over  the  ill-for¬ 
tune  which  has  followed  my  other  books  are  al¬ 
ready  known  to  you.  Indeed,  I  had  decided  not 
to  publish  any  more  of  my  work.  And  yet  in 
order  to  save  it  from  complete  oblivion,  it  seemed 
to  me  wise  to  leave  a  manuscript  copy  in  some 
place  where  it  would  be  available  at  least  to 
those  who  follow  intelligently  the  subjects  which 
I  have  treated.  Accordingly,  I  chose  first  to  place 
my  work  in  your  Lordship’s  hands,  asking  no 
more  worthy  depository,  and  believing  that,  on 
account  of  your  affection  for  me,  you  would 
have  at  heart  the  preservation  of  my  studies  and 
labours.  Therefore,  when  you  were  returning 
home  from  your  mission  to  Rome,  I  came  to 
pay  my  respects  in  person  as  I  had  already  done 
many  times  before  by  letter.  At  this  meeting  I 
presented  to  your  Lordship  a  copy  of  these  two 
works  which  at  that  time  I  happened  to  have 
ready.  In  the  gracious  reception  which  you  gave 
these  I  found  assurance  of  their  preservation. 
The  fact  of  your  carrying  them  to  France  and 
showing  them  to  friends  of  yours  who  are  skilled 
in  these  sciences  gave  evidence  that  my  silence 
was  not  to  be  interpreted  as  complete  idleness. 
A  little  later,  just  as  I  was  on  the  point  of  send¬ 
ing  other  copies  to  Germany,  Flanders,  Eng¬ 
land,  Spain,  and  possibly  to  some  places  in  Italy, 
I  was  notified  by  the  Elzevirs  that  they  had 
these  works  of  mine  in  press,  and  that  I  ought  to 
decide  upon  a  dedication  and  send  them  a  reply 
at  once.  This  sudden  and  unexpected  news  led 
me  to  think  that  the  eagerness  of  your  Lord¬ 


ship  to  revive  and  spread  my  name  by  passing 
these  works  on  to  various  friends  was  the  real 
cause  of  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  printers 
who,  because  they  had  already  published  other 
works  of  mine,  now  wished  to  honour  me  with  a 
beautiful  and  ornate  edition  of  this  work.  But 
these  writings  of  mine  must  have  received  addi¬ 
tional  value  from  the  criticism  of  so  excellent  a 
judge  as  your  Lordship,  who  by  the  union  of 
many  virtues  has  won  the  admiration  of  all.  Your 
desire  to  enlarge  the  renown  of  my  work  shows 
your  unparalleled  generosity  and  your  zeal  for 
the  public  welfare  which  you  thought  would 
thus  be  promoted.  Under  these  circumstances 
it  is  eminently  fitting  that  I  should,  in  unmis¬ 
takable  terms,  gratefully  acknowledge  this  gen¬ 
erosity  on  the  part  of  your  Lordship,  who  has 
given  to  my  fame  wings  that  have  carried  it  into 
regions  more  distant  than  I  had  dared  to  hope. 
It  is,  therefore,  proper  that  I  dedicate  to  your 
Lordship  this  child  of  my  brain.  To  this  course 
I  am  constrained  not  only  by  the  weight  of 
obligation  under  which  you  have  placed  me, 
but  also,  if  I  may  so  speak,  by  the  interest 
which  I  have  in  securing  your  Lordship  as  the 
defender  of  my  reputation  against  adversaries 
who  may  attack  it  while  I  remain  under  your 
protection. 

And  now,  advancing  under  your  banner,  I 
pay  my  respects  to  you  by  wishing  that  you 
may  be  rewarded  for  these  kindnesses  by  the 
achievement  of  the  highest  happiness  and  great¬ 
ness. 

I  am  your  Lordship’s 
Most  devoted  Servant, 

Galileo  Galilei 

Arcetri,  6  March,  1638 


129 


aril  gninisDnoD  wugpiRiCI 
wo^l  owT 


.w 


f;i: 


r,..#2,t 


saxjiAoM  so  THuop  cuoj  auoiarsujji  raoM  hht  oT 

so  KMKO  TOT  HO  TOanoi  .rmxAM  HAmjsKti  tjwu  «!«  so  aojije 
OKA  JAItOZSSrS?  rl3aXAUI400  flSIA  JAHUAM  (U3IS  «TitOII3  YJOff  SlfT 

MT  TOAUST^.iau  i’-naiAH  WH  a»tA  ^ybjiaoo>i  so  aovtaavoo 

V^TAS^JUSSIHSKOW  OKA  aaoi  YM  „ivfO«  VOA 

:ajioJ 


stttKM  ytj  9(nm  ^oi  baaayijQs  y/jwt  oi  qiib 
Mat  Ml  tan  tbnshl  umhr/  o»oot}h®w  amb 
;  xjMnivj  In  »tnwJ  arfi  otfli  aaiUd  ibrff  10  ^ub 
Isflin  (mktUuq  ybcank  bta  ysifa  wmad  \adm 
tdii^valutatoiioi  h9diiwmin  ,9fAa}ot3how 
iu8  jtion  ntU  )n  nni}H»  alaono  bos  loUiuasd 
“ibba  brthm  vrad  Ituai  xiia  io  zgn^ihw  aadi 
li,Jaatf9M9  o»}o  rmbhho  omi  sukv 
h  flotnu  yd  otKv  .qiditnoj  luoy  tc  ^bif( 
vioY  .Ua'kmeaniatbam  nmrmltytmivyium 
•wwfa  owiNun  kJ J  atiaib 

lol  has  M>w{  (wM  yiuomag  balaUnaqmi  lony 
Wanw  id^uml]  ofty  dsiriw  aiaihw  aitduq  aiii 
mosiniinaib  aMib  labbU  .bajamoiq  ad  »udi. 
•thaaa  ai  .hluodt  I  wsd»  jiriitil  vbnanitiw  a  « 
•o-y^  tUb  yttu^aicr;]  tWtM  aldaMui' 

«wi  odw  AiUtto&i  luoy  'io  naq  ad^  aoyjkms 
o)nitiiMate>9Tedii9d}«JtnfA'3<iu^^oi  nayij 
^aqpil  oi  I»tiAb  bod  1  nadi  joaitib  »«Kn  HKM^'n 
wroy  Cl)  »JC3il»b  I  radi  laqmq  .avdaiad)  y.i  jl 


,  -  JillJITAt^ 

3dJ  mojl  yf'ntb  uw  riaidy.  Tnucssbt 

iixrr  asio^Kisi  I  .aaunlodifWr '^iihloiL 

foanHataqqKib  adT  .yiiminsii^ni  >V  _ 

adMsyt)  tW  avsd  I  j.r  rmWMv^tJg^ 
•k  rtmJood  ndto  yen  .'•  ■  i!-d  daidlr4o^ 
babbabtnd  I  .baabql  .uoyoi  n. /end  "yfetai.' 
ni  iar  hn/  .Jtwn  ym  1o  aiom  yn*  /I'tfduc 


u  *•  «»WW^>i.c»iviW6aJafcpi«»fnajl,i3V^ 

WO*  fli  yqm iqhactmcnt  n  avcal  o*  tniwhafVi 
OS  1J5  okidkvif  billow  li  tniAfi 

rfairfw'clidfcimxh  vhfn^fbifuwoMqtfw 

TMq  M  i«a  ( M^ibiot^A .  i>!J  j  i 

otf  litbtii:  rl^bimi  t‘qiiimQj  njo^  oi  ;|i 

no  fifidi  jnlvoibd  but  .7'!ot/?t)q'jb  vibio  _ 

hlliow  iiov  ibV  loo^'lo  irtu^Si* 

bhttfolimT«  Ycalonafir/itt9iq^ 
gajinii29i  013W  t«)Y  iKirfvr  .nuodid 

oJ  noiiD  I  aOiooM  oi  CKii^sim  vjo%  mod 

3u<>b  vb&:nU  bid  [  cc  rionoq  ol'iiDtaom  ^  YJsq 


^  *  j —  : V?  ¥o&:niR  om  i  cc  fionoq  oriiDtaom  Ymvm 

Bdl  oT  Jimd  ymTo  cid^qidtlnal  .1  gitoaom  siiit  rA  .wJal  V tnol^lSIKS 

to  iflsio//  oili  vd  vino  mn  l  _ ^ .  t  ^  ^ 


7o  irigis  w  ad;  yd  yloo  ton  booiinnnoa  m*  I 
,9m  inactrj  avud  «6y  daidw  aohqgildo 
imanu  odl  yd  ,d«9qf  o«  ywu  I  ii  anIb  lud 
901  tt  qiddnoj  jittory  iphuacM  ni  pvtd  I  dtfidn 
mtKnaviic  nnuj^  oofMltfqat  vacf  )o  tsbmdab 
ii»y  ubou  WBinn  I  afidw  jt  i^ts  ysm  ndw 

•nc^Jicnq 

k.isoftcd  twoy  i9bau  sntMtvbt  ,noa  buA 
wy  ted;  juiukin  yd  Ony  «i  moqTO  ym  yoq 
ODJ  ^  «dimibai;il  srdt  tiA  bibicwTi  ad  vnn 
•)»)gLasBt»iiqqiui;oi{gid  adik  uumaya^ 

"  1^ 

t'qidibickj  liter/  au  I  ? 

•lOBtnacilntovabnold  f  ; 

BUMAtiOIJUAO 

8(di  .AmuM  d  AMtmA 


-  - - - 

owt  »adi  to  yqa> «  qidabioJtnoy  at  tntnimb 
Tnd  ol  bscuqqxd  f  amt)  Jiid)  )«  daidwF^tiiiM 
oviqi  i»y  dMdw  iiSjtqaam  atig  aAnlJ^ST 
.ooitcv-cmoiq  lodj  to  aannuKs  noudk  f  wifi 
bftt  adtimH  at  mad)  gmyiiita  tony  to  tasl  ;alT 

badiifeaniindwriuoytodioaiUoltnatb  ;;aiwdt 

aoAalUym  tub  aaaatoyy  avi^  osnaiat'aca^m 
.ttanalbt  9»fi]moei  («  Jbia>Mpa)Qi>ad  at  too  *cO 
-bott  to  inicn^)  no  caw  I  te  no(  V»at*S  alwB  A 
•joa  ^ctabnida  ,ynsiimO  ot  laiqoa  ladio  ^oi 
.ylail  ni  caosiq  amocoi  yMuaoq  bo*  .ntsqd.biud 
bad  yadf-  iiub  cuvodH  adi  yd  baflijoii  taw  I 
at  idttifo  I  jadl  boa  ,ttaiq  ni  -mi in  to  tthdWaatf  j 
yloai,  a  mad;  bnat  baa  ooitaaibabiaoqqii  aboab 
bal  tnx  bataoqxMlu  boa  nabbut  BidT^toOa  i$ 
dnaJL  woy  to  namagsa  ad)  tub  doid)  oj  am- 


FIRST  DAY 


INTERLOCUTORS:  SALVIATl,  SAGREDO  AND  SIMPLICIO 


Salviati.  The  constant  activity  which  you  Ve¬ 
netians  display  in  your  famous  arsenal  suggests 
to  the  studious  mind  a  large  field  for  investiga¬ 
tion,  especially  that  part  of  the  work  which  in¬ 
volves  mechanics  ;  for  in  this  department  all  types 
of  instruments  and  machines  are  constantly  be¬ 
ing  constructed  by  many  artisans,  among  whom 
there  must  be  some  who,  partly  by  inherited 
experience  and  partly  by  their  own  observa¬ 
tions,  have  become  highly  expert  and  clever  in 
explanation. 

Sagr.  You  are  quite  right.  Indeed,  I  myself, 
being  curious  by  nature,  frequently  visit  this 
place  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  observing  the 
work  of  those  who,  on  account  of  their  superi¬ 
ority  over  other  artisans,  we  call  “first  rank  men.” 
Conference  with  them  has  often  helped  me  in 
the  investigation  of  certain  effects  including  not 
only  those  which  are  striking,  but  also  those 
which  are  recondite. and  almost  incredible.  At 
times  also  I  have  been  put  to  confusion  and  driv¬ 
en  to  despair  of  ever  explaining  something  for 
which  I  could  not  account,  but  which  my  senses 
told  me  to  be  true.  And  notwithstanding  the 
fact  that  what  the  old  man  told  us  a  little  while 
ago  is  proverbial  and  commonly  accepted,  yet 
it  seemed  to  me  altogether  false,  like  many  an¬ 
other  saying  which  is  current  among  the  igno¬ 
rant;  for  I  think  they  introduce  these  expres¬ 
sions  in  order  to  give  the  appearance  of  know¬ 
ing  something  about  matters  which  they  do  not 
understand. 

Salv.  You  refer,  perhaps,  to  that  last  remark 
of  his  when  we  asked  the  reason  why  they  em¬ 
ployed  stocks,  scaffolding,  and  bracing  of  larger 
dimensions  for  launching  a  big  vessel  than  they 
do  for  a  small  one;  and  he  answered  that  they 
did  this  in  order  to  avoid  the  danger  of  the  ship 
parting  under  its  own  heavy  weight,  a  danger 
to  which  small  boats  are  not  subject  ? 

Sagr.  Yes,  that  is  what  I  mean;  and  1  refer 
especially  to  his  last  assertion  which  I  have  al¬ 
ways  regarded  as  false,  though  current,  opinion; 
namely,  that  in  speaking  of  these  and  other  sim¬ 
ilar  machines  one  cannot  argue  from  the  small 


to  the  large,  because  many  devices  which  suc¬ 
ceed  on  a  small  scale  do  not  work  on  a  large 
scale.  Now,  since  mechanics  has  its  foundation 
in  geometry,  where  mere  size  cuts  no  figure,  I 
do  not  see  that  the  properties  of  circles,  triangles, 
cylinders,  cones,  and  other  solid  figures  will 
change  with  their  size.  If,  therefore,  a  large  ma¬ 
chine  be  constructed  in  such  a  way  that  its  parts 
bear  to  one  another  the  same  ratio  as  in  a  smaller 
one,  and  if  the  smaller  is  sufficiently  strong  for 
the  purpose  for  which  it  was  designed,  I  do  not 
see  why  the  larger  also  should  not  be  able  to 
withstand  any  severe  and  destructive  tests  to 
which  it  may  be  subjected. 

Salv.  The  common  opinion  is  here  absolutely 
wrong.  Indeed,  it  is  so  far  wrong  that  precisely 
the  opposite  is  true,  namely,  that  many  ma¬ 
chines  can  be  constructed  even  more  perfectly 
on  a  large  scale  than  on  a  small;  thus,  for  in¬ 
stance,  a  clock  which  indicates  and  strikes  the 
hour  can  be  made  more  accurate  on  a  large  scale 
than  on  a  small.  There  are  some  intelligent  peo¬ 
ple  who  maintain  this  same  opinion,  but  on  more 
reasonable  grounds,  when  they  cut  loose  from 
geometry  and  argue  that  the  better  perform¬ 
ance  of  the  large  machine  is  owing  to  the  imper¬ 
fections  and  variations  of  the  material.  Here  I 
trust  you  will  not  charge  me  with  arrogance  if  I 
say  that  imperfections  in  the  material,  even  those 
which  are  great  enough  to  invalidate  the  clearest 
mathematical  proof,  are  not  sufficient  to  explain 
the  deviations  observed  between  machines  in 
the  concrete  and  in  the  abstract.  Yet  I  shall  say 
it  and  will  affirm  that,  even  if  the  imperfections 
did  not  exist  and  matter  were  absolutely  per¬ 
fect,  unalterable,  and  free  from  all  accidental 
variations,  still  the  mere  fact  that  it  is  matter 
makes  the  larger  machine,  built  of  the  same  ma¬ 
terial  and  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  smaller, 
correspond  with  exactness  to  the  smaller  in  every 
respect  except  that  it  will  not  be  so  strong  or  so 
resistant  against  violent  treatment;  the  larger 
the  machine,  the  greater  its  weakness.  Since  I 
assume  matter  to  be  unchangeable  and  always 
the  same,  it  is  clear  that  we  are  no  less  able  to 


131 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


treat  this  constant  and  invariable  property  in  a 
rigid  manner  than  if  it  belonged  to  simple  and 
pure  mathematics.  Therefore,  Sagredo,  you 
would  do  well  to  change  the  opinion  which  you, 
and  perhaps  also  many  other  students  of  me¬ 
chanics,  have  entertained  concerning  the  abil¬ 
ity  of  machines  and  structures  to  resist  external 
disturbances,  thinking  that  when  they  are  built 
of  the  same  material  and  maintain  the  same  ra¬ 
tio  between  parts,  they  are  able  equally,  or  rath¬ 
er  proportionally,  to  resist  or  yield  to  such  ex¬ 
ternal  disturbances  and  blows.  For  we  can  dem¬ 
onstrate  by  geometry  that  the  large  machine  is 
not  proportionately  stronger  than  the  small. 
Finally,  we  may  say  that,  for  every  machine  and 
structure,  whether  artificial  or  natural,  there  is 
set  a  necessary  limit  beyond  which  neither  art 
nor  nature  can  pass;  it  is  here  understood,  of 
course,  that  the  material  is  the  same  and  the 
proportion  preserved. 

Sagr.  My  brain  already  reels.  My  mind,  like 
a  cloud  momentarily  illuminated  by  a  lightning- 
flash,  is  for  an  instant  filled  with  an  unusual  light, 
which  now  beckons  to  me  and  which  now  sud¬ 
denly  mingles  and  obscures  strange,  crude  ideas. 
From  what  you  have  said  it  appears  to  me  im¬ 
possible  to  build  two  similar  structures  of  the 
same  material,  but  of  different  sizes  and  have 
them  proportionately  strong;  and  if  this  were 
so,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  find  two  single 
poles  made  of  the  same  wood  which  shall  be 
alike  in  strength  and  resistance  but  unlike  in 
size. 

Salv.  So  it  is,  Sagredo.  And  to  make  sure 
that  we  understand  each  other,  I  say  that  if  we 
take  a  wooden  rod  of  a  certain  length  and  size, 
fitted,  say,  into  a  wall  at  right  angles,  /.e.,  paral¬ 
lel  to  the  horizon,  it  may  be  reduced  to  such  a 
length  that  it  will  just  support  itself;  so  that  if  a 
hair’s  breadth  be  added  to  its  length  it  will  break 
under  its  own  weight  and  will  be  the  only  rod 
of  the  kind  in  the  world.  Thus  if,  for  instance, 
its  length  be  a  hundred  times  its  breadth,  you 
will  not  be  able  to  find  another  rod  whose  length 
is  also  a  hundred  times  its  breadth  and  which, 
like  the  former,  is  just  able  to  sustain  its  own 
weight  and  no  more:  all  the  larger  ones  will 
break  while  all  the  shorter  ones  will  be  strong 
enough  to  support  something  more  than  their 
own  weight.  And  this  which  I  have  said  about 
the  ability  to  support  itself  must  be  understood 
to  apply  also  to  other  tests;  so  that  if  a  piece  of 
scantling  will  carry  the  weight  of  ten  similar  to 
itself,  a  beam  having  the  same  proportions  will 
not  be  able  to  support  ten  similar  beams. 

Please  observe,  gentlemen,  how  facts  which 


at  first  seem  improbable  will,  even  on  scant  ex¬ 
planation,  drop  the  cloak  which  has  hidden  them 
and  stand  forth  in  naked  and  simple  beauty. 
Who  does  not  know  that  a  horse  falling  from  a 
height  of  three  or  four  cubits  will  break  his  bones, 
while  a  dog  falling  from  the  same  height  or  a  cat 
from  a  height  of  eight  or  ten  cubits  will  suffer 
no  injury?  Equally  harmless  would  be  the  fall 
of  a  grasshopper  from  a  tower  or  the  fall  of  an 
ant  from  the  distance  of  the  moon.  Do  not  chil¬ 
dren  fall  with  impunity  from  heights  which 
would  cost  their  elders  a  broken  leg  or  perhaps 
a  fractured  skull?  And  just  as  smaller  animals 
are  proportionately  stronger  and  more  robust 
than  the  larger,  so  also  smaller  plants  are  able  to 
stand  up  better  than  larger.  I  am  certain  you 
both  know  that  an  oak  two  hundred  cubits  high 
would  not  be  able  to  sustain  its  own  branches  if 
they  were  distributed  as  in  a  tree  of  ordinary 
size;  and  that  nature  cannot  produce  a  horse  as 
large  as  twenty  ordinary  horses  or  a  giant  ten 
times  taller  than  an  ordinary  man  unless  by  mir¬ 
acle  or  by  greatly  altering  the  proportions  of 
his  limbs  and  especially  of  his  bones,  which  would 
have  to  be  considerably  enlarged  over  the  or¬ 
dinary.  Likewise  the  current  belief  that,  in  the 
case  of  artificial  machines  the  very  large  and  the 
small  are  equally  feasible  and  lasting  is  a  manifest 
error.  Thus,  for  example,  a  small  obelisk  or  col¬ 
umn  or  other  solid  figure  can  certainly  be  laid 
down  or  set  up  without  danger  of  breaking,  while 
the  very  large  ones  will  go  to  pieces  under  the 
slightest  provocation,  and  that  purely  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  own  weight.  And  here  I  must  re¬ 
late  a  circumstance  which  is  worthy  of  your  at¬ 
tention  as  indeed  are  all  events  which  happen 
contrary  to  expectation,  especially  when  a  pre¬ 
cautionary  measure  turns  out  to  be  a  cause  of 
disaster.  A  large  marble  column  was  laid  out  so 
that  its  two  ends  rested  each  upon  a  piece  of 
beam;  a  little  later  it  occurred  to  a  mechanic 
that,  in  order  to  be  doubly  sure  of  its  not  break¬ 
ing  in  the  middle  by  its  own  weight,  it  would  be 
wise  to  lay  a  third  support  midway;  this  seemed 
to  all  an  excellent  idea;  but  the  sequel  showed 
that  it  was  quite  the  opposite,  for  not  many 
months  passed  before  the  column  was  found 
cracked  and  broken  exactly  above  the  new  mid¬ 
dle  support. 

Simp.  A  very  remarkable  and  thoroughly  un¬ 
expected  accident,  especially  if  caused  by  plac¬ 
ing  that  new  support  in  the  middle. 

Salv.  Surely  this  is  the  explanation,  and  the 
moment  the  cause  is  known  our  surprise  vanish¬ 
es;  for  when  the  two  pieces  of  the  column  were 
placed  on  level  ground  it  was  observed  that  one 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


133 


of  the  end  beams  had,  after  a  long  while,  be¬ 
come  decayed  and  sunken,  but  that  the  middle 
one  remained  hard  and  strong,  thus  causing  one 
half  of  the  column  to  project  in  the  air  without 
any  support.  Under  these  circumstances  the  body 
therefore  behaved  differently  from  what  it  would 
have  done  if  supported  only  upon  the  first  beams; 
because  no  matter  how  much  they  might  have 
sunken  the  column  would  have  gone  with  them. 
This  is  an  accident  which  could  not  possibly 
have  happened  to  a  small  column,  even  though 
made  of  the  same  stone  and  having  a  length 
corresponding  to  its  thickness,  /.  e,,  preserving 
the  ratio  between  thickness  and  length  found  in 
the  large  pillar. 

Sagr.  I  am  quite  convinced  of  the  facts  of  the 
case,  but  I  do  not  understand  why  the  strength 
and  resistance  are  not  multiplied  in  the  same 
proportion  as  the  material;  and  I  am  the  more 
puzzled  because,  on  the  contrary,  I  have  noticed 
in  other  cases  that  the  strength  and  resistance 
against  breaking  increase  in  a  larger  ratio  than 
the  amount  of  material.  Thus,  for  instance,  if 
two  nails  be  driven  into  a  wall,  the  one  which  is 
twice  as  big  as  the  other  will  support  not  only 
twice  as  much  weight  as  the  other,  but  three  or 
four  times  as  much. 

Salv.  Indeed  you  will  not  be  far  wrong  if  you 
say  eight  times  as  much;  nor  does  this  phenom¬ 
enon  contradict  the  other  even  though  in  ap¬ 
pearance  they  seem  so  different. 

Sagr.  Will  you  not  then,  Salviati,  remove 
these  difficulties  and  clear  away  these  obscuri¬ 
ties  if  possible :  for  I  imagine  that  this  problem 
of  resistance  opens  up  a  field  of  beautiful  and 
useful  ideas;  and  if  you  are  pleased  to  make  this 
the  subject  of  to-day’s  discourse  you  will  place 
Simplicio  and  me  under  many  obligations. 

Salv.  I  am  at  your  service  if  only  I  can  call  to 
mind  what  I  learned  from  our  Academician^  who 
had  thought  much  upon  this  subject  and  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  custom  had  demonstrated  everything 
by  geometrical  methods  so  that  one  might  fairly 
call  this  a  new  science.  For,  although  some  of  his 
conclusions  had  been  reached  by  others,  first  of 
all  by  Aristotle,  these  are  not  the  most  beautiful 
and,  what  is  more  important,  they  had  not  been 
proven  in  a  rigid  manner  from  fundamental  prin¬ 
ciples.  Now,  since  I  wish  to  convince  you  by 
demonstrative  reasoning  rather  than  to  persuade 
you  by  mere  probabilities,  I  shall  suppose  that 
you  are  familiar  with  present-day  mechanics  so 
far  as  it  is  needed  in  our  discussion.  First  of  all 
it  is  necessary  to  consider  what  happens  when  a 

^  Galileo:  the  author  frequently  refers  to  himself  un¬ 
der  this  name.  Trans. 


piece  of  wood  or  any  other  solid  which  coheres 
firmly  is  broken;  for  this  is  the  fundamental 
fact,  involving  the  first  and  simple  principle 
which  we  must  take  for  granted  as  well  known. 

To  grasp  this  more  clearly,  imagine  a  cylinder 
or  prism,  AB^  made  of  wood  or  other  solid  co¬ 
herent  material.  Fasten  the  upper  end,  so 
that  the  cylinder  hangs  vertically.  To  the  lower 
end,  B,  attack  the  weight  C.  It  is  clear  that  how¬ 
ever  great  they  may  be,  the  tenacity  and  co¬ 
herence  between  the  parts  of  this  solid,  so  long 
as  they  are  not  infinite,  can  be  overcome  by  the 
pull  of  the  weight  G,  a  weight  which  can  be  in¬ 
creased  indefinitely  until  finally  the  solid  breaks 
like  a  rope.  And  as  in  the  case  of  the  rope  whose 
strength  we  know  to  be  derived  from  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  hemp  threads  which  compose  it,  so  in 
the  case  of  the  wood,  we  observe  its  fibres  and 
filaments  run  lengthwise  and  render  it  much 
stronger  than  a  hemp  rope  of  the  same  thick¬ 
ness.  But  in  the  case  of  a 
stone  or  metallic  cylinder 
where  the  coherence  seems 
to  be  still  greater  the  ce¬ 
ment  which  holds  the  parts 
together  must  be  some¬ 
thing  other  than  filaments 
and  fibres;  and  yet  even 
this  can  be  broken  by  a 
strong  pull. 

Simp.  If  this  matter  be 
as  you  say  I  can  well  under¬ 
stand  that  the  fibres  of  the 
wood,  being  as  long  as  the 
piece  of  wood  itself,  render 
it  strong  and  resistant  a- 
gainst  large  forces  tend¬ 
ing  to  break  it.  But  how 
can  one  make  a  rope  one 
hundred  cubits  long  out  of 
hempen  fibres  which  are 
not  more  than  two  or  three  cubits  long,  and 
still  give  it  so  much  strength }  Besides,  I  should 
be  glad  to  hear  your  opinion  as  to  the  manner  in 
which  the  parts  of  metal,  stone,  and  other  ma¬ 
terials  not  showing  a  filamentous  structure  are 
put  together;  for,  if  I  mistake  not,  they  exhibit 
even  greater  tenacity. 

Salv.  To  solve  the  problems  which  you  raise 
it  will  be  necessary  to  make  a  digression  into 
subjects  which  have  little  bearing  upon  our  pres¬ 
ent  purpose. 

Sagr.  But  if,  by  digressions,  we  can  reach  new 
truth,  what  harm  is  there  in  making  one  now, 
so  that  we  may  not  lose  this  knowledge,  remem¬ 
bering  that  such  an  opportunity,  once  omitted. 


Fig.  I 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


may  not  return;  remembering  also  that  we  are 
not  tied  down  to  a  fixed  and  brief  method  but 
that  we  meet  solely  for  our  own  entertainment  ? 
Indeed,  who  knows  but  that  we  may  thus  fre¬ 
quently  discover  something  more  interesting 
and  beautiful  than  thesolution  originally  sought? 
I  beg  of  you,  therefore,  to  grant  the  request  of 
Simplicio,  which  is  also  mine;  for  I  am  no  less 
curious  and  desirous  than  he  to  learn  what  is  the 
binding  material  which  holds  together  the  parts 
of  solids  so  that  they  can  scarcely  be  separated. 
This  information  is  also  needed  to  understand 
the  coherence  of  the  parts  of  fibres  themselves 
of  which  some  solids  are  built  up. 

SALv^  I  am  at  your  serv  ice,  since  you  desire  it. 
The  first  question  is,  How  are  fibres,  each  not 
more  than  twoor  three  cubits  in  length, so  tightly 
bound  together  in  the  case  of  a  rope  one  hun¬ 
dred  cubits  long  that  great  force  is  required  to 
break  it? 

Now  tell  me,  Simplicio,  can  you  not  hold  a 
hempen  fibre  so  tightly  between  your  fingers 
that  I,  pulling  by  the  other  end,  would  break  it 
before  drawing  it  away  from  you?  Certainly 
you  can.  And  now  when  the  fibres  of  hemp  are 
held  not  only  at  the  ends,  but  are  grasped  by 
the  surrounding  medium  throughout  their  en¬ 
tire  length  is  it  not  manifestly  more  difficult  to 
tear  them  loose  from  what  holds  them  than  to 
break  them?  But  in  the  case  of  the  rope  the 
very  act  of  twisting  causes  the  threads  to  bind 
one  another  in  such  a  way  that  when  the  rope  is 
stretched  with  a  great  force  the  fibres  break 
rather  than  separate  from  each  other. 

At  the  point  where  a  rope  parts  the  fibres  are, 
as  ever^^one  knows,  very  short,  nothing  like  a 
cubit  long,  as  they  would  be  if  the  parting  of 
the  rope  occurred,  not  by  the  breaking  of  the 
filaments,  but  by  their  slipping  one  over  the 
other. 

Sagr.  In  confirmation  of  this  it  may  be  re¬ 
marked  that  ropes  sometimes  break  not  by  a 
lengthwise  pull  but  by  excessive  twisting.  This, 
it  seems  to  me,  is  a  conclusive  argument  because 
the  threads  bind  one  another  so  tightly  that  the 
compressing  fibres  do  not  permit  those  which 
are  compressed  to  lengthen  the  spirals  even  that 
little  bit  by  which  it  is  necessary  for  them  to 
lengthen  in  order  to  surround  the  rope  which, 
on  twisting,  grows  shorter  and  thicker. 

Salv.  You  are  quite  right.  Now  see  how  one 
fact  suggests  another.  The  thread  held  between 
the  fingers  does  not  yield  to  one  who  wishes  to 
draw  it  away  even  when  pulled  with  consider¬ 
able  force,  but  resists  because  it  is  held  back  by 
a  double  compression,  seeing  that  the  upper  fin¬ 


ger  presses  against  the  lower  as  hard  as  the  lower 
against  the  upper.  Now,  if  we  could  retain  only 
one  of  these  pressures  there  is  no  doubt  that 
only  half  the  original  resistance  would  remain; 
but  since  we  are  not  able,  by  lifting,  say,  the 
upper  finger,  to  remove  one  of  these  pressures 
without  also  removing  the  other,  it  becomes 
necessar}’  to  preserve  one  of  them  by  means  of  a 
new  device  which  causes  the  thread  to  press  it¬ 
self  against  the  finger  or  against  some  other  solid 
body  upon  which  it  rests;  and  thus  it  is  brought 


about  that  the  very  force  which  pulls  it  in  order 
to  snatch  it  away  compresses  it  more  and  more 
as  the  pull  increases.  This  is  accomplished  by 
wrapping  the  thread  around  the  solid  in  the 
manner  of  a  spiral;  and  will  be  better  under¬ 
stood  by  means  of  a  figure.  Let  AB  and  CD  be 
two  cylinders  between  which  is  stretched  the 
thread  EF:  and  for  the  sake  of  greater  clearness 
we  will  imagine  it  to  be  a  small  cord.  If  these 
two  cylinders  be  pressed  strongly  together,  the 
cord  EF,  when  drawm  by  the  end  F,  will  un¬ 
doubtedly  stand  a  considerable  pull  before  it 
slips  between  the  two  compressing  solids.  But  if 
we  remove  one  of  these  cylinders  the  cord, 
though  remaining  in  contact  with  the  other, 
will  not  thereby  be  prevented  from  slipping 
freely.  On  the  other  hand,  if  one  holds  the  cord 
loosely  against  the  top  of  the  cylinder  A,  winds 
it  in  the  spiral  form  AFLOTR,  and  then  pulls  it 
by  the  end  R,  it  is  evident  that  the  cord  will  be¬ 
gin  to  bind  the  cylinder;  the  greater  the  number 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


of  spirals  the  more  tightly  will  the  cord  be  pressed 
against  the  cylinder  by  any  given  pulL  Thus  as 
the  number  of  turns  increases,  the  line  of  con¬ 
tact  becomes  longer  and  in  consequence  more 
resistant;  so  that  the  cord  slips  and  yields  to  the 
tractive  force  with  increasing  difficulty. 

Is  it  not  clear  that  this  is  precisely  the  kind  of 
resistance  which  one  meets  in  the  case  of  a  thick 
hemp  rope  where  the  fibres  form  thousands  and 
thousands  of  similar  spirals?  And,  indeed,  the 
binding  effect  of  these  turns  is  so  great  that  a 
few  short  rushes  woven  together  into  a  few  in¬ 
terlacing  spirals  form  one  of  the  strongest  of 
ropes  which  I  believe  they  call  pack  rope. 

Sagr.  What  you  say  has  cleared  up  two  points 
which  I  did  not  previously  understand.  One  fact 
is  how  two,  or  at  most  three,  turns  of  a  rope 
around  the  axle  of  a  windlass  cannot  only  hold 
it  fast,  but  can  also  prevent  it  from  slipping 
when  pulled  by  the  immense  force  of  the  weight 
which  it  sustains;  and  moreover  how,  by  turn¬ 
ing  the  windlass,  this  same  axle,  by  mere  friction 
of  the  rope  around  it,  can  wind  up  and  lift  huge 
stones  while  a  mere  boy  is  able  to 
handle  the  slack  of  the  rope.  The 
other  fact  has  to  do  with  a  simple 
but  clever  device,  invented  by  a 
young  kinsman  of  mine,  for  the 
purpose  of  descending  from  a  win¬ 
dow  by  means  of  a  rope  without  lac¬ 
erating  the  palms  of  his  hands,  as 
had  happened  to  him  shortly  before 
and  greatly  to  his  discomfort.  A 
small  sketch  will  make  this  clear. 
He  took  a  wooden  cylinder,  AB^ 
about  as  thick  as  a  walking  stick 
and  about  one  span  long:  on  this 
he  cut  a  spiral  channel  of  about  one 
turn  and  a  half,  and  large  enough 
to  just  receive  the  rope  which  he 
wished  to  use.  Having  introduced 
the  rope  at  the  end  A  and  led  it  out 
again  at  the  end  B,  he  enclosed  both  the  cylinder 
and  the  rope  in  a  case  of  wood  or  tin,  hinged 
along  the  side  so  that  it  could  be  easily  opened 
and  closed.  After  he  had  fastened  the  rope  to  a 
firm  support  above,  he  could,  on  grasping  and 
squeezing  the  case  with  both  hands,  hang  by  his 
arms.  The  pressure  on  the  rope,  lying  between 
the  case  and  the  cylinder,  was  such  that  he 
could,  at  will,  either  grasp  the  case  more  tightly 
and  hold  himself  from  slipping,  or  slacken  his 
hold  and  descend  as  slowly  as  he  wished. 

Salv.  a  truly  ingenious  device!  I  feel,  how¬ 
ever,  that  for  a  complete  explanation  other  con¬ 
siderations  might  well  enter;  yet  I  must  not  now 


Fig-  3 


digress  upon  this  particular  topic  since  you  are 
waiting  to  hear  what  I  think  about  the  breaking 
strength  of  other  materials  which,  unlike  ropes 
and  most  woods,  do  not  show  a  filamentous  struc¬ 
ture.  The  coherence  of  these  bodies  is,  in  my 
estimation,  produced  by  other  causes  which  may 
be  grouped  under  two  heads.  One  is  that  much- 
talked-of  repugnance  which  nature  exhibits  to¬ 
wards  a  vacuum;  but  this  horror  of  a  vacuum 
not  being  sufficient,  it  is  necessary  to  introduce 
another  cause  in  the  form  of  a  gluey  or  viscous 
substance  which  binds  firmly  together  the  com¬ 
ponent  parts  of  the  body. 

First  I  shall  speak  of  the  vacuum,  demonstrat¬ 
ing  by  definite  experiment  the  quality  and  quan¬ 
tity  of  its  force.  If  you  take  two  highly  polished 
and  smooth  plates  of  marble,  metal,  or  glass  and 
place  them  face  to  face,  one  will  slide  over  the 
other  with  the  greatest  ease,  showing  conclu¬ 
sively  that  there  is  nothing  of  a  viscous  nature 
between  them.  But  when  you  attempt  to  sep¬ 
arate  them  and  keep  them  at  a  constant  dis¬ 
tance  apart,  you  find  the  plates  exhibit  such  a 
repugnance  to  separation  that  the  upper  one 
will  carry  the  lower  one  with  it  and  keep  it  lifted 
indefinitely,  even  when  the  latter  is  big  and 
heavy. 

This  experiment  shows  the  aversion  of  nature 
for  empty  space,  even  during  the  brief  moment 
required  for  the  outside  air  to  rush  in  and  fill  up 
the  region  between  the  two  plates.  It  is  also  ob¬ 
served  that  if  two  plates  are  not  thoroughly  pol¬ 
ished,  their  contact  is  imperfect  so  that  when 
you  attempt  to  separate  them  slowly  the  only 
resistance  offered  is  that  of  weight;  if,  however, 
the  pull  be  sudden,  then  the  lower  plate  rises, 
but  quickly  falls  back,  having  followed  the  up¬ 
per  plate  only  for  that  very  short  interval  of 
time  required  for  the  expansion  of  the  small 
amount  of  air  remaining  between  the  plates,  in 
consequence  of  their  not  fitting,  and  for  the  en¬ 
trance  of  the  surrounding  air.  This  resistance 
which  is  exhibited  between  the  two  plates  is 
doubtless  likewise  present  between  the  parts  of 
a  solid,  and  enters,  at  least  in  part,  as  a  concomi¬ 
tant  cause  of  their  coherence. 

Sagr.  Allow  me  to  interrupt  you  for  a  mo¬ 
ment,  please;  for  I  want  to  speak  of  something 
which  just  occurs  to  me,  namely,  when  I  see  how 
the  lower  plate  follows  the  upper  one  and  how 
rapidly  it  is  lifted,  I  feel  sure  that,  contrary  to 
the  opinion  of  many  philosophers,  including  per¬ 
haps  even  Aristotle  himself,  motion  in  a  vacu¬ 
um  is  not  instantaneous.  If  this  were  so  the  two 
plates  mentioned  above  would  separate  without 
any  resistance  whatever,  seeing  that  the  same 


136 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


instant  of  time  would  suffice  for  their  separa¬ 
tion  and  for  the  surrounding  medium  to  rush  in 
and  fill  the  vacuum  between  them.  The  fact 
that  the  lower  plate  follows  the  upper  one  al¬ 
lows  us  to  infer,  not  only  that  motion  in  a  vacu¬ 
um  is  not  instantaneous,  but  also  that,  between, 
the  two  plates,  a  vacuum  really  exists,  at  least 
for  a  very  short  time,  sufficient  to  allow  the  sur¬ 
rounding  medium  to  rush  in  and  fill  the  vacu¬ 
um;  for  if  there  were  no  vacuum  there  would  be 
no  need  of  any  motion  in  the  medium.  One 
must  admit  then  that  a  vacuum  is  sometimes 
produced  by  violent  motion  or  contrary  to  the 
laws  of  nature,  (although  in  my  opinion  nothing 
occurs  contrary  to  nature  except  the  impossible, 
and  that  never  occurs). 

But  here  another  difficulty  arises.  While  ex¬ 
periment  convinces  me  of  the  correctness  of  this 
conclusion,  my  mind  is  not  entirely  satisfied  as 
to  the  cause  to  which  this  effect  is  to  be  attri¬ 
buted.  For  the  separation  of  the  plates  precedes 
the  formation  of  the  vacuum  which  is  produced 
as  a  consequence  of  this  separation;  and  since  it 
appears  to  me  that,  in  the  order  of  nature,  the 
cause  must  precede  the  effect,  even  though  it 
appears  to  follow  in  point  of  time,  and  since 
every  positive  effect  must  have  a  positive  cause, 
I  do  not  see  how  the  adhesion  of  two  plates  and 
their  resistance  to  separation — actual  facts — can 
be  referred  to  a  vacuum  as  cause  when  this  vacu¬ 
um  is  yet  to  follow.  According  to  the  infallible 
maxim  of  the  Philosopher,  the  non-existent  can 
produce  no  effect. 

Simp.  Seeing  that  you  accept  this  axiom  of 
Aristotle,  I  hardly  think  you  will  reject  another 
excellent  and  reliable  maxim  of  his,  namely,  Na¬ 
ture  undertakes  only  that  which  happens  with¬ 
out  resistance;  and  in  this  saying,  it  appears  to 
me,  you  will  find  the  solution  of  your  difficulty. 
Since  nature  abhors  a  vacuum,  she  prevents  that 
from  which  a  vacuum  would  follow  as  a  neces¬ 
sary  consequence.  Thus  it  happens  that  nature 
prevents  the  separation  of  the  two  plates. 

S.\GR.  Now  admitting  that  what  Simplicio 
says  is  an  adequate  solution  of  my  difficulty,  it 
seems  to  me,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  resume  my 
former  argument,  that  this  very  resistance  to  a 
vacuum  ought  to  be  sufficient  to  hold  together 
the  parts  either  of  stone  or  of  metal  or  the  parts 
of  any  other  solid  which  is  knit  together  more 
strongly  and  which  is  more  resistant  to  separa¬ 
tion.  If  for  one  effect  there  be  only  one  cause,  or 
if,  more  being  assigned,  they  can  be  reduced  to 
one,  then  why  is  not  this  vacuum  which  really 
exists  a  sufficient  cause  for  all  kinds  of  resistance  ^ 

Salv.  I  do  not  wish  just  now  to  enter  this 


discussion  as  to  whether  the  vacuum  alone  is 
sufficient  to  hold  together  the  separate  parts  of 
a  solid  body;  but  I  assure  you  that  the  vacuum 
which  acts  as  a  sufficient  cause  in  the  case  of  the 
two  plates  is  not  alone  sufficient  to  bind  togeth¬ 
er  the  parts  of  a  solid  cylinderof  marble  or  metal 
which,  when  pulled  violently,  separates  and  di¬ 
vides.  And  now  if  I  find  a  method  of  distinguish¬ 
ing  this  well  known  resistance,  depending  upon 
the  vacuum,  from  every  other  kind  which  might 
increase  the  coherence,  and  if  I  show  you  that 
the  aforesaid  resistance  alone  is  not  nearly  suf¬ 
ficient  for  such  an  effect,  will  you  not  grant  that 
we  are  bound  to  introduce  another  cause  ?  Help 
him,  Simplicio,  since  he  does  not  know  what 
reply  to  make. 

Simp.  Surely,  Sagredo’s  hesitation  must  be 
owing  to  another  reason,  for  there  can  be  no 
doubt  concerning  a  conclusion  which  is  at  once 
so  clear  and  logical. 

Sagr.  You  have  guessed  rightly,  Simplicio.  I 
was  wondering  whether,  if  a  million  of  gold  each 
year  from  Spain  were  not  sufficient  to  pay  the 
army,  it  might  not  be  necessary  to  make  provi¬ 
sion  other  than  small  coin  for  the  pay  of  the 
soldiers. 

But  go  ahead,  Sal  via  ti;  assume  that  I  admit 
your  conclusion  and  show  us  your  method  of 
separating  the  action  of  the  vacuum  from  other 
causes;  and  by  measuring  it  show  us  how  it  is 
not  sufficient  to  produce  the  effect  in  question. 

Salv.  Your  good  angel  assist  you.  I  will  tell 
you  how  to  separate  the  force  of  the  vacuum 
from  the  others,  and  afterwards  how  to  measure 
it.  For  this  purpose  let  us  consider  a  continuous 
substance  whose  parts  lack  all  resistance  to  sep¬ 
aration  except  that  derived  from  a  vacuum,  such 
as  is  the  case  with  water, 
a  fact  fully  demonstrated 
by  our  Academician  in 
one  of  his  treatises.  When¬ 
ever  a  cylinder  of  water  is 
subjected  to  a  pull  and 
offers  a  resistance  to  the 
separation  of  its  parts  this 
can  be  attributed  to  no 
other  cause  than  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  the  vacuum. 

In  order  to  try  such  an 
experiment  I  have  in¬ 
vented  a  device  which  I 
can  better  explain  by 
means  of  a  sketch  than  by 
mere  words.  Let  CABD 
represent  the  cross  section 
ofacylindereitherofmet-  Fig.  4 


THE  TWO  NEW 

al  or,  preferably,  of  glass,  hollow  inside  and  ac¬ 
curately  turned.  Into  this  is  introduced  a  per¬ 
fectly  fitting  cylinder  of  wood,  represented  in 
cross  section  by  EGHF,  and  capable  of  up-and- 
down  motion.  Through  the  middle  of  this  cyl¬ 
inder  is  bored  a  hole  to  receive  an  iron  wire,  car¬ 
rying  a  hook  at  the  end  K,  while  the  upper  end 
of  the  wire,  7,  is  provided  with  a  conical  head. 
The  wooden  cylinder  is  countersunk  at  the  top 
so  as  to  receive,  with  a  perfect  fit,  the  conical 
head  1  of  the  wire,  IK,  when  pulled  down  by  the 
endi^. 

Now  insert  the  wooden  cylinder  EH  in  the 
hollow  cylinder  AD,  so  as  not  to  touch  the  up¬ 
per  end  of  the  latter  but  to  leave  free  a  space  of 
two  or  three  finger- breadths;  this  space  is  to  be 
filled  with  water  by  holding  the  vessel  with  the 
mouth  CD  upwards,  pushing  down  on  the  stop¬ 
per  EH,  and  at  the  same  time  keeping  the  con¬ 
ical  head  of  the  wire,  1,  away  from  the  hollow 
portion  of  the  wooden  cylinder.  The  air  is  thus 
allowed  to  escape  alongside  the  iron  wire  (which 
does  not  make  a  close  fit)  as  soon  as  one  presses 
down  on  the  wooden  stopper.  The  air  having 
been  allowed  to  escape  and  the  iron  wire  hav¬ 
ing  been  drawn  back  so  that  it  fits  snugly  against 
the  conical  depression  in  the  wood,  invert  the 
vessel,  bringing  it  mouth  downwards,  and  hang 
on  the  hook  K  a  vessel  which  can  be  filled  with 
sand  or  any  heavy  material  in  quantity  suffi¬ 
cient  to  finally  separate  the  upper  surface  of  the 
stopper,  EF,  from  the  lower  surface  of  the  water 
to  which  it  was  attached  only  by  the  resistance 
of  the  vacuum.  Next  weigh  the  stopper  and 
wire  together  with  the  attached  vessel  and  its 
contents;  we  shall  then  have  the  force  of  the 
vacuum.  If  one  attaches  to  a  cylinder  of  marble 
or  glass  a  weight  which,  together  with  the  weight 
of  the  marble  or  glass  itself,  is  just  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  weights  before  mentioned,  and  if 
breaking  occurs  we  shall  then  be  justified  in  say¬ 
ing  that  the  vacuum  alone  holds  the  parts  of  the 
marble  and  glass  together;  but  if  this  weight 
does  not  suffice  and  if  breaking  occurs  only  after 
adding,  say,  four  times  this  weight,  we  shall  then 
be  compelled  to  say  that  the  vacuum  furnishes 
only  one  fifth  of  the  total  resistance. 

Simp.  No  one  can  doubt  the  cleverness  of  the 
device;  yet  it  presents  many  difficulties  which 
make  me  doubt  its  reliability.  For  who  will  as¬ 
sure  us  that  the  air  does  not  creep  in  between 
the  glass  and  stopper  even  if  it  is  well  packed 
with  tow  or  other  yielding  material  ?  I  question 
also  whether  oiling  with  wax  or  turpentine  will 
suffice  to  make  the  cone,  I,  fit  snugly  on  its  seat. 
Besides,  may  not  the  parts  of  the  water  expand 


SCIENCES  137 

and  dilate  ?  Why  may  not  the  air  or  exhalations 
or  some  other  more  subtile  substances  penetrate 
the  pores  of  the  wood,  or  even  of  the  glass  it¬ 
self 

Salv.  With  great  skill  indeed  has  Simplicio 
laid  before  us  the  difficulties;  and  he  has  even 
partly  suggested  how  to  prevent  the  air  from 
penetrating  the  wood  or  passing  between  the 
wood  and  glass.  But  now  let  me  point  out  that, 
as  our  experience  increases,  we  shall  learn  whether 
or  not  these  alleged  difficulties  really  exist.  For 
if,  as  is  the  case  with  air,  water  is  by  nature  ex¬ 
pansible,  although  only  under  severe  treatment, 
we  shall  see  the  stopper  descend ;  and  if  we  put  a 
small  excavation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  glass 
vessel,  such  as  indicated  by  V,  then  the  air  or 
any  other  tenuous  and  gaseous  substance,  which 
might  penetrate  the  pores  of  glass  or  wood,  would 
pass  through  the  water  and  collect  in  this  re¬ 
ceptacle  V.  But  if  these  things  do  not  happen 
we  may  rest  assured  that  our  experiment  has 
been  performed  with  proper  caution;  and  we 
shall  discover  that  water  does  not  dilate  and 
that  glass  does  not  allow  any  material,  however 
tenuous,  to  penetrate  it. 

Sagr.  Thanks  to  this  discussion,  I  have  learned 
the  cause  of  a  certain  effect  which  I  have  long 
wondered  at  and  despaired  of  understanding.  I 
once  saw  a  cistern  which  had  been  provided  with 
a  pump  under  the  mistaken  impression  that  the 
water  might  thus  be  drawn  with  less  effort  or  in 
greater  quantity  than  by  means  of  the  ordinary 
bucket.  The  stock  of  the  pump  carried  its  suck¬ 
er  and  valve  in  the  upper  part  so  that  the  water 
was  lifted  by  attraction  and  not  by  a  push  as  is 
the  case  with  pumps  in  which  the  sucker  is  placed 
lower  down.  This  pump  worked  perfectly  so 
long  as  the  water  in  the  cistern  stood  above  a 
certain  level;  but  below  this  level  the  pump 
failed  to  work.  When  I  first  noticed  this  phe¬ 
nomenon  I  thought  the  machine  was  out  of  or¬ 
der;  but  the  workman  whom  I  called  in  to  repair 
it  told  me  the  defect  was  not  in  the  pump  but  in 
the  water  which  had  fallen  too  low  to  be  raised 
through  such  a  height;  and  he  added  that  it  was 
not  possible,  either  by  a  pump  or  by  any  other 
machine  working  on  the  principle  of  attraction, 
to  lift  water  a  hair’s  breadth  above  eighteen 
cubits;  whether  the  pump  be  large  or  small  this 
is  the  extreme  limit  of  the  lift.  Up  to  this  time  I 
had  been  so  thoughtless  that,  although  I  knew 
a  rope,  or  rod  of  wood,  or  of  iron,  if  sufficiently 
long,  would  break  by  its  own  weight  when  held 
by  the  upper  end,  it  never  occurred  to  me  that 
the  same  thing  would  happen,  only  much  more 
easily,  to  a  column  of  water.  And  really  is  not 


rjS  GALILEO  GALILEI 


that  thing  which  is  attracted  in  the  pump  a  col¬ 
umn  of  water  attached  at  the  upper  end  and 
stretched  more  and  more  until  finally  a  point  is 
reached  where  it  breaks,  like  a  rope,  on  account 
of  its  excessive  weight  ? 

Salv.  That  is  precisely  the  way  it  works;  this 
fixed  elevation  of  eighteen  cubits  is  true  for  any 
quantity  of  water  whatever,  be  the  pump  large 
or  small  or  even  as  fine  as  a  straw.  We  may  there¬ 
fore  say  that,  on  weighing  the  water  contained 
in  a  tube  eighteen  cubits  long,  no  matter  what 
the  diameter,  we  shall  obtain  the  value  of  the 
resistance  of  the  vacuum  in  a  cylinder  of  any 
solid  material  having  a  bore  of  this  same  diame¬ 
ter.  .\nd  having  gone  so  far,  let  us  see  how  easy 
it  is  to  find  to  what  length  cylinders  of  metal, 
stone,  wood,  glass,  etc.,  of  any  diameter  can  be 
elongated  without  breaking  by  theirow  n  weight. 

Take  for  instance  a  copper  w  ire  of  any  length 
and  thickness;  fix  the  upper  end  and  to  the  other 
end  attach  a  greater  and  greater  load  until  final¬ 
ly  the  wire  breaks;  let  the  maximum  load  be, 
say,  fifty  pounds.  Then  it  is  clear  that  if  fifty 
pounds  of  copper,  in  addition  to  the  weight  of 
the  wire  itself  which  may  be,  say,  ounce,  is 
drawn  out  into  w’ire  of  this  same  size  we  shall 
have  the  greatest  length  of  this  kind  of  ware 
w'hich  can  sustain  its  owm  w^eight.  Suppose  tfie 
ware  w  hich  breaks  to  be  one  cubit  in  length  and 

ounce  in  weight;  then  since  it  supports  50 
lbs.  in  addition  to  its  owm  weight,  /.  <?.,  4800 
eighths-of-an-ounce,  it  follows  that  all  copper 
wires,  independent  of  size,  can  sustain  them¬ 
selves  up  to  a  length  of  4801  cubits  and  no  more. 
Since  then  a  copper  rod  can  sustain  itsowm  w  eight 
up  to  a  length  of  4801  cubits  it  follow^s  that  that 
part  of  the  breaking  strength  w^hich  depends 
upon  the  vacuum,  comparing  it  wath  the  re¬ 
maining  factors  of  resistance,  is  equal  to  the 
weight  of  a  rod  of  water,  eighteen  cubits  long 
and  as  thick  as  the  copper  rod.  If,  for  example, 
copper  is  nine  times  as  heavy  as  w^ater,  the  break¬ 
ing  strength  of  any  copper  rod,  in  so  far  as  it  de¬ 
pends  upon  the  vacuum,  is  equal  to  the  weight 
of  two  cubits  of  this  same  rod.  By  a  similar 
method  one  can  find  the  maximum  length  of 
ware  or  rod  of  any  material  w^hich  wall  just  sus¬ 
tain  its  owm  weight,  and  can  at  the  same  time 
discover  the  part  which  the  vacuum  plays  in  its 
breaking  strength. 

Sagr.  It  still  remains  for  you  to  tell  us  upon 
what  depends  the  resistance  to  breaking,  other 
than  that  of  the  vacuum;  what  is  the  gluey  or 
viscous  substance  which  cements  together  the 
parts  of  the  solid?  For  I  cannot  imagine  a  glue 
that  wall  not  burn  up  in  a  highly  heated  furnace 


in  two  or  three  months,  or  certainly  w  ithin  ten 
or  a  hundred.  For  if  gold,  silver  and  glass  are 
kept  for  a  long  w'hile  in  the  molten  state  and  are 
removed  from  the  furnace,  their  parts,  on  CfK)l- 
ing,  immediately  reunite  and  bind  themselves 
together  as  before.  Not  only  so,  but  whatever 
difficulty  arises  with  respect  to  the  cementation 
of  the  parts  of  the  glass  arises  also  with  regard 
to  the  parts  of  the  glue;  in  other  words,  w  hat  is 
that  w  hich  holds  these  parts  together  so  firmly  ? 

Salv.  A  little  while  ago,  I  expressed  the  hope 
that  your  good  angel  might  assist  you.  I  now’ 
find  myself  in  thesamestraits.  Experiment  leaves 
no  doubt  that  the  reason  why  two  plates  cannot 
be  separated,  except  wnth  violent  effort,  is  that 
they  are  held  together  by  the  resistance  of  the 
vacuum;  and  the  same  can  be  said  of  two  large 
pieces  of  a  marble  or  bronze  column.  This  being 
so,  I  do  not  see  why  this  same  cause  may  not  ex¬ 
plain  the  coherence  of  smaller  parts  and  indeed 
of  the  veiy^  smallest  particles  of  these  materials. 
Now’,  since  each  effect  must  have  one  true  and 
sufficient  cause  and  since  I  find  no  other  cement, 
am  I  not  justified  in  tiydng  to  discover  whether 
the  vacuum  is  not  a  sufficient  cause  ? 

Simp.  But  seeing  that  you  have  already  proved 
that  the  resistance  which  the  large  vacuum  of¬ 
fers  to  the  separation  of  two'large  parts  of  a  solid 
is  really  veiA’  small  in  comparison  with  that  co¬ 
hesive  force  which  binds  together  the  most  mi¬ 
nute  parts,  w’hy  do  you  hesitate  to  regard  this 
latter  as  something  very  different  from  the  for¬ 
mer? 

Salv.  Sagredo  has  already  answ  ered  this  ques¬ 
tion  w  hen  he  remarked  that  each  individual  sol¬ 
dier  w'as  being  paid  from  coin  collected  by  a 
general  tax  of  pennies  and  farthings,  while  even 
a  million  of  gold  w  ould  not  suffice  to  pay  the  en¬ 
tire  army.  And  who  knows  but  that  there  may 
be  other  extremely  minute  vacua  which  affect 
the  smallest  particles  so  that  that  which  binds 
together  the  contiguous  parts  is  throughout  of 
the  same  mintage?  Let  me  tell  you  something 
w’hich  has  just  occurred  to  me  and  which  I  do 
not  offer  as  an  absolute  fact,  but  rather  as  a  pass¬ 
ing  thought,  still  immature  and  calling  for  more 
careful  consideration.  You  may  take  of  it  what 
you  like;  and  judge  the  rest  as  you  see  fit.  Some¬ 
times  when  I  have  obser\’ed  how’  fire  w  inds  its 
way  in  between  the  most  minute  particles  of 
this  or  that  metal  and,  even  though  these  are 
solidly  cemented  together,  tears  them  apart  and 
separates  them,  and  when  I  have  obser\’ed  that, 
on  removing  the  fire,  these  particles  reunite  with 
the  same  tenacity  as  at  first,  without  any  loss  of 
quantity  in  the  case  of  gold  and  with  little  loss 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


in  the  case  of  other  metals,  even  though  these 
parts  have  been  separated  for  a  long  while,  I 
have  thought  that  the  explanation  might  lie  in 
the  fact  that  the  extremely  fine  particles  of  fire, 
penetrating  the  slender  pores  of  the  metal  (too 
small  to  admit  even  the  finest  particles  of  air  or 
of  many  other  fluids),  would  fill  the  small  inter¬ 
vening  vacua  and  would  set  free  these  small  par¬ 
ticles  from  the  attraction  which  these  same  vac¬ 
ua  exert  upon  them  and  which  prevents  their 
separation.  Thus  the  particles  are  able  to  move 
freely  so  that  the  mass  becomes  fluid  and  re¬ 
mains  so  as  long  as  the  particles  of  fire  remain 
inside;  but  if  they  depart  and  leave  the  former 
vacua  then  the  original  attraction  returns  and 
the  parts  are  again  cemented  together. 

In  reply  to  the  question  raised  by  Simplicio, 
one  may  say  that  although  each  particular  vacu¬ 
um  is  exceedingly  minute  and  therefore  easily 
overcome,  yet  their  number  is  so  extraordina¬ 
rily  great  that  their  combined  resistance  is,  so  to 
speak,  multipled  almost  without  limit.  The  na¬ 
ture  and  the  amount  of  force  which  results  from 
adding  together  in  immense  number  of  small 
forces  is  clearly  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  a 
weight  of  millions  of  pounds,  suspended  by  great 
cables,  is  overcome  and  lifted,  when  the  south 
wind  carries  innumerable  atoms  of  water,  sus¬ 
pended  in  thin  mist,  which  moving  through  the 
air  penetrate  between  the  fibres  of  the  tense 
ropes  in  spite  of  the  tremendous  force  of  the 
hanging  weight.  When  these  particles  enter  the 
narrow  pores  they  swell  the  ropes,  thereby  short¬ 
en  them,  and  perforce  lift  the  heavy  mass. 

Sagr.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  any  resist¬ 
ance,  so  long  as  it  is  not  infinite,  may  be  over¬ 
come  by  a  multitude  of  minute  forces.  Thus  a 
vast  number  of  ants  might  carry  ashore  a  ship 
laden  with  grain.  And  since  experience  shows  us 
daily  that  one  ant  can  easily  carry  one  grain,  it 
is  clear  that  the  number  of  grains  in  the  ship  is 
not  infinite,  but  falls  below  a  certain  limit.  If 
you  take  another  number  four  or  six  times  as 
great,  and  if  you  set  to  work  a  corresponding 
number  of  ants  they  will  carry  the  grain  ashore 
and  the  boat  also.  It  is  true  that  this  will  call  for 
a  prodigious  number  of  ants,  but  in  my  opinion 
this  is  precisely  the  case  with  the  vacua  which 
bind  together  the  least  particles  of  a  metal. 

Salv.  But  even  if  this  demanded  an  infinite 
number  would  you  still  think  it  impossible  } 

Sagr.  Not  if  the  mass  of  metal  were  infinite; 
otherwise. .  .  . 

Salv.  Otherwise  what?  Now  since  we  have 
arrived  at  paradoxes  let  us  see  if  we  cannot  prove 
that  within  a  finite  extent  it  is  possible  to  dis¬ 


cover  an  infinite  number  of  vacua.  At  the  same 
time  we  shall  at  least  reach  a  solution  of  the 
most  remarkable  of  all  that  list  of  problems  which 
Aristotle  himself  calls  wonderful;  I  refer  to  his 
Questions  in  Mechanics.  This  solution  may  be  no 
less  clear  and  conclusive  than  that  which  he  him¬ 
self  gives  and  quite  different  also  from  that  so 
cleverly  expounded  by  the  most  learned  Mon¬ 
signor  di  Guevara. 

First  it  is  necessary  to  consider  a  proposition, 
not  treated  by  others,  but  upon  which  depends 
the  solution  of  the  problem  and  from  which,  if  I 
mistake  not,  we  shall  derive  other  new  and  re¬ 
markable  facts.  For  the  sake  of  clearness  let  us 
draw  an  accurate  figure.  About  G  as  a  centre 
describe  an  equiangular  and  equilateral  polygon 
of  any  number  of  sides,  say  the  hexagon  ABC- 
DBF.  Similar  to  this  and  concentric  with  it,  de¬ 
scribe  another  smaller  one  which  we  shall  call 
HIKLMN.  Prolong  the  side  ABy  of  the  larger 
hexagon,  indefinitely  toward  5;  in  like  manner 
prolong  the  corresponding  side  HI  of  the  small¬ 
er  hexagon,  in  the  same  direction,  so  that  the 
line  HT  is  parallel  to  AS;  and  through  the  cen¬ 
tre  draw  the  line  GV  parallel  to  the  other  two. 
This  done,  imagine  the  larger  polygon  to  roll 
upon  the  line  ASy  carrying  with  it  the  smaller 
polygon.  It  is  evident  that,  if  the  point  B,  the 
end  of  the  side  ABy  remains  fixed  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  rotation,  the  point  A  will  rise  and 
the  point  C  will  fall  describing  the  arc  CO  until 
the  side  BC  coincides  with  the  line  BQy  equal  to 
BC.  But  during  this  rotation  the  point  /,  on  the 
smaller  polygon,  will  rise  above  the  line  IT  be¬ 
cause  IB  is  oblique  to  AS;  and  it  will  not  again 
return  to  the  line  IT  until  the  point  Cshall  have 
reached  the  position  0.  The  point  /,  having  de¬ 
scribed  the  arc  10  above  the  line  HTy  will  reach 
the  position  O  at  the  same  time  the  side  IK  as¬ 
sumes  the  position  OP;  but  in  the  meantime  the 
centre  G  has  traversed  a  path  above  GV  and 
does  not  return  to  it  until  it  has  completed  the 
arc  GC.  This  step  having  been  taken,  the  larger 
polygon  has  been  brought  to  rest  with  its  side 
BC  coinciding  with  the  line  BQ  while  the  side 
IK  of  the  smaller  polygon  has  been  made  to  co¬ 
incide  with  the  line  OP,  having  passed  over  the 
portion  10  without  touching  it;  also  the  centre 
G  will  have  reached  the  position  C  after  having 
traversed  all  its  course  above  the  parallel  line 
GV.  And  finally  the  entire  figure  will  assume  a 
position  similar  to  the  first,  so  that  if  we  con¬ 
tinue  the  rotation  and  come  to  the  next  step, 
the  side  DC  of  the  larger  polygon  will  coincide 
with  the  portion  OX  and  the  side  KL  of  the 
smaller  polygon,  having  first  skipped  the  arc 


140 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


Py,  will  fall  on  YZ,  while  the  centre  still  keep¬ 
ing  above  the  line  GV  will  return  to  it  at  R  after 
having  jumped  the  interval  CR.  At  the  end  of 
one  complete  rotation  the  larger  polygon  will 
have  traced  upon  the  line  ASy  without  break, 
six  lines  together  equal  to  its  perimeter;  the 
lesser  polygon  will  likewise  have  imprinted  six 
lines  equal  to  its  perimeter,  but  separated  by 
the  interposition  of  five  arcs,  whose  chords  rep¬ 
resent  the  parts  of  HT  not  touched  by  the  poly¬ 
gon:  the  centre  G  never  reaches  the  line  GV  ex¬ 
cept  at  six  points.  From  this  it  is  clear  that  the 
space  traversed  by  the  smaller  polygon  is  almost 
equal  to  that  traversed  by  the  larger,  that  is,  the 
line  //Tapp roximates  the  line  ASy  differing  from 
it  only  by  the  length  of  one  chord  of  one  of  these 
arcs,  provided  we  understand  the  line  HT  to  in¬ 
clude  the  five  skipped  arcs. 

Now  this  exposition  which  I  have  given  in  the 
case  of  these  hexagons  must  be  understood  to  be 
applicable  to  all  other  polygons,  whatever  the 
number  of  sides,  provided  only  they  are  similar, 
concentric,  and  rigidly  connected,  so  that  when 
the  greater  one  rotates  the  lesser  will  also  turn 
however  small  it  may  be.  You  must  also  under¬ 
stand  that  the  lines  described  by  these  two  are 
nearly  equal  provided  we  include  in  the  space 
traversed  by  the  smaller  one  the  intervals  which 
are  not  touched  by  any  part  of  the  perimeter  of 
this  smaller  polygon. 

Let  a  large  polygon  of,  say,  one  thousand  sides 
make  one  complete  rotation  and  thus  lay  off  a 
line  equal  to  its  perimeter;  at  the  same  time  the 
small  one  will  pass  over  an  approximately  equal 


D 


E 


F 


5 

distance,  made  up  of  a  thousand  small  portions 
each  equal  to  one  of  its  sides,  but  interrupted 
by  a  thousand  spaces  which,  in  contrast  with 
the  portions  that  coincide  with  the  sides  of  the 
polygon,  we  may  call  empty.  So  far  the  matter 
is  free  from  difficulty  or  doubt. 

But  now  suppose  that  about  any  centre,  say 
Ay  we  describe  two  concentric  and  rigidly  con¬ 
nected  circles;  and  suppose  that  from  the  points 
C and  By  on  their  radii,  there  are  drawn  the  tan¬ 
gents  CE and  BF and  that  through  the  centre  A 
the  line  AD  is  drawn  parallel  to  them,  then  if 
the  large  circle  makes  one  complete  rotation 
along  the  line  BFy  equal  not  only  to  its  circum¬ 
ference  but  also  to  the  other  two  lines  CE  and 
AD,  tell  me  what  the  smaller  circle  will  do  and 
also  what  the  centre  will  do.  As  to  the  centre  it 
will  certainly  traverse  and  touch  the  entire  line 
AD  while  the  circumference  of  the  smaller  cir¬ 
cle  will  have  measured  off  by  its  points  of  con¬ 
tact  the  entire  line  CEy  just  as  was  done  by  the 
above  mentioned  polygons.  The  only  difference 
is  that  the  line  HT  was  not  at  every  point  in 
contact  with  the  perimeter  of  the  smaller  poly¬ 
gon,  but  there  were  left  untouched  as  many  va¬ 
cant  spaces  as  there  were  spaces  coinciding  with 
the  sides.  But  here  in  the  case  of  the  circles  the 
circumference  of  the  smaller  one  never  leaves 
the  line  CE,  so  that  no  part  of  the  latter  is  left 
untouched,  nor  is  there  ever  a  time  when  some 
point  on  the  circle  is  not  in  contact  with  the 
straight  line.  How  now  can  the  smaller  circle 
traverse  a  length  greater  than  its  circumference 
unless  it  go  by  jumps ? 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


Sagr.  It  seems  to  me  that  one  may  say  that 
just  as  the  centre  of  the  circle,  by  itself,  carried 
along  the  line  AD  is  constantly  in  contact  with 
it,  although  it  is  only  a  single  point,  so  the  points 
on  the  circumference  of  the  smaller  circle,  car¬ 
ried  along  by  the  motion  of  the  larger  circle, 
would  slide  over  some  small  parts  of  the  line  CE, 

Salv.  There  are  two  reasons  why  this  cannot 
happen.  First  because  there  is  no  ground  for 
thinking  that  one  point  of  contact,  such  as  that 
at  C,  rather  than  another,  should  slip  over  cer¬ 
tain  portions  of  the  line  CE.  But  if  such  slidings 
along  CE  did  occur  they  would  be  infinite  in 
number  since  the  points  of  contact  (being  mere 
points)  are  infinite  in  number:  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  finite  slips  will  however  make  an  infinite¬ 
ly  long  line,  while  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  line 
CE  'is  finite.  The  other  reason  is  that  as  the  greater 
circle,  in  its  rotation,  changes  its  point  of  con¬ 
tact  continuously  the  lesser  circle  must  do  the 
same  because  B  is  the  only  point  from  which  a 
straight  line  can  be  drawn  to  A  and  pass  through 
(7.  Accordingly  the  small  circle  must  change  its 
point  of  contact  whenever  the  large  one  changes : 
no  point  of  the  small  circle  touches  the  straight 
line  CE  in  more  than  one  point.  Not  only  so, 
but  even  in  the  rotation  of  the  polygons  there 
was  no  point  on  the  perimeter  of  the  smaller 
which  coincided  with  more  than  one  point  on 
the  line  traversed  by  that  perimeter;  this  is  at 
once  clear  when  you  remember  that  the  line  IK 
is  parallel  to  BC  and  that  therefore  IK  will  re¬ 
main  above  7P until  BC  coincides  with  BQy  and 
that  IK  will  not  lie  upon  /P  except  at  the  very 
instant  when  BC  occupies  the  position  BO;  at 
this  instant  the  entire  line  IK  coincides  with  OP 
and  immediately  afterwards  rises  above  it. 

Sagr.  This  is  a  very  intricate  matter.  I  see  no 
solution.  Pray  explain  it  to  us. 

Salv.  Let  us  return  to  the  consideration  of 
the  above  mentioned  polygons  whose  behavior 
we  already  understand.  Now  in  the  case  of  poly¬ 
gons  with  1 00000  sides,  the  line  traversed  by 
the  perimeter  of  the  greater,  z>.,  the  line  laid 
down  by  its  looooo  sides  one  after  another,  is 
equal  to  the  line  traced  out  by  the  looooo  sides 
of  the  smaller,  provided  we  include  the  lOoooo 
vacant  spaces  interspersed.  So  in  the  case  of  the 
circles,  polygons  having  an  infinitude  of  sides, 
the  line  traversed  by  the  continuously  distribu¬ 
ted  infinitude  of  sides  is  in  the  greater  circle 
equal  to  the  line  laid  down  by  the  infinitude  of 
sides  in  the  smaller  circle  but  with  the  exception 
that  these  latter  alternate  with  empty  spaces; 
and  since  the  sides  are  not  finite  in  number,  but 
infinite,  so  alsoarethe  intervening  empty  spaces 


not  finite  but  infinite.  The  line  traversed  by  the 
larger  circle  consists  then  of  an  infinite  number 
of  points  which  completely  fill  it;  while  that 
which  is  traced  by  the  smaller  circle  consists  of 
an  infinite  number  of  points  which  leave  empty 
spaces  and  only  partly  fill  the  line.  And  here  I 
wish  you  to  observe  that  after  dividing  and  re¬ 
solving  a  line  into  a  finite  number  of  parts,  that 
is,  into  a  number  which  can  be  counted,  it  is  not 
possible  to  arrange  them  again  into  a  greater 
length  than  that  which  they  occupied  when  they 
formed  a  continuum  and  were  connected  with¬ 
out  the  interposition  of  as  many  empty  spaces. 
But  if  we  consider  the  line  resolved  into  an  in¬ 
finite  number  of  infinitely  small  and  indivisible 
parts,  we  shall  be  able  to  conceive  the  line  ex¬ 
tended  indefinitely  by  the  interposition,  not  of 
a  finite,  but  of  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely 
small  indivisible  empty  spaces. 

Now  this  which  has  been  said  concerning  sim¬ 
ple  lines  must  be  understood  to  hold  also  in  the 
case  of  surfaces  and  solid  bodies,  it  being  as¬ 
sumed  that  they  are  made  up  of  an  infinite,  not 
a  finite,  number  of  atoms.  Such  a  body  once  di¬ 
vided  into  a  finite  number  of  parts  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  reassemble  them  so  as  to  occupy  more 
space  than  before  unless  we  interpose  a  finite 
number  of  empty  spaces,  that  is  to  say,  spaces 
free  from  the  substance  of  which  the  solid  is 
made.  But  if  we  imagine  the  body,  by  some  ex¬ 
treme  and  final  analysis,  resolved  into  its  pri¬ 
mary  elements,  infinite  in  number,  then  we 
shall  be  able  to  think  of  them  as  indefinitely  ex¬ 
tended  in  space,  not  by  the  interposition  of  a 
finite,  but  of  an  infinite  number  of  empty  spaces. 
Thus  one  can  easily  imagine  a  small  ball  of  gold 
expanded  into  a  very  large  space  without  the 
in  troduction  of  a  finite  number  of  empty  spaces, 
always  provided  the  gold  is  made  up  of  an  in¬ 
finite  number  of  indivisible  parts. 

Simp.  It  seems  to  me  that  you  are  travelling 
along  toward  those  vacua  advocated  by  a  cer¬ 
tain  ancient  philosopher. 

Salv.  But  you  have  failed  toadd,  “who  denied 
Divine  Providence,”  an  inapt  remark  made  on 
a  similar  occasion  by  a  certain  antagonist  of  our 
Academician. 

Simp.  I  noticed,  and  not  without  indignation, 
the  rancor  of  this  ill-natured  opponent;  further 
references  to  these  affairs  I  omit,  not  only  as  a 
matter  of  good  form,  but  also  because  I  know 
how  unpleasant  they  are  to  the  good  tempered 
and  well  ordered  mind  of  one  so  religious  and 
pious,  so  orthodox  and  God-fearing  as  you. 

But  to  return  to  our  subject,  your  previous 
discourse  leaves  with  me  many  difficulties  which 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


I  am  unable  to  solve.  First  among  these  is  that, 
if  the  circumferences  of  the  two  circles  are  equal 
to  the  two  straight  lines,  CEand  EE,  the  latter 
considered  as  a  continuum,  the  former  as  inter¬ 
rupted  with  an  infinity  of  empty  points,  I  do 
not  see  how  it  is  possible  to  say  that  the  line 
AD  described  by  the  centre,  and  made  up  of 
an  infinity  of  points,  is  equal  to  this  centre 
which  is  a  single  point.  Besides,  this  building 
up  of  lines  out  of  points,  divisibles  out  of  in¬ 
divisibles,  and  finites  out  of  infinites,  offers  me 
an  obstacle  difficult  to  avoid;  and  the  necessity 
of  introducing  a  vacuum,  so  conclusively  re¬ 
futed  by  Aristotle,  presents  the  same  difficulty. 

Salv.  These  difficulties  are  real;  and  they  are 
not  the  only  ones.  But  let  us  remember  that 
we  are  dealing  with  infinities  and  indivisibles 
both  of  which  transcend  our  finite  understand¬ 
ing,  the  former  on  account  of  their  magnitude, 
the  latter  because  of  their  smallness.  In  spite  of 
this,  men  cannot  refrain  from  discussing  them, 
even  though  it  must  be  done  in  a  roundabout 
way. 

Therefore  I  also  should  like  to  take  the  liberty 
to  present  some  of  my  ideas  which,  though  not 
necessarily  convincing,  would,  on  account  of 
their  novelty,  at  least,  prove  somewhat  start¬ 
ling,  But  such  a  diversion  might  perhaps  carry 
us  too  far  away  from  the  subject  under  discus¬ 
sion  and  might  therefore  appear  to  you  inop¬ 
portune  and  not  very  pleasing. 

Sagr.  Pray  let  us  enjoy  the  advantages  and 
privileges  which  come  from  conversation  be¬ 
tween  friends,  especially  upon  subjects  freely 
chosen  and  not  forced  upon  us,  a  matter  vastly 
different  from  dealing  with  dead  books  which 
give  rise  to  many  doubts  but  remove  none. 
Share  with  us,  therefore,  the  thoughts  which 
our  discussion  has  suggested  to  you;  for  since 
we  are  free  from  urgent  business  there  will  be 
abundant  time  to  pursue  the  topics  already 
mentioned;  and  in  particular  the  objections 
raised  by  Simplicio  ought  not  in  any  wise  to  be 
neglected. 

Salv.  Granted,  since  you  so  desire.  The  first 
question  was.  How  can  a  single  point  be  equal 
to  a  line }  Since  I  cannot  do  more  at  present  I 
shall  attempt  to  remove,  or  at  least  diminish, 
one  improbability  by  introducing  a  similar  or  a 
greater  one,  just  as  sometimes  a  wonder  is  di¬ 
minished  by  a  miracle.^ 

And  this  I  shall  do  by  showing  you  two  equal 
surfaces,  together  with  two  equal  solids  located 
upon  these  same  surfaces  as  bases,  all  four  of 
which  diminish  continuously  and  uniformly  in 

'Cf.  p.  143  below. — Trans. 


such  a  way  that  their  remainders  always  pre¬ 
serve  equality  among  themselves,  and  finally 
both  the  surfaces  and  the  solids  terminate  their 
previous  constant  equality  by  degenerating,  the 
one  solid  and  the  one  surface  into  a  very  long 
line,  the  other  solid  and  the  other  surface  into 
a  single  point;  that  is,  the  latter  to  one  point, 
the  former  to  an  infinite  number  of  points. 

Sagr.  This  proposition  appears  to  me  won¬ 
derful,  indeed;  but  let  us  hear  the  explanation 
and  demonstration. 

Salv.  Since  the  proof  is  purely  geometrical 
we  shall  need  a  figure.  Let  AVB  be  a  semicircle 
with  centre  at  C;  about  it  describe  the  rec¬ 
tangle  ADEB  and  from  the  centre  draw  the 
straight  lines  CD  and  CE  to  the  points  D  and 
E.  Imagine  the  radius  CF  to  be  drawn  per¬ 
pendicular  to  either  of  the  lines  AB  or  EE, 
and  the  entire  figure  to  rotate  about  this  ra¬ 
dius  as  an  axis.  It  is  clear  that  the  rectangle 
ADEB  will  thus  describe  a  cylinder,  the  semi¬ 
circle  APB  a  hemisphere,  and  the  triangle 
CEE,  a  cone.  Next  let  us  remove  the  hemi¬ 
sphere  but  leave  the  cone  and  the  rest  of  the 
cylinder,  which,  on  account  of  its  shape,  we 
will  call  a  “bowl.”  First  we  shall  prove  that 
the  bowl  and  the  cone  are  equal;  then  we  shall 
show  that  a  plane  drawn  parallel  to  the  circle 
which  forms  the  base  of  the  bowl  and  which 
has  the  line  EE  for  diameter  and  F  for  a  centre 
— a  plane  whose  trace  is  GN — cuts  the  bowl  in 
the  points  G,  /,  O,  N,  and  the  cone  in  the  points 
Hy  L,  so  that  the  part  of  the  cone  indicated  by 
CHL  is  always  equal  to  the  part  of  the  bowl 
whose  profile  is  represented  by  the  triangles 
GAI  and  BON.  Besides  this  we  shall  prove  that 
the  base  of  the  cone,  /.<?.,  the  circle  whose  diam¬ 
eter  is  HL,  is  equal  to  the  circular  surface  which 


A _ C _ B 


U  -  HX 

XL  0/ 

X. 

P  Nv  7 

D  F  E 


Fig.  6 

forms  the  base  of  this  portion  of  the  bowl,  or  as 
one  might  say,  equal  to  a  ribbon  whose  width  is 
GL  (Note  by  the  way  the  nature  of  mathemati¬ 
cal  definitions  which  consist  merely  in  the  im¬ 
position  of  names  or,  if  you  prefer,  abbrevia¬ 
tions  of  speech  established  and  introduced  in 
order  to  avoid  the  tedious  drudgery  which  you 
and  I  now  experience  simply  because  we  have 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIE>:CES 


not  agreed  to  call  this  surface  a  ‘'circular  band” 
and  that  sharp  solid  portion  of  the  bowl  a 
“round  razor.”)  Now  call  them  by  what  name 
you  please.  It  suhices  to  understand  that  the 
plane,  drawn  at  any  height  whatever,  so  long 
as  it  is  parallel  to  the  base,  /.e.,  to  the  circle 
whose  diameter  is  DE,  alwu^-s  cuts  the  two  sol¬ 
ids  so  that  the  portion  CHL  of  the  cone  Is  equal 
to  the  upper  portion  of  the  bowl:  like'tvise  the 
two  areas  which  are  the  bases  of  these  solids, 
namely  the  band  and  the  circle  HL,  are  also 
equal.  Here  we  have  the  miracle  mentioned 
above:  as  the  cutting  plane  approaches  the  line 
AB  the  portions  of  the  solids  cut  od'  are  alwnys 
equal,  so  also  the  areas  of  their  bases.  .\nd  as  the 
cutting  plane  comes  near  the  top,  the  two  sol¬ 
ids  (al^;va>’s  equal)  as  well  as  their  bases  (areas 
which  are  also  equal)  finally  vanish,  one  pair  of 
them  degenerating  into  the  circumference  of  a 
circle,  the  other  into  a  single  point,  namely,  the 
upper  edge  of  the  bowl  and  the  apex  of  the 
cone.  Now,  since  as  these  solids  diminish  equal- 
itv'  is  maintained  betw^een  them  up  to  the  very’ 
last,  we  are  justified  in  saying  that,  at  the  ex¬ 
treme  and  final  end  of  this  diminution,  thev 
are  still  equal  and  that  one  is  not  infinitely 
greater  than  the  other.  It  appears  therefore  that 
we  may  equate  the  circumference  of  a  large  cir¬ 
cle  to  a  single  point.  And  this  which  is  true  of 
the  solids  is  true  also  of  the  surfaces  which  form 
their  bases;  for  these  also  preseiv'e  equality  be¬ 
tween  themselves  throughout  their  diminution 
and  in  the  end  vanish,  the  one  into  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  a  circle,  the  other  into  a  single  point. 
Shall  we  not  then  call  them  equal  seeing  that 
they  are  the  last  traces  and  remnants  ot  equal 
magnitudes?  Note  also  that,  even  if  these  ves¬ 
sels  were  large  enough  to  contain  immense  ce¬ 
lestial  hemispheres,  both  their  upper  edges  and 
the  apexes  of  the  cones  therein  contained  would 
always  remain  equal  and  would  vanish,  the  for¬ 
mer  into  circles  having  the  dimensions  of  the 
largest  celestial  orbits,  the  latter  into  single 
points.  Hence  in  conformity*  with  the  preced¬ 
ing  w*e  may  say  that-  all  circumferences  of  cir¬ 
cles,  however  diiferent,  are  equal  to  each  other, 
and  are  each  equal  to  a  single  point. 

S.\GR.  This  presentation  strikes  me  as  so  clev¬ 
er  and  novel  that,  even  if  I  were  able,  I  would 
not  be  willing  to  oppose  it:  for  to  deface  so 
beautiful  a  structure  by  a  blunt  pedantic  at¬ 
tack  would  be  nothing  short  of  sinful.  But  for 
our  complete  satisfaction  pray  give  us  this  geo¬ 
metrical  proof  that  there  is  alwa\*s  equality*  be- 
tw'een  these  solids  and  between  their  bases;  for 
it  cannot,  I  think,  fail  to  be  very  ingenious,  see¬ 


ing  how  subtle  is  the  philosophical  argument 
based  upon  this  result. 

Sauv.  The  demonstration  b  both  short  and 
easy.  Referring  to  the  preceding  figure,  since 
IPC  is  a  right  angle  the  square  of  the  radius  1C 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the  two 
sides  IP,  PC:  but  the  radius  IC  b  equal  to  AC 
and  also  to  GP,  while  CP  b  equal  to  PH.  Hence 
the  square  of  the  line  GP  b  equal  to  the  sum 
ot  the  squares  of  IP  and  PH,  or  mulriphring 
through  by  4,  we  have  the  square  of  the  diune- 
ter  G-V  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  10 
and  HL.  And,  since  the  areas  of  circles  are  to 
each  other  as  the  squares  of  their  diameters,  it 
follows  that  the  area  of  the  circle  whose  diame¬ 
ter  b  G.V  b  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  areas  of 
circles  having  diimeters  10  and  HL^  so  that  if 
we  remove  the  common  area  of  the  circle  hav¬ 
ing  10  for  diameter  the  remaining  area  of  the 
circle  G.V  wfill  be  equal  to  the  area  of  the  circle 
whose  diameter  is  HL.  So  much  for  the  first 
part-  As  for  the  ocher  part,  we  leave  its  demon¬ 
stration  for  the  present,  partly  because  those 
who  wbh  CO  follow  it  will  find  it  in  the  twelfth 
proposition  of  the  second  book  of  Z)e  cr::ro  grr- 
z’-tsAs  soUAam-n  by  the  .Archimedes  of  our  age, 
Luca  \’a!erio,  who  made  use  of  it  for  a  diiferent 
object,  and  partly*  because,  tor  our  purpose,  it 
sutiices  to  have  seen  that  the  above-mentioGed 
surfaces  are  always  equal  and  that,  as  thev  keep 
on  diminishing  uniformly,  thev  degenerate,  the 
one  into  a  single  point,  the  other  into  the  cir¬ 
cumference  of  a  circle  Larger  than  anv  assign¬ 
able;  in  this  tact  lies  our  miracle. 

Sagr.  The  demonstrarion  b  ingenious  and 
the  inferences  drawn  from  it  are  remarkable. 
.And  now  let  us  hear  something  concerning  the 
other  dimculcy*  rabed  by  Simplicio,  if  vou  have 
anything  special  to  say.  which,  however,  seems 
to  me  hardly  possible,  since  the  matter  has  al¬ 
ready  been  so  thoroughly*  dbcussed. 

S-KI.V,  But  I  do  have  something  special  to 
say,  and  will  first  of  all  repeat  what  I  said  a  lit¬ 
tle  while  ago,  namely*,  that  infinity  and  Lndb*bi- 
bility*  are  in  their  very*  nature  inoomprehensi- 
ble  CO  us:  imagine  then  what  they*  are  when 
combined-  Yet  if  we  wbh  to  build  up  a  line  out 
of  indivbible  points,  we  must  take  an  infinite 
number  of  them,  and  are,  thereibre,  bound  to 
understand  both  the  infinite  and  the  indivbible 
at  the  same  time.  Many  ideas  have  passed 
through  my*  mind  concerning  thb  subject,  some 
of  which,  possibly  the  more  important.  I  may 
not  be  able  to  recall  on  the  spur  of  the  moment ; 
but  in  the  course  of  our  dbeussion  it  may  hap¬ 
pen  that  I  shall  awaken  in  y*ou,  and  especially 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


in  Simplicio,  objections  and  difficulties  which 
in  turn  will  bring  to  memory  that  which,  with¬ 
out  such  stimulus,  would  have  lain  dormant  in 
my  mind.  Allow  me  therefore  the  customary 
liberty  of  introducing  some  of  our  human  fan¬ 
cies,  for  indeed  we  may  so  call  them  in  compari¬ 
son  with  supernatural  truth  which  furnishes  the 
one  true  and  safe  recourse  for  decision  in  our 
discussions  and  which  is  an  infallible  guide  in 
the  dark  and  dubious  paths  of  thought. 

One  of  the  main  objections  urged  against 
this  building  up  of  continuous  quantities  out 
of  indivisible  quantities  is  that  the  addition  of 
one  indivisible  to  another  cannot  produce  a  di¬ 
visible,  for  if  this  were  so  it  would  render  the 
indivisible  divisible.  Thus  if  two  indivisibles, 
say  two  points,  can  be  united  to  form  a  quan¬ 
tity,  say  a  divisible  line,  then  an  even  more 
divisible  line  might  be  formed  by  the  union 
of  three,  five,  seven,  or  any  other  odd  number 
of  points.  Since  however  these  lines  can  be  cut 
into  two  equal  parts,  it  becomes  possible  to  cut 
the  indivisible  which  lies  exactly  in  the  middle 
of  the  line.  In  answer  to  this  and  other  objec¬ 
tions  of  the  same  type  we  reply  that  a  divisible 
magnitude  cannot  be  constructed  out  of  two 
or  ten  or  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  indivisibles, 
but  requires  an  infinite  number  of  them. 

Simp.  Here  a  difficulty  presents  itself  which 
appears  to  me  insoluble.  Since  it  is  clear  that  we 
may  have  one  line  greater  than  another,  each 
containing  an  infinite  number  of  points,  we  are 
forced  to  admit  that,  within  one  and  the  same 
class,  we  may  have  something  greater  than  in¬ 
finity,  because  the  infinity  of  points  in  the  long 
line  is  greater  than  the  infinity  of  points  in  the 
short  line.  This  assigning  to  an  infinite  quantity 
a  value  greater  than  infinity  is  quite  beyond  my 
comprehension. 

Salv.  This  is  one  of  the  difficulties  which 
arise  when  we  attempt,  with  our  finite  minds, 
to  discuss  the  infinite,  assigning  to  it  those  prop¬ 
erties  which  we  give  to  the  finite  and  limited; 
but  this  I  think  is  wrong,  for  we  cannot  speak 
of  infinite  quantities  as  being  the  one  greater 
or  less  than  or  equal  to  another.  To  prove  this 
I  have  in  mind  an  argument  which,  for  the  sake 
of  clearness,  I  shall  put  in  the  form  of  questions 
to  Simplicio  who  raised  this  difficulty. 

I  take  it  for  granted  that  you  know  which  of 
the  numbers  are  squares  and  which  are  not. 

Simp.  I  am  quite  aware  that  a  squared  num¬ 
ber  is  one  which  results  from  the  multiplication 
of  another  number  by  itself;  thus  4,  9,  etc.,  are 
squared  numbers  which  come  from  multiply¬ 
ing  2,  3,  etc.,  by  themselves. 


Salv.  Very  well;  and  you  also  know  that  just 
as  the  products  are  called  squares  so  the  factors 
are  called  sides  or  roots;  while  on  the  other  hand 
those  numbers  which  do  not  consist  of  two  equal 
factors  are  not  squares.  Therefore  if  I  assert  that 
all  numbers,  including  both  squares  and  non¬ 
squares,  are  more  than  the  squares  alone,  I  shall 
speak  the  truth,  shall  I  not.?^ 

Simp.  Most  certainly. 

Salv.  If  I  should  ask  further  how  many 
squares  there  are  one  might  reply  truly  that 
there  are  as  many  as  the  corresponding  number 
of  roots,  since  every  square  has  its  own  root  and 
every  root  its  own  square,  while  no  square  has 
more  than  one  root  and  no  root  more  than  one 
square. 

Simp.  Precisely  so. 

Salv.  But  if  I  inquire  how  many  roots  there 
are,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  there  are  as  many 
as  there  are  numbers  because  every  number  is  a 
root  of  some  square.  This  being  granted  we 
must  say  that  there  are  as  many  squares  as  there 
are  numbers  because  they  are  just  as  numerous 
as  their  roots,  and  all  the  numbers  are  roots.  Yet 
at  the  outset  we  said  there  are  many  more  num¬ 
bers  than  squares,  since  the  larger  portion  of 
them  are  not  squares.  Not  only  so,  but  the  pro¬ 
portionate  number  of  squares  diminishes  as  we 
pass  to  larger  numbers.  Thus  up  to  100  we  have 
10  squares,  that  is,  the  squares  constitute  i/io 
part  of  all  the  numbers;  up  to  10000,  we  find 
only  i/ioo  part  to  be  squares;  and  up  to  a  mil¬ 
lion  only  I /looo  part;  on  the  other  hand  in  an 
infinite  number,  if  one  could  conceive  of  such 
a  thing,  he  would  be  forced  to  admit  that  there 
are  as  many  squares  as  there  are  numbers  all 
taken  together. 

Sagr.  What  then  must  one  conclude  under 
these  circumstances.'^ 

Salv.  So  far  as  I  see  we  can  only  infer  that  the 
totality  of  all  numbers  is  infinite,  that  the  num¬ 
ber  of  squares  is  infinite,  and  that  the  number 
of  their  roots  is  infinite ;  neither  is  the  number  of 
squares  less  than  the  totality  of  all  numbers,  nor 
the  latter  greater  than  the  former;  and  finally 
the  attributes  “equal,’"  “greater,”  and  “less,” 
are  not  applicable. to  infinite,  but  only  to  finite, 
quantities.  When  therefore  Simplicio  intro¬ 
duces  several  lines  of  different  lengths  and  asks 
me  how  it  is  possible  that  the  longer  ones  do 
not  contain  more  points  than  the  shorter,  I  an¬ 
swer  him  that  one  line  does  not  contain  more 
or  less  or  just  as  many  points  as  another,  but 
that  each  line  contains  an  infinite  number.  Or 
if  I  had  replied  to  him  that  the  points  in  one 
line  were  equal  in  number  to  the  squares;  in 


145 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


another,  greater  than  the  totality  of  numbers; 
and  in  the  little  one,  as  many  as  the  number  of 
cubes,  might  I  not,  indeed,  have  satisfied  him 
by  thus  placing  more  points  in  one  line  than  in 
another  and  yet  maintaining  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  in  each?  So  much  for  the  first  difficulty. 

Sagr.  Pray  stop  a  moment  and  let  me  add  to 
what  has  already  been  said  an  idea  which  just 
occurs  to  me.  If  the  preceding  be  true,  it  seems 
to  me  impossible  to  say  either  that  one  infinite 
number  is  greater  than  another  or  even  that  it 
is  greater  than  a  finite  number,  because  if  the 
infinite  number  were  greater  than,  say,  a  mil¬ 
lion  it  would  follow  that  on  passing  from  the 
million  to  higher  and  higher  numbers  we  would 
be  approaching  the  infinite;  but  this  is  not  so; 
on  the  contrary,  the  larger  the  number  to  which 
we  pass,  the  more  we  recede  from  infinity,  be¬ 
cause  the  greater  the  numbers  the  fewer  are  the 
squares  contained  in  them;  but  the  squares  in 
infinity  cannot  be  less  than  the  totality  of  all 
the  numbers,  as  we  have  just  agreed;  hence  the 
approach  to  greater  and  greater  numbers 
means  a  departure  from  infinity. 

Salv.  And  thus  from  your  ingenious  argu¬ 
ment  we  are  led  to  conclude  that  the  attributes 
‘‘larger,”  “smaller,”  and  “equal”  have  no  place 
either  in  comparing  infinite  quantities  with 
each  other  or  in  comparing  infinite  with  finite 
quantities. 

I  pass  now  to  another  consideration.  Since 
lines  and  all  continuous  quantities  are  divisible 
into  parts  which  are  themselves  divisible  with¬ 
out  end,  I  do  not  see  how  it  is  possible  to  avoid 
the  conclusion  that  these  lines  are  built  up  of  an 
infinite  number  of  indivisible  quantities  because 
a  division  and  a  subdivision  which  can  be  car¬ 
ried  on  indefinitely  presupposes  that  the  parts 
are  infinite  in  number,  otherwise  the  subdivi¬ 
sion  would  reach  an  end;  and  if  the  parts  are 
infinite  in  number,  we  must  conclude  that  they 
are  not  finite  in  size,  because  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  finite  quantities  would  give  an  infinite 
magnitude.  And  thus  we  have  a  continuous 
quantity  built  up  of  an  infinite  number  of  in¬ 
divisibles. 

Simp.  But  if  we  can  carry  on  indefinitely  the 
division  into  finite  parts  what  necessity  is  there 
then  for  the  introduction  of  non-finite  parts? 

Salv.  The  very  fact  that  one  is  able  to  con¬ 
tinue,  without  end,  the  division  into  finite  parts 
makes  it  necessary  to  regard  the  quantity  as 
composed  of  an  infinite  number  of  immeasur¬ 
ably  small  elements.  Now  in  order  to  settle  this 
matter  I  shall  ask  you  to  tell  me  whether,  in 
your  opinion,  a  continuum  is  made  up  of  a  finite 


or  of  an  infinite  number  of  finite  parts. 

Simp.  My  answer  is  that  their  number  is  both 
infinite  and  finite;  potentially  infinite  but  act¬ 
ually  finite;  that  is  to  say,  potentially  infinite 
before  division  and  actually  finite  after  division; 
because  parts  cannot  be  said  to  exist  in  a  body 
which  is  not  yet  divided  or  at  least  marked  out; 
if  this  is  not  done  we  say  that  they  exist  poten¬ 
tially. 

Salv.  So  that  a  line  which  is,  for  instance, 
twenty  spans  long  is  not  said  to  contain  actually 
twenty  lines  each  one  span  in  length  except 
after  division  into  twenty  equal  parts;  before 
division  it  is  said  to  contain  them  only  poten¬ 
tially.  Suppose  the  facts  are  as  you  say;  tell  me 
then  whether,  when  the  division  is  once  made, 
the  size  of  the  original  quantity  is  thereby  in¬ 
creased,  diminished,  or  unaffected. 

Simp.  It  neither  increases  nor  diminishes. 

Salv.  That  is  my  opinion  also.  Therefore  the 
finite  parts  in  a  continuum^  whether  actually  or 
potentially  present,  do  not  make  the  quantity 
either  larger  or  smaller;  but  it  is  perfectly  clear 
that,  if  the  number  of  finite  parts  actually  con¬ 
tained  in  the  whole  is  infinite  in  number,  they 
will  make  the  magnitude  infinite.  Hence  the 
number  of  finite  parts,  although  existing  only 
potentially,  cannot  be  infinite  unless  the  mag¬ 
nitude  containing  them  be  infinite;  and  con¬ 
versely  if  the  magnitude  is  finite  it  cannot  con¬ 
tain  an  infinite  number  of  finite  parts  either 
actually  or  potentially. 

Sagr.  How  then  is  it  possible  to  divide  a  con¬ 
tinuum  without  limit  into  parts  which  are  them¬ 
selves  always  capable  of  subdivision? 

Salv.  This  distinction  of  yours  between 
actual  and  potential  appears  to  render  easy  by 
one  method  what  would  be  impossible  by  an¬ 
other.  But  I  shall  endeavor  to  reconcile  these 
matters  in  another  way;  and  as  to  the  query 
whether  the  finite  parts  of  a  limited  continuum 
are  finite  or  infinite  in  number  I  will,  contrary 
to  the  opinion  of  Simplicio,  answer  that  they 
are  neither  finite  nor  infinite. 

Simp.  This  answer  would  never  have  occurred 
to  me  since  I  did  not  think  that  there  existed 
any  intermediate  step  between  the  finite  and 
the  infinite,  so  that  the  classification  or  distinc¬ 
tion  which  assumes  that  a  thing  must  be  either 
finite  or  infinite  is  faulty  and  defective. 

Salv.  So  it  seems  to  me.  And  if  we  consider 
discrete  quantities  I  think  there  is,  between 
finite  and  infinite  quantities,  a  third  intermed¬ 
iate  term  which  corresponds  to  every  assigned 
number;  so  that  if  asked,  as  in  the  present  case, 
whether  the  finite  parts  of  a  continuum  are  finite 


146  GALILEO  GALILEI 


or  infinite  in  number  the  best  reply  is  that  they 
are  neither  finite  nor  infinite  but  correspond  to 
every  assigned  number.  In  order  that  this  may 
be  possible,  it  is  necessary  that  those  parts 
should  not  be  included  within  a  limited  num¬ 
ber,  for  in  that  case  they  would  not  correspond 
to  a  number  which  is  greater;  nor  can  they  be 
infinite  in  number  since  no  assigned  number  is 
infinite;  and  thus  at  the  pleasure  of  the  ques¬ 
tioner  we  may,  to  any  given  line,  assign  a  hun¬ 
dred  finite  parts,  a  thousand,  a  hundred  thou¬ 
sand,  or  indeed  any  number  we  may  please  so 
long  as  it  be  not  infinite.  I  grant,  therefore,  to 
the  philosophers,  that  the  continuum  contains 
as  many  finite  parts  as  they  please  and  I  con¬ 
cede  also  that  it  contains  them,  either  actually 
or  potentially,  as  they  may  like;  but  I  must  add 
that  just  as  a  line  ten  fathoms  in  length  con¬ 
tains  ten  lines  each  of  one  fathom  and  forty  lines 
each  of  one  cubit  and  eighty  lines  each  of  half  a 
cubit,  etc.,  so  it  contains  an  infinite  number  of 
points;  call  them  actual  or  potential,  as  you  like, 
for  as  to  this  detail,  Simplicio,  I  defer  to  your 
opinion  and  to  your  judgment. 

SiMi>.  I  cannot  help  admiring  your  discussion; 
but  I  fear  that  this  parallelism  between  the 
points  and  the  finite  parts  contained  in  a  line 
will  not  prove  satisfactory,  and  that  you  will 
not  find  it  so  easy  to  divide  a  given  line  into  an 
infinite  number  of  points  as  the  philosophers  do 
to  cut  it  into  ten  fathoms  or  forty  cubits;  not 
only  so,  but  such  a  division  is  quite  impossible 
to  realize  in  practice,  so  that  this  will  be  one  of 
those  potentialities  which  cannot  be  reduced 
to  actuality. 

Salv.  The  fact  that  something  can  be  done 
only  with  effort  or  diligence  or  with  great  ex¬ 
penditure  of  time  does  not  render  it  impossible; 
for  I  think  that  you  yourself  could  not  easily 
divide  a  line  into  a  thousand  parts,  and  much 
less  if  the  number  of  parts  were  937  or  any  other 
large  prime  number.  But  if  I  were  to  accom¬ 
plish  this  division  which  you  deem  impossible  as 
readily  as  another  person  would  divide  the  line 
into  forty  parts  would  you  then  be  more  will¬ 
ing,  in  our  discussion,  to  concede  the  possibility 
of  such  a  division } 

Simp.  In  general  I  enjoy  greatly  your  meth¬ 
od;  and  replying  to  your  query,  I  answer  that 
it  would  be  more  than  sufficient  if  it  prove  not 
more  difficult  to  resolve  a  line  into  points  than 
to  divide  it  into  a  thousand  parts. 

Salv.  I  will  now  say  something  which  may 
perhaps  astonish  you;  it  refers  to  the  possibility 
of  dividing  a  line  into  its  infinitely  small  ele¬ 
ments  by  following  the  same  order  which  one 


employs  in'dividing  the  same  line  into  forty, 
sixty,  or  a  hundred  parts,  that  is,  by  dividing 
it  into  two,  four,  etc.  He  who  thinks  that,  by 
following  this  method,  he  can  reach  an  infinite 
number  of  points  is  greatly  mistaken;  for  if  this 
process  were  followed  to  eternity  there  would 
still  remain  finite  parts  which  were  undivided. 

Indeed  by  such  a  method  one  is  very  far  from 
reaching  the  goal  of  indivisibility;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  he  recedes  from  it  and  while  he  thinks 
that,  by  continuing  this  division  and  by  multi¬ 
plying  the  multitude  of  parts,  he  will  approach 
infinity,  he  is,  in  my  opinion,  getting  farther 
and  farther  away  from  it.  My  reason  is  this.  In 
the  preceding  discussion  we  concluded  that,  in 
an  infinite  number,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
squares  and  cubes  should  be  as  numerous  as  the 
totality  of  the  natural  numbers,  because  both 
of  these  are  as  numerous  as  their  roots  which 
constitute  the  totality  of  the  natural  numbers. 
Next  we  saw  that  the  larger  the  numbers  taken 
the  more  sparsely  distributed  were  the  squares, 
and  still  more  sparsely  the  cubes;  therefore  it  is 
clear  that  the  larger  the  numbers  to  which  we 
pass  the  farther  we  recede  from  the  infinite 
number;  hence  it  follows  that,  since  this  process 
carries  us  farther  and  farther  from  the  end 
sought,  if  on  turning  back  we  shall  find  that  any 
number  can  be  said  to  be  infinite,  it  must  be 
unity.  Here  indeed  are  satisfied  all  those  con¬ 
ditions  which  are  requisite  for  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber;  I  mean  that  unity  contains  in  itself  as  many 
squares  as  there  are  cubes  and  natural  numbers. 

Simp.  I  do  not  quite  grasp  the  meaning  of 
this. 

Salv.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  the  matter 
because  unity  is  at  once  a  square,  a  cube,  a 
square  of  a  square  and  all  the  other  powers,  nor 
is  there  any  essential  peculiarity  in  squares  or 
cubes  which  does  not  belong  to  unity;  as,  for 
example,  the  property  of  two  square  numbers 
that  they  have  between  them  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional;  take  any  square  number  you  please  as 
the  first  term  and  unity  for  the  other,  then  you 
will  always  find  a  number  which  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional.  Consider  the  two  square  numbers,  9 
and  4;  then  3  is  the  mean  proportional  between 
9  and  I ;  while  2  is  a  mean  proportional  between 
4  and  I ;  between  9  and  4  we  have  6  as  a  mean 
proportional.  A  property  of  cubes  is  that  they 
must  have  between  them  two  mean  propor¬ 
tional  numbers;  take  8  and  27;  between  them 
lie  12  and  18;  while  between  i  and  8  we  have 
2  and  4  intervening;  and  between  i  and  27 
there  lie  3  and  9.  Therefore  we  conclude  that 
unity  is  the  only  infinite  number.  These  are 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


some  of  the  marvels  which  our  imagination  can¬ 
not  grasp  and  which  should  warn  us  against  the 
serious  error  of  those  who  attempt  to  discuss 
the  infinite  by  assigning  to  it  the  same  proper¬ 
ties  which  we  employ  for  the  finite,  the  natures 
of  the  two  having  nothing  in  common. 

With  regard  to  this  subject  I  must  tell  you  of 
a  remarkable  property  which  just  now  occurs 
to  me  and  which  will  explain  the  vast  alteration 
and  change  of  character  which  a  finite  quan¬ 
tity  would  undergo  in  passing  to  infinity.  Let 
us  draw  the  straight  line  AB  of  arbitrary  length 
and  let  the  point  C  divide  it  into  two  unequal 
parts;  then  I  say  that,  if  pairs  of  lines  be  drawn, 
one  from  each  of  the  terminal  points  A  and  B, 
and  if  the  ratio  between  the  lengths  of  these 
lines  is  the  same  as  that  between  AC  and  CB, 
their  points  of  intersection  will  all  lie  upon  the 
circumference  of  one  and  the  same  circle.  Thus, 
for  example,  AL  and  BL  drawn  from  A  and  5, 
meeting  at  the  point  L,  bearing  to  one  another 
the  same  ratio  as  AC  to  BC,  and  the  pair  AK 

H 


147 


and  BK  meeting  at  K  also  bearing  to  one  an¬ 
other  the  same  ratio,  and  likewise  the  pairs  AC 
Bh  AH,  BH,  AG,  BG,  AF,  BF,  AE,  BE,  have 
their  points  of  intersection  L,  K,  I,  H,  G,  F,  E, 
all  lying  upon  the  circumference  of  one  and  the 
same  circle.  Accordingly  if  we  imagine  the  point 
C  to  move  continuously  in  such  a  manner  that 
the  lines  drawn  from  it  to  the  fixed  terminal 
points,  A  and  B,  always  maintain  the  same  ra¬ 
tio  between  their  lengths  as  exists  between  the 
original  parts,  AC  and  CB,  then  the  point  C 
will,  as  I  shall  presently  prove,  describe  a  circle. 
And  the  circle  thus  described  will  increase  in 
size  without  limit  as  the  point  C approaches  the 
middle  point  which  we  may  call  O;  but  it  will 
diminish  in  size  as  C  approaches  the  end  B.  So 
that  the  infinite  number  of  points  located  in 
the  line  OB  will,  if  the  motion  be  as  explained 
above,  describe  circles  of  every  size,  some 
smaller  than  the  pupil  of  the  eye  of  a  flea,  others 
larger  than  the  celestial  equator.  Now  if  we 


move  any  of  the  points  lying  between  the  two 
ends  O  and  B  they  will  all  describe  circles,  those 
nearest  O,  immense  circles;  but  if  we  move  the 
point  O  itself,  and  continue  to  move  it  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  aforesaid  law,  namely,  that  the  lines 
drawn  from  O  to  the  terminal  points,  A  and  B, 
maintain  the  same  ratio  as  the  original  lines  AO 
and  OB,  what  kind  of  a  line  will  be  produced  ? 
A  circle  will  be  drawn  larger  than  the  largest  of 
the  others,  a  circle  which  is  therefore  infinite. 
But  from  the  point  O  a  straight  line  will  also  be 
drawn  perpendicular  to  BA  and  extending  to 
infinity  without  ever  turning,  as  did  the  others, 
to  join  its  last  end  with  its  first;  for  the  point  C, 
with  its  limited  motion,  having  described  the 
upper  semicircle,  CHE,  proceeds  to  describe 
the  lower  semicircle  EMC,  thus  returning  to 
the  starting  point.  But  the  point  O  having 
started  to  describe  its  circle,  as  did  all  the  other 
points  in  the  line  AB,  (for  the  points  in  the 
other  portion  OA  describe  their  circles  also,  the 
largest  being  those  nearest  the  point  O)  is  un¬ 
able  to  return  to  its  starting  point  because 
the  circle  it  describes,  being  the  largest  of 
all,  is  infinite ;  in  fact,  it  describes  an  infinite 
straight  line  as  circumference  of  its  infinite 
circle.  Think  now  what  a  difference  there  is 
between  a  finite  and  an  infinite  circle  since 
the  latter  changes  character  in  such  a  man¬ 
ner  that  it  loses  not  only  its  existence  but 
also  its  possibility  of  existence;  indeed,  we 
already  clearly  understand  that  there  can 
be  no  such  thing  as  an  infinite  circle;  simi¬ 
larly  there  can  be  no  infinite  sphere,  no  in¬ 
finite  body,  and  no  infinite  surface  of  any 
shape.  Now  what  shall  we  say  concerning  this 
metamorphosis  in  the  transition  from  finite  to 
infinite?  And  why  should  we  feel  greater  re¬ 
pugnance,  seeing  that,  in  our  search  after  the 
infinite  among  numbers  we  found  it  in  unity? 
Having  broken  up  a  solid  into  many  parts,  hav¬ 
ing  reduced  it  to  the  finest  of  powder  and  hav¬ 
ing  resolved  it  into  its  infinitely  small  indivisi¬ 
ble  atoms  why  may  we  not  say  that  this  solid 
has  been  reduced  to  a  single  continuum  perhaps 
a  fluid  like  water  or  mercury  or  even  a  liquified 
metal  ?  And  do  we  not  see  stones  melt  into  glass 
and  the  glass  itself  under  strong  heat  become 
more  fluid  than  water? 

Sagr.  Are  we  then  to  believe  that  substances 
become  fluid  in  virtue  of  being  resolved  into 
their  infinitely  small  indivisible  components  ? 

Salv.  I  am  not  able  to  find  any  better  means 
of  accounting  for  certain  phenomena  of  which 
the  following  is  one.  When  I  take  a  hard  sub¬ 
stance  such  as  stone  or  metal  and  when  I  reduce 


148  GALILEO  GALILEI 


it  by  means  of  a  hammer  or  fine  file  to  the  most 
minute  and  impalpable  powder,  it  is  clear  that 
its  finest  particles,  although  when  taken  one  by 
one  arc,  on  account  of  their  smallness,  imper¬ 
ceptible  to  our  sight  and  touch,  are  nevertheless 
finite  in  size,  possess  shape,  and  capability  of  be¬ 
ing  counted.  It  is  also  true  that  when  once 
heaped  up  they  remain  in  a  heap;  and  if  an 
excavation  be  made  within  limits  the  cavity 
will  remain  and  the  surrounding  particles  will 
not  rush  in  to  fill  it;  if  shaken  the  particles  come 
to  rest  immediately  after  the  external  disturb¬ 
ing  agent  is  removed;  the  same  effects  are  ob¬ 
served  in  all  piles  of  larger  and  larger  particles, 
of  any  shape,  even  if  spherical,  as  is  the  case 
with  piles  of  millet,  wheat,  lead  shot,  and  every 
other  material.  But  if  we  attempt  to  discover 
such  properties  in  water  we  do  not  find  them; 
for  when  once  heaped  up  it  immediately  flattens 
out  unless  held  up  by  some  vessel  or  other  ex¬ 
ternal  retaining  body;  when  hollowed  out  it 
quickly  rushes  in  to  fill  the  cavity;  and  when 
disturbed  it  fluctuates  for  a  long  time  and  sends 
out  its  waves  through  great  distances. 

Seeing  that  water  has  less  firmness  than  the 
finest  of  powder,  in  fact  has  no  consistence 
whatever,  we  may,  it  seems  to  me,  very  reason¬ 
ably  conclude  that  the  smallest  particles  into 
which  it  can  be  resolved  are  quite  different 
from  finite  and  divisible  particles;  indeed  the 
only  difference  I  am  able  to  discover  is  that  the 
former  are  indivisible.  The  exquisite  transpar¬ 
ency  of  water  also  favors  this  view;  for  the  most 
transparent  crystal  when  broken  and  ground 
and  reduced  to  powder  loses  its  transparency; 
the  finer  the  grinding  the  greater  the  loss;  but 
in  the  case  of  water  where  the  attrition  is  of  the 
highest  degree  we  have  extreme  transparency. 
Gold  and  silver  when  pulverized  with  acids 
more  finely  than  is  possible  with  any  file  still 
remain  powders,  and  do  not  become  fluids  until 
the  finest  particles  of  fire  or  of  the  rays  of  the 
sun  dissolve  them,  as  I  think,  into  their  ulti¬ 
mate,  indivisible,  and  infinitely  small  compon¬ 
ents. 

Sack.  This  phenomenon  of  light  which  you 
mention  is  one  which  I  have  many  times  re¬ 
marked  with  astonishment.  I  have,  for  instance, 
seen  lead  melted  instantly  by  means  of  a  con¬ 
cave  mirror  only  three  hands  in  diameter. 
Hence  I  think  that  if  the  mirror  were  very 
large,  well-polished  and  of  a  parabolic  figure,  it 
would  just  as  readily  and  quickly  melt  any  other 
metal,  seeing  that  the  small  mirror,  which  was 
not  well  polished  and  had  only  a  spherical  shape, 
was  able  so  energetically  to  melt  lead  and  burn 


every  combustible  substance.  Such  effects  as 
these  render  credible  to  me  the  marvels  accom¬ 
plished  by  the  mirrors  of  Archimedes. 

Salv.  Speaking  of  the  effects  produced  by 
the  mirrors  of  Archimedes,  it  was  his  own  books 
(which  I  had  already  read  and  studied  with  in¬ 
finite  astonishment)  that  rendered  credible  to 
me  all  the  miracles  described  by  various  writers. 
And  if  any  doubt  had  remained,  the  book  which 
Father  Buenaventura  Cavalieri^  has  recently 
published  on  the  subject  of  the  burning  glass 
and  which  I  have  read  with  admiration  would 
have  removed  the  last  difficulty. 

Sagr.  I  also  have  seen  this  treatise  and  have 
read  it  with  pleasure  and  astonishment;  and 
knowing  the  author  I  was  confirmed  in  the 
opinion  which  I  had  already  formed  of  him, 
that  he  was  destined  to  become  one  of  the  lead¬ 
ing  mathematicians  of  our  age.  But  now,  with 
regard  to  the  surprising  effect  of  solar  rays  in 
melting  metals,  must  we  believe  that  such  a 
furious  action  is  devoid  of  motion  or  that  it  is 
accompanied  by  the  most  rapid  of  motions.-^ 

Salv.  We  observe  that  other  combustions 
and  resolutions  are  accompanied  by  motion,  and 
that,  the  most  rapid;  note  the  action  of  light¬ 
ning  and  of  powder  as  used  in  mines  and  pe¬ 
tards;  note  also  how  the  charcoal  flame,  mixed 
as  it  is  with  heavy  and  impure  vapours,  in¬ 
creases  its  power  to  liquify  metals  whenever 
quickened  by  a  pair  of  bellows.  Hence  I  do  not 
understand  how  the  action  of  light,  although 
very  pure,  can  be  devoid  of  motion  and  that  of 
the  swiftest  type. 

Sagr.  But  of  what  kind  and  how  great  must 
we  consider  this  speed  of  light  to  be  ?  Is  it  in¬ 
stantaneous  or  momentary  or  does  it  like  other 
motions  require  time.f^  Can  we  not  decide  this 
by  experiment  ? 

Simp.  Everyday  experience  shows  that  the 
propagation  of  light  is  instantaneous;  for  when 
we  see  a  piece  of  artillery  fired,  at  great  distance, 
the  flash  reaches  our  eyes  without  lapse  of  time; 
but  the  sound  reaches  the  ear  only  after  a  no¬ 
ticeable  interval. 

Sagr.  Well,  Simplicio,  the  only  thing  I  am 
able  to  infer  from  this  familiar  bit  of  experience 
is  that  sound,  in  reaching  our  ear,  travels  more 
slowly  than  light;  it  does  not  inform  me  whether 
the  coming  of  the  light  is  instantaneous  or 
whether,  although  extremely  rapid,  it  still  oc- 

^  One  of  the  most  active  investigators  among  Galileo’s 
contemporaries;  a  Jesuit,  first  to  introduce  the  use  of  log¬ 
arithms  into  Italy  and  first  to  derive  the  expression  for 
the  focal  length  of  a  lens  having  unequal  radii  of  curva¬ 
ture.  Trans. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


cupies  time.  An  observation  of  this  kind  tells  us 
nothing  more  than  one  in  which  it  is  claimed 
that  “As  soon  as  the  sun  reaches  the  horizon 
its  light  reaches  our  eyes”;  but  who  will  assure 
me  that  these  rays  had  not  reached  this  limit 
earlier  than  they  reached  our  vision  ? 

Salv.  The  small  conclusiveness  of  these  and 
other  similar  observations  once  led  me  to  de¬ 
vise  a  method  by  which  one  might  accurately 
ascertain  whether  illumination,  t,e,^  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  light,  is  really  instantaneous.  The  fact 
that  the  speed  of  sound  is  as  high  as  it  is,  assures 
us  that  the  motion  of  light  cannot  fail  to  be 
extraordinarily  swift.  The  experiment  which  I 
devised  was  as  follows : 

Let  each  of  two  persons  take  a  light  con¬ 
tained  in  a  lantern,  or  other  receptacle,  such 
that  by  the  interposition  of  the  hand,  the  one 
can  shut  off  or  admit  the  light  to  the  vision  of 
the  other.  Next  let  them  stand  opposite  each 
other  at  a  distance  of  a  few  cubits  and  practice 
until  they  acquire  such  skill  in  uncovering  and 
occulting  their  lights  that  the  instant  one  sees 
the  light  of  his  companion  he  will  uncover  his 
own.  After  a  few  trials  the  response  will  be  so 
prompt  that  without  sensible  error  the  uncov¬ 
ering  of  one  light  is  immediately  followed  by 
the  uncovering  of  the  other,  so  that  as  soon  as 
one  exposes  his  light  he  will  instantly  see  that 
of  the  other.  Having  acquired  skill  at  this  short 
distance  let  the  two  experimenters,  equipped 
as  before,  take  up  positions  separated  by  a  dis¬ 
tance  of  two  or  three  miles  and  let  them  per¬ 
form  the  same  experiment  at  night,  noting  care¬ 
fully  whether  the  exposures  and  occultations 
occur  in  the  same  manner  as  at  short  distances; 
if  they  do,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the 
propagation  of  light  is  instantaneous;  but  if 
time  is  required  at  a  distance  of  three  miles 
which,  considering  the  going  of  one  light  and 
the  coming  of  the  other,  really  amounts  to  six, 
then  the  delay  ought  to  be  easily  observable. 
If  the  experiment  is  to  be  made  at  still  greater 
distances,  say  eight  or  ten  miles,  telescopes  may 
be  employed,  each  observer  adjusting  one  for 
himself  at  the  place  where  he  is  to  make  the 
experiment  at  night;  then  although  the  lights 
are  not  large  and  are  therefore  invisible  to  the 
naked  eye  at  so  great  a  distance,  they  can  read¬ 
ily  be  covered  and  uncovered  since  by  aid  of 
the  telescopes,  once  adjusted  and  fixed,  they 
will  become  easily  visible. 

Sagr.  This  experiment  strikes  me  as  a  clever 
and  reliable  invention.  But  tell  us  what  you 
conclude  from  the  results. 

Salv.  In  fact  I  have  tried  the  experiment 


only  at  a  short  distance,  less  than  a  mile,  from 
which  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  with  cer¬ 
tainty  whether  the  appearance  of  the  opposite 
light  was  instantaneous  or  not;  but  if  not  in¬ 
stantaneous  it  is  extraordinarily  rapid — I  should 
call  it  momentary;  and  for  the  present  I  should 
compare  it  to  motion  which  we  see  in  the  light¬ 
ning  flash  between  clouds  eight  or  ten  miles 
distant  from  us.  We  see  the  beginning  of  this 
light — I  might  say  its  head  and  source — located 
at  a  particular  place  among  the  clouds;  but  it 
immediately  spreads  to  the  surrounding  ones, 
which  seems  to  be  an  argument  that  at  least 
some  time  is  required  for  propagation;  for  if  the 
illumination  were  instantaneous  and  not  grad¬ 
ual,  we  should  not  be  able  to  distinguish  its 
origin — its  centre,  so  to  speak — from  its  out¬ 
lying  portions.  What  a  sea  we  are  gradually 
slipping  into  without  knowing  it!  With  vacua 
and  infinities  and  indivisibles  and  instantaneous 
motions,  shall  we  ever  be  able,  even  by  means 
of  a  thousand  discussions,  to  reach  dry  land } 

Sagr.  Really  these  matters  lie  far  beyond 
our  grasp.  Just  think;  when  we  seek  the  infinite 
among  numbers  we  find  it  in  unity;  that  which 
is  ever  divisible  is  derived  from  indivisibles; 
the  vacuum  is  found  inseparably  connected 
with  the  plenum;  indeed  the  views  commonly 
held  concerning  the  nature  of  these  matters  are 
so  reversed  that  even  the  circumference  of  a 
circle  turns  out  to  be  an  infinite  straight  line,  a 
fact  which,  if  my  memory  serves  me  correctly, 
you,  Salviati,  were  intending  to  demonstrate 
geometrically.  Please  therefore  proceed  with¬ 
out  further  digression. 

Salv.  I  am  at  your  service;  but  for  the  sake 
of  greater  clearness  let  me  first  demonstrate  the 
following  problem : 

Given  a  straight  line  divided  into  unequal  parts 
which  bear  to  each  other  any  ratio  whatever,  to 
describe  a  circle  such  that  two  straight  lines  drawn 
from  the  ends  of  the  given  line  to  any  point  on  the 
circumference  will  bear  to  each  other  the  saine 
ratio  as  the  two  parts  of  the  given  line,  thus  maJqng 
those  lines  which  are  drawn  from  the  same  termi¬ 
nal  points  homologous. 

Let  AB  represent  the  given  straight  line  di¬ 
vided  into  any  two  unequal  parts  by  the  point 
C;  the  problem  is  to  describe  a  circle  such  that 
two  straight  lines  drawn  from  the  terminal 
points,  A  and  B,  to  any  point  on  the  circum¬ 
ference  will  bear  to  each  other  the  same  ratio 
as  the  part  AC  bears  to  BC,  so  that  lines  drawn 
from  the  same  terminal  points  are  homologous. 
About  C  as  centre  describe  a  circle  having  the 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


150 

shorter  part  CB  of  the  given  line,  as  radius. 
Through  A  draw  a  straight  line  AD  which  shall 
be  tangent  to  the  circle  at  D  and  indefinitely 
prolonged  toward  E.  Draw  the  radius  CD 
which  will  be  perpendicular  to  .  IE.  At  B  erect 
a  perpendicular  to  AB;  this  perpendicular  will 


dividendo  AC  :  CF=  CB  :  BE,  or  AC  :  FG=^ 
CB  :  BF\  also  compone?ido  we  have  both 
AB  :  BG=CB  :  BEand^fG  :  GB=CF:FB  = 
AE:EB  =  AC:BC.  q.  e.  d. 

Take  now  any  other  point  in  the  circum¬ 
ference,  say  //,  where  the  two  lines  AH 
and  BH  intersect;  in  like  manner  we  shall 
have  AC  :CB  =  AH  :  HB.  Prolong  HB  un¬ 
til  it  meets  the  circumference  at  I  and  join 
IF;  and  since  we  have  already  found  that 
AB  :BG  =  CB  :  BE  it  follows  that  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB-BF  Is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
CB  BG  or  IB  BH.  Hence  AB  :  B//  = 
IB  :  BE.  But  the  angles  at  B  are  equal  and 
therefore  AH  :HB=^  IF :  FB  =  EF  :  FB  = 
AE  :  EB. 

Besides,  I  may  add,  that  it  is  impossible 
for  lines  which  maintain  this  same  ratio  and 
which  are  drawn  from  the  terminal  points, 
A  and  B,  to  meet  at  any  point  either  inside 
or  outside  the  circle,  CEG.  For  suppose  this 
were  possible;  let  AL  and  BL  be  two  such 
lines  intersecting  at  the  point  L  outside  the 
circle :  prolong  LB  till  it  meets  the  circumference 
at  Mand  join  ME.  If  AL:BL=  AC:  BC==  MF : 
FBy  then  we  shall  have  two  triangles  ALB  and 
MEB  which  have  the  sides  about  the  two  angles 
proportional,  the  angles  at  the  vertex,  B,  equal, 
and  the  two  remaining  angles,  FMB  and  LABy 
less  than  right  angles  (because  the  right  angle  at 
M  has  for  its  base  the  entire  diameter  CG  and 
not  merely  a  part  BE:  and  the  other  angle  at  the 
point  A  is  acute  because  the  line  ALy  the  homolo- 
gue  of  ACy  is  greater  than  BL,  the  homologue 
of  BC).  From  this  it  follows  that  the  triangles 
ABL  and  MBF  are  similar  and  therefore  AB  : 
BL  =  MB  :BFy  making  the  rectangle  AB  BF^ 
MB-BL;  but  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the 
rectangle  AB  BF  is  equal  to  CB  BG;  whence  it 
would  follow  that  the  rectangle  MB- BL  is  equal 
to  the  rectangle  CB’BG  which  is  impossible; 
therefore  the  intersection  cannot  fall  outside  the 
circle.  And  in  like  manner  we  can  show  that  it 
cannot  fall  inside;  hence  all  these  intersections 
fall  on  the  circumference. 

But  now  it  is  time  for  us  to  go  back  and  grant 
the  request  of  Simplicio  by  showing  him  that  it 
is  not  only  not  impossible  to  resolve  a  line  into 
an  infinite  numberof  points  but  that  this  isquite 
as  easy  as  to  divide  it  into  its  finite  parts.  This 
I  will  do  under  the  following  condition  which 
I  am  sure,  Simplicio,  you  will  not  deny  me, 
namely,  that  you  will  not  require  me  to  sep¬ 
arate  the  points,  one  from  the  other,  and  show 
them  to  you,  one  by  one,  on  this  paper;  for  I 
should  be  content  that  you,  without  separating 


Fig.  8 


intersect  AE  at  some  point  since  the  angle  at  A 
is  acute;  call  this  point  of  intersection  E,  and 
from  it  draw  a  perpendicular  to  AE  which  will 
intersect  AB  prolonged  in  E.  Now  I  say  the  two 
straight  lines  FE  and  EC  are  equal.  For  if  we 
join  E  and  C,  we  shall  have  two  triangles,  DEC 
and  BECy  in  which  the  two  sides  of  the  one, 
DE  and  EC,  are  equal  to  the  two  sides  of  the 
other,  BE  and  EC,  both  DE  and  EB  being  tan¬ 
gents  to  the  circle  DB  while  the  bases  DC  and 
CB  are  likewise  equal;  hence  the  two  angles, 
DEC  and  BEC,  will  be  equal.  Now  since  the 
angle  BCE  differs  from  a  right  angle  by  the 
angle  CEB,  and  the  angle  CEE  also  differs 
from  a  right  angle  by  the  angle  CED,  and 
since  these  differences  are  equal,  it  follows 
that  the  angle  ECE  is  equal  to  CEE;  conse¬ 
quently  the  sides  EE  and  EC  are  equal.  If  we 
describe  a  circle  with  F  as  centre  and  EE  as 
radius  it  will  pass  through  the  point  C;  let  CEG 
be  such  a  circle.  This  is  the  circle  sought,  for  if 
we  draw  lines  from  the  terminal  points  A  and 
B  to  any  point  on  its  circumference  they  will 
bear  to  each  other  the  same  ratio  as  the  two 
portions  AC  and  BC  which  meet  at  the  point 
C.  This  is  manifest  in  the  case  of  the  two  lines 
AE  and  BE,  meeting  at  the  point  E,  because  the 
angle  E  of  the  triangle  AEB  is  bisected  by  the 
line  CE,and  therefore  AC  :  CB  =  AE  :  BE.  The 
same  may  be  proved  of  the  two  lines  AG  and 
BG  terminating  in  the  point  G.  For  since  the 
triangles  AFE  and  EEB  are  similar,  we  have 
AF:FE=EF:  EB,  or  AF  iFC^CF  :  EB,  and 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


the  four  or  six  parts  of  a  line  from  one  another, 
should  show  me  the  marked  divisions  or  at 
most  that  you  should  fold  them  at  angles  form¬ 
ing  a  square  or  a  hexagon :  for,  then,  I  am  certain 
you  would  consider  the  division  distinctly  and 
actually  accomplished. 

Simp.  I  certainly  should. 

Salv.  If  now  the  change  which  takes  place 
when  you  bend  a  line  at  angles  so  as  to  form 
now  a  square,  now  an  octagon,  now  a  polygon 
of  forty,  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  angles,  is  suf¬ 
ficient  to  bring  into  actuality  the  four,  eight, 
forty,  hundred,  and  thousand  parts  which,  ac¬ 
cording  to  you,  existed  at  first  only  potentially 
in  the  straight  line,  may  I  not  say,  with  equal 
right,  that,  when  I  have  bent  the  straight  line 
into  a  polygon  having  an  infinite  number  of 
sides,  /.  e.y  into  a  circle,  I  have  reduced  to  actu¬ 
ality  that  infinite  number  of  parts  which  you 
claimed,  while  it  was  straight,  were  contained 
in  it  only  potentially?  Nor  can  one  deny  that 
the  division  into  an  infinite  number  of  points  is 
just  as  truly  accomplished  as  the  one  into  four 
parts  when  the  square  is  formed  or  into  a  thou¬ 
sand  parts  when  the  millagon  is  formed;  for  in 
such  a  division  the  same  conditions  are  satisfied 
as  in  the  case  of  a  polygon  of  a  thousand  or  a 
hundred  thousand  sides.  Such  a  polygon  laid 
upon  a  straight  line  touches  it  with  one  of  its 
sides,  /.  e.y  with  one  of  its  hundred  thousand 
parts;  while  the  circle  which  is  a  polygon  of  an 
infinite  number  of  sides  touches  the  same 
straight  line  with  one  of  its  sides  which  is  a 
single  point  different  from  all  its  neighbors  and 
therefore  separate  and  distinct  in  no  less  degree 
than  is  one  side  of  a  polygon  from  the  other 
sides.  And  just  as  a  polygon,  when  rolled  along 
a  plane,  marks  out  upon  this  plane,  by  the  suc¬ 
cessive  contacts  of  its  sides,  a  straight  line  equal 
to  its  perimeter,  so  the  circle  rolled  upon  such 
a  plane  also  traces  by  its  infinite  succession  of 
contacts  a  straight  line  equal  in  length  to  its 
own  circumference.  I  am  willing,  Simplicio,  at 
the  outset,  to  grant  to  the  Peripatetics  the  truth 
of  their  opinion  that  a  continuous  quantity  is 
divisible  only  into  parts  which  are  still  further 
divisible  so  that  however  far  the  division  and 
subdivision  be  continued  no  end  will  be  reached; 
but  I  am  not  so  certain  that  they  will  concede 
to  me  that  none  of  these  divisions  of  theirs  can 
be  a  final  one,  as  is  surely  the  fact,  because  there 
always  remains  “another”;  the  final  and  ulti¬ 
mate  division  is  rather  one  which  resolves  a 
continuous  quantity  into  an  infinite  number  of 
indivisible  quantities,  a  result  which  I  grant 
can  never  be  reached  by  successive  division  into 


an  ever-increasing  number  of  parts.  But  if  they 
employ  the  method  which  I  propose  for  sepa¬ 
rating  and  resolving  the  whole  of  infinity,  at  a 
single  stroke  (an  artifice  which  surely  ought  not 
to  be  denied  me),  I  think  that  they  would  be 
contented  to  admit  that  a  continuous  quantity 
is  built  up  out  of  absolutely  indivisible  atoms, 
especially  since  this  method,  perhaps  better 
than  any  other,  enables  us  to  avoid  many  in¬ 
tricate  labyrinths,  such  as  cohesion  in  solids,  al¬ 
ready  mentioned,  and  the  question  of  expansion 
and  contraction,  without  forcing  upon  us  the 
objectional  admission  of  empty  spaces  which 
carries  with  it  the  penetrability  of  bodies.  Both 
of  these  objections,  it  appears  to  me,  are  avoided 
if  we  accept  the  above-mentioned  view  of  indi¬ 
visible  constituents. 

Simp.  I  hardly  know  what  the  Peripatetics 
would  say  since  the  views  advanced  by  you 
would  strike  them  as  mostly  new,  and  as  such 
we  must  consider  them.  It  is  however,  not  un¬ 
likely  that  they  would  find  answers  and  solu¬ 
tions  for  these  problems  which  I,  for  want  of 
time  and  critical  ability,  am  at  present  unable 
to  solve.  Leaving  this  to  one  side  for  the  mo¬ 
ment,  I  should  like  to  hear  how  the  introduc¬ 
tion  of  these  indivisible  quantities  helps  us  to 
understand  contraction  and  expansion  avoiding 
at  the  same  time  the  vacuum  and  the  penetra¬ 
bility  of  bodies. 

Sagr.  I  also  shall  listen  with  keen  interest  to 
this  same  matter  which  is  far  from  clear  in  my 
mind;  provided  I  am  allowed  to  hear  what,  a 
moment  ago,  Simplicio  suggested  we  omit, 
namely,  the  reasons  which  Aristotle  offers 
against  the  existence  of  the  vacuum  and  the  ar¬ 
guments  which  you  must  advance  in  rebuttal. 

Salv.  I  will  do  both.  And  first,  just  as,  for  the 
production  of  expansion,  we  employ  the  line  de¬ 
scribed  by  the  small  circle  during  one  rotation 
of  the  large  one — a  line  greater  than  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  small  circle — so,  in  order  to  ex¬ 
plain  contraction,  we  point  out  that,  during 
each  rotation  of  the  smaller  circle,  the  larger 
one  describes  a  straight  line  which  is  shorter 
than  its  circumference. 

For  the  better  understanding  of  this  we  pro¬ 
ceed  to  the  consideration  of  what  happens  in 
the  case  of  polygons.  Employing  a  figure  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  earlier  one,  construct  the  two  hexa¬ 
gons,  ABC  and  HIK,  about  the  common  centre 
L,  and  let  them  roll  along  the  parallel  lines 
HOM  and  ABc,  Now  holding  the  vertex  1  fixed, 
allow  the  smaller  polygon  to  rotate  until  the 
side  IK  lies  upon  the  parallel,  during  which  mo¬ 
tion  the  point  K  will  describe  the  arc  KMy  and 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


the  side  Kl  will  coincide  with  IM,  Let  us  see 
what,  in  the  meantime,  the  side  CB  of  the  larger 
polygon  has  been  doing.  Since  the  rotation  is 
about  the  point  /,  the  terminal  point  B,  of  the 
line  IB,  moving  backwards,  will  describe  the 
arc  Bb  underneath  the  parallel  cA  so  that  when 
the  side  KI  coincides  with  the  line  Ml,  the  side 
BC  will  coincide  with  be,  having  advanced  only 
through  the  distance  Be,  but  having  retreated 
through  a  portion  of  the  line  BA  which  subtends 
the  arc  Bb,  If  we  allow  the  rotation  of  the  small¬ 
er  polygon  to  go  on  it  will  traverse  and  describe 
along  its  parallel  a  line  equal  to  its  perimeter; 
while  the  la!rger  one  will  traverse  and  describe 
a  line  less  than  its  perimeter  by  as  many  times 
the  length  bB  as  there  are  sides  less  one;  this  line 
is  approximately  equal  to  that  described  by  the 
smaller  polygon  exceeding  it  only  by  the  dis¬ 
tance  bB,  Here  now  we  see,  without  any  diffi¬ 


culty,  why  the  larger  polygon,  when  carried  by 
the  smaller,  does  not  measure  off  with  its  sides 
a  line  longer  than  that  traversed  by  the  smaller 
one;  this  is  because  a  portion  of  each  side  is 
superposed  upon  its  immediately  preceding 
neighbour. 

Let  us  next  consider  two  circles,  having  a 
common  centre  at  A,  and  lying  upon  their  re¬ 
spective  parallels,  the  smaller  being  tangent  to 
its  parallel  at  the  point  5;  the  larger,  at  the  point 


C  Here  when  the  small  circle  commences  to 
roll  the  point  B  does  not  remain  at  rest  for  a 
while  so  as  to  allow  BC  to  move  backward  and 
carry  with  it  the  point  C,  as  happened  in  the 
case  of  the  polygons,  where  the  point  /  remained 
fixed  until  the  side  KI  coincided  with  MI  and 
the  line  IB  carried  the  terminal  point  B  back¬ 
ward  as  far  as  b,  so  that  the  side  BC  fell  upon 
be,  thus  superposing  upon  the  line  BA,  the  por¬ 
tion  Bb,  and  advancing  by  an  amount  Be,  equal 
to  MI,  that  is,  to  one  side  of  the  smaller  polygon. 
On  account  of  these  superpositions,  which  are 
the  excesses  of  the  sides  of  the  larger  over  the 
smaller  polygon,  each  net  advance  is  equal  to 
one  side  of  the  smaller  polygon  and,  during 
one  complete  rotation,  these  amount  to  a 
straight  line  equal  in  length  to  the  perimeter 
of  the  smaller  polygon. 

But  now  reasoning  in  the  same  way  concern¬ 
ing  the  circles,  we  must  observe  that  whereas 
the  number  of  sides  in  any  polygon  is  comprised 
within  a  certain  limit,  the  number  of  sides  in  a 
circle  is  infinite;  the  former  are  finite  and  divisi¬ 
ble;  the  latter  infinite  and  indivisible.  In  the 
case  of  the  polygon,  the  vertices  remain  at  rest 
during  an  interval  of  time  which  bears  to  the 
period  of  one  complete  rotation  the  same  ratio 
which  one  side  bears  to  the  perimeter;  likewise, 
in  the  case  of  the  circles,  the  delay  of  each  of  the 
infinite  number  of  vertices  is  merely  instantane¬ 
ous,  because  an  instant  is  such  a  fraction  of  a  fi¬ 
nite  interval  as  a  point  is  of  a  line  which  con¬ 
tains  an  infinite  number  of  points.  The  retro¬ 
gression  of  the  sides  of  the  larger  polygon  is  not 
equal  to  the  length  of  one  of  its  sides  but  merely 
to  the  excess  of  such  a  side  over  one  side  of  the 
smaller  polygon,  the  net  advance  being  equal  to 
this  smaller  side;  but  in  the  circle,  the. point  or 
side  C,  during  the  instantaneous  rest  of  B,  re¬ 
cedes  by  an  amount  equal  to  its  excess  over  the 
side  B,  making  a  net  progress  equal  to  B  itself. 
In  short  the  infinite  number  of  indivisible  sides 
of  the  greater  circle  with  their  infinite  number 
of  indivisible  retrogressions,  made  during  the 
infinite  number  of  instantaneous  delays  of  the 
infinite  number  of  vertices  of  the  smaller  circle, 
together  with  the  infinite  number  of  progres¬ 
sions,  equal  to  the  infinite  number  of  sides  in 
the  smaller  circle — all  these,  I  say,  add  up  to  a 
line  equal  to  that  described  by  the  smaller 
circle,  a  line  which  contains  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  infinitely  small  superpositions,  thus 
bringing  about  a  thickening  or  contraction 
without  any  overlapping  or  interpenetration 
of  finite  parts.  This  result  could  not  be  obtained 
in  the  case  of  a  line  divided  into  finite  parts 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


such  as  is  the  perimeter  of  any  polygon,  which 
when  laid  out  in  a  straight  line  cannot  be  short¬ 
ened  except  by  the  overlapping  and  interpen¬ 
etration  of  its  sides.  This  contraction  of  an 
infinite  number  of  infinitely  small  parts  with¬ 
out  the  interpenetration  or  overlapping  of  fi¬ 
nite  parts  and  the  previously  mentioned  ex¬ 
pansion  of  an  infinite  number  of  indivisible 
parts  by  the  interposition  of  indivisible  vacua 
is,  in  my  opinion,  the  most  that  can  be  said  con¬ 
cerning  the  contractionand  rarefaction  of  bodies, 
unless  we  give  up  the  impenetrability  of  matter 
and  introduce  empty  spaces  of  finite  size.  If 
you  find  anything  here  that  you  consider  worth 
while,  pray  use  it;  if  not  regard  it,  together 
with  my  remarks,  as  idle  talk;  but  this  remem¬ 
ber,  we  are  dealing  with  the  infinite  and  the  in¬ 
divisible. 

Sagr.  I  frankly  confess  that  your  idea  is  subtle 
and  that  it  impresses  me  as  new  and  strange; 
but  whether,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  nature  actually 
behaves  according  to  such  a  law  I  am  unable  to 
determine;  however,  until  I  find  a  more  satis¬ 
factory  explanation  I  shall  hold  fast  to  this  one. 
Perhaps  Simplicio  can  tell  us  something  which  I 
have  not  yet  heard,  namely,  how  to  explain  the 
explanation  which  the  philosophers  have  given 
of  this  abstruse  matter;  for,  indeed,  all  that  I 
have  hitherto  read  concerning  contraction  is  so 
dense  and  that  concerning  expansion  so  thin  that 
my  poor  brain  can  neither  penetrate  the  former 
nor  grasp  the  latter. 

Simp.  I  am  all  at  sea  and  find  difficulties  in 
following  either  path,  especially  this  new  one; 
because  according  to  this  theory  an  ounce  of 
gold  might  be  rarefied  and  expanded  until  its 
size  would  exceed  that  of  the  earth,  while  the 
earth,  in  turn,  might  be  condensed  and  reduced 
until  it  would  become  smaller  than  a  walnut, 
something  which  I  do  not  believe;  nor  do  I  be¬ 
lieve  that  you  believe  it.  The  arguments  and 
demonstrations  which  you  have  advanced  are 
mathematical,  abstract,  and  far  removed  from 
concrete  matter;  and  I  do  not  believe  that  when 
applied  to  the  physical  and  natural  world  these 
laws  will  hold. 

Salv.  I  am  not  able  to  render  the  invisible 
visible,  nor  do  I  think  that  you  will  ask  this. 
But  now  that  you  mention  gold,  do  not  our 
senses  tell  us  that  that  metal  can  be  immensely 
expanded  ?  I  do  not  know  whether  you  have  ob¬ 
served  the  method  employed  by  those  who  are 
skilled  in  drawing  gold  wire,  of  which  really 
only  the  surface  is  gold,  the  inside  material  be¬ 
ing  silver.  The  way  they  draw  it  is  as  follows: 
they  take  a  cylinder  or,  if  you  please,  a  rod  of 


silver,  about  half  a  cubit  long  and  three  or  four 
times  as  wide  as  one’s  thumb;  this  rod  they  cover 
with  gold-leaf  which  is  so  thin  that  it  almost 
floats  in  air,  putting  on  not  more  than  eight 
or  ten  thicknesses.  Once  gilded  they  begin  to 
pull  it,  with  great  force,  through  the  holes  of  a 
draw-plate;  again  and  again  it  is  made  to  pass 
through  smaller  and  smaller  holes,  until,  after 
very  many  passages,  it  is  reduced  to  the  fineness 
of  a  lady’s  hair,  or  perhaps  even  finer;  yet  the 
surface  remains  gilded.  Imagine  now  how  the 
substance  of  this  gold  has  been  expanded  and  to 
what  fineness  it  has  been  reduced. 

Simp.  I  do  not  see  that  this  process  would  pro¬ 
duce,  as  a  consequence,  that  marvellous  thin¬ 
ning  of  the  substance  of  the  gold  which  you  sug¬ 
gest:  first,  because  the  original  gilding  consist¬ 
ing  of  ten  layers  of  gold-leaf  has  a  sensible  thick¬ 
ness;  secondly,  because  in  drawing  out  the  silver 
it  grows  in  length  but  at  the  same  time  dimin¬ 
ishes  proportionally  in  thickness;  and,  since  one 
dimension  thus  compensates  the  other,  the  area 
will  not  be  so  increased  as  to  make  it  necessary 
during  the  process  of  gilding  to  reduce  the  thin¬ 
ness  of  the  gold  beyond  tha  t  of  the  original  leaves. 

Salv.  You  are  greatly  mistaken,  Simplicio, 
because  the  surface  increases  directly  as  the 
square  root  of  the  length,  a  fact  which  I  can 
demonstrate  geometrically. 

Sagr,  Please  give  us  the  demonstration  not 
only  for  my  own  sake  but  also  for  Simplicio  pro¬ 
vided  you  think  we  can  understand  it. 

Salv.  I’ll  see  if  I  can  recall  it  on  the  spur  of 
the  moment.  At  the  outset,  it  is  clear  that  the 
original  thick  rod  of  silver  and  the  wire  drawn 
out  to  an  enormous  length  are  two  cylinders  of 
the  same  volume,  since  they  are  the  same  body 
of  silver.  So  that,  if  I  determine  the  ratio  be¬ 
tween  the  surfaces  of  cylinders  of  the  same 
volume,  the  problem  will  be  solved.  I  say  then. 
The  areas  of  cylinders  of  equal  volumes,  neglect¬ 
ing  the  bases,  bear  to  each  other  a  ratio  which  is 
the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  their  lengths. 

Take  two  cylinders  of  equal  volume  having 
the  altitudes  AB  and  CD,  between  which  the 
line  E  is  a  mean  proportional.  Then  I  claim  that, 
omitting  the  bases  of  each  cylinder,  the  surface 
of  the  cylinder  AB  is  to  that  of  the  cylinder  CD 
as  the  length  AB  is  to  the  line  E,  that  is,  as  the 
square  root  of  AB  is  to  the  square  root  of  CD, 
Now  cut  off  the  cylinder  AB  at  F  so  that  the 
altitude  AF  is  equal  to  CD,  Then  since  the  bases 
of  cylinders  of  equal  volume  bear  to  one  another 
the  inverse  ratio  of  their  heights,  it  follows  that 
the  area  of  the  circular  base  of  the  cylinder  CD 
will  be  to  the  area  of  the  circular  base  oi  AB 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


154 

as  the  altitude  BA  is  to  DC:  moreover,  since 
circles  are  to.  one  another  as  the  squares  of 
their  diameters,  the  said  squares  will  be  to  each 
other  as  BA  is  to  CD.  But  BA  is  to  CD  as 
the  square  of  BA  is  to  the 
square  of  E:  and,  therefore, 
these  foursquares  will  form 
a  proportion;  and  likewise 
their  sides;  so  the  line  AB 
is  to  E  as  the  diameter  of 
circle  C  is  to  the  diameter 
of  the  circle  A.  But  the 
diameters  are  proportion¬ 
al  to  the  circumferences 
and  the  circumferences  are 
proportional  to  the  areas  of 
cylinders  of  equal  height; 
hence  the  line  AB  is  to  E  as 
the  surface  of  the  cylinder 
CD  is  to  the  surface  of  the  cylinder  AF.  Now 
since  the  height  AF  is  \  oAB  as  the  surface  of 
is  to  the  surface  of  AB;  and  since  the  height  AB 
is  to  the  line  F as  the  surface  CD  is  to  AFy  it  fol- 
lo^^  s,  ex  oeqtiali  in  proportione  pertiirbata^y  that 
the  height  /^F  is  to  Fas  the  surface  CD  is  to  the 
surface  AB^  and  convertendo,  the  surface  of  the 
cylinder  AB  is  to  the  surface  of  the  cylinder 
CD  as  the  line  F  is  to  AF,  i.  e.,  to  CD,  or  as  AB 
is  to  F  which  is  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of 
AB  to  CD.  Q.  E.  D. 

If  now  we  apply  these  results  to  the  case  in 
hand,  and  assume  that  the  silver  cylinder  at  the 
time  of  gilding  had  a  length  of  only  half  a  cubit 
and  a  thickness  three  or  four  times  that  of  one’s 
thumb,  we  shall  find  that,  when  the  wire  has 
been  reduced  to  the  fineness  of  a  hair  and  has 
been  drawn  out  to  a  length  of  twenty  thousand 
cubits  (and  perhaps  more),  the  area  of  its  sur¬ 
face  will  have  been  increased  not  less  than  two 
hundred  times.  Consequently  the  ten  leaves  of 
gold  which  were  laid  on  have  been  extended 
over  a  surface  two  hundred  times  greater,  assur¬ 
ing  us  that  the  thickness  of  the  gold  which  now 
covers  the  surface  of  so  many  cubits  of  wire  can¬ 
not  be  greater  than  one  twentieth  that  of  an  or¬ 
dinary  leaf  of  beaten  gold.  Consider  now  what 
degree  of  fineness  it  must  have  and  whether  one 
could  conceive  it  to  happen  in  any  other  way 
than  by  enormous  expansion  of  parts:  consider 
also  whether  this  experiment  does  not  suggest 
that  physical  bodies  are  composed  of  infinitely 
small  indivisible  particles,  a  view  which  is  sup¬ 
ported  by  other  more  striking  and  conclusive 
examples. 

Sagr.  This  demonstration  is  so  beautiful  that, 

^  See  Euclid,  V.  20. 


even  if  it  docs  not  huN  c  the  cogency  originally 
intended, — although  to  my  mind,  it  is  very  force¬ 
ful — the  short  time  devoted  to  it  has  neverthe¬ 
less  been  most  happily  spent. 

Salv.  Since  you  are  so  fond  of  these  geometri¬ 
cal  demonstrations,  which  carry  with  them  dis¬ 
tinct  gain,  I  will  give  you  a  companion  theorem 
which  answers  an  extremely  interesting  quer\'. 
We  have  seen  above  what  relations  hold  between 
equal  cylinders  of  different  height  or  length :  let 
us  now  see  what  holds  when  the  cylinders  are 
equal  in  area  but  unequal  in  height,  understand¬ 
ing  area  to  include  the  curved  surface,  but  not 
the  upper  and  lower  bases.  The  theorem  is: 

The  volumes  of  right  cylinders  having  equal 

curved  surfaces  are  irwersely  proportional  to  their 

altitudes. 

Let  the  surfaces  of  the  two  cylinders,  ^4Fand 
CF,  be  equal  but  let  the  height  of  the  latter, 
CD,  be  greater  than  that  of  the  former,  AB: 
then  I  say  that  the  volume  of  the  cylinder  AE  is 
to  that  of  the  cylinder  CF  as  the  height  CD  is  to 
AB.  Now  since  the  surface  of  CF  is  equal  to  the 
surface  of  AE,  it  follows  that  the  volume  of  CF 
is  less  than  that  of  AE;  for,  if  they  were  equal, 
the  surface  of  CF  would,  by  the  preceding  prop¬ 
osition,  exceed  that  of  ^F,  and  the  excess  would 
be  so  much  the  greater  if  the  volume  of  the  cyl¬ 
inder  CF  were  greater  than  that  of  AE.  Let  us 
now  take  a  cylinder  ID  having  a  volume  equal 
to  that  oiAE:  then,  according  to  the  preceding 
theorem,  the  surface  of  the  cylinder  ID  is  to  the 
surface  of  AE  as  the  altitude  IF  is  to  the  mean 
proportional  between  /Fand  AB.  But  since  one 


Fig.  ii 


Fig.  10 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


datum  of  the  problem  is  that  the  surface  of  AE 
is  equal  to  that  of  CE,  and  since  the  surface  ID 
is  to  the  surface  CF  as  the  altitude  IF  is  to  the 
altitude  CD,  it  follows  that  CD  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  /Fand  AB,  Not  only  so,  but 
since  the  volume  of  the  cylinder  ID  is  equal  to 
that  of  AE»  each  will  bear  the  same  ratio  to  the 
volume  of  the  cylinder  CF;  but  the  volume  ID 
is  to  the  volume  CF  as  the  altitude  IF  is  to  the 
altitude  CD;  hence  the  volume  of  AE  is  to  the 
volume  of  CF  as  the  length  IF  is  to  the  length 
CD,  that  is,  as  the  length  CD  is  to  the  length 
AB,  Q.  E.  D. 

This  explains  a  phenomenon  upon  which  the 
common  people  always  look  with  wonder,  name¬ 
ly,  if  we  have  a  piece  of  stuff  which  has  one  side 
longer  than  the  other,  we  can  make  from  it  a 
cornsack,  using  the  customary  wooden  base, 
which  will  hold  more  when  the  short  side  of  the 
cloth  is  used  for  the  height  of  the  sack  and  the 
long  side  is  wrapped  around  the  wooden  base, 
than  with  the  alternative  arrangement.  So  that, 
for  instance,  from  a  piece  of  cloth  which  is  six 
cubits  on  one  side  and  twelve  on  the  other,  a 
sack  can  be  made  which  will  hold  more  when 
the  side  of  twelve  cubits  is  wrapped  around  the 
wooden  base,  leaving  the  sack  six  cubits  high 
than  when  the  six  cubit  side  is  put  around  the 
base  making  the  sack  twelve  cubits  high.  From 
what  has  been  proven  above  we  learn  not  only 
the  general  fact  that  one  sack  holds  more  than 
the  other,  but  we  also  get  specific  and  particular 
information  as  to  how  much  more,  namely,  just 
in  proportion  as  the  altitude  of  the  sack  dimin¬ 
ishes  the  contents  increase  and  vice  versa.  Thus  if 
we  use  the  figures  given  which  make  the  cloth 
twice  as  long  as  wide  and  if  we  use  the  long  side 
for  the  seam,  the  volume  of  the  sack  will  be  just 
one-half  as  great  as  with  the  opposite  arrange¬ 
ment.  Likewise  if  we  have  a  piece  of  matting 
which  measures  7  x  25  cubits  and  make  from  it 
a  basket,  the  contents  of  the  basket  will,  when 
the  seam  is  lengthwise,  be  seven  as  compared 
with  twenty-five  when  the  seam  runs  endwise. 

Sagr.  It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  we  con¬ 
tinue  thus  to  acquire  new  and  useful  informa¬ 
tion.  But  as  regards  the  subject  just  discussed,  I 
really  believe  that,  among  those  who  are  not  al¬ 
ready  familiar  with  geometry,  you  would  scarce¬ 
ly  find  four  persons  in  a  hundred  who  would  not, 
at  first  sight,  make  the  mistake  of  believing  that 
bodies  having  equal  surfaces  would  be  equal  in 
other  respects.  Speaking  of  areas,  the  same  error 
is  made  when  one  attempts,  as  often  happens,  to 
determine  the  sizes  of  various  cities  by  measur¬ 
ing  their  boundary  lines,  forgetting  that  the  cir¬ 


cuit  of  one  may  be  equal  to  the  circuit  of  an¬ 
other  while  the  area  of  the  one  is  much  greater 
than  that  of  the  other.  And  this  is  true  not  only 
in  the  case  of  irregular,  but  also  of  regular  sur¬ 
faces,  where  the  polygon  having  the  greater 
number  of  sides  always  contains  a  larger  area 
than  the  one  with  the  less  number  of  sides,  so 
that  finally  the  circle  which  is  a  polygon  of  an 
infinite  number  of  sides  contains  the  largest  area 
of  all  polygons  of  equal  perimeter.  I  remember 
with  particular  pleasure  having  seen  this  dem¬ 
onstration  when  I  was  studying  the  sphere  of 
Sacrobosco^  with  the  aid  of  a  learned  commen¬ 
tary. 

Salv.  Very  true!  I  too  came  across  the  same 
passage  which  suggested  to  me  a  method  of  show¬ 
ing  how,  by  a  single  short  demonstration,  one 
can  prove  that  the  circle  has  the  largest  content 
of  all  regular  isoperimetric  figures;  and  that,  of 
other  figures,  the  one  which  has  the  krger  num¬ 
ber  of  sides  contains  a  greater  area  than  that 
which  has  the  smaller  number. 

Sagr.  Being  exceedingly  fond  of  choice  and 
uncommon  propositions,  I  beseech  you  to  let  us 
have  your  demonstration. 

Salv.  I  can  do  this  in  a  few  words  by  proving 
the  following  theorem : 

The  area  of  a  circle  is  a  mean  proportional  be' 
tween  any  two  regular  and  similar  polygons  of 
which  one  circumscribes  it  and  the  other  is  iso' 
perimetric  with  it.  In  addition^  the  area  of  the 
circle  is  less  than  that  of  any  circumscribed  poly- 
gon  and  greater  than  that  of  any  isoperimetric 
polygon.  And  further,  of  these  circumscribed 
polygons,  the  one  which  has  the  greater  number 
of  sides  is  smaller  than  the  one  which  has  a  less 
number;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  that  isoperF 
metric  polygon  which  has  the  greater  number  of 
sides  is  the  larger. 

Let  A  and  B  be  two  similar  polygons  of  which 
A  circumscribes  the  given  circle  and  B  is  iso¬ 
perimetric  with  it.  The  area  of  the  circle  will 
then  be  a  mean  proportional  between  the  areas 
of  the  polygons.  For  if  we  indicate  the  radius  of 
the  circle  by  and  if  we  remember  that  the 
area  of  the  circle  is  equal  to  that  of  a  right- 
angled  triangle  in  which  one  of  the  sides  about 
the  right  angle  is  equal  to  the  radius,  AC,  and 
the  other  to  the  circumference;  and  if  likewise 
we  remember  that  the  area  of  the  polygon  A  is 
equal  to  the  area  of  a  right-angled  triangle  one 
of  whose  sides  about  the  right  angle  has  the  same 
length  as  AC  and  the  other  is  equal  to  the  per¬ 
imeter  of  the  polygon  itself;  it  is  then  manifest 

^  John  of  Holywood,  English  mathematician,  was 
known  as  Johannes  de  Sacro  Bosco. — Ed. 


156 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


that  the  circumscribed  polygon  bears  to  the  cir- 
cle  the  same  ratio  which  its  perimeter  bears  to 
the  circumference  of  the  circle,  or  to  the  perb 
meter  of  the  polygon  B  which  is,  by  hypothesis, 
equal  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle.  But 
since  the  polygons  A  and  B  are  similar  their 
areas  are  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  their 
perimeters;  hence  the  area  of  the  circle  ^  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  the  areas  of  the 
two  polygons  A  and  B,  And  since  the  area  of 
the  polygon  A  is  greater  than  that  of  the  circle 
A,  it  is  clear  that  the  area  of  the  circle  A  is 
greater  than  that  of  the  isoperimetric  polygon 
By  and  is  therefore  the  greatest  of  all  regular 
polygons  having  the  same  perimeter  as  the 
circle. 

We  now  demonstrate  the  remaining  portion 
of  the  theorem,  which  is  to  prove  that,  in  the 
case  of  polygons  circumscribing  a  given  circle, 
the  one  having  the  smaller  number  of  sides  has 
a  larger  area  than  one  having  a  greater  number 
of  sides;  but  that  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  case 
of  isoperimetric  polygons,  the  one  having  the 
more  sides  has  a  larger  area  than  the  one  with 
less  sides.  To  the  circle  which  has  O  for  centre 
and  OA  for  radius  draw  the  tangent  AD;  and 
on  this  tangent  lay  off,  say,  AD  which  shall 
represent  one-half  of  the  side  of  a  circumscribed 
pentagon  and  which  shall  represent  one-half 
of  the  side  of  a  heptagon;  draw  the  straight 
lines  OGC  and  OFD;  then  with  O  as  a  centre 
and  OC  as  radius  draw  the  arc  ECI.  Now  since 
the  triangle  DOC  is  greater  than  the  sector  EOC 
and  since  the  sector  COI  is  greater  than  the 
triangle  COAy  it  follows  that  the  triangle  DOC 
bears  to  the  triangle  CO  A  a  greater  ratio  than 
the  sector  EOC  bears  to  the  sector  GO/,  that  is, 
than  the  sector  FOG  bears  to  the  sector  GOA. 
Hence,  componendo  et  permiitandoy  the  triangle 
DOA  bears  to  the  sector  FOA  a  greater  ratio 
than  that  which  the  triangle  CO  A  bears  to  the 
sector  GOAy  and  also  10  such  triangles  DOA 
bear  to  10  such  sectors  FOA  a  greater  ratio  than 
14  such  triangles  CO  A  bear  to  14  such  sectors 
GOAy  that  is  to  say,  the  circumscribed  penta¬ 


gon  bears  to  the  circle  a  greater  ratio  than  does 
the  heptagon.  Hence  the  pentagon  exceeds  the 
heptagon  in  area. 

But  now  let  us  assume  that  both  the  hepta¬ 
gon  and  the  pentagon  have  the  same  perimeter 
as  that  of  a  given  circle.  Then  I  say  the  hepta¬ 
gon  will  contain  a  larger  area  than  the  penta¬ 
gon.  For  since  the  area  of  the  circle  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  areas  of  the  circumscribed 
and  of  the  isoperimetric  pentagons,  and  since 
likewise  it  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the 
circumscribed  and  isoperimetric  heptagons, 
and  since  also  we  have  proved  that  the  circum¬ 
scribed  pentagon  is  larger  than  the  circum¬ 
scribed  heptagon,  it  follows  that  this  circum¬ 
scribed  pentagon  bears  to  the  circle  a  larger 
ratio  than  does  the  heptagon,  that  is,  the  circle 
will  bear  to  its  isoperimetric  pentagon  a  greater 
ratio  than  to  its  isoperimetric  heptagon.  Hence 
the  pentagon  is  smaller  than  its  isoperimetric 
heptagon.  q.  e.  d. 

Sagr.  a  very  clever  and  elegant  demonstra¬ 
tion  !  But  how  did  we  come  to  plunge  into  ge¬ 
ometry  while  discussing  the  objections  urged 
by  Simplicio,  objections  of  great  moment,  es¬ 
pecially  that  one  referring  to  density  which 
strikes  me  as  particularly  difficult? 

Salv.  If  contraction  and  expansion  consist  in 
contrary  motions,  one  ought  to  find  for  each 
great  expansion  a  correspondingly  large  con¬ 
traction.  But  our  surprise  is  increased  when, 
every  day,  we  see  enormous  expansions  taking 
place  almost  instantaneously.  Think  what  a  tre¬ 
mendous  expansion  occurs  when  a  small  quan¬ 
tity  of  gun-powder  flares  up  into  a  vast  volume 
of  fire!  Think  too  of  the  almost  limitless  expan¬ 
sion  of  the  light  which  it  produces!  Imagine  the 
contraction  which  would  take  place  if  this  fire 
and  this  light  were  to  reunite,  which,  indeed, 
is  not  impossible  since  only  a  little  while  ago 
they  were  located  together  in  this  small  space. 
You  will  find,  upon  observation,  a  thousand 
such  expansions  for  they  are  more  obvious  than 
contractions  since  dense  matter  is  more  palpa¬ 
ble  and  accessible  to  our  senses.  We  can  take 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


wood  and  see  it  go  up  in  fire  and  light,  but  we 
do  not  see  them  recombine  to  form  wood;  we 
see  fruits  and  flowers  and  a  thousand  other  solid 
bodies  dissolve  largely  into  odours,  but  we  do 
not  observe  these  fragrant  atoms  coming  to¬ 
gether  to  form  fragrant  solids.  But  where  the 
senses  fail  us  reason  must  step  in;  for  it  will 
enable  us  to  understand  the  motion  involved 
in  the  condensation  of  extremely  rarefied  and 
tenuous  substances  just  as  clearly  as  that  in¬ 
volved  in  the  expansion  and  dissolution  of  so¬ 
lids.  Moreover  we  are  trying  to  find  out  how 
it  is  possible  to  produce  expansion  and  con¬ 
traction  in  bodies  which  are  capable  of  such 
changes  without  introducing  vacua  and  with¬ 
out  giving  up  the  impenetrability  of  matter; 
but  this  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of 
there  being  materials  which  possess  no  such 
properties  and  do  not,  therefore,  carry  with 
them  consequences  which  you  call  inconve¬ 
nient  and  impossible.  And  finally,  Simplicio, 
I  have,  for  the  sake  of  you  philosophers,  taken 
pains  to  find  an  explanation  of  how  expan¬ 
sion  and  contraction  can  take  place  without 
our  admitting  the  penetrability  of  matter  and 
introducing  vacua,  properties  which  you  deny 
and  dislike;  if  you  were  to  admit  them,  I  should 
not  oppose  you  so  vigorously.  Now  either  ad¬ 
mit  these  difficulties  or  accept  my  views  or  sug¬ 
gest  something  better. 

Sagr.  I  quite  agree  with  the  peripatetic  phi¬ 
losophers  in  denying  the  penetrability  of  mat¬ 
ter.  As  to  the  vacua  I  should  like  to  hear  a 
thorough  discussion  of  Aristotle’s  demonstra¬ 
tion  in  which  he  opposes  them,  and  what  you, 
Salviati,  have  to  say  in  reply.  I  beg  of  you, 
Simplicio,  that  you  give  us  the  precise  proof 
of  the  Philosopher  and  that  you,  Salviati,  give 
us  the  reply. 

Simp.  So  far  as  I  remember,  Aristotle  inveighs 
against  the  ancient  view  that  a  vacuum  is  a 
necessary  prerequisite  for  motion  and  that  the 
latter  could  not  occur  without  the  former.  In 
opposition  to  this  view  Aristotle  shows  that  it 
is  precisely  the  phenomenon  of  motion,  as  we 
shall  see,  which  renders  untenable  the  idea  of  a 
vacuum.  His  method  is  to  divide  the  argument 
into  two  parts.  He  first  supposes  bodies  of  dif¬ 
ferent  weights  to  move  in  the  same  medium; 
then  supposes,  one  and  the  same  body  to  move 
in  different  media.  In  the  first  case,  he  supposes 
bodies  of  different  weight  to  move  in  one  and 
the  same  medium  with  different  speeds  which 
stand  to  one  another  in  the  same  ratio  as  the 
weights;  so  that,  for  example,  a  body  which  is 
ten  times  as  heavy  as  another  will  move  ten 


times  as  rapidly  as  the  other.  In  the  second  case, 
he  assumes  that  the  speeds  of  one  and  the  same 
body  moving  in  different  media  are  in  inverse 
ratio  to  the  densities  of  these  media;  thus,  for 
instance,  if  the  density  of  water  were  ten  times 
that  of  air,  the  speed  in  air  would  be  ten  times 
greater  than  in  water.  From  this  second  suppo¬ 
sition,  he  shows  that,  since  the  tenuity  of  a 
vacuum  differs  infinitely  from  that  of  any  me¬ 
dium  filled  with  matter  however  rare,  any  body 
which  moves  in  a  plenum  through  a  certain 
space  in  a  certain  time  ought  to  move  through 
a  vacuum  instantaneously;  but  instantaneous 
motion  is  an  impossibility;  it  is  therefore  im¬ 
possible  that  a  vacuum  should  be  produced  by 
motion. 

Salv.  The  argument  is,  as  you  see,  ad  homi- 
nemy  that  is,  it  is  directed  against  those  who 
thought  the  vacuum  a  prerequisite  for  motion. 
Now,  if  I  admit  the  argument  to  be  conclusive 
and  concede  also  that  motion  cannot  take  place 
in  a  vacuum,  the  assumption  of  a  vacuum  con¬ 
sidered  absolutely  and  not  with  reference  to 
motion,  is  not  thereby  invalidated.  But  to  tell 
you  what  the  ancients  might  possibly  have  re¬ 
plied  and  in  order  to  better  understand  just 
how  conclusive  Aristotle’s  demonstration  is,  we 
may,  in  my  opinion,  deny  both  of  his  assump¬ 
tions.  And  as  to  the  first,  I  greatly  doubt  that 
Aristotle  ever  tested  by  experiment  whether  it 
be  true  that  two  stones,  one  weighing  ten  times 
as  much  as  the  other,  if  allowed  to  fall,  at  the 
same  instant,  from  a  height  of,  say,  too  cubits, 
would  so  differ  in  speed  that  when  the  heavier 
had  reached  the  ground,  the  other  would  not 
have  fallen  more  than  lo  cubits. 

Simp.  His  language  would  seem  to  indicate 
that  he  had  tried  the  experiment,  because  he 
says:  We  see  the  heavier,  now  the  word  see  shows 
that  he  had  made  the  experiment. 

Sagr.  But  I,  Simplicio,  who  had  made  the 
test  can  assure  you  that  a  cannon  ball  weighing 
one  or  two  hundred  pounds,  or  even  more,  will 
not  reach  the  ground  by  as  much-  as  a  span 
ahead  of  a  musket  ball  weighing  only  half  a 
pound,  provided  both  are  dropped  from  a 
height  of  200  cubits. 

Salv.  But,  even  without  further  experiment, 
it  is  possible  to  prove  clearly,  by  means  of  a 
short  and  conclusive  argument,  that  a  heavier 
body  does  not  move  more  rapidly  than  a  lighter 
one  provided  both  bodies  are  of  the  same  mate¬ 
rial  and  in  short  such  as  those  mentioned  by 
Aristotle.  But  tell  me,  Simplicio,  whether  you 
admit  that  each  falling  body  acquires  a  definite 
speed  fixed  by  nature,  a  velocity  which  cannot 


158  GALILEO  GALILEI 


be  increased  or  diminished  except  by  the  use  of 
force  or  resistance. 

SiMP.There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  one  and 
the  same  body  moving  in  a  single  medium  has 
a  fixed  velocity  which  is  determined  by  nature 
and  which  Cannot  be  increased  except  by  the 
addition  of  momentum  or  diminished  except  by 
some  resistance  which  retards  it. 

Salv.  If  then  we  take  two  bodies  whose  natu¬ 
ral  speeds  are  different,  it  is  clear  that  on  unit¬ 
ing  the  two,  the  more  rapid  one  will  be  partly 
retarded  by  the  slower,  and  the  slower  will  be 
somewhat  hastened  by  the  swifter.  Do  you  not 
agree  with  me  in  this  opinion.'’ 

vSiMP.  You  are  unquestionably  right. 

Salv.  But  if  this  is  true,  and  if  a  large  stone 
moves  with  a  speed  of,  say,  eight  while  a  smaller 
moves  with  a  speed  oLfour,  then  when  they  are 
united,  the  system  will  move  with  a  speed  less 
than  eight;  but  the  two  stones  when  tied  to¬ 
gether  make  a  stone  larger  than  that  which  be¬ 
fore  moved  with  a  speed  of  eight.  Hence  the 
heavier  body  moves  with  less  speed  than  the 
lighter;  an  effect  which  is  contrary  to  your  sup¬ 
position.  Thus  you  see  how,  from  your  assump¬ 
tion  that  the  heavier  body  moves  more  rapidly 
than  the  lighter  one,  I  infer  that  the  heavier 
body  moves  more  slowly. 

Simp.  I  am  all  at  sea  because  it  appears  to  me 
that  the  smaller  stone  when  added  to  the  larger 
increases  its  weight  and  by  adding  weight  I  do 
not  see  how  it  can  fail  to  increase  its  speed  or, 
at  least,  not  to  diminish  it. 

Salv.  Here  again  you  are  in  error,  Simplicio, 
because  it  is  not  true  that  the  smaller  stone  adds 
weight  to  the  larger. 

Simp.  This  is,  indeed,  quite  beyond  my  com¬ 
prehension. 

Salv.  It  will  not  be  beyond  you  when  I  have 
once  shown  you  the  mistake  under  which  you 
are  labouring.  Note  that  it  is  necessary  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  between  heavy  bodies  in  motion  and 
the  same  bodies  at  rest.  A  large  stone  placed  in 
a  balance  not  only  acquires  additional  weight 
by  having  another  stone  placed  upon  it,  but 
even  by  the  addition  of  a  handful  of  hemp  its 
weight  is  augmented  six  to  ten  ounces  according 
to  the  quantity  of  hemp.  But  if  you  tie  the 
hemp  to  the  stone  and  allow  them  to  fall  freely 
from  some  height,  do  you  believe  that  the  hemp 
will  press  down  upon  the  stone  and  thus  accel¬ 
erate  its  motion  or  do  you  think  the  motion 
will  be  retarded  by  a  partial  upward  pressure  ? 
One  always  feels  the  pressure  upon  his  shoul¬ 
ders  when  he  prevents  the  motion  of  a  load 
resting  upon  him;  but  if  one  descends  just  as 


rapidly  as  the  load  would  fall  how  can  it  grav¬ 
itate  or  press  upon  him.?  Do  you  not  see  that 
this  would  be  the  same  as  trying  to  strike  a  man 
with  a  lance  when  he  is  running  away  from  you 
with  a  speed  which  is  equal  to,  or  even  greater, 
than  that  with  which  you  are  following  him.? 
You  must  therefore  conclude  that,  during  free 
and  natural  fall,  the  small  stone  does  not  press 
upon  the  larger  and  consequently  does  not  in¬ 
crease  its  weight  as  it  does  when  at  rest. 

Simp.  But  what  if  we  should  place  the  larger 
stone  upon  the  smaller.? 

Salv.  Its  weight  would  be  increased  if  the 
larger  stone  moved  more  rapidly;  but  we  have 
already  concluded  that  when  the  small  stone 
moves  more  slowly  it  retards  to  some  extent  the 
speed  of  the  larger,  so  that  the  combination  of 
the  two,  which  is  a  heavier  body  than  the  larger 
of  the  two  stones,  would  move  less  rapidly,  a 
conclusion  which  is  contrary  to  your  hypothe¬ 
sis,  We  infer  therefore  that  large  and  small  bod¬ 
ies  move  with  the  same  speed  provided  they 
are  of  the  same  specific  gravity. 

Simp.  Your  discussion  is  really  admirable; 
yet  I  do  not  find  it  easy  to  believe  that  a  bird- 
shot  falls  as  swiftly  as  a  cannon  ball. 

Salv.  Why  not  say  a  grain  of  sand  as  rapidly 
as  a  grindstone.?  But,  Simplicio,  I  trust  you  will 
not  follow  the  example  of  many  others  who  di¬ 
vert  the  discussion  from  its  main  intent  and 
fasten  upon  some  statement  of  mine  which  lacks 
a  hairVbreadth  of  the  truth  and,  under  this 
hair,  hide  the  fault  of  another  which  is  as  big  as 
a  ship’s  cable.  Aristotle  says  that  “an  iron  ball 
of  one  hundred  pounds  falling  from  a  height  of 
one  hundred  cubits  reaches  the  ground  before 
a  one-pound  ball  has  fallen  a  single  cubit.”  I  say 
that  they  arrive  at  the  same  time.  You  find,  on 
making  the  experiment,  that  the  larger  out¬ 
strips  the  smaller  by  two  finger-breadths,  that 
is,  when  the  larger  has  reached  the  ground,  the 
other  is  short  of  it  by  two  finger-breadths;  now 
you  would  not  hide  behind  these  two  fingers  the 
ninety-nine  cubits  of  Aristotle,  nor  would  you 
mention  my  small  error  and  at  the  same  time 
pass  over  in  silence  his  ver)^  large  one.  Aristotle 
declares  that  bodies  of  different  weights,  in  the 
same  medium,  travel  (in  so  far  as  their  motion 
depends  upon  gravity)  with  speeds  which  are 
proportional  to  their  weights;  this  he  illustrates 
by  use  of  bodies  in  which  it  is  possible  to  per¬ 
ceive  the  pure  and  unadulterated  effect  of  gravi¬ 
ty,  eliminating  other  considerations,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  figure  as  being  of  small  importance,  in¬ 
fluences  which  are  greatly  dependent  upon  the 
medium  which  modifies  the  single  eftect  of 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


gravity  alone.  Thus  we  observe  that  gold,  the 
densest  of  all  substances,  when  beaten  out  into 
a  very  thin  leaf,  goes  floating  through  the  air; 
the  same  thing  happens  with  stone  when  ground 
into  a  very  fine  powder.  But  if  you  wish  to 
maintain  the  general  proposition  you  will  have 
to  show  that  the  same  ratio  of  speeds  is  pre¬ 
served  in  the  case  of  all  heavy  bodies,  and  that  a 
stone  of  twenty  pounds  moves  ten  times  as 
rapidly  as  one  of  two;  but  I  claim  that  this  is 
false  and  that,  if  they  fall  from  a  height  of  fifty 
or  a  hundred  cubits,  they  will  reach  the  earth 
at  the  same  moment. 

Simp.  Perhaps  the  result  would  be  different 
if  the  fall  took  place  not  from  a  few  cubits  but 
from  some  thousands  of  cubits. 

Salv.  If  this  were  what  Aristotle  meant  you 
would  burden  him  with  another  error  which 
would  amount  to  a  falsehood;  because,  since 
there  is  no  such  sheer  height  available  on  earth, 
it  is  clear  that  Aristotle  could  not  have  made 
the  experiment;  yet  he  wishes  to  give  us  the 
impression  of  his  having  performed  it  when 
he  speaks  of  such  an  effect  as  one  which  we 
see. 

Simp.  In  fact,  Aristotle  does  not  employ  this 
principle,  but  uses  the  other  one  which  is  not, 
I  believe,  subject  to  these  same  difficulties. 

Salv.  But  the  one  is  as  false  as  the  other;  and 
I  am  surprised  that  you  yourself  do  not  see  the 
fallacy  and  that  you  do  not  perceive  that  if  it 
were  true  that,  in  media  of  different  densities 
and  different  resistances,  such  as  water  and  air, 
one  and  the  same  body  moved  in  air  more  rap¬ 
idly  than  in  water,  in  proportion  as  the  density 
of  water  is  greater  than  that  of  air,  then  it 
would  follow  that  any  body  which  falls  through 
air  ought  also  to  fall  through  water.  But  this 
conclusion  is  false  inasmuch  as  many  bodies 
which  descend  in  air  not  only  do  not  descend  in 
water,  but  actually  rise. 

Simp.  I  do  not  understand  the  necessity  of 
your  inference;  and  in  addition  I  will  say  that 
Aristotle  discusses  only  those  bodies  which  fall 
in  both  media,  not  those  which  fall  in  air  but 
rise  in  water. 

Salv.  The  arguments  which  you  advance  for 
the  Philosopher  are  such  as  he  himself  would 
have  certainly  avoided  so  as  not  to  aggravate 
his  first  mistake.  But  tell  me  now  whether  the 
density  of  the  water,  or  whatever  it  may  be  that 
retards  the  motion,  bears  a  definite  ratio  to  the 
density  of  air  which  is  less  retardative;  and  if 
so  fix  a  value  for  it  at  your  pleasure. 

Simp.  Such  a  ratio  does  exist;  let  us  assume  it 
to  be  ten;  then,  for  a  body  which  falls  in  both 


these  media,  the  speed  in  water  will  be  ten  times 
slower  than  in  air. 

Salv.  I  shall  now  take  one  of  those  bodies 
which  fall  in  air  but  not  in  water,  say  a  wooden 
ball,  and  1  shall  ask  you  to  assign  to  it  any  speed 
you  please  for  its  descent  through  air. 

Simp.  Let  us  suppose  it  moves  with  a  speed  of 
twenty. 

Salv.  Very  well.  Then  it  is  clear  that  this 
speed  bears  to  some  smaller  speed  the  same  ratio 
as  the  density  of  water  bears  to  that  of  air;  and 
the  value  of  this  smaller  speed  is  two.  So  that 
really  if  we  follow  exactly  the  assumption  of 
Aristotle  we  ought  to  infer  that  the  wooden 
ball  which  falls  in  air,  a  substance  ten  times  less- 
resisting  than  water,  with  a  speed  of  twenty 
would  fall  in  water  with  a  speed  of  two,  instead 
of  coming  to  the  surface  from  the  bottom  as  it 
does;  unless  perhaps  you  wish  to  reply,  which 
I  do  not  believe  you  will,  that  the  rising  of  the 
wood  through  the  water  is  the  same  as  its  falling 
with  a  speed  of  two.  But  since  the  wooden  ball 
does  not  go  to  the  bottom,  I  think  you  will 
agree  with  me  that  we  can  find  a  ball  of  another 
material,  not  wood,  which  does  fall  in  water 
with  a  speed  of  two. 

Simp.  Undoubtedly  we  can;  but  it  must  be  of 
a  substance  considerably  heavier  than  wood. 

Salv.  That  is  it  exactly.  But  if  this  second 
ball  falls  in  water  with  a  speed  of  two,  what  will 
be  its  speed  of  descent  in  air.?  If  you  hold  to  the 
rule  of  Aristotle  you  must  reply  that  it  will 
move  at  the  rate  of  twenty;  but  twenty  is  the 
speed  which  you  yourself  have  already  assigned 
to  the  wooden  ball;  hence  this  and  the  other 
heavier  ball  will  each  move  through  air  with 
the  same  speed.  But  now  how  does  the  Philoso¬ 
pher  harmonize  this  result  with  his  other,  name¬ 
ly,  that  bodies  of  different  weight  move  through 
the  same  medium  with  different  speeds — speeds 
which  are  proportional  to  their  weights?  But 
without  going  into  the  matter  more  deeply,  how' 
have  these  common  and  obvious  properties  es¬ 
caped  your  notice  ?  Have  you  not  observed  that 
two  bodies  which  fall  in  water,  one  with  a  speed 
a  hundred  times  as  great  as  that  of  the  other, 
will  fall  in  air  with  speeds  so  nearly  equal  that 
one  will  not  surpass  the  other  by  as  much  as  one 
hundredth  part?  Thus,  for  example,  an  egg 
made  of  marble  will  descend  in  water  one  hun¬ 
dred  times  more  rapidly  than  a  hen’s  egg,  while 
in  air  falling  from  a  height  of  twenty  cubits  the 
one  will  fall  short  of  the  other  by  less  than  four 
finger- breadths.  In  short,  a  heavy  body  which 
sinks  through  ten  cubits  of  water  in  three  hours 
will  traverse  ten  cubits  of  air  in  one  or  two 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


i6o 

pulse-beats;  and  if  the  heavy  body  be  a  ball  of 
lead  it  will  easily  traverse  the  ten  cubits  of  wa¬ 
ter  in  less  than  double  the  time  required  for  ten 
cubits  of  air.  And  here,  I  am  sure,  Simplicio,  you 
find  no  ground  for  difference  or  objection.  We 
conclude,  therefore,  that  the  argument  does 
not  bear  against  the  existence  of  a  vacuum;  but 
if  it  did,  it  would  only  do  away  with  vacua  of 
considerable  size  which  neither  I  nor,  in  my 
opinion,  the  ancients  ever  believed  to  exist  in 
nature,  although  they  might  possibly  be  pro¬ 
duced  by  force  as  may  be  gathered  from  various 
experiments  whose  description  would  here  oc¬ 
cupy  too  much  time. 

Sagr.  Seeing  that  Simplicio  is  silent,  I  will 
take  the  opportunity  of  saying  something. 
Since  you  have  clearly  demonstrated  that  bod¬ 
ies  of  different  weights  do  not  move  in  one  and 
the  same  medium  with  velocities  proportional 
to  their  weights,  but  that  they  all  move  with 
the  same  speed,  understanding  of  course  that 
they  are  of  the  same  substance  or  at  least  of  the 
same  specific  gravity;  certainly  not  of  different 
specific  gravities,  for  I  hardly  think  you  would 
have  us  believe  a  ball  of  cork  moves  with  the 
same  speed  as  one  of  lead;  and  again  since  you 
have  clearly  demonstrated  that  one  and  the 
same  body  moving  through  differently  resisting 
media  does  not  acquire  speeds  which  are  in¬ 
versely  proportional  to  the  resistances,  I  am 
curious  to  learn  what  are  the  ratios  actually 
observed  in  these  cases. 

Salv.  These  are  interesting  questions  and  I 
have  thought  much  concerning  them.  I  will 
give  you  the  method  of  approach  and  the  result 
which  I  finally  reached.  Having  once  estab¬ 
lished  the  falsity  of  the  proposition  that  one 
and  the  same  body  moving  through  differently 
resisting  media  acquires  speeds  which  are  in¬ 
versely  proportional  to  the  resistances  of  these 
media,  and  having  also  disproved  the  statement 
that  in  the  same  medium  bodies  of  different 
weight  acquire  velocities  proportional  to  their 
weights  (understanding  that  this  applies  also  to 
bodies  which  differ  merely  in  specific  gravity), 
I  then  began  to  combine  these  two  facts  and  to 
consider  what  would  happen  if  bodies  of  differ¬ 
ent  weight  were  placed  in  media  of  different 
resistances;  and  I  found  that  the  differences  in 
speed  were  greater  in  those  media  which  were 
more  resistant,  that  is,  less  yielding.  This  differ¬ 
ence  was  such  that  two  bodies  which  differed 
scarcely  at  all  in  their  speed  through  air  would, 
in  water,  fall  the  one  with  a  speed  ten  times  as 
great  as  that  of  the  other.  Further,  there  are 
bodies  which  will  fall  rapidly  in  air,  whereas  if 


placed  in  water  not  only  will  not  sink  but  will 
remain  at  rest  or  will  even  rise  to  the  top:  for  it 
is  possible  to  find  some  kinds  of  wood,  such  as 
knots  and  roots,  which  remain  at  rest  in  water 
but  fall  rapidly  in  air. 

Sagr.  I  have  often  tried  with  the  utmost 
patience  to  add  grains  of  sand  to  a  ball  of  wax 
until  it  should  acquire  the  same  specific  gravity 
as  water  and  would  therefore  remain  at  rest  in 
this  medium.  But  with  all  my  care  I  was  never 
able  to  accomplish  this.  Indeed,  I  do  not  know 
whether  there  is  any  solid  substance  whose 
specific  gravity  is,  by  nature,  so  nearly  equal  to 
that  of  water  that  if  placed  anywhere  in  water 
it  will  remain  at  rest. 

Salv.  In  this,  as  in  a  thousand  other  opera¬ 
tions,  men  are  surpassed  by  animals.  In  this 
problem  of  yours  one  may  learn  much  from  the 
fish  which  are  very  skillful  in  maintaining  their 
equilibrium  not  only  in  one  kind  of  water,  but 
also  in  waters  which  are  notably  different  either 
by  their  own  nature  or  by  some  accidental 
muddiness  or  through  salinity,  each  of  which 
produces  a  marked  change.  So  perfectly  indeed 
can  fish  keep  their  equilibrium  that  they  are 
able  to  remain  motionless  in  any  position.  This 
they  accomplish,  I  believe,  by  means  of  an  ap¬ 
paratus  especially  provided  by  nature,  namely, 
a  bladder  located  in  the  body  and  communicat¬ 
ing  with  the  mouth  by  means  of  a  narrow  tube 
through  which  they  are  able,  at  will,  to  expel 
a  portion  of  the  air  contained  in  the  bladder:  by 
rising  to  the  surface  they  can  take  in  more  air; 
thus  they  make  themselves  heavier  or  lighter 
than  water  at  will  and  maintain  equilibrium. 

Sagr.  By  means  of  another  device  I  was  able 
to  deceive  some  friends  to  whom  I  had  boasted 
that  I  could  make  up  a  ball  of  wax  that  would 
be  in  equilibrium  in  water.  In  the  bottom  of  a 
vessel  I  placed  some  salt  water  and  upon  this 
some  fresh  water;  then  I  showed  them  that  the 
ball  stopped  in  the  middle  of  the  water,  and 
that,  when  pushed  to  the  bottom  or  lifted  to 
the  top,  would  not  remain  in  either  of  these 
places  but  would  return  to  the  middle. 

Salv.  This  experiment  is  not  without  useful¬ 
ness.  For  when  physicians  are  testing  the  vari¬ 
ous  qualities  of  waters,  especially  their  specific 
gravities,  they  employ  a  ball  of  this  kind  so  ad¬ 
justed  that,  in  certain  water,  it  will  neither  rise 
nor  fall.  Then  in  testing  another  water,  differ¬ 
ing  ever  so  slightly  in  specific  gravity,  the  ball 
will  sink  if  this  water  be  lighter  and  rise  if  it  be 
heavier.  And  so  exact  is  this  experiment  that 
the  addition  of  two  grains  of  salt  to  six  pounds 
of  water  is  sufficient  to  make  the  ball  rise  to  the 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


surface  from  the  bottom  to  which  it  had  fallen. 
To  illustrate  the  precision  of  this  experiment 
and  also  to  clearly  demonstrate  the  non-resist¬ 
ance  of  water  to  division,  I  wish  to  add  that 
this  notable  difference  in  specific  gravity  can 
be  produced  not  only  by  solution  of  some 
heavier  substance,  but  also  by  merely  heating 
or  cooling;  and  so  sensitive  is  water  to  this  proc¬ 
ess  that  by  simply  adding  four  drops  of  another 
water  which  is  slightly  warmer  or  cooler  than 
the  six  pounds  one  can  cause  the  ball  to  sink  or 
rise;  it  will  sink  when  the  warm  water  is  poured 
in  and  will  rise  upon  the  addition  of  cold  water. 
Now  you  can  see  how  mistaken  are  those  phil¬ 
osophers  who  ascribe  to  water  viscosity  or  some 
other  coherence  of  parts  which  offers  resistance 
to  separation  of  parts  and  to  penetration. 

Sagr.  With  regard  to  this  question  I  have 
found  many  convincing  arguments  in  a  treatise 
by  our  Academician;  but  there  is  one  great  dif¬ 
ficulty  of  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  rid  my¬ 
self,  namely,  if  there  be  no  tenacity  or  coher¬ 
ence  between  the  particles  of  water  how  is  it 
possible  for  those  large  drops  of  water  to  stand 
out  in  relief  upon  cabbage  leaves  without  scat¬ 
tering  or  spreading  out  ? 

Salv.  Although  those  who  are  in  possession  of 
the  truth  are  able  to  solve  all  objections  raised, 
I  would  not  arrogate  to  myself  such  power;  nev¬ 
ertheless  my  inability  should  not  be  allowed  to 
becloud  the  truth.  To  begin  with  let  me  confess 
that  I  do  not  understand  how  these  large  glob¬ 
ules  of  water  stand  out  and  hold  themselves  up, 
although  I  know  for  a  certainty,  that  it  is  not 
owing  to  any  internal  tenacity  acting  between 
the  particles  of  water;  whence  it  must  follow 
that  the  cause  of  this  effect  is  external.  Beside 
the  experiments  already  shown  to  prove  that 
the  cause  is  not  internal,  I  can  offer  another 
which  is  very  convincing.  If  the  particles  of  wa¬ 
ter  which  sustain  themselves  in  a  heap,  while 
surrounded  by  air,  did  so  in  virtue  of  an  internal 
cause  then  they  would  sustain  themselves  much 
more  easily  when  surrounded  by  a  medium  in 
which  they  exhibit  less  tendency  to  fall  than 
they  do  in  air;  such  a  medium  would  be  any 
fluid  heavier  than  air,  as,  for  instance,  wine:  and 
therefore  if  some  wine  be  poured  about  such  a 
drop  of  water,  the  wine  might  rise  until  the  drop 
was  entirely  covered,  without  the  particles  of 
water,  held  together  by  this  internal  coherence, 
ever  parting  company.  But  this  is  not  the  fact; 
for  as  soon  as  the  wine  touches  the  water,  the 
latter  without  waiting  to  be  covered  scatters 
and  spreads  out  underneath  the  wine  if  it  be 
red.  The  cause  of  this  effect  is  therefore  external 


i6t 

and  is  possibly  to  be  found  in  the  surrounding 
air.  Indeed  there  appears  to  be  a  considerable 
antagonism  between  air  and  water  as  I  have  ob¬ 
served  in  the  following  experiment.  Having  tak¬ 
en  a  glass  globe  which  had  a  mouth  of  about  the 
same  diameter  as  a  straw,  I  filled  it  with  water 
and  turned  it  mouth  downwards;  nevertheless, 
the  water,  although  quite  heavy  and  prone  to 
descend,  and  the  air,  which  is  very  light  and 
disposed  to  rise  through  the  water,  refused,  the 
one  to  descend  and  the  other  to  ascend  through 
the  opening,  but  both  remained  stubborn  and 
defiant.  On  the  other  hand,  as  soon  as  I  apply  to 
this  opening  a  glass  of  red  wine,  which  is  almost 
inappreciably  lighter  than  water,  red  streaks  are 
immediately  observed  to  ascend  slowly  through 
the  water  while  the  water  with  equal  slowness 
descends  through  the  wine  without  mixing,  un¬ 
til  finally  the  globe  is  completely  filled  with 
wine  and  the  water  has  all  gone  down  into  the 
vessel  below.  What  then  can  we  say  except  that 
there  exists,  between  water  and  air,  a  certain  in¬ 
compatibility  which  I  do  not  understand,  but 
perhaps. .  . . 

Simp.  I  feel  almost  like  laughing  at  the  great 
antipathy  which  Salvia ti  exhibits  against  the  use 
of  the  word  antipathy;  and  yet  it  is  excellently 
adapted  to  explain  the  difficulty. 

Salv.  Alright,  if  it  please  Simplicio,  let  this 
word  antipathy  be  the  solution  of  our  difficulty. 
Returning  from  this  digression,  let  us  again  take 
up  our  problem.  We  have  already  seen  that  the 
difference  of  speed  between  bodies  of  different 
specific  gravities  is  most  marked  in  those  media 
which  are  the  most  resistant:  thus,  in  a  medium 
of  quicksilver,  gold  not  merely  sinks  to  the  bot¬ 
tom  more  rapidly  than  lead  but  it  is  the  only 
substance  that  will  descend  at  all;  all  other  met¬ 
als  and  stones  rise  to  the  surface  and  float.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  variation  of  speed  in  air  be¬ 
tween  balls  of  gold,  lead,  copper,  porphyry,  and 
other  heavy  materials  is  so  slight  that  in  a  fall  of 
100  cubits  a  ball  of  gold  would  surely  not  out¬ 
strip  one  of  copper  by  as  much  as  four  fingers. 
Having  observed  this  I  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  in  a  medium  totally  devoid  of  resistance  all 
bodies  would  fall  with  the  same  speed. 

Simp.  This  is  a  remarkable  statement,  Salvi- 
ati.  But  I  shall  never  believe  that  even  in  a  vacu¬ 
um,  if  motion  in  such  a  place  were  possible,  a 
lock  of  wool  and  a  bit  of  lead  can  fall  with  the 
same  velocity. 

Salv.  A  little  more  slowly,  Simplicio.  Your 
difficulty  is  not  so  recondite  nor  am  I  so  impru¬ 
dent  as  to  warrant  you  in  believing  that  I  have 
not  already  considered  this  matter  and  found 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


162 

the  proper  solution.  Hence  for  my  justification 
and  for  your  enlightenment  hear  what  I  have  to 
say.  Our  problem  is  to  find  out  what  happens  to 
bodies  of  dilferent  weight  moving  in  a  medium 
devoid  of  resistance,  so  that  the  only  difference 
in  speed  is  that  which  arises  from  inequality  of 
weight.  Since  no  medium  except  one  entirely 
free  from  air  and  other  bodies,  be  it  ever  so  ten¬ 
uous  and  yielding,  can  furnish  our  senses  with 
the  evidence  we  are  looking.for,  and  since  such 
a  medium  is  not  available,  we  shall  observe  what 
happens  in  the  rarest  and  least  resistant  media 
as  compared  with  what  happens  in  denser  and 
more  resistant  media.  Because  if  we  find  as  a 
fact  that  the  variation  of  speed  among  bodies 
of  different  specific  gravities  is  less  and  less  ac¬ 
cording  as  the  medium  becomes  more  and 
more  yielding,  and  if  finally  in  a  medium  of  ex¬ 
treme  tenuity,  though  not  a  perfect  vacuum, 
we  find  that,  in  spite  of  great  diversity  of 
specific  gravity,  the  difference  in  speed  is  very 
small  and  almost  inappreciable,  then  we  are 
justified  in  believing  it  highly  probable  that 
in  a  vacuum  all  bodies  would  fall  with  the  same 
speed.  Let  us,  in  view  of  this,  consider  what 
takes  place  in  air,  where  for  the  sake  of  a  def¬ 
inite  figure  and  light  material  imagine  an  in¬ 
flated  bladder.  The  air  in  this  bladder  when  sur¬ 
rounded  by  air  will  weigh  little  or  nothing,  since 
it  can  be  only  slightly  compressed;  its  weight 
then  is  small  being  merely  that  of  the  skin  which 
does  not  amount  to  the  thousandth  part  of  a 
mass  of  lead  having  the  same  size  as  the  inflated 
bladder.  Now,  Simplicio,  if  we  allow  these  two 
bodies  to  fall  from  a  height  of  four  or  six  cubits, 
by  what  distance  do  you  imagine  the  lead  will 
anticipate  the  bladder?  You  may  be  sure  that 
the  lead  will  not  travel  three  times,  or  even 
twice,  as  swiftly  as  the  bladder,  although  you 
would  have  made  it  move  a  thousand  times  as 
rapidly. 

Simp.  It  may  be  as  you  say  during  the  first 
four  or  six  cubits  of  the  fall;  but  after  the  mo¬ 
tion  has  continued  a  long  while,  I  believe  that 
the  lead  will  have  left  the  bladder  behind  not 
only  six  out  of  twelve  parts  of  the  distance  but 
even  eight  or  ten. 

Salv.  I  quite  agree  with  you  and  doubt  not 
that,  in  very  long  distances,  the  lead  might  cover 
one  hundred  miles  while  the  bladder  was  trav¬ 
ersing  one;  but,  my  dear  Simplicio,  this  phe¬ 
nomenon  which  you  adduce  against  my  propo¬ 
sition  is  precisely  the  one  which  confirms  it.  Let 
me  once  more  explain  that  the  variation  of  speed 
observed  in  bodies  of  different  specific  gravities 
is  not  caused  by  the  difference  of  specific  gravity 


but  depends  upon  external  circumstances  and, 
in  particular,  upon  the  resistance  of  the  medi¬ 
um,  so  that  if  this  is  removed  all  bodies  would 
fall  with  the  same  velocity;  and  this  result  I  de¬ 
duce  mainly  from  the  fact  which  you  have  just 
admitted  and  which  is  very  true,  namely, that, 
in  the  caseofbodieswhichdifferwidely  in  weight, 
their  velocities  differ  more  and  more  as  the  spaces 
traversed  increase,  something  which  would  not 
occur  if  the  effect  depended  upon  differences  of 
specific  gravity.  For  since  these  specific  gravities 
remain  constant,  the  ratio  between  the  distances 
traversed  ought  to  remain  constant  whereas  the 
fact  is  that  this  ratio  keeps  on  increasing  as  the 
motion  continues.  Thus  a  very  heavy  body  in 
a  fall  of  one  cubit  will  not  anticipate  a  very 
light  one  by  so  much  as  the  tenth  part  of  this 
space;  but  in  a  fall  of  twelve  cubits  the  heavy 
body  would  outstrip  the  other  by  one-third, 
and  in  a  fall  of  one  hundred  cubits  by  90/100, 
etc. 

Simp.  Very  well:  but,  following  your  own  line 
of  argument,  if  differences  of  weight  in  bodies  of 
different  specific  gravities  cannot  produce  a 
change  in  the  ratio  of  their  speeds,  on  the  ground 
that  their  specific  gravities  do  not  change,  how 
is  it  possible  for  the  medium,  which  also  we  sup¬ 
pose  to  remain  constant,  to  bring  about  any 
change  in  the  ratio  of  these  velocities  ? 

Salv.  This  objection  with  which  you  oppose 
my  statement  is  clever;  and  I  must  meet  it.  I 
begin  by  saying  that  a  heavy  body  has  an  in¬ 
herent  tendency  to  move  with  a  constantly  and 
uniformly  accelerated  motion  toward  the  com¬ 
mon  center  of  gravity,  that  is,  toward  the  center 
of  our  earth,  so  that  during  equal  intervals  of 
time  it  receives  equal  increments  of  momentum 
and  velocity.  This,  you  must  understand,  holds 
whenever  all  external  and  accidental  hindrances 
have  been  removed;  but  of  these  there  is  one 
which  we  can  never  remove,  namely,  the  medi¬ 
um  which  must  be  penetrated  and  thrust  aside  by 
the  falling  body.  This  quiet,  yielding,  fluid  me¬ 
dium  opposes  motion  through  it  with  a  resist¬ 
ance  which  is  proportional  to  the  rapidity  with 
which  the  medium  must  give  way  to  the  passage 
of  the  body;  which  body,  as  I  have  said,  is  by 
nature  continuously  accelerated  so  that  it  meets 
with  more  and  more  resistance  in  the  medium 
and  hence  a  diminution  in  its  rate  of  gain  of 
speed  until  finally  the  speed  reaches  such  a  point 
and  the  resistance  of  the  medium  becomes  so 
great  that,  balancing  each  other,  they  prevent 
any  further  acceleration  and  reduce  the  motion 
of  the  body  to  one  which  is  uniform  and  which 
will  thereafter  maintain  a  constant  value.  There 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


is,  therefore,  an  increase  in  the  resistance  of  the 
medium,  not  on  account  of  any  change  in  its 
essential  properties,  but  on  account  of  the  change 
in  rapidity  with  which  it  must  yield  and  give 
way  laterally  to  the  passage  of  the  falling  body 
which  is  being  constantly  accelerated. 

Now  seeing  how  great  is  the  resistance  which 
the  air  offers  to  the  slight  momentum  of  the 
bladder  and  how  small  that  which  it  offers  to 
the  large  weight  of  the  lead,  I  am  convinced 
that,  if  the  medium  were  entirely  removed,  the 
advantage  received  by  the  bladder  would  be  so 
great  and  that  coming  to  the  lead  so  small  that 
their  speeds  would  be  equalized.  Assuming  this 
principle,  that  all  falling  bodies  acquire  equal 
speeds  in  a  medium  which,  on  account  of  a  vac¬ 
uum  or  something  else,  offers  no  resistance  to 
the  speed  of  the  motion,  we  shall  be  able  ac¬ 
cordingly  to  determine  the  ratios  of  the  speeds 
of  both  similar  and  dissimilar  bodies  moving 
either  through  one  and  the  same  medium  or 
through  different  space-filling,  and  therefore  re¬ 
sistant,  media.  This  result  we  may  obtain  by 
observing  how  much  the  weight  of  the  medium 
detracts  from  the  weight  of  the  moving  body, 
which  weight  is  the  means  employed  by  the  fall¬ 
ing  body  to  open  a  path  for  itself  and  to  push 
aside  the  parts  of  the  medium,  something  which 
does  not  happen  in  a  vacuum  where,  therefore, 
no  difference  is  to  be  expected  from  a  difference 
of  specific  gravity.  And  since  it  is  known  that 
the  effect  oithe  medium  is  todiminish  the  weight 
of  the  body  by  the  weight  of  the  medium  dis¬ 
placed,  we  may  accomplish  our  purpose  by  di¬ 
minishing  in  just  this  proportion  the  speeds  of 
the  falling  bodies,  which  in  a  non-resisting  me¬ 
dium  we  have  assumed  to  be  equal. 

Thus,  for  example,  imagine  lead  to  be  ten 
thousand  times  as  heavy  as  air  while  ebony  is 
only  one  thousand  times  as  heavy.  Here  we  have 
two  substances  whose  speeds  of  fall  in  a  medium 
devoid  of  resistance  are  equal:  but,  when  air  is 
the  medium,  it  will  subtract  from  the  speed  of 
the  lead  one  part  in  ten  thousand,  and  from  the 
speed  of  the  ebony  one  part  in  one  thousand, 
/.  e.  ten  parts  in  ten  thousand.  While  therefore, 
lead  and  ebony  would  fall  from  any  given  height 
in  the  same  interval  of  time,  provided  the  re¬ 
tarding  effect  of  the  air  were  removed,  the  lead 
will,  in  air,  lose  in  speed  one  part  in  ten  thou¬ 
sand;  and  the  obony,  ten  parts  in  ten  thousand. 
In  other  words,  if  the  elevation  from  which  the 
bodies  start  be  divided  into  ten  thousand  parts, 
the  lead  will  reach  the  ground  leaving  the  ebony 
behind  by  as  much  as  ten,  or  at  least  nine,  of 
these  parts.  Is  it  not  clear  then  that  a  leaded  ball 


1^3 

allowed  to  fall  from  a  tower  two  hundred  cubits 
high  will  outstrip  an  ebony  ball  by  less  than 
four  inches  Now  ebony  weighs  a  thousand  times 
as  much  as  air  but  this  inflated  bladder  only  four 
times  as  much;  therefore  air  diminishes  the  in¬ 
herent  and  natural  speed  of  ebony  Ey  one  part 
in  a  thousand;  while  that  of  the  bladder  which, 
if  free  from  hindrance,  would  be  the  same,  ex¬ 
periences  a  diminution  in  air  amounting  to  one 
part  in  four.  So  that  when  the  ebony  ball,  fall¬ 
ing  from  the  tower,  has  reached  the  earth,  the 
bladder  will  have  traversed  only  three-quarters 
of  this  distance.  Lead  is  twelve  times  as  heavy 
as  water;  but  ivory  is  only  twice  as  heavy.  The 
speeds  of  these  two  substances  which,  when  en¬ 
tirely  unhindered,  are  equal  will  be  diminished 
in  water,  that  of  lead  by  one  part  in  twelve, 
that  of  ivory  by  half.  Accordingly,  when  the 
lead  has  fallen  through  eleven  cubits  of  water 
the  ivory  will  have  fallen  through  only  six.  Em¬ 
ploying  this  principle  we  shall,  I  believe,  find  a 
much  closer  agreement  of  experiment  with  our 
computation  than  with  that  of  Aristotle. 

In  a  similar  manner  we  may  find  the  ratio  of 
the  speeds  of  one  and  the  same  body  in  different 
fluid  media,  not  by  comparing  the  different  re¬ 
sistances  of  the  media,  but  by  considering  the 
excess  of  the  specific  gravity  of  the  body  above 
those  of  the  media.  Thus,  for  example,  tin  is  one 
thousand  times  heavier  than  air  and  ten  times 
heavier  than  water;  hence,  if  we  divide  its  un¬ 
hindered  speed  into  looo  parts;  air  will  rob  it  of 
one  of  these  parts  so  that  it  will  fall  with  a  speed 
of  999,  while  in  water  its  speed  will  be  900,  see¬ 
ing  that  water  diminishes  its  weight  by  one  part 
in  ten  while  air  by  only  one  part  in  a  thousand. 

Again  take  a  solid  a  little  heavier  than  water, 
such  as  oak,  a  ball  of  which  will  weigh  let  us  say 
1000  drachms;  suppose  an  equal  volume  of  wa¬ 
ter  to  weigh  950,  and  an  equal  volume  of  air,  2; 
then  it  is  clear  that  if  the  unhindered  speed  of 
the  ball  is  1000,  its  speed  in  air  will  be  998,  but 
in  water  only  50,  seeing  that  the  water  removes 
950  of  the  1000  parts  which  the  body  weighs, 
leaving  only  50. 

Such  a  solid  would  therefore  move  almost 
twenty  times  as  fast  in  air  as  in  water,  since  its 
specific  gravity  exceeds  that  of  water  by  one 
part  in  twenty.  And  here  we  must  consider  the 
fact  that  only  those  substances  which  have  a 
specific  gravity  greater  than  water  can  fall 
through  it — substances  which  must,  therefore, 
be  hundreds  of  times  heavier  than  air;  hence 
when  we  try  to  obtain  the  ratio  of  the  speed  in 
air  to  that  in  water,  we  may,  without  appreci¬ 
able  error,  assume  that  air  does  not,  to  any  con- 


i64  GALILEO  GALILEI 


siderable  extent,  diminish  the  free  weight,  and 
consequently  the  unhindered  speed  of  such  sub¬ 
stances.  Having  thus  easily  found  the  excess  of 
the  weight  of  these  substances  over  that  of  wa¬ 
ter,  we  can  say  that  their  speed  in  air  is  to  their 
speed  in  water  as  their  free  weight  is  to  the  ex¬ 
cess  of  this  weight  over  that  of  water.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  a  ball  of  ivory  weighs  20  ounces;  an  equal 
volume  of  water  weighs  17  ounces;  hence  the 
speed  of  ivory  in  air  bears  to  its  speed  in  water 
the  approximate  ratio  of  20:3. 

Sagr.  I  have  made  a  great  step  forward  in  this 
truly  interesting  subject  upon  which  I  have  long 
laboured  in  vain.  In  order  to  put  these  theories 
into  practice  we  need  only  discover  a  method  of 
determining  the  specific  gravity  of  air  with  ref¬ 
erence  to  water  and  hence  with  reference  to 
other  heavy  substances. 

Simp.  But  if  we  find  that  air  has  levity  instead 
of  gravity  what  then  shall  we  say  of  the  forego¬ 
ing  discussion  which,  in  other  respects,  is  very 
clever.? 

Salv.  I  should  say  that  it  was  empty,  vain,  and 
trifling.  But  can  you  doubt  that  air  has  weight 
when  you  have  the  clear  testimony  of  Aristotle 
affirming  that  all  the  elements  have  weight  in¬ 
cluding  air,  and  excepting  only  fire .?  As  evidence 
of  this  he  cites  the  fact  that  a  leather  bottle 
weighs  more  when  inflated  than  when  collapsed. 

Simp.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  in¬ 
crease  of  weight  observed  in  the  inflated  leather 
bottle  or  bladder  arises,  not  from  the  gravity  of 
the  air,  but  from  the  many  thick  vapours  mingled 
with  it  in  these  lower  regions.  To  this  I  would 
attribute  the  increase  of  weight  in  the  leather 
bottle. 

Salv.  I  would  not  have  you  say  this,  and  much 
less  attribute  it  to  Aristotle;  because,  if  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  elements,  he  wished  to  persuade  me 
by  experiment  that  air  has  weight  and  were  to 
say  to  me:  “Take  a  leather  bottle,  fill  it  with 
heavy  vapours  and  observe  how  its  weight  in¬ 
creases,”  I  would  reply  that  the  bottle  would 
weigh  still  more  if  filled  with  bran;  and  would 
then  add  that  this  merely  proves  that  bran  and 
thick  vapours  are  heavy,  but  in  regard  to  air  I 
should  still  remain  in  the  same  doubt  as  before. 
However,  the  experiment  of  Aristotle  is  good 
and  the  proposition  is  true.  But  I  cannot  say  as 
much  of  a  certain  other  consideration,  taken  at 
face  value;  this  consideration  was  offered  by  a 
philosopher  whose  name  slips  me;  but  I  know  I 
have  read  his  argument  which  is  that  air  exhib¬ 
its  greater  gravity  than  levity,  because  it  car¬ 
ries  heavy  bodies  downward  more  easily  than  it 
does  light  ones  upward. 


Sagr.  Fine  indeed !  So  according  to  this  theory 
air  is  much  heavier  than  water,  since  all  heavy 
bodies  are  carried  downward  more  easily  through 
air  than  through  water,  and  all  light  bodies 
buoyed  up  more  easily  through  water  than 
through  air;  further  there  is  an  infinite  number 
of  heavy  bodies  which  fall  through  air  but 
ascend  in  water  and  there  is  an  infinite  number 
of  substances  which  rise  in  water  and  fall  in 
air.  But,  Simplicio,  the  question  as  to  whether 
the  weight  of  the  leather  bottle  is  owing  to 
thick  vapours  or  to  pure  air  does  not  affect 
our  problem  which  is  to  discover  how  bodies 
move  through  this  vapour-laden  atmosphere 
of  ours.  Returning  now  to  the  question  which 
interests  me  more,  I  should  like,  for  the  sake 
of  more  complete  and  thorough  knowledge  of 
this  matter,  not  only  to  be  strengthened  in  my 
belief  that  air  has  weight  but  also  to  learn,  if 
possible,  how  great  its  specific  gravity  is.  There¬ 
fore,  Salviati,  if  you  can  satisfy  my  curiosity  on 
this  point  pray  do  so. 

SALv.Theexperimentwith  the  inflated  leather 
bottle  of  Aristotle  proves  conclusively  that  air 
possesses  positive  gravity  and  not,  as  some  have 
believed,  levity,  a  property  possessed  possibly 
by  no  substance  whatever;  for  if  air  did  possess 
this  quality  of  absolute  and  positive  levity,  it 
should  on  compression  exhibit  greaterlevityand, 
hence,  a  greater  tendency  to  rise;  but  experi¬ 
ment  shows  precisely  the  opposite. 

As  to  the  other  question,  namely,  how  to  de¬ 
termine  the  specific  gravity  of  air,  I  have  em¬ 
ployed  the  following  method.  I  took  a  rather 
large  glass  bottle  with  a  narrow  neck  and  at¬ 
tached  to  it  a  leather  cover,  binding  it  tightly 
about  the  neck  of  the  bottle:  in  the  top  of  this 
cover  I  inserted  and  firmly  fastened  the  valve  of 
a  leather  bottle,  through  which  I  forced  into 
the  glass  bottle,  by  means  of  a  syringe,  a  large 
quantity  of  air.  And  since  air  is  easily  condensed 
one  can  pump  into  the  bottle  two  or  three  times 
its  own  volume  of  air.  After  this  I  took  an  accu¬ 
rate  balance  and  weighed  this  bottle  of  com¬ 
pressed  air  with  the  utmost  precision,  adjusting 
the  weight  with  fine  sand.  I  next  opened  the 
valve  and  allowed  the  compressed  air  to  escape; 
then  replaced  the  flask  upon  the  balance  and 
found  it  perceptibly  ligh  ter :  from  the  sand  which 
had  been  used  as  a  counter\veight  I  now  re¬ 
moved  and  laid  aside  as  much  as  was  necessary 
to  again  secure  balance.  Under  these  conditions 
there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  weight  of 
the  sand  thus  laid  aside  represents  the  weight  of 
the  air  which  had  been  forced  into  the  flask  and 
had  afterwards  escaped.  But  after  all  this  ex- 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES  165 


periment  tells  me  merely  that  the  weight  of  the 
compressed  air  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  sand  re¬ 
moved  from  the  balance;  when  however  it  comes 
to  knowing  certainly  and  definitely  the  weight 
of  air  as  compared  with  that  of  water  or  any 
other  heavy  substance,  this  I  cannot  hope  to  do 
without  first  measuring  the  volume  \quantit^  of 
compressed  air;  for  this  measurement  I  have  de¬ 
vised  the  two  following  methods. 

According  to  the  first  method  one  takes  a  bot¬ 
tle  with  a  narrow  neck  similar  to  the  previous 
one;  over  the  mouth  of  this  bottle  is  slipped  a 
leather  tube  which  is  bound  tightly  about  the 
neck  of  the  flask;  the  other  end  of  this  tube  em¬ 
braces  the  valve  attached  to  the  first  flask  and  is 
tightly  bound  about  it.  This  second  flask  is  pro¬ 
vided  with  a  hole  in  the  bottom  through  which 
an  iron  rod  can  be  placed  so  as  to  open,  at  will, 
the  valve  above  mentioned  and  thus  permit  the 
surplus  air  of  the  first  to  escape  after  it  has  once 
been  weighed:  but  his  second  bottle  must  be 
filled  with  water.  Having  prepared  everything 
in  the  manner  above  described,  open  the  valve 
with  the  rod;  the  air  will  rush  into  the  flask  con¬ 
taining  the  water  and  will  drive  it  through  the 
hole  at  the  bottom,  it  being  clear  that  the  vol¬ 
ume  of  water  thus  displaced  is  equal  to  the  vol¬ 
ume  of  air  escaped  from  the  other  vessel.  Having 
set  aside  this  displaced  water,  weigh  the  vessel 
from  which  the  air  has  escaped  (which  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  been  weighed  previously  while 
containing  the  compressed  air),  and  remove  the 
surplus  of  sand  as  described  above;  it  is  then 
manifest  that  the  weight  of  this  sand  is  precisely 
the  weight  of  a  volume  of  air  equal  to  the  vol¬ 
ume  of  water  displaced  and  set  aside;  this  water 
we  can  weigh  and  find  how  many  times  its  weight 
contains  the  weight  of  the  removed  sand,  thus 
determining  definitely  how  many  times  heavier 
water  is  than  air;  and  we  shall  find,  contrary  to 
the  opinion  of  Aristotle,  that  this  is  not  i  o  times, 
but,  as  our  experiment  shows,  more  nearly  400 
times. 

The  second  method  is  more  expeditious  and 
can  be  carried  out  with  a  single  vessel  fitted  up 
as  the  first  was.  Here  no  air  is  added  to  that 
which  the  vessel  naturally  contains  but  water  is 
forced  into  it  without  allowing  any  air  to  es¬ 
cape  ;  the  water  thus  introduced  necessarily  com¬ 
presses  the  air.  Having  forced  into  the  vessel  as 
much  water  as  possible,  filling  it,  say,  three- 
fourths  full,  which  does  not  require  any  extra¬ 
ordinary  effort,  place  it  upon  the  balance  and 
weigh  it  accurately;  next  hold  the  vessel  mouth 
up,  open  the  valve,  and  allow  the  air  to  escape; 
the  volume  of  the  air  thus  escaping  is  precisely 


equal  to  the  volume  of  water  contained  in  the 
flask.  Again  weigh  the  vessel  which  will  have 
diminished  in  weight  on  account  of  the  escaped 
air;  this  loss  in  weight  represents  the  weight  of  a 
volume  of  air  equal  to  the  volume  of  water  con¬ 
tained  in  the  vessel. 

Simp.  No  one  can  deny  the  cleverness  and  in¬ 
genuity  of  your  devices;  but  while  they  appear 
to  give  complete  intellectual  satisfaction  they 
confuse  me  in  another  direction.  For  since  it  is 
undoubtedly  true  that  the  elements  when  in 
their  proper  places  have  neither  weight  nor  lev¬ 
ity,  I  cannot  understand  how  it  is  possible  for 
that  portion  of  air,  which  appeared  to  weigh, 
say,  4  drachms  of  sand,  should  really  have  such 
a  weight  in  air  as  the  sand  which  counterbal¬ 
ances  it.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  ex¬ 
periment  should  be  carried  out,  not  in  air,  but 
in  a  medium  in  which  the  air  could  exhibit  its 
property  of  weight  if  such  it  really  has. 

Salv.  The  objection  of  Simplicio  is  certainly 
to  the  point  and  must  therefore  either  be  un¬ 
answerable  or  demand  an  equally  clear  solution. 
It  is  perfectly  evident  that  that  air  which,  under 
compression,  weighed  as  much  as  the  sand,  loses 
this  weight  when  once  allowed  to  escape  into  its 
own  element,  while,  indeed,  the  sand  retains  its 
weight.  Hence  for  this  experiment  it  becomes 
necessary  to  select  a  place  where  air  as  well  as 
sand  can  gravitate;  because,  as  has  been  often 
remarked,  the  medium  diminishes  the  weight  of 
any  substance  immersed  in  it  by  an  amount  equal 
to  the  weight  of  the  displaced  medium;  so  that 
air  in  air  loses  all  its  weight.  If  therefore  this  ex¬ 
periment  is  to  be  made  with  accuracy,  it  should 
be  performed  in  a  vacuum  where  every  heavy 
body  exhibits  its  momentum  without  the  slight¬ 
est  diminution.  If  then,  Simplicio,  we  were  to 
weigh  a  portion  of  air  in  a  vacuum  would  you 
then  be  satisfied  and  assured  of  the  fact  ? 

Simp.  Yes  truly:  but  this  is  to  wish  or  ask  the 
impossible. 

Salv.  Your  obligation  will  then  be  very  great 
if,  for  your  sake,  I  accomplish  the  impossible. 
But  I  do  not  want  to  sell  you  something  which  I 
have  already  given  you ;  for  in  the  previous  ex¬ 
periment  we  weighed  the  air  in  vacuum  and  not 
in  air  or  other  medium.  The  fact  that  any  fluid 
medium  diminishes  the  weight  of  a  mass  im¬ 
mersed  in  it,  is  due,  Simplicio,  to  the  resistance 
which  this  medium  offers  to  its  being  opened  up, 
driven  aside,  and  finally  lifted  up.  The  evidence 
for  this  is  seen  in  the  readiness  with  which  the 
fluid  rushes  to  fill  up  any  space  formerly  occu¬ 
pied  by  the  mass;  if  the  medium  were  not  af¬ 
fected  by  such  an  immersion  then  it  would  not 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


i66 

react  against  the  immersed  body.  Tell  me  now, 
when  you  have  a  flask,  in  air,  filled  with  its  na¬ 
tural  amount  of  air  and  then  proceed  to  pump 
into  the  vessel  more  air,  does  this  extra  charge 
in  any  way  separate  or  divide  or  change  the  cir¬ 
cumambient  air?  Does  the  vessel  perhaps  ex¬ 
pand  so  that  the  surrounding  medium  is  dis¬ 
placed  in  order  to  give  more  room?  Certainly 
not.  Therefore,  one  is  able  to  say  that  this  extra 
charge  of  air  is  not  immersed  in  the  surrounding 
medium  for  it  occupies  no  space  in  it,  but  is,  as 
it  were,  in  a  vacuum.  Indeed,  it  is  really  in  a 
vacuum;  for  it  diffuses  into  the  vacuities  which 
are  not  completely  filled  by  the  original  and  un¬ 
condensed  air.  In  fact  I  do  not  see  any  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  enclosed  and  the  surrounding 
media:  for  the  surrounding  medium  does  not 
press  upon  the  enclosed  medium,  and,  viceversa^ 
the  enclosed  medium  exerts  no  pressure  against 
the  surrounding  one;  this  same  relationship  ex¬ 
ists  in  the  case  of  any  matter  in  a  vacuum,  as 
well  as  in  the  case  of  the  extra  charge  of  air  com¬ 
pressed  into  the  flask.  The  weight  of  this  con¬ 
densed  air  is  therefore  the  same  as  that  which  it 
would  have  if  set  free  in  a  vacuum.  It  is  true  of 
course  that  the  weight  of  the  sand  used  as  a 
counterpoise  would  be  a  little  greater  in  vacuo 
than  in  free  air.  We  must,  then,  say  that  the  air 
is  slightly  lighter  than  the  sand  required  to 
counterbalance  it,  that  is  to  say,  by  an  amount 
equal  to  the  weight  in  vacuo  of  a  volume  of  air 
equal  to  the  volume  of  the  sand. 

At  this  point  in  an  annotated  copy  of  the  original 
edition  the  following  note  by  Galileo  is  found: 

Sagr.  a  very  clever  discussion,  solving  a  wonder¬ 
ful  problem,  because  it  demonstrates  briefly  and 
concisely  the  manner  in  which  one  may  find  the 
weight  of  a  body  in  vacuo  by  simply  weighing  it  in 
air.  The  explanation  is  as  follows:  when  a  heavy 
body  is  immersed  in  air  it  loses  in  weight  an  amount 
equal  to  the  weight  of  a  volume  of  air  equivalent  to 
the  volume  of  the  body  itself.  Hence  if  one  adds  to  a 
body,  without  expanding  it,  a  quantity  of  air  equal 
to  that  which  it  displaces  and  weighs  it,  he  will  ob¬ 
tain  its  absolute  weight  in  vacuo^  since,  without  in¬ 
creasing  it  in  size,  he  has  increased  its  weight  by  just 
the  amount  which  it  lost  through  immersion  in  air. 

When,  therefore,  we  force  a  quantity  of  water  in¬ 
to  a  vessel  which  already  contains  its  normal  amount 
of  air,  without  allowing  any  of  this  air  to  escape  it  is 
clear  that  this  normal  quantity  of  air  will  be  com¬ 
pressed  and  condensed  into  a  smaller  space  in  order 
to  make  room  for  the  water  which  is  forced  in:  it  is 
also  clear  that  the  volume  of  air  thus  compressed  is 
equal  to  the  volume  of  water  added.  If  now  the  ves¬ 
sel  be  weighed  in  air  in  this  condition,  it  is  manifest 
that  the  weight  of  the  water  will  be  increased  by 
that  of  .an  equal  v'olume  of  air;  the  total  weight  of 


water  and  air  thus  obtained  is  equal  to  the  weight 
of  the  water  alone  in  vacuo. 

Now  record  the  weight  of  the  entire  vessel  and 
then  allow  the  compressed  air  to  escape;  weigh  the 
remainder;  the  difference  of  these  two  weights  will 
be  the  weight  of  the  compressed  air  which,  in  vol¬ 
ume,  is  equal  to  that  of  the  w’ater.  Next  find  the 
weight  of  the  water  alone  and  add  to  it  that  of  the 
compressed  air;  we  shall  then  have  the  water  alone 
in  vacuo.  To  find  the  weight  of  the  water  we  shall 
have  to  remove  it  from  the  vessel  and  weigh  the  ves¬ 
sel  alone;  subtract  this  weight  from  that  of  the  ves¬ 
sel  and  water  together.  It  is  clear  that  the  remainder 
will  be  the  weight  of  the  water  alone  in  air. 

Simp.  The  previous  experiments,  in  my  opin¬ 
ion,  left  something  to  be  desired:  but  now  I  am 
fully  satisfied. 

Salv.  The  facts  set  forth  by  me  up  to  this 
point  and,  in  particular,  the  one  which  shows 
that  difference  of  weight,  even  when  ver}^  great, 
is  without  effect  in  changing  the  speed  of  falling 
bodies,  so  that  as  far  as  weight  is  concerned  they 
all  fall  with  equal  speed:  this  idea  is,  I  say,  so 
new,  and  at  first  glance  so  remote  from  fact, 
that  if  we  do  not  have  the  means  of  making  it 
just  as  clear  as  sunlight,  it  had  better  not  be 
mentioned;  but  having  once  allowed  it  to  pass 
my  lips  I  must  neglect  no  experiment  or  argu¬ 
ment  to  establish  it. 

Sagr.  Not  only  this  but  also  many  other  of 
your  views  are  so  far  removed  from  the  com¬ 
monly  accepted  opinions  and  doctrines  that  if 
you  were  to  publish  them  you  would  stir  up  a 
large  number  of  antagonists;  for  human  nature 
is  such  that  men  do  not  look  with  favor  upon 
discoveries — either  of  truth  or  fallacy — in  their 
own  field,  when  made  by  others  than  themselves. 
They  call  him  an  innovator  of  doctrine,  an  un¬ 
pleasant  title,  by  which  they  hope  to  cut  those 
knots  which  they  cannot  untie,  and  by  subter¬ 
ranean  mines  they  seek  to  destroy  structures 
which  patient  artisans  have  built  with  custom¬ 
ary  tools.  But  as  for  ourselves  who  have  no  such 
thoughts,  the  experiments  and  arguments  which 
you  have  thus  far  adduced  are  fully  satisfactory; 
however  if  you  have  any  experiments  which  are 
more  direct  or  any  arguments  which  are  more 
convincing,  we  will  hear  them  with  pleasure. 

Salv.  The  experiment  made  to  ascertain 
whether  two  bodies  differing  greatly  in  weight 
will  fall  from  a  given  height  with  the  same  speed, 
offers  some  difficulty;  because,  if  the  height  is 
considerable,  the  retarding  effect  of  the  medi¬ 
um,  which  must  be  penetrated  and  thrust  aside 
by  the  falling  body,  will  be  greater  in  the  case  of 
the  small  momentum  of  the  very  light  body 
than  in  the  case  of  the  great  force  of  the  heavy 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES  167 


body;  so  that,  in  a  long  distance,  the  light  body 
will  be  left  behind ;  if  the  height  be  small,  one  may 
well  doubt  whether  there  is  any  difference;  and 
if  there  be  a  difference  it  will  be  inappreciable. 

It  occurred  to  me,  therefore,  to  repeat  many 
times  the  fall  through  a  small  height  in  such  a 
way  that  I  might  accumulate  all  those  small  in¬ 
tervals  of  time  that  elapse  between  the  arrival 
of  the  heavy  and  light  bodies  respectively  at 
their  common  terminus,  so  that  this  sum  makes 
an  interval  of  time  which  is  not  only  observable, 
but  easily  observable.  In  order  to  employ  the 
slowest  speeds  possible  and  thus  reduce  the 
change  which  the  resisting  medium  produces 
upon  the  simple  effect  of  gravity,  it  occurred  to 
me  to  allow  the  bodies  to  fall  along  a  plane 
slightly  inclined  to  the  horizontal.  For  in  such  a 
plane,  just  as  well  as  in  a  vertical  plane,  one  may 
discover  how  bodies  of  different  weight  behave: 
and  besides  this,  I  also  wished  to  rid  myself  of 
the  resistance  which  might  arise  from  contact  of 
the  moving  body  with  the  aforesaid  inclined 
plane.  Accordingly,  I  took  two  balls,  one  of  lead 
and  one  of  cork,  the  former  more  than  a  hun¬ 
dred  times  heavier  than  the  latter,  and  suspend¬ 
ed  them  by  means  of  two  equal  fine  threads, 
each  four  of  five  cubits  long.  Pulling  each  ball 
aside  from  the  perpendicular,  I  let  them  go  at 
the  same  instant,  and  they,  falling  along  the  cir¬ 
cumferences  of  circles  having  these  equal  strings 
for  semi-diameters,  passed  beyond  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  and  returned  along  the  same  path.  This 
free  vibration  repeated  a  hundred  times  showed 
clearly  that  the  heavy  body  maintains  so  nearly 
the  period  of  the  light  body  that  neither  in  a 
hundred  swings  nor  even  in  a  thousand  will  the 
former  anticipate  the  latter  by  as  much  as  a 
single  moment,  so  perfectly  do  they  keep  step. 
We  can  also  observe  the  effect  of  the  medium 
which,  by  the  resistance  which  it  offers  to  mo¬ 
tion,  diminishes  the  vibration  of  the  cork  more 
than  that  of  the  lead,  but  without  altering  the 
frequency  of  either;  even  when  the  arc  trav¬ 
ersed  by  the  cork  did  not  exceed  five  or  six  de¬ 
grees  while  that  of  the  lead  was  fifty  or  sixty, 
the  swings  were  performed  in  equal  times. 

Simp.  If  this  be  so,  why  is  not  the  speed  of  the 
lead  greater  than  that  of  the  cork,  seeing  that 
the  former  traverses  sixty  degrees  in  the  same 
interval  in  which  the  latter  covers  scarcely  six.? 

Salv.  But  what  would  you  say,  Simplicio,  if 
both  covered  their  paths  in  the  same  time  when 
the  cork,  drawn  aside  through  thirty  degrees, 
traverses  an  arc  of  sixty,  while  the  lead  pulled 
aside  only  two  degrees  traverses  an  arc  of  four? 
Would  not  then  the  cork  be  proportionately 


swifter?  And  yet  such  is  the  experimental  fact. 
But  observe  this:  having  pulled  aside  the 
pendulum  of  lead,  say  through  an  arc  of  fifty 
degrees,  and  set  it  free,  it  swings  beyond  the 
perpendicular  almost  fifty  degrees,  thus  de¬ 
scribing  an  arc  of  nearly  one  hundred  de¬ 
grees;  on  the  return  swing  it  describes  a  lit¬ 
tle  smaller  arc;  and  after  a  large  number  of 
such  vibrations  it  finally  comes  to  rest.  Each  vi¬ 
bration,  whether  of  ninety,  fifty,  twenty,  ten, 
or  four  degrees  occupies  the  same  time:  accord¬ 
ingly,  the  speed  of  the  moving  body  keeps  on 
diminishing  since  in  equal  intervals  of  time,  it 
traverses  arcs  which  grow  smaller  and  smaller. 

Precisely  the  same  things  happen  with  the 
pendulum  of  cork,  suspended  by  a  string  of  equal 
length,  except  that  a  smaller  number  of  vibra¬ 
tions  is  required  to  bring  it  to  rest,  since  on  ac¬ 
count  of  its  lightness  it  is  less  able  to  overcome 
the  resistance  of  the  air;  nevertheless  the  vibra¬ 
tions,  whether  large  or  small,  are  all  performed 
in  time-intervals  which  are  not  only  equal  among 
themselves,  but  also  equal  to  the  period  of  the 
lead  pendulum.  Hence  it  is  true  that,  if  while 
the  lead  is  traversing  an  arc  of  fifty  degrees  the 
cork  covers  one  of  only  ten,  the  cork  moves 
more  slowly  than  the  lead;  but  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  also  true  that  the  cork  may  cover  an 
arc  of  fifty  while  the  lead  passes  over  one  of  only 
ten  or  six;  thus,  at  different  times,  we  have  now 
the  cork,  now  the  lead,  moving  more  rapidly. 
But  if  these  same  bodies  traverse  equal  arcs  in 
equal  times  we  may  rest  assured  that  their  speeds 
are  equal. 

Simp.  I  hesitate  to  admit  the  conclusiveness 
of  this  argument  because  of  the  confusion  which 
arises  from  your  making  both  bodies  move  now 
rapidly,  now  slowly  and  now  very  slowly,  which 
leaves  me  in  doubt  as  to  whether  their  velocities 
are  always  equal. 

Sagr.  Allow  me,  if  you  please.  Salvia ti,  to  say 
j  ust  a  few  words.  Now  tell  me,  Simplicio,  whether 
you  admit  that  one  can  say  with  certainty  that 
the  speeds  of  the  cork  and  the  lead  are  equal 
whenever  both,  starting  from  rest  at  the  same 
moment  and  descending  the  same  slopes,  always 
traverse  equal  spaces  in  equal  times  ? 

Simp.  This  can  neither  be  doubted  nor  gain¬ 
said. 

Sagr.  Now  it  happens,  in  the  case  of  the  pen¬ 
dulums,  that  each  of  them  traverses  now  an  arc 
of  sixty  degrees,  now  one  of  fifty,  or  thirty  or 
ten  or  eight  or  four  or  two,  etc.;  and  when  they 
both  swing  through  an  arc  of  sixty  degrees  they 
do  so  in  equal  intervals  of  time;  the  same  thing 
happens  when  the  arc  is  fifty  degrees  or  thirty 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


i68 

or  ten  or  any  other  number;  and  therefore  we 
conclude  that  the  speed  of  the  lead  in  an  arc  of 
sixty  degrees  is  equal  to  the  speed  of  the  cork 
when  the  latter  also  swings  through  an  arc  of 
sixty  degrees;  in  the  case  of  a  fifty-degree  arc 
these  speeds  are  also  equal  to  each  other;  so  also 
in  the  case  of  other  arcs.  But  this  is  not  saying 
that  the  speed  which  occurs  in  an  arc  of  sixty  is 
the  same  as  that  which  occurs  in  an  arc  of  fifty; 
nor  is  the  speed  in  an  arc  of  fifty  equal  to  that  in 
one  of  thirty,  etc.;  but  the  smaller  the  arcs,  the 
smaller  the  speeds;  the  fact  observed  is  that  one 
and  the  same  moving  body  requires  the  same 
time  for  traversing  a  large  arc  of  sixty  degrees  as 
for  a  small  arc  of  fifty  or  even  a  very  small  arc  of 
ten;  all  these  arcs,  indeed,  are  covered  in  the 
same  interval  of  time.  It  is  true  therefore  that 
the  lead  and  the  cork  each  diminish  their  speed 
in  proportion  as  their  arcs  diminish;  but  this 
does  not  contradict  the  fact  that  they  maintain 
equal  speeds  in  equal  arcs. 

My  reason  for  saying  these  things  has  been 
rather  because  I  wanted  to  learn  whether  I  had 
correctly  understood  Salviati,  than  because  I 
thought  Simplicio  had  any  need  of  a  clearer  ex¬ 
planation  than  that  given  by  Salviati  which  like 
everything  else  of  his  is  extremely  lucid,  so  lucid, 
indeed,  that  when  he  solves  questions  which  are 
difficult  not  merely  in  appearance,  but  in  reality 
and  in  fact,  he  does  so  with  reasons,  observations 
and  experiments  which  are  common  and  familiar 
to  everyone. 

In  this  manner  he  has,  as  I  have  learned  from 
various  sources,  given  occasion  to  a  highly  es¬ 
teemed  professor  for  undervaluing  his  discover¬ 
ies  on  the  ground  that  they  are  commonplace, 
and  established  upon  a  mean  and  vulgar  basis;  as 
if  it  were  not  a  most  admirable  and  praiseworthy 
feature  of  demonstrative  science  that  it  springs 
from  and  grows  out  of  principles  well-known, 
understood,  and  conceded  by  all. 

But  let  us  continue  with  this  light  diet;  and 
if  Simplicio  is  satisfied  to  understand  and  admit 
that  the  gravity  inherent  in  various  falling  bodies 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  difference  of  speed 
observed  among  them,  and  that  all  bodies,  in  so 
far  as  their  speeds  depend  upon  it,  would  move 
with  the  same  velocity,  pray  tell  us,  Salviati, 
how  you  explain  the  appreciable  and  evident  in¬ 
equality  of  motion;  please  reply  also  to  the  ob¬ 
jection  urged  by  Simplicio — an  objection  in 
which  I  concur — namely,  that  a  cannon  ball  falls 
more  rapidly  than  a  bird-shot.  From  my  point 
of  view,  one  might  expect  the  difference  of  speed 
to  be  small  in  the  case  of  bodies  of  the  same  sub¬ 
stance  moving  through  any  single  medium. 


whereas  the  larger  ones  will  descend,  during  a 
single  pulse-beat,  a  distance  which  the  smaller 
ones  will  not  traverse  in  an  hour,  or  in  four,  or 
even  in  twenty  hours;  as  for  instance  in  the  case 
of  stones  and  fine  sand  and  especially  that  very 
fine  sand  which  produces  muddy  waterand  which 
in  many  hours  will  not  fall  through  as  much  as 
two  cubits,  a  distance  which  stones  not  much 
larger  will  traverse  in  a  single  pulse-beat. 

Salv.  The  action  of  the  medium  in  producing 
a  greater  retardation  upon  those  bodies  which 
have  a  less  specific  gravity  has  already  been  ex¬ 
plained  by  showing  that  they  experience  a  di¬ 
minution  of  weight.  But  to  explain  how  one  and 
the  same  medium  produces  such  different  re¬ 
tardations  in  bodies  which  are  made  of  the  same 
material  and  have  the  same  shape,  but  differ 
only  in  size,  requires  a  discussion  more  clever 
than  that  by  which  one  explains  how  a  more  ex¬ 
panded  shape  or  an  opposing  motion  of  the  me¬ 
dium  retards  the  speed  of  the  moving  body.  The 
solution  of  the  present  problem  lies,  I  think,  in 
the  roughness  and  porosity  which  are  generally 
and  almost  necessarily  found  in  the  surfaces  of 
solid  bodies.  When  the  body  is  in  motion  these 
rough  places  strike  the  air  or  other  ambient  me¬ 
dium.  The  evidence  for  this  is  found  in  the  hum¬ 
ming  which  accompanies  the  rapid  motion  of  a 
body  through  air,  even  when  that  body  is  as 
round  as  possible.  One  hears  not  only  humming, 
but  also  hissing  and  whistling,  whenever  there 
is  any  appreciable  cavity  or  elevation  upon  the 
body.  We  observe  also  that  a  round  solid  body 
rotating  in  a  lathe  produces  a  current  of  air.  But 
what  more  do  we  need  ?  When  a  top  spins  on  the 
ground  at  its  greatest  speed  do  we  not  hear  a  dis¬ 
tinct  buzzing  of  high  pitch  ?  This  sibilant  note 
diminishes  in  pitch  as  the  speed  of  rotation 
slackens,  which  is  evidence  that  these  small  ru¬ 
gosities  on  the  surface  meet  resistance  in  the  air. 
There  can  be  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  in  the 
motion  of  falling  bodies  these  rugosities  strike 
the  surrounding  fluid  and  retard  the  speed;  and 
this  they  do  so  much  the  more  in  proportion  as 
the  surface  is  larger,  which  is  the  case  of  small 
bodies  as  compared  with  greater. 

Simp.  Stop  a  moment  please,  I  am  getting 
confused.  For  although  I  understand  and  admit 
that  friction  of  the  medium  upon  the  surface  of 
the  body  retards  its  motion  and  that,  if  other 
things  are  the  same,  the  larger  surface  suffers 
greater  retardation,  I  do  not  see  on  what  ground 
you  say  that  the  surface  of  the  smaller  body  is 
larger.  Besides  if,  as  you  say,  the  larger  surface 
suffers  greater  retardation  the  larger  solid  should 
move  more  slowly,  which  is  not  the  fact.  But 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES  169 


this  objection  can  be  easily  met  by  saying  that, 
although  the  larger  body  has  a  larger  surface,  it 
has  also  a  greater  weight,  in  comparison  with 
which  the  resistance  of  the  larger  surface  is  no 
more  than  the  resistance  of  the  small  surface  in 
comparison  with  its  smaller  weight;  so  that  the 
speed  of  the  larger  solid  does  not  become  less.  I 
therefore  see  no  reason  for  expecting  any  differ¬ 
ence  of  speed,  so  long  as  the  driving  weight  di¬ 
minishes  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  retard¬ 
ing  power  of  the  surface. 

Salv.  I  shall  answer  all  your  objections  at 
once.  You  will  admit,  of  course,  Simplicio,  that 
if  one  takes  two  equal  bodies,  of  the  same  material 
and  same  figure,  bodies  which  would  therefore 
fall  with  equal  speeds,  and  if  he  diminishes  the 
weight  of  one  of  them  in  the  same  proportion  as 
its  surface  (maintaining  the  similarity  of  shape) 
he  would  not  thereby  diminish  the  speed  of  this 
body. 

Simp.  This  inference  seems  to  be  in  harmony 
with  your  theory  which  states  that  the  weight 
of  a  body  has  no  effect  in  either  accelerating  or 
retarding  its  motion. 

Salv.  I  quite  agree  with  you  in  this  opinion 
from  which  it  appears  to  follow  that,  if  the  weight 
of  a  body  is  diminished  in  greater  proportion 
than  its  surface,  the  motion  is  retarded  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  extent;  and  this  retardation  is  greater  and 
greater  in  proportion  as  the  diminu  tion  of  weight 
exceeds  that  of  the  surface. 

Simp.  This  I  admit  without  hesitation. 

Salv.  Now  you  must  know,  Simplicio,  that 
it  is  not  possible  to  diminish  the  surface  of  a 
solid  body  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  weight,  and 
at  the  same  time  maintain  similarity  of  figure. 
For  since  it  is  clear  that  in  the  case  of  a  diminish¬ 
ing  solid  the  weight  grows  less  in  proportion  to 
the  volume,  and.  since  the  volume  always  di¬ 
minishes  more  rapidly  than  the  surface,  when 
the  same  shape  is  maintained,  the  weight  must 
therefore  diminish  more  rapidly  than  the  sur¬ 
face.  But  geometry  teaches  us  that,  in  the  case 
of  similar  solids,  the  ratio  of  two  volumes  is 
greater  than  the  ratio  of  their  surfaces;  which, 
for  the  sake  of  better  understanding,  I  shall  il¬ 
lustrate  by  a  particular  case. 

Take,  for  example,  a  cube  two  inches  on  a 
side  so  that  each  face  has  an  area  of  four  square 
inches  and  the  total  area,  the  sum  of  the  six 
faces,  amounts  to  twenty  Tour  square  inches; 
now  imagine  this  cube  to  be  sawed  through 
three  times  so  as  to  divide  it  into  eight  smaller 
cubes,  each  one  inch  on  the  side,  each  face  one 
inch  square,  and  the  total  surface  of  each  cube 
six  square  inches  instead  of  twenty-four  as  in 


the  case  of  the  larger  cube.  It  is  evident  there¬ 
fore,  that  the  surface  of  the  little  cube  is  only 
one-fourth  that  of  the  larger,  namely,  the  ratio 
of  six  to  twenty-four;  but  the  volume  of  the 
solid  cube  itself  is  only  one-eighth;  the  volume, 
and  hence  also  the  weight,  diminishes  therefore 
much  more  rapidly  than  the  surface.  If  we  again 
divide  the  little  cube  into  eight  others  we  shall 
have,  for  the  total  surface  of  one  of  these,  one 
and  one-half  square  inches,  which  is  one-six¬ 
teenth  of  the  surface  of  the  original  cube;  but 
its  volume  is  only  one-sixty-fourth  part.  Thus, 
by  two  divisions,  you  see  that  the  volume  is 
diminished  four  times  as  much  as  the  surface. 
And,  if  the  subdivision  be  continued  until  the 
original  solid  be  reduced  to  a  fine  powder,  we 
shall  find  that  the  weight  of  one  of  these  smallest 
particles  has  diminished  hundreds  and  hun¬ 
dreds  of  times  as  much  as  its  surface.  And  this 
which  I  have  illustrated  in  the  case  of  cubes 
holds  also  in  the  case  of  all  similar  solids,  where 
the  volumes  stand  in  sesquialteral  ratio  to  their 
surfaces.  Observe  then  how  much  greater  the 
resistance,  arising  from  contact  of  the  surface  of 
the  moving  body  with  the  medium,  in  the  case 
of  small  bodies  than  in  the  case  of  large;  and 
when  one  considers  that  the  rugosities  on  the 
very  small  surfaces  of  fine  dust  particles  are  per¬ 
haps  no  smaller  than  those  on  the  surfaces  of 
larger  solids  which  have  been  carefully  polished, 
he  will  see  how  important  it  is  that  the  medium 
should  be  very  fluid  and  offer  no  resistance  to 
being  thrust  aside,  easily  yielding  to  a  small 
force.  You  see,  therefore,  Simplicio,  that  I  was 
not  mistaken  when,  not  long  ago,  I  said  that 
the  surface  of  a  small  solid  is  comparatively 
greater  than  that  of  a  large  one. 

Simp.  I  am  quite  convinced;  and,  believe  me, 
if  I  were  again  beginning  my  studies,  I  should 
follow  the  advice  of  Plato  and  start  with  mathe¬ 
matics,  a  science  which  proceeds  very  cautious¬ 
ly  and  admits  nothing  as  established  until  it  has 
been  rigidly  demonstrated. 

Sagr.  This  discussion  has  afforded  me  great 
pleasure;  but  before  proceeding  further  I  should 
like  to  hear  the  explanation  of  a  phrase  of  yours 
which  is  new  to  me,  namely,  that  similar  solids 
are  to  each  other  in  the  sesquialteral  ratio  of 
their  surfaces;  for  although  I  have  seen  and  un¬ 
derstood  the  proposition  in  which  it  is  demon¬ 
strated  that  the  surfaces  of  similar  solids  are  in 
the  duplicate  ratio  of  their  sides,  and  also  the 
proposition  which  proves  that  the  volumes  are 
in  the  triplicate  ratio  of  their  sides,  yet  I  have 
not  so  much  as  heard  mentioned  the  ratio  of 
the  volume  of  a  solid  to  its  surface. 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


Salv.  You  yourself  have  suggested  the  an¬ 
swer  to  your  question  and  have  removed  every 
doubt.  For  if  one  quantity  is  the  cube  of  some¬ 
thing  of  which  another  quantity  is  the  square 
does  it  not  follow  that  the  cube  is  the  sesqui¬ 
alteral  of  the  square  ?  Surely.  Now  if  the  surface 
varies  as  the  square  of  its  linear  dimensions  while 
the  volume  varies  as  the  cube  of  these  dimen¬ 
sions,  may  we  not  say  that  the  volume  stands 
in  sesquialteral  ratio  to  the  surface.? 

Sagr.  Quite  so.  And  now  although  there  are 
still  some  details,  in  connection  with  the  sub¬ 
ject  under  discussion,  concerning  which  I  might 
ask  questions  yet,  if  we  keep  making  one  digres¬ 
sion  after  another,  it  will  be  long  before  we 
reach  the  main  topic  which  has  to  do  with  the 
variety  of  properties  found  in  the  resistance 
which  solid  bodies  offer  to  fracture;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  if  you  please,  let  us  return  to  the  subject 
which  we  originally  proposed  to  discuss. 

Salv.  Very  well;  but  the  questions  which  we 
have  already  considered  are  so  numerous  and 
so  varied,  and  have  taken  up  so  much  time  that 
there  is  not  much  of  this  day  left  to  spend  upon 
our  main  topic  which  abounds  in  geometrical 
demonstrations  calling  for  careful  consideration. 
May  I,  therefore,  suggest  that  we  postpone  the 
meeting  until  to-morrow,  not  only  for  the  rea¬ 
son  just  mentioned  but  also  in  order  that  I  may 
bring  with  me  some  papers  in  which  I  have  set 
down  in  an  orderly  way  the  theorems  and  propo¬ 
sitions  dealing  with  the  various  phases  of  this 
subject,  matters  which,  from  memory  alone,  I 
could  not  present  in  the  proper  order. 

Sagr.  I  fully  concur  in  your  opinion  and  all 
the  more  willingly  because  this  will  leave  time 
to-day  to  take  up  some  of  my  difficulties  with 
the  subject  which  we  have  just  been  discussing. 
One  question  is  whether  we  are  to  consider  the 
resistance  of  the  medium  as  sufficient  to  de¬ 
stroy  the  acceleration  of  a  body  of  very  heavy 
material,  very  large  volume,  and  spherical  fig¬ 
ure.  I  say  spherical  in  order  to  select  a  volume 
which  is  contained  within  a  minimum  surface 
and  therefore  less  subject  to  retardation. 

Another  question  deals  with  the  vibrations  of 
pendulums  which  may  be  regarded  from  several 
viewpoints;  the  first  is  whether  all  vibrations, 
large,  medium,  and  small,  are  performed  in  ex¬ 
actly  and  precisely  equal  times:  another  is  to 
find  the  ratio  of  the  times  of  vibration  of  pen¬ 
dulums  supported  by  threads  of  unequal  length. 

Salv.  These  are  interesting  questions:  but  I 
fear  that  here,  as  in  the  case  of  all  other  facts, 
if  we  take  up  for  discussion  any  one  of  them, 
it  will  carry  in  its  wake  so  many  other  facts  and 


curious  consequences  that  time  will  not  remain 
to-day  for  the  discussion  of  all. 

Sagr.  If  these  are  as  full  of  interest  as  the  fore¬ 
going,  I  would  gladly  spend  as  many  days  as 
there  remain  hours  between  now  and  night¬ 
fall;  and  I  dare  say  that  Simplicio  would  not  be 
wearied  by  these  discussions. 

Simp.  Certainly  not;  especially  when  the 
questions  pertain  to  natural  science  and  have 
not  been  treated  by  other  philosophers. 

Salv.  Now  taking  up  the  first  question,  I  can 
assert  without  hesitation  that  there  is  no  sphere 
so  large,  or  composed  of  material  so  dense  but 
that  the  resistance  of  the  medium,  although 
very  slight,  would  check  its  acceleration  and 
would,  in  time  reduce  its  motion  to  uniformity; 
a  statement  which  is  strongly  supported  by  ex¬ 
periment.  For  if  a  falling  body,  as  time  goes  on, 
were  to  acquire  a  speed  as  great  as  you  please, 
no  such  speed,  impressed  by  external  forces,  can 
be  so  great  but  that  the  body  will  first  acquire  it 
and  then,  owing  to  the  resisting  medium,  lose 
it.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  a  cannon  ball,  having 
fallen  a  distance  of  four  cubits  through  the  air 
and  having  acquired  a  speed  of,  say,  ten  units 
were  to  strike  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  if 
the  resistance  of  the  water  were  not  able  to 
check  the  momentum  of  the  shot,  it  would  ei¬ 
ther  increase  in  speed  or  maintain  a  uniform 
motion  until  the  bottom  were  reached:  but 
such  is  not  the  observed  fact;  on  the  contrary, 
the  water  when  only  a  few  cubits  deep  hinders 
and  diminishes  the  motion  in  such  a  way  that 
the  shot  delivers  to  the  bed  of  the  river  or  lake 
a  very  slight  impulse.  Clearly  then  if  a  short 
fall  through  the  water  is  sufficient  to  deprive  a 
cannon  ball  of  its  speed,  this  speed  cannot  be 
regained  by  a  fall  of  even  a  thousand  cubits. 
How  could  a  body  acquire,  in  a  fall  of  a  thou¬ 
sand  cubits,  that  which  it  loses  in  a  fall  of  four.? 
But  what  more  is  needed  .?Do  we  not  observe  that 
the  enormous  momentum,  delivered  to  a  shot 
by  a  cannon,  is  so  deadened  bypassing  through 
a  few  cubits  of  water  that  the  ball,  so  far  from 
injuring  the  ship,  barely  strikes  it?  Even  the 
air,  although  a  very  yielding  medium,  can  also 
diminish  the  speed  of  a  falling  body,  as  may  be 
easily  understood  from  similar  experiments.  For 
if  a  gun  be  fired  downwards  from  the  top  of  a 
very  high  tower  the  shot  will  make  a  smaller 
impression  upon  the  ground  than  if  the  gun  had 
been  fired  from  an  elevation  of  only  four  or  six 
cubits;  this  is  clear  evidence  that  the  momen¬ 
tum  of  the  ball,  fired  from  the  top  of  the  tower, 
diminishes  continually  from  the  instant  it  leaves 
the  barrel  until  it  reaches  the  ground.  There- 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


fore,  a  fall  from  ever  so  great  an  altitude  will 
not  suffice  to  give  to  a  body  that  momentum 
which  it  has  once  lost  through  the  resistance  of 
the  air,  no  matter  how  it  was  originally  ac- 
cjuired.  In  like  manner,  the  destructive  effect 
produced  upon  a  wall  by  a  shot  fired  from  a 
gun  at  a  distance  of  twenty  cubits  cannot  be 
duplicated  by  the  fall  of  the  same  shot  from  any 
altitude  however  great.  My  opinion  is,  there¬ 
fore,  that  under  the  circumstances  which  occur 
in  nature,  the  acceleration  of  any  body  falling 
from  rest  reaches  an  end  and  that  the  resistance 
of  the  medium  finally  reduces  its  speed  to  a  con¬ 
stant  value  which  is  thereafter  maintained. 

Sagr.  These  experiments  are  in  my  opinion 
much  to  the  purpose;  the  only  question  is 
whether  an  opponent  might  not  make  bold  to 
deny  the  fact  in  the  case  of  bodies  which  are 
very  large  and  heavy  or  to  assert  that  a  cannon 
ball,  falling  from  the  distance  of  the  moon  or 
from  the  upper  regions  of  the  atmosphere, 
would  deliver  a  heavier  blow  than  if  just  leav¬ 
ing  the  muzzle  of  the  gun. 

Salv.  No  doubt  many  objections  may  be 
raised  not  all  of  which  can  be  refuted  by  experi¬ 
ment:  however  in  this  particular  case  the  fol¬ 
lowing  consideration  must  be  taken  into  ac¬ 
count,  namely,  that  it  is  very  likely  that  a  heavy 
body  falling  from  a  height  will,  on  reaching  the 
ground,  have  acquired  just  as  much  momentum 
as  was  necessary  to  carry  it  to  that  height;  as 
may  be  clearly  seen  in  the  case  of  a  rather  heavy 
pendulum  which,  when  pulled  aside  fifty  or  six¬ 
ty  degrees  from  the  vertical,  will  acquire  pre¬ 
cisely  that  speed  and  force  which  are  sufficient 
to  carry  it  to  an  equal  elevation,  save  only  that 
small  portion  which  it  loses  through  friction  on 
the  air.  In  order  to  place  a  cannon  ball  at  such 
a  height  as  might  suffice  to  give  it  just  that 
momentum  which  the  powder  imparted  to  it 
on  leaving  the  gun,  we  need  only  fire  it  verti¬ 
cally  upwards  from  the  same  gun;  and  we  can 
then  observe  whether  on  falling  back  it  delivers 
a  blow  equal  to  that  of  the  gun  fired  at  close 
range;  in  my  opinion  it  would  be  much  weaker. 
The  resistance  of  the  air  would,  therefore,  I 
think,  prevent  the  muzzle  velocity  from  being 
equalled  by  a  natural  fall  from  rest  at  any  height 
whatsoever. 

We  come  now  to  the  other  questions,  relat¬ 
ing  to  pendulums,  a  subject  which  may  appear 
to  many  exceedingly  arid,  especially  to  those 
philosophers  who  are  continually  occupied  with 
the  more  profound  questions  of  nature.  Never¬ 
theless,  the  problem  is  one  which  I  do  not  scorn. 
I  am  encouraged  by  the  example  of  Aristotle 


whom  I  admire  especially  because  he  did  not 
fail  to  discuss  every  subject  which  he  thought 
in  any  degree  worthy  of  consideration. 

Impelled  by  your  queries  I  may  give  you 
some  of  my  ideas  concerning  certain  problems 
in  music,  a  splendid  subject,  upon  which  so 
many  eminent  men  have  written:  among  these 
is  Aristotle  himself  who  has  discussed  numer¬ 
ous  interesting  acoustical  questions.  According¬ 
ly,  if  on  the  basis  of  some  easy  and  tangible 
experiments,  I  shall  explain  some  striking  phe¬ 
nomena  in  the  domain  of  sound,  I  trust  my  ex¬ 
planations  will  meet  your  approval. 

Sagr.  I  shall  receive  them  not  only  grate¬ 
fully  but  eagerly.  For,  although  I  take  pleasure 
in  every  kind  of  musical  instrument  and  have 
paid  considerable  attention  to  harmony,  I  have 
never  been  able  to  fully  understand  why  some 
combinations  of  tones  are  more  pleasing  than 
others,  or  why  certain  combinations  not  only 
fail  to  please  but  are  even  highly  offensive.  Then 
there  is  the  old  problem  of  two  stretched  strings 
in  unison;  when  one  of  them  is  sounded,  the 
other  begins  to  vibrate  and  to  emit  its  note; 
nor  do  I  understand  the  different  ratios  of  har¬ 
mony  and  some  other  details. 

Salv.  Let  us  see  whether  we  cannot  derive 
from  the  pendulum  a  satisfactory  solution  of  all 
these  difficulties.  And  first,  as  to  the  question 
whether  one  and  the  same  pendulum  really  per¬ 
forms  its  vibrations,  large,  medium,  and  small, 
all  in  exactly  the  same  time,  I  shall  rely  upon 
what  I  have  already  heard  from  our  Academi¬ 
cian.  He  has  clearly  shown  that  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  is  the  same  along  all  chords,  whatever  the 
arcs  which  subtend  them,  as  well  along  an  arc  of 
i8o°  {i.e,y  the  whole  diameter)  as  along  one  of 
100®,  6o®,  10®,  2®,  ^®,  or  4'.  It  is  understood,  of 
course,  that  these  arcs  all  terminate  at  the  low¬ 
est  point  of  the  circle,  where  it  touches  the  hor¬ 
izontal  plane. 

If  now  we  consider  descent  along  arcs  instead 
of  their  chords  then,  provided  these  do  not  ex¬ 
ceed  90®,  experiment  shows  that  they  are  all 
traversed  in  equal  times;  but  these  times  are 
greater  for  the  chord  than  for  the  arc,  an  effect 
which  is  all  the  more  remarkable  because  at  first 
glance  one  would  think  just  the  opposite  to  be 
true.  For  since  the  terminal  points  of  the  two 
motions  are  the  same  and  since  the  straight  line 
included  between  these  two  points  is  the  short¬ 
est  distance  between  them,  it  would  seem  rea¬ 
sonable  that  motion  along  this  line  should  be 
executed  in  the  shortest  time;  but  this  is  not 
the  case,  for  the  shortest  time — and  therefore 
the  most  rapid  motion— is  that  employed  along 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


the  arc  of  which  this  straight  line  is  the  chord. 

As  to  the  times  of  vibration  of  bodies  sus¬ 
pended  by  threads  of  different  lengths,  they 
bear  to  each  other  the  same  proportion  as  the 
square  roots  of  the  lengths  of  the  thread;  or  one 
might  say  the  lengths  are  to  each  other  as  the 
squares  of  the  times;  so  that  if  one  wishes  to 
make  the  vibration-time  of  one  pendulum  twice 
that  of  another,  he  must  make  its  suspension 
four  times  as  long.  In  like  manner,  if  one  pendu¬ 
lum  has  a  suspension  nine  times  as  long  as  an¬ 
other,  this  second  pendulum  will  execute  three 
vibrations  during  each  one  of  the  first;  from 
which  it  follows  that  the  lengths  of  the  suspend¬ 
ing  cords  bear  to  each  other  the  [inverse]  ratio 
of  the  squares  of  the  number  of  vibrations  per¬ 
formed  in  the  same  time. 

Sagr.  Then,  if  I  understand  you  correctly,  I 
can  easily  measure  the  length  of  a  string  whose 
upper  end  is  attached  at  any  height  whatever 
even  if  this  end  were  invisible  and  I  could  see 
only  the  lower  extremity.  For  if  I  attach  to  the 
lower  end  of  this  string  a  rather  heavy  weight 
and  give  it  a  to-and-fro  motion,  and  if  I  ask  a 
friend  to  count  a  number  of  its  vibrations,  while 
I,  during  the  same  time-interval,  count  the 
number  of  vibrations  of  a  pendulum  which  is 
exactly  one  cubit  in  length,  then  knowing  the 
number  of  vibrations  which  each  pendulum 
makes  in  the  given  interval  of  time  one  can  de¬ 
termine  the  length  of  the  string.  Suppose,  for 
example,  that  my  friend  counts  20  vibrations 
of  the  long  cord  during  the  same  time  in  which 
I  count  240  of  my  string  which  is  one  cubit  in 
length;  taking  the  squares  of  the  two  numbers, 
20  and  240,  namely  400  and  57600,  then,  I  say, 
the  long  string  contains  57600  units  of  such 
length  that  my  pendulum  will  contain  400  of 
them;  and  since  the  length  of  my  string  is  one 
cubit,  I  shall  divide  57600  by  400  and  thus  ob¬ 
tain  144.  Accordingly,  I  shall  call  the  length  of 
the  string  144  cubits. 

Salv.  Nor  will  you  miss  it  by  as  much  as  a 
hand’s  breadth,  especially  if  you  observe  a  large 
number  of  vibrations. 

Sagr.  You  give  me  frequent  occasion  to  ad¬ 
mire  the  wealth  and  profusion  of  nature  when, 
from  such  common  and  even  trivial  phenomena, 
you  derive  facts  which  are  not  only  striking  and 
new  but  which  are  often  far  removed  from  what 
we  would  have  imagined.  Thousands  of  times  I 
have  observed  vibrations  especially  in  churches 
where  lamps,  suspended  by  long  cords,  had  been 
inadvertently  set  into  motion;  but  the  most 
which  I  could  infer  from  these  observations  was 
that  the  view  of  those  who  think  that  such  vi¬ 


brations  are  maintained  by  the  medium  is  high¬ 
ly  improbable:  for,  in  that  case,  the  air  must 
needs  have  considerable  judgment  and  little 
else  to  do  but  kill  time  by  pushing  to  and  fro  a 
pendent  weight  with  perfect  regularity.  But  I 
never  dreamed  of  learning  that  one  and  the 
same  body,  when  suspended  from  a  string  a  hun¬ 
dred  cubits  long  and  pulled  aside  through  an 
arc  of  90°  or  even  1°  or  would  employ  the 
same  time  in  passing  through  the  least  as 
through  the  largest  of  these  arcs;  and,  indeed, 
it  still  strikes  me  as  somewhat  unlikely.  Now  I 
am  waiting  to  hear  how  these  same  simple 
phenomena  can  furnish  solutions  for  those  acous¬ 
tical  problems — solutions  which  will  be  at  least 
partly  satisfactory. 

Salv.  First  of  all  one  must  observe  that  each 
pendulum  has  its  own  time  of  vibration  so  defi¬ 
nite  and  determinate  that  it  is  not  possible  to 
make  it  move  with  any  other  period  than  that 
which  nature  has  given  it.  For  let  any  one  take 
in  his  hand  the  cord  to  which  the  weight  is  at¬ 
tached  and  try,  as  much  as  he  pleases,  to  increase 
or  diminish  the  frequency  of  its  vibrations;  it 
will  be  time  wasted.  On  the  other  hand,  one 
can  confer  motion  upon  even  a  heavy  pendulum 
which  is  at  rest  by  simply  blowing  against  it; 
by  repeating  these  blasts  with  a  frequency 
which  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  pendulum  one 
can  impart  considerable  motion.  Suppose  that 
by  the  first  puff  we  have  displaced  the  pendu¬ 
lum  from  the  vertical  by,  say,  half  an  inch;  then 
if,  after  the  pendulum  has  returned  and  is  about 
to  begin  the  second  vibration,  we  add  a  second 
puff,  we  shall  impart  additional  motion;  and  so 
on  with  other  blasts  provided  they  are  applied 
at  the  right  instant,  and  not  when  the  pendulum 
is  coming  toward  us,  since  in  this  case  the  blast 
would  impede  rather  than  aid  the  motion.  Con¬ 
tinuing  thus  with  many  impulses  we  impart  to 
the  pendulum  such  momentum  that  a  greater 
impulse  than  that  of  a  single  blast  will  be  needed 
to  stop  it. 

Sagr.  Even  as  a  boy,  I  observed  that  one  man 
alone  by  giving  these  impulses  at  the  right  in¬ 
stant  was  able  to  ring  a  bell  so  large  that  when 
four,  or  even  six,  men  seized  the  rope  and  tried 
to  stop  it  they  were  lifted  from  the  ground,  all 
of  them  together  being  unable  to  counterbal¬ 
ance  the  momentum  which  a  single  man,  by 
properly-timed  pulls,  had  given  it. 

Salv.  Your  illustration  makes  my  meaning 
clear  and  is  quite  as  well  fitted,  as  what  I  have 
just  said,  to  explain  the  wonderful  phenomenon 
of  the  strings  of  the  cittern  or  of  the  spinet, 
namely,  the  fact  that  a  vibrating  string  will  set 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


another  string  in  motion  and  cause  it  to  sound 
not  only  when  the  latter  is  in  unison  but  even 
when  it  differs  from  the  former  by  an  octave  or 
a  fifth.  A  string  which  has  been  struck  begins  to 
vibrate  and  continues  the  motion  as  long  as  one 
hears  the  sound;  these  vibrations  cause  the  im¬ 
mediately  surrounding  air  to  vibrate  and  quiv¬ 
er;  then  these  ripples  in  the  air  expand  far  into 
space  and  strike  not  only  all  the  strings  of  the 
same  instrument  but  even  those  of  neighboring 
instruments.  Since  that  string  which  is  tuned  to 
unison  with  the  one  plucked  is  capable  of  vi¬ 
brating  with  the  same  frequency,  it  acquires, 
at  the  first  impulse,  a  slight  oscillation;  after 
receiving  two,  three,  twenty,  or  more  impulses, 
delivered  at  proper  intervals,  it  finally  accum¬ 
ulates  a  vibratory  motion  equal  to  that  of  the 
plucked  string,  as  is  clearly  shown  by  equality  of 
amplitude  in  their  vibrations.  This  undulation 
expands  through  the  air  and  sets  into  vibration 
not  only  strings,  but  also  any  other  body  which 
happens  to  have  the  same  period  as  that  of  the 
plucked  string.  Accordingly  if  we  attach  to  the 
side  of  an  instrument  small  pieces  of  bristle  or 
other  flexible  bodies,  we  shall  observe  that, 
when  a  spinet  is  sounded,  only  those  pieces  re¬ 
spond  that  have  the  same  period  as  the  string 
which  has  been  struck;  the  remaining  pieces  do 
not  vibrate  in  response  to  this  string,  nor  do  the 
former  pieces  respond  to  any  other  tone. 

If  one  bows  the  base  string  on  a  viola  rather 
smartly  and  brings  near  it  a  goblet  of  fine,  thin 
glass  having  the  same  tone  as  that  of  the  string, 
this  goblet  will  vibrate  and  audibly  resound. 
That  the  undulations  of  the  medium  are  widely 
dispersed  about  the  sounding  body  is  evinced 
by  the  fact  that  a  glass  of  water  may  be  made 
to  emit  a  tone  merely  by  the  friction  of  the 
finger-tip  upon  the  rim  of  the  glass;  for  in  this 
water  is  produced  a  series  of  regular  waves.  The 
same  phenomenon  is  observed  to  better  advan¬ 
tage  by  fixing  the  base  of  the  goblet  upon  the 
bottom  of  a  rather  large  vessel  of  water  filled 
nearly  to  the  edge  of  the  goblet;  for  if,  as  before, 
we  sound  the  glass  by  friction  of  the  finger,  we 
shall  see  ripples  spreading  with  the  utmost  regu¬ 
larity  and  with  high  speed  to  large  distances 
about  the  glass.  I  have  often  remarked,  in  thus 
sounding  a  rather  large  glass  nearly  full  of  water, 
that  at  first  the  waves  are  spaced  with  great  un¬ 
iformity,  and  when,  as  sometimes  happens,  the 
tone  of  the  glass  jumps  an  octave  higher  I  have 
noted  that  at  this  moment  each  of  the  aforesaid 
waves  divides  into  two;  a  phenomenon  which 
shows  clearly  that  the  ratio  involved  in  the  oc¬ 
tave  is  two. 


Sagr.  More  than  once  have  I  observed  this 
same  thing,  much  to  my  delight  and  also  to  my 
profit.  For  a  long  time  I  have  been  perplexed 
about  these  different  harmonies,  since  the  ex¬ 
planations  hitherto  given  by  those  learned  in 
music  impress  me  as  not  sufficiently  conclusive. 
They  tell  us  that  the  diapason,  /.<?.,  the  octave, 
involves  the  ratio  of  two,  that  the  diapente 
which  we  call  the  fifth  involves  a  ratio  of  3:2, 
etc.;  because  if  the  open  string  of  a  monochord 
be  sounded  and  afterwards  a  bridge  be  placed 
in  the  middle  and  the  half  length  be  sounded 
one  hears  the  octave;  and  if  the  bridge  be  placed 
at  the  length  of  the  string,  then  on  plucking 
first  the  open  string  and  afterwards  ^  of  its 
length  the  fifth  is  given;  for  this  reason  they 
say  that  the  octave  depends  upon  the  ratio  of 
two  to  one  and  the  fifth  upon  the  ratio  of  three 
to  two.  This  explanation  does  not  impress  me 
as  sufficient  to  establish  2  and  3/2  as  the  natural 
ratios  of  the  octave  and  the  fifth;  and  my  reason 
for  thinking  so  is  as  follows.  There  are  three  dif¬ 
ferent  ways  in  which  the  tone  of  a  string  may 
be  sharpened,  namely,  by  shortening  it,  by 
stretching  it,  and  by  making  it  thinner.  If  the 
tension  and  size  of  the  string  remain  constant 
one  obtains  the  octave  by  shortening  it  to  one- 
half,  by  sounding  first  the  open  string  and 
then  one-half  of  it;  but  if  length  and  size  remain 
constant  and  one  attempts  to  produce  the  oc¬ 
tave  by  stretching,  he  will  find  that  it  does  not 
suffice  to  double  the  stretching  weight;  it  must 
be  quadrupled;  so  that,  if  the  fundamental  note 
is  produced  by  a  weight  of  one  pound,  four  will 
be  required  to  bring  out  the  octave. 

And  finally  if  the  length  and  tension  remain 
constant,  while  one  changes  the  size  of  the 
string,  he  will  find  that  in  order  to  produce  the 
octave  the  size  must  be  reduced  to  1/4  that 
which  gave  the  fundamental.  And  what  I  have 
said  concerning  the  octave,  namely,  that  its  ra¬ 
tio  as  derived  from  the  tension  and  size  of  the 
string  is  the  square  of  that  derived  from  the 
length,  applies  equally  well  to  all  other  musical 
intervals.  Thus  if  one  wishes  to  produce  a  fifth 
by  changing  the  length  he  finds  that  the  ratio  of 
the  lengths  must  be  sesquialteral,  in  other  words 
he  sounds  first  the  open  string,  then  two- thirds 
of  it;  but  if  he  wishes  to  produce  this  same  re¬ 
sult  by  stretching  or  thinning  the  string  then  it 
becomes  necessary  to  square  the  ratio  3/2  that 
is  by  taking  9/4;  accordingly,  if  the  fundamental 
requires  a  weight  of  4  pounds,  the  higher  note 
will  be  produced  not  by  6,  but  by  9  pounds; 
the  same  is  true  in  regard  to  size,  the  string 
which  gives  the  fundamental  is  larger  than  that 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


which  yields  the  fifth  in  the  ratio  of  9  to  4. 

In  view  of  these  facts,  I  sec  no  reason  why 
those  wise  philosophers  should  adopt  2  rather 
than  4  as  the  ratio  of  the  octave,  or  why  in  the 
case  of  the  fifth  they  should  employ  the  sesqui¬ 
alteral  ratio,  3/2,  rather  than  that  of  9/4.  Since 
it  is  impossible  to  count  the  vibrations  of  a 
sounding  string  on  account  of  its  high  frequen¬ 
cy,  I  should  still  have  been  in  doubt  as  to 
whether  a  string,  emitting  the  upper  octave, 
made  twice  as  many  vibrations  in  the  same  time 
as  one  giving  the  fundamental,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  following  fact,  namely,  that  at  the  in¬ 
stant  when  the  tone  jumps  to  the  octave,  the 
waves  which  constantly  accompany  the  vibrat¬ 
ing  glass  divide  up  into  smaller  ones  which  are 
precisely  half  as  long  as  the  former. 

Salw  This  is  a  beautiful  experiment  enabling 
us  to  distinguish  individually  the  waves  which 
are  produced  by  the  vibrations  of  a  sonorous 
body,  which  spread  through  the  air,  bringing 
to  the  tympanum  of  the  ear  a  stimulus  which 
the  mind  translates  into  sound.  But  since  these 
waves  in  the  water  last  only  so  long  as  the  fric¬ 
tion  of  the  finger  continues  and  are,  even  then, 
not  constant  but  are  always  forming  and  disap¬ 
pearing,  would  it  not  be  a  fine  thing  if  one  had 
the  ability  to  produce  waves  which  would  per¬ 
sist  for  a  long  while,  even  months  and  years,  so 
as  to  easily  measure  and  count  them.? 

Sagr.  Such  an  invention  would,  I  assure  you, 
command  my  admiration. 

Salv.  The  device  is  one  which  I  hit  upon  by 
accident;  my  part  consists  merely  in  the  obser¬ 
vation  of  it  and  in  the  appreciation  of  its  value 
as  a  confirmation  of  something  to  which  I  had 
given  profound  consideration;  and  yet  the  de¬ 
vice  is,  in  itself,  rather  common.  As  I  was  scrap¬ 
ing  a  brass  plate  with  a  sharp  iron  chisel  in  or¬ 
der  to  remove  some  spots  from  it  and  was  run¬ 
ning  the  chisel  rather  rapidly  over  it,  I  once  or 
twice,  during  many  strokes,  heard  the  plate 
emit  a  rather  strong  and  clear  whistling  sound; 
on  looking  at  the  plate  more  carefully,  I  noticed 
a  long  row  of  fine  streaks  parallel  and  equidis¬ 
tant  from  one  another.  Scraping  with  the  chisel 
over  and  over  again,  I  noticed  that  it  was  only 
when  the  plate  emitted  this  hissing  noise  that 
any  marks  were  left  upon  it;  when  the  scraping 
was  not  accompanied  by  this  sibilant  note  there 
was  not  the  least  trace  of  such  marks.  Repeat¬ 
ing  the  trick  several  times  and  making  the 
stroke,  now  with  greater  now  with  less  speed, 
the  whistling  followed  with  a  pitch  which  was 
correspondingly  higher  and  lower.  I  noted  also 
that  the  marks  made  when  the  tones  were 


higher  were  closer  together;  but  when  the  tones 
were  deeper,  they  were  farther  apart.  I  also  ob- 
serv^ed  that  when,  during  a  single  stroke,  the 
speed  increased  toward  the  end  the  sound  be¬ 
came  sharper  and  the  streaks  grew  closer  to¬ 
gether,  but  always  in  such  a  way  as  to  remain 
sharply  defined  and  equidistant.  Besides,  when¬ 
ever  the  stroke  was  accompanied  by  hissing  I 
felt  the  chisel  tremble  in  my  grasp  and  a  sort  of 
shiver  run  through  my  hand.  In  short,  we  see 
and  hear  in  the  case  of  the  chisel  precisely  that 
which  is  seen  and  heard  in  the  case  of  a  whisper 
followed  by  a  loud  voice;  for,  when  the  breath 
is  emitted  without  the  production  of  a  tone, 
one  does  not  feel  either  in  the  throat  or  mouth 
any  motion  to  speak  of  in  comparison  with  that 
which  is  felt  in  the  larynx  and  upper  part  of  the 
throat  when  the  voice  is  used,  especially  when 
the  tones  employed  are  low  and  strong. 

At  times  I  have  also  observed  among  the 
strings  of  the  spinet  two  which  were  in  unison 
with  two  of  the  tones  produced  by  the  afore¬ 
said  scraping;  and  among  those  which  differed 
most  in  pitch  I  found  two  which  were  separated 
by  an  interval  of  a  perfect  fifth.  Upon  measur¬ 
ing  the  distance  between  the  markings  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  two  scrapings  it  was  found  that 
the  space  which  contained  45  of  one  contained 
30  of  the  other,  which  is  precisely  the  ratio  as¬ 
signed  to  the  fifth. 

But  now,  before  proceeding  any  farther,  I 
want  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that,  of 
the  three  methods  for  sharpening  a  tone,  the 
one  which  you  refer  to  as  the  fineness  of  the 
string  should  be  attributed  to  its  weight.  So 
long  as  the  material  of  the  string  is  unchanged, 
the  size  and  weight  vary  in  the  same  ratio.  Thus 
in  the  case  of  gut-strings,  we  obtain  the  octave 
by  making  one  string  4  times  as  large  as  the 
other;  so  also  in  the  case  of  brass  one  wire  must 
have  4  times  the  size  of  the  other;  but  if  now  we 
wish  to  obtain  the  octave  of  a  gut-string,  by 
use  of  brass  wire,  we  must  make  it,  not  four 
times  as  large,  but  four  times  as  heavy  as  the 
gut-string:  as  regards  size,  therefore,  the  metal 
string  is  not  four  times  as  big  but  four  times  as 
heavy.  The  wire  may  therefore  be  even  thinner 
than  the  gut,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the 
latter  gives  the  higher  note.  Hence  if  two  spin¬ 
ets  are  strung,  one  with  gold  wire  the  other 
with  brass,  and  if  the  corresponding  strings  each 
have  the  same  length,  diameter,  and  tension,  it 
follows  that  the  instrument  strung  with  gold 
will  have  a  pitch  about  one-fifth  lower  than  the 
other  because  gold  has  a  density  almost  twice 
that  of  brass.  And  here  it  is  to  be  noted  that  it 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


is  the  weight  rather  than  the  size  of  a  moving 
body  which  offers  resistance  to  change  of  mo¬ 
tion,  contrary  to  what  one  might  at  first  glance 
think.  For  it  seems  reasonable  to  believe  that 
a  body  which  is  large  and  light  should  suffer 
greater  retardation  of  motion  in  thrusting  aside 
the  medium  than  would  one  which  is  thin  and 
heavy,  yet  here  exactly  the  opposite  is  true. 

Returning  now  to  the  original  subject  of  dis¬ 
cussion,  I  assert  that  the  ratio  of  a  musical  in¬ 
terval  is  not  immediately  determined  either  by 
the  length,  size,  or  tension  of  the  strings  but 
rather  by  the  ratio  of  their  frequencies,  that  is, 
by  the  number  of  pulses  of  air  waves  which 
strike  the  tympanum  of  the  ear,  causing  it  also 
to  vibrate  with  the  same  frequency.  This  fact 
established,  we  may  possibly  explain  why  cer¬ 
tain  pairs  of  notes,  differing  in  pitch  produce  a 
pleasing  sensation,  others  a  less  pleasant  effect, 
and  still  others  a  disagreeable  sensation.  Such 
an  explanation  would  be  tantamount  to  an  ex¬ 
planation  of  the  more  or  less  perfect  consonances 
and  of  dissonances.  The  unpleasant  sensation 
produced  by  the  latter  arises,  I  think,  from  the 
discordant  vibrations  of  two  different  tones 
which  strike  the  ear  out  of  time.  Especially 
harsh  is  the  dissonance  between  notes  whose  fre¬ 
quencies  are  incommensurable;  such  a  case  oc¬ 
curs  when  one  has  two  strings  in  unison  and 
sounds  one  of  them  open,  together  with  a  part 
of  the  other  which  bears  the  same  ratio  to  its 
whole  length,  as  the  side  of  a  square  bears  to 
the  diagonal;  this  yields  a  dissonance  similar 
to  the  augmented  fourth  or  diminished  fifth. 

Agreeable  consonances  are  pairs  of  tones 
which  strike  the  ear  with  a  certain  regularity; 
this  regularity  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  puls¬ 
es  delivered  by  the  two  tones,  in  the  same  inter¬ 
val  of  time,  shall  be  commensurable  in  number, 
so  as  not  to  keep  the  ear  drum  in  perpetual 
torment,  bending  in  two  different  directions  in 
order  to  yield  to  the  ever-discordant  impulses. 

The  first  and  most  pleasing  consonance  is, 
therefore,  the  octave  since,  for  every  pulse 
given  to  the  tympanum  by  the  lower  string, 
the  sharp  string  delivers  two;  accordingly,  at 
every  other  vibration  of  the  upper  string,- both 
pulses  are  delivered  simultaneously  so  that  one- 
half  the  entire  number  of  pulses  are  delivered 
in  unison.  But  when  two  strings  are  in  unison 
their  vibrations  always  coincide  and  the  effect 
is  that  of  a  single  string;  hence  we  do  not  refer 
to  it  as  consonance.  The  fifth  is  also  a  pleasing 
interval  since  for  every  two  vibrations  of  the 
lower  string  the  upper  one  gives  three,  so  that 
considering  the  entire  number  of  pulses  from 


175 

the  upper  string  one-third  of  them  will  strike  in 
unison,  between  each  pair  of  concordant 
vibrations  there  intervene  two  single  vibra¬ 
tions;  and  when  the  interval  is  a  fourth,  three 
single  vibrations  intervene.  In  case  the  interval 
is  a  second  where  the  ratio  is  9/8  it  is  only  every 
ninth  vibration  of  the  upper  string  which 
reaches  the  ear  simultaneously  with  one  of  the 
lower;  all  the  others  are  discordant  and  produce 
a  harsh  effect  upon  the  recipient  ear  which  in¬ 
terprets  them  as  dissonances. 

Simp.  Won’t  you  be  good  enough  to  explain 
this  argument  a  little  more  clearly 

Salv.  Let  AB  denote  the  length  of  a  wave 
emitted  by  the  lower  string  and  CD  that  of  a 
higher  string  which  is  emitting  the  octave  oiAB\ 
divide  AB  in  the  middle  at  E.  If  the  two  strings 
begin  their  motions  at  A  and  C,  it  is  clear  that 
when  the  sharp  vibration  has  reached  the  end 
Dy  the  other  vibration  will  have  travelled 
only  as  far  as  E,  which,  not  being  a  terminal 
point,  will  emit  no  pulse;  but  there  is  a  blow  de¬ 
livered  at  D.  Accordingly,  when  the  one  wave 
comes  back  from  D  to  C,  the  other  passes  on 
from  E  to  B;  hence  the  two  pulses  from  B  and 
G  strike  the  drum  of  the  ear  simultaneously 
Seeing  that  these  vibrations  are  repeated  again 

A _ E _ B  and  again  in  the  same 

*  '  manner,  we  conclude  that 

Q  jy  each  alternate  pulse  from 

'  *  CD  falls  in  unison  with 

one  from  AB.  But  each  of 
A  E  O  B  pulsations  at  the  ter- 
'  *  '  '  minal  points,  A  and  is 

Q  ^  constantly  accompanied 

' - ^  by  one  which  leaves  al- 

^3  ways  from  C  or  always 

from  D.  This  is  clear  because  if  we  suppose  the 
waves  to  reach  A  and  C  at  the  same  instant, 
then,  while  one  wave  travels  from  A  to  B,  the 
other  will  proceed  from  C  to  D  and  back  to  C, 
so  that  waves  strike  at  C  and  B  simultaneously; 
during  the  passage  of  the  wave  from  B  back  to 
A  the  disturbance  at  Cgoes  to  D  and  again  re¬ 
turns  to  C,  so  that  once  more  the  pulses  at  A 
and  C  are  simultaneous. 

Next  let  the  vibrations  AB  and  CD  be  separa¬ 
ted  by  an  interval  of  a  fifth,  that  is,  by  a  ratio  of 
3/2;  choose  the  points  E  and  O  such  that  they 
will  divide  the  wave  length  of  the  lower  string 
into  three  equal  parts  and  imagine  the  vibra¬ 
tions  to  start  at  the  same  instant  from  each  of 
the  terminals  A  and  C.  It  is  evident  that  when 
the  pulse  has  been  delivered  at  the  terminal  D, 
the  wave  in  AB  has  travelled  only  as  far  as  0; 
the  drum  of  the  ear  receives,  therefore,  only  the 


176  GALILEO  GALILEI 


pulse  from  D.  Then  during  the  return  of  the 
one  vibration  from  D  to  C,  the  other  will  pass 
from  O  io  B  and  then  back  to  O,  producing  an 
isolated  pulse  at  B — a  pulse  which  is  out  of 
time  but  one  which  must  be  taken  into  con¬ 
sideration. 

Now  since  we  have  assumed  that  the  first 
pulsations  started  from  the  terminals  A  and  G 
at  the  same  instant,  it  follows  that  the  second 
pulsation,  isolated  at  D,  occurred  after  an  in¬ 
terval  of  time  equal  to  that  required  for  passage 
from  C  to  D  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  from  A 
to  O;  but  the  next  pulsation,  the  one  at  5,  is 
separated  from  the  preceding  by  only  half  this 
interval,  namely,  the  time  required  for  passage 
from  O  to  B.  Next  while  the  one  vibration 
travels  from  O  to  A,  the  other  travels  from  C  to 
D,  the  result  of  which  is  that  two  pulsations  oc¬ 
cur  simultaneously  at  A  and  D.  Cycles  of  this 
kind  follow  one  after  another,  /.<?,,  one  solitary 
pulse  of  the  lower  string  interposed  between 
two  solitary  pulses  of  the  upper  string.  Let  us 
now  imagine  time  to  be  divided  into  very  small 
equal  intervals;  then  if  we  assume  that,  during 
the  first  two  of  these  intervals,  the  disturbances 
which  occurred  simultaneously  at  and  C  have 
travelled  as  far  as  O  and  D  and  have  produced 
a  pulse  at  D\  and  if  we  assume  that  during  the 
third  and  fourth  intervals  one  disturbance  re¬ 
turns  from  D  to  C,  producing  a  pulse  at  C, 
while  the  other,  passing  on  from  O  to  5  and 
back  to  O,  produces  a  pulse  at  B;  and  if  finally, 
during  the  fifth  and  sixth  intervals,  the  disturb¬ 
ances  travel  from  O  and  C  to  A  and  D,  pro¬ 
ducing  a  pulse  at  each  of  the  latter  two,  then 
the  sequence  in  which  the  pulses  strike  the  ear 
will  be  such  that,  if  we  begin  to  count  time 
from  any  instant  where  two  pulses  are  simul¬ 
taneous,  the  ear  drum  will,  after  the  lapse  of 
two  of  the  said  intervals,  receive  a  solitary 
pulse;  at  the  end  of  the  third  interval,  another 
solitary  pulse;  so  also  at  the  end  of  the  fourth 
interval;  and  two  intervals  later,  /.(?.,  at  the  end 
of  the  sixth  interval,  will  be  heard  two  pulses  in 
unison.  Here  ends  the  cycle — the  anomaly,  so 
to  speak — which  repeats  itself  over  and  over 
again. 

Sagr.  I  can  no  longer  remain  silent;  for  I 
must  express  to  you  the  great  pleasure  I  have 
in  hearing  such  a  complete  explanation  of  phe¬ 
nomena  with  regard  to  which  I  have  so  long 
been  in  darkness.  Now  I  understand  why  unison 
does  not  differ  from  a  single  tone;  I  understand 
why  the  octave  is  the  principal  harmony,  but 
so  like  unison  as  often  to  be  mistaken  for  it  and 
also  why  it  occurs  with  the  other  harmonies.  It 


resembles  unison  because  the  pulsations  of 
strings  in  unison  always  occur  simultaneously, 
and  those  of  the  lower  string  of  the  octave  are 
always  accompanied  by-  those  of  the  upper 
string;  and  among  the  latter  is  interposed  a  soli¬ 
tary  pulse  at  equal  intervals  and  in  such  a  man¬ 
ner  as  to  produce  no  disturbance;  the  result  is 
that  such  a  harmony  is  rather  too  much  soft¬ 
ened  and  lacks  fire.  But  the  fifth  is  character¬ 
ized  by  its  displaced  beats  and  by  the  inter¬ 
position  of  two  solitary  beats  of  the  upper 
string  and  one  solitary  beat  of  the  lower  string 
between  each  pair  of  simultaneous  pulses;  these 
three  solitary  pulses  are  separated  by  intervals 
of  time  equal  to  half  the  interval  which  sepa¬ 
rates  each  pair  of  simultaneous  beats  from  the 
solitary  beats  of  the  upper  string.  Thus  the  ef¬ 
fect  of  the  fifth  is  to  produce  a  tickling  of  the 
ear  drum  such  that  its  softness  is  modified  with 
sprightliness,  giving  at  the  same  moment  the 
impression  of  a  gentle  kiss  and  of  a  bite. 

Salv.  Seeing  that  you  have  derived  so  much 
pleasure  from  these  novelties,  I  must  show  you 
a  method  by  which  the  eye  may  enjoy  the  same 
game  as  the  ear.  Suspend  three  balls  of  lead,  or 
other  heavy  material,  by  means  of  strings  of  dif¬ 
ferent  length  such  that  while  the  longest  makes 
two  vibrations  the  shortest  will  make  four  and 
the  medium  three;  this  will  take  place  when  the 
longest  string  measures  16,  either  in  hand 
breadths  or  in  any  other  unit,  the  medium  9 
and  the  shortest  4,  all  measured  in  the  same  unit. 

Now  pull  all  these  pendulums  aside  from  the 
perpendicular  and  release  them  at  the  same  in¬ 
stant;  you  will  see  a  curious  interplay  of  the 
threads  passing  each  other  in  various  manners 
but  such  that  at  the  completion  of  every  fourth 
vibration  of  the  longest  pendulum,  all  three  will 
arrive  simultaneously  at  the  same  terminus, 
whence  they  start  over  again  to  repeat  the  same 
cycle.  This  combination  of  vibrations,  when  pro¬ 
duced  on  strings  is  precisely  that  which  yields 
the  interval  of  the  octave  and  the  intermediate 
fifth.  If  we  employ  the  same  disposition  of  ap¬ 
paratus  but  change  the  lengths  of  the  threads, 
always  however,  in  such  a  way  that  their  vibra¬ 
tions  correspond  to  those  of  agreeable  musical 
intervals,  we  shall  see  a  different  crossing  of  these 
threads  but  always  such  that,  after  a  definite 
interval  of  time  and  after  a  definite  number  of 
vibrations,  all  the  threads,  whether  three  or  four, 
will  reach  the  same  terminus  at  the  same  in¬ 
stant,  and  then  begin  a  repetition  of  the  cycle. 

If  however  the  vibrations  of  two  or  more 
strings  are  incommensurable  so  that  they 
never  complete  a  definite  number  of  vibrations 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


at  the  same  instant,  or  if  commensurable  they 
return  only  after  a  long  interval  of  time  and 
after  a  large  number  of  vibrations,  then  the 
eye  is  confused  by  the  disorderly  succession  of 
crossed  threads.  In  like  manner  the  ear  is 
pained  by  an  irregular  sequence  of  air  waves 
which  strike  the  tympanum  without  any  fixed 
order. 

But,  gentlemen,  whither  have  we  drifted  dur^ 
ing  these  many  hours  lured  on  by  various  prob¬ 
lems  and  unexpected  digressions  ?  The  day  is  al¬ 
ready  ended  and  we  have  scarcely  touched  the 


subject  proposed  for  discussion.  Indeed  we  have 
deviated  so  far  that  I  remember  only  with  diffi¬ 
culty  our  early  introduction  and  the  little  prog¬ 
ress  made  in  the  way  of  hypotheses  and  princi¬ 
ples  for  use  in  later  demonstrations. 

Sagr.  Let  us  then  adjourn  for  to-day  in  order 
that  our  minds  may  find  refreshment  in  sleep  and 
that  we  may  return  tomorrow,  if  so  please  you, 
and  resume  the  discussion  of  the  main  question. 

Salv.  I  shall  not  fail  to  be  here  to-morrow  at 
the  same  hour,  hoping  not  only  to  render  you 
service  but  also  to  enjoy  your  company. 


SECOND  DAY 


Sagredo.  While  Simplicio  and  I  were  awaiting 
your  arrival  we  were  trying  to  recall  that  last 
consideration  which  you  advanced  as  a  principle 
and  basis  for  the  results  you  intended  to  obtain; 
this  consideration  dealt  with  the  resistance  which 
all  solids  offer  to  fracture  and  depended  upon  a 
certain  cement  which  held  the  parts  glued  to¬ 
gether  so  that  they  would  yield  and  separate 
only  under  considerable  pull.  Later  we  tried  to 
find  the  explanation  of  this  coherence,  seeking 
it  mainly  in  the  vacuum;  this  was  the  occasion 
of  our  many  digressions  which  occupied  the  en¬ 
tire  day  and  led  us  far  afield  from  the  original 
question  which,  as  I  have  already  stated,  was 
the  consideration  of  the  resistance  that  solids 
oiler  to  fracture. 

Sai.v.  I  remember  it  all  very  well.  Resuming 
the  thread  of  our  discourse,  whatever  the  nature 
of  this  resistance  which  solids  offer  to  large  trac¬ 
tive  forces  there  can  at  least  be  no  doubt  of  its 
existence ;  and  though  this  resistance  is  very  great 
in  the  case  of  a  direct  pull,  it  is  found,  as  a  rule, 
to  be  less  in  the  case  of  bending  forces.  Thus,  for 
example,  a  rod  of  steel  or  of  glass  will  sustain  a 
longitudinal  pull  of  a  thousand  pounds  while  a 
weight  of  fifty  pounds  would  be  quite  sufficient 
to  break  it  if  the  rod  were  fastened  at  right  angles 
into  a  vertical  wall.  It  is  this  second  type  of  re¬ 
sistance  which  we  must  consider,  seeking  to  dis¬ 
cover  in  what  proportion  it  is  found  in  prisms 
and  cylinders  of  the  same  material,  whether 
alike  or  unlike  in  shape,  length,  and  thickness. 
In  this  discussion  I  shall  take  for  granted  the 
well-known  mechanical  principle  which  has  been 
shown  to  govern  the  behaviour  of  a  bar,  which 
we  call  a  lever,  namely,  that  the  force  bears  to 
the  resistance  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  distances 
which  separate  the  fulcrum  from  the  force  and 
resistance  respectively. 

Simp.  This  was  demonstrated  first  of  all  by 
Aristotle,  in  his  Mechanics, 

Salv.  Yes,  I  am  willing  to  concede  him  prior¬ 
ity  in  point  of  time;  but  as  regards  rigour  of  dem¬ 
onstration  the  first  place  must  be  given  to  Arch¬ 
imedes,  since  upon  a  single  proposition  proved 
in  his  book  on  Equilibrium'^  depends  not  only 

*  Sec  Archimedes,  Equilibrium  of  Planes,  p.  502-19. 


the  law  of  the  lever  but  also  those  of  most  other 
mechanical  devices. 

Sagr.  Since  now  this  principle  is  fundamental 
to  all  the  demonstrations  which  you  propose  to 
set  forth  would  it  not  be  advisable  to  give  us  a 
complete  and  thorough  proof  of  this  proposi¬ 
tion,  unless  possibly  it  would  take  toomuchtime.? 

Salv.  Yes,  that  would  be  quite  proper,  but  it 
is  better  I  think  to  approach  our  subject  in  a 
manner  somewhat  different  from  that  employed 
by  Archimedes,  namely,  by  first  assuming  mere¬ 
ly  that  equal  weights  placed  in  a  balance  of  equal 
arms  will  produce  equilibrium — a  principle  also 
assumed  by  Archimedes — and  then  proving  that 
it  is  no  less  true  that  unequal  weights  produce 
equilibrium  when  the  arms  of  the  steelyard  have 
lengths  inversely  proportional  to  the  weights 
suspended  from  them ;  in  other  words,  i  t  amoun  ts 
to  the  same  thing  whether  one  places  equal 
weights  at  equal  distances  or  unequal  weights  at 
distances  which  bear  to  each  other  the  inverse 
ratio  of  the  weights. 

In  order  to  make  this  matter  clear  imagine  a 
prism  or  solid  cylinder,  AB^  suspended  at  each 
end  to  the  rod  ///,  and  supported  by  two 
threads  HA  and  1B  \  it  is  evident  that  if  I  attach 
a  thread,  C,  at  the  middle  point  of  the  balance 
beam  ///,  the  entire  prism  AB  will,  according 
to  the  principle  assumed,  hang  in  equilibrium 
since  one-half  its  weight  lies  on  one  side,  and  the 
other  half  on  the  other  side,  of  the  point  of  sus¬ 
pension  C.  Now  suppose  the  prism  to  be  divid¬ 
ed  into  unequal  parts  by  a  plane  through  the 
line  Dy  and  let  the  part  DA  be  the  larger  and 
DB  the  smaller:  this  division  having  been  made, 
imagine  a  thread  EDy  attached  at  the  point  E 
and  supporting  the  parts  AD  and  DB,  in  order 
that  these  parts  may  remain  in  the  same  posi¬ 
tion  relative  to  line  HI:  and  since  the  relative 
position  of  the  prism  and  the  beam  HI  remains 
unchanged,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the 
prism  will  maintain  its  former  state  of  equili¬ 
brium.  But  circumstances  would  remain  the 
same  if  that  part  of  the  prism  which  is  now  held 
up,  at  the  ends,  by  the  threads  AH  and  DE 
were  supported  at  the  middle  by  a  single  thread 
GL\  and  likewise  the  other  part  DB  would  not 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


179 


*00^ 


Fig.  14 

change  position  if  held  by  a  thread  FM  placed 
at  its  middle  point.  Suppose  now  the  threads 
HAy  EDy  and  IB  to  be  removed,  leaving  only 
the  two  GL  and  FM,  then  the  same  equilibrium 
will  be  maintained  so  long  as  the  suspension  is 
at  C.  Now  let  us  consider  that  we  have  here 
two  heavy  bodies  AD  and  DB  hung  at  the  ends 
G  and  F,  of  a  balance  beam  GF  in  equilibrium 
about  the  point  G,  so  that  the  line  CG  is  the 
distance  from  C  to  the  point  of  suspension  of 
the  heavy  body  ADy  while  CF  is  the  distance 
at  which  the  other  heavy  body,  DBy  is  sup¬ 
ported.  It  remains  now  only  to  show  that  these 
distances  bear  to  each  other  the  inverse  ratio  of 
the  weights  themselves,  that  is,  the  distance  GC 
is  to  the  distance  CF  as  the  prism  DB  is  to  the 
prism  DA — a  proposition  which  we  shall  prove 
as  follows :  Since  the  line  GE  is  the  half  of  FH, 
and  since  EF  is  the  half  of  Ely  the  whole  length 
GF  will  be  half  of  the  entire  line  ///,  and  there¬ 
fore  equal  to  Cl;  if  now  we  subtract  the  com¬ 
mon  part  CF  the  remainder  GC  will  be  equal 
to  the  remainder  F/,  that  is,  to  FF,  and  if  to 
each  of  these  we  add  CF  we  shall  have  GF 
equal  to  CF:  hence  GF;FF=FC;CG.  But  GF 
and  FF  bear  the  same  ratio 
to  each  other  as  do  their 
doubles  HE  and  Ely  that  is, 
the  same  ratio  as  the  prism 
AD  to  DB.  Therefore,  by 
equating  ratios  we  have, 
convertendOy  the  distance 
GC  is  to  the  distance  CF 
as  the  weight  BD  is  to  the 
weight  DAy  which  is  what  I  desired  to  prove. 

If  what  precedes  is  clear,  you  will  not  hesi¬ 
tate,  I  think,  to  admit  that  the  two  prisms  AD 
and  DB  are  in  equilibrium  about  the  point  C 
since  one-half  of  the  whole  body  AB  lies  on  the 
right  of  the  suspension  C  and  the  other  half  on 
the  left;  in  other  words,  this  arrangement  is 
equivalent  to  two  equal  weights  disposed  at 
equal  distances.  I  do  not  see  how  any  one  can 
doubt,  if  the  two  prisms  AD  and  DB  were  trans¬ 
formed  into  cubes,  spheres,  or  into  any  other 


figure  whatever  and  if  G  and  F  were 
j  retained  as  points  of  suspension,  that 
they  would  remain  in  equilibrium  a- 
bout  the  point  C,  for  it  is  only  too 
evident  that  change  of  figure  does 
not  produce  change  of  weight  so  long 
as  the  mass  does  not  vary.  From  this 
we  may  derive  the  general  conclusion 
that  any  two  heavy  bodies  are  in 
equilibrium  at  distances  which  are  in¬ 
versely  proportional  to  their  weights. 

This  principle  established,  I  desire,  before 
passing  to  any  other  subject,  to  call  your  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  fact  that  these  forces,  resistances, 
moments,  figures,  etc.,  may  be  considered  either 
in  the  abstract,  dissociated  from  matter,  or  in 
the  concrete,  associated  with  matter.  Hence 
the  properties  which  belong  to  figures  that  are 
merely  geometrical  and  non-material  must  be 
modified  when  we  fill  these  figures  with  matter 
and  therefore  give  them  weight.  Take,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  lever  BA  which,  resting  upon  the 
support  F,  is  used  to  lift  a  heavy  stone  D.  The 
principle  just  demonstrated  makes  it  clear  that 
a  force  applied  at  the  extremity  B  will  just  suf¬ 
fice  to  equilibrate  the  resistance  offered  by  the 
heavy  body  D,  provided  this  force  bears  to  the 
force  at  D  the  same  ratio  as  the  distance  AC 
bears  to  the  distance  CB;  and  this  is  true  so  long 
as  we  consider  only  the  moments  of  the  single 
force  at  B  and  of  the  resistance  at  Dy  treating 
the  lever  as  an  immaterial  body  devoid  of 
weight.  But  if  we  take  into  account  the  weight 
of  the  lever  itself — an  instrument  which  may 
be  made  either  of  wood  or  of  iron — it  is  mani¬ 
fest  that,  when  this  weight  has  been  added  to 


the  force  at  F,  the  ratio  will  be  changed  and 
must  therefore  be  expressed  in  different  terms. 
Hence,  before  going  further  let  us  agree  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  between  these  two  points  of  view; 
when  we  consider  an  instrument  in  the  abstract, 
i.e.y  apart  from  the  weight  of  its  own  material, 
we  shall  speak  of  “taking  it  in  an  absolute 
sense”;  but  if  we  fill  one  of  these  simple  and 
absolute  figures  with  matter  and  thus  give  it 
weight,  we  shall  refer  to  such  a  material  figure 
as  a  “moment”  or  “compound  force.” 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


i8o 

Sagr.  I  must  break  my  resolution  about  not 
leading  you  off  into  a  digression;  for  I  cannot 
concentrate  my  attention  upon  what  is  to  fol¬ 
low  until  a  certain  doubt  is  removed  from  my 
mind,  namely,  you  seem  to  compare  the  force 
at  B  with  the  total  weight  of  the  stone  D,  a 
part  of  which — possibly  the  greater  part — rests 
upon  the  horizontal  plane:  so  that  ,  .  . 

Salv.  I  understand  perfectly:  you  need  go 
no  further.  However,  please  observe  that  I  have 
not  mentioned  the  total  weight  of  the  stone; 
I  spoke  only  of  its  force  at  the  point  A, 
the  extremity  of  the  lever  BA,  which  force  is 
always  less  than  the  total  weight  of  the  stone, 
and  varies  with  its  shape  and  elevation. 

Sagr.  Good:  but  there  occurs  to  me  another 
question  about  which  I  am  curious.  For  a  com¬ 
plete  understanding  of  this  matter,  I  should  like 
you  to  show  me,  if  possible,  how  one  can  deter¬ 
mine  what  part  of  the  total  weight  is  supported 
by  the  underlying  plane  and  what  part  by  the 
end  A  of  the  lever. 

Salv.  The  explanation  will  not  delay  us  long 
and  I  shall  therefore  have  pleasure  in  granting 
your  request.  In  the  accompanying  figure,  let  us 
understand  that  the  weight  having  its  center  of 
gravity  at  A  rests  with  the  end  B  upon  the  hori¬ 
zontal  plane  and  with  the  other  end  upon  the 
lever  CG.  Let  N  be  the  fulcrum  of  a  lever  to 
which  the  force  is  applied  at  G.  Let  fall  the  per¬ 
pendiculars,  AO  and  GF,  from  the  center  A  and 
the  end  C.  Then  I  say,  the  magnitude  of  the  en¬ 
tire  weight  bears  to  the  magnitude  of  the  force 
at  G  a  ratio  compounded  of  the  ratio  between 
the  two  distances  GA^and  NC  and  the  ratio  be¬ 


Fig.  i6 

tween  FB  and  BO,  Lay  off  a  distance  X  such 
that  its  ratio  to  NC  is  the  same  as  that  of  BO  to 
FB;  then,  since  the  total  weight  A  is  counter¬ 
balanced  by  the  two  forces  at  B  and  at  G,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  force  at  B  is  to  that  at  G  as  the  dis¬ 
tance  FO  is  to  the  distance  OB.  Hence,  com' 
ponendo,  the  sum  of  the  forces  at  B  and  G,  that 
is,  the  total  weight  A,  is  to  the  force  at  G  as  the 
line  FB  is  to  the  line  FO,  that  is,  as  NC  is  to  X: 
but  the  force  applied  at  G  is  to  the  force  applied 
at  G  as  the  distance  GN  is  to  the  distance  NC; 
hence  it  follows,  ex  aequali  in  proportione  pertiir' 


bata^^  that  the  entire  weight  A  is  to  the  force  ap¬ 
plied  at  G  as  the  distance  GN  is  to  X,  But  the 
ratio  of  GN  to  X  is  compounded  of  the  ratio  of 
GN  toNGand  of  A'G  to  X,  that  is,  of  FF  to  FO; 
hence  the  weight  A  bears  to  the  equilibrating 
force  at  G  a  ratio  compounded  of  that  of  GN  to 
NC  and  of  FB  to  FO:  which  was  to  be  proved. 

Let  us  now  return  to  our  original  subject; 
then,  if  what  has  hitherto  been  said  is  clear,  it 
will  be  easily  understood  that, 

Proposition  I 

A  prism  or  solid  cylinder  of  glass,  steel,  wood, 
or  other  breakable  material  which  is  capable  of 
sustaining  a  very  heavy  weight  when  applied 
longitudinally  is,  as  previously  remarked, easily 
broken  by  the  transverse  application  of  a  weight 
which  may  be  much  smaller  in  proportion  as  the 
length  of  the  cylinder  exceeds  its  thickness. 

Let  us  imagine  a  solid  prism  ABCD  fastened 
into  a  wall  at  the  end  XF,  and  supporting  a 
weight  Fat  the  other  end;  understand  also  that 
the  wall  is  vertical  and  that  the  prism  or  cylin¬ 
der  is  fastened  at  right  angles  to  the  wall.  It  is  clear 
that,  if  the  cylinder  breaks,  fracture  will  occur 
at  the  point  F  where  the  edge  of  the  mortise 
acts  as  a  fulcrum  for  the  lever  FG,  to  which  the 
force  is  applied;  the  thickness  of  the  solid  BA  is 
the  other  arm  of  the  lever  along  which  is  located 
the  resistance.  This  resistance  opposes  the  sep¬ 
aration  of  the  part  FD,  lying  outside  the  wall, 
from  that  portion  lying  inside.  From  the  pre¬ 
ceding,  it  follows  that  the  magnitude  of  the  force 
applied  at  G  bears  to  the  magnitude  of  the  re¬ 
sistance,  found  in  the  thickness  of  the  prism,  /. 

e.y  in  the  attachment  of  the  base  BA 
to  its  contiguous  parts,  the  same 
ratio  which  the  length  CB  bears  to 
half  the  length  BA ;  if  now  we  define 
absolute  resistance  to  fracture  as  that 
offered  to  a  longitudinal  pull  (in 
which  case  the  stretching  force  acts 
in  the  same  direction  as  that 
through  which  the  body  is  moved), 
then  it  follows  that  the  absolute  resistance  of 
the  prism  BD  is  to  the  breaking  load  placed  at 
the  end  of  the  lever  BC  in  the  same  ratio  as  the 
length  FG  is  to  the  half  of  AB  in  the  case  of  a 
prism,  or  the  semidiameter  in  the  case  of  a  cyl¬ 
inder.  This  is  our  first  proposition.  Observe 
that  in  what  has  here  been  said  the  weight  of 
the  solid  BD  itself  has  been  left  out  of  consider¬ 
ation,  or  rather,  the  prism  has  been  assumed  to 
be  devoid  of  weight.  But  if  the  weight  of  the 
prism  is  to  be  taken  account  of  in  conjunction 

^  See  Euclid,  v.  20. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


i8i 


Salv.  Precisely  so,  and  a  fact  worth 
remembering.  Now  we  can  readily  un¬ 
derstand 

Proposition  II 

How  and  in  what  proportion  a  rod, 
or  rather  a  prism,  whose  width  is  great¬ 
er  than  its  thickness  offers  more  resis- 


Fig.  17 

with  the  weight  E,  we  must  add  to  the  weight 
E  one  half  that  of  the  prism  BD:  so  that  if,  for 
example,  the  latter  weighs  two  pounds  and  the 
weight  E  is  ten  pounds  we  must  treat  the 
weight  E  as  if  it  were  eleven  pounds. 

Simp.  Why  not  twelve  ? 

Salv.  The  weight  E,  my  dear  Simplicio,  hang¬ 
ing  at  the  extreme  end  Cacts  upon  the  lever  BG 
with  its  full  moment  of  ten  pounds :  so  also  would 
the  solid  BD  if  suspended  at  the  same  point  ex¬ 
ert  its  full  moment  of  two  pounds;  but,  as  you 
know,  this  solid  isuniformly  distributed  through¬ 
out  its  entire  length,  EC,  so  that  the  parts  which 
lie  near  the  end  E  are  less  effective  than  those 
more  remote. 

Accordingly,  if  we  strike  a  balance  between 
the  two,  the  weight  of  the  entire  prism  may  be 
considered  as  concentrated  at  its  center  of  grav¬ 
ity  which  lies  midway  of  the  lever  EC.  But  a 
weight  hung  at  the  extremity  C  exerts  a  mo¬ 
ment  twice  as  great  as  it  would  if  suspended  from 
the  middle:  therefore,  if  we  consider  the  mo¬ 
ments  of  both  as  located  at  the  end  C,  we  must 
add  to  the  weight  E  one-half  that  of  the  prism. 

Simp.  I  understand  perfectly;  and  moreover, 
if  I  mistake  not,  the  force  of  the  two  weights 
BD  and  E,  thus  disposed,  would  exert  the  same 
moment  as  would  the  entire  weight  BD  together 
with  twice  the  weight  E  suspended  at  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  lever  EC. 


tance  to  fracture  when  the  force  is  applied  in 
the  direction  of  its  breadth  than  in  the  direction 
of  its  thickness. 

For  the  sake  of  clearness,  take  a  ruler  ad  whose 
width  is  ac ^nd  whose  thickness,  cb,  is  much  less 
than  its  width.  The  question  now  is  why  will 
the  ruler,  if  stood  on  edge,  as  in  the  first  figure, 
withstand  a  great  weight  T,  while,  when  laid 
flat,  as  in  the  second  figure,  it  will  not  support 
the  weight  X  which  is  less  than  T.  The  answer  is 
evident  when  we  remember  that  in  the  one  case 
the  fulcrum  is  at  the  line  be,  and  in  the  other  case 
at  ca,  while  the  distance  at  which  the  force  is  ap¬ 
plied  is  the  same  in  both  cases,  namely,  the  length 
bd  but  in  the  first  case  the  distance  of  the  re¬ 
sistance  from  the  fulcrum — half  the  line  ca —  is 
greater  than  in  the  other  case  where  it  is  only 
half  of  be.  Therefore  the  weight  T  is  greater  than 
X  in  the  same  ratio  as  half  the  width  ea  is  greater 
than  half  the  thickness  be,  since  the  former  acts 
as  a  lever  arm  for  ea,  and  the  latter  for  eb,  against 
the  same  resistance,  namely,  the  strength  of  all 
the  fibres  in  the  cross-section  ab.  We  conclude, 
therefore,  that  any  given  ruler,  or  prism,  whose 
width  exceeds  its  thickness,  will  offer  greater  re¬ 
sistance  to  fracture  when  standing  on  edge  than 


1 82 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


when  lying  flat,  and  this  in  the  ratio  of  the  width 
to  the  thickness. 

Proposition  III 

Considering  now  the  case  of  a  prism  or  cyl¬ 
inder  growing  longer  in  a  horizontal  direction, 
we  must  find  out  in  what  ratio  the  moment  of 
its  own  weight  increases  in  comparison  with  its 
resistance  to  fracture.  This  moment  I  find  in¬ 
creases  in  proportion  to  the  square  of  the  length. 
In  order  to  prove  this  let  AD  be  a  prism  or  cyl¬ 
inder  lying  horizontal  with  its  end. ^  firmly  fixed 
in  a  wall.  Let  the  length  of  the  prism  be  increased 
by  the  addition  of  the  portion  BE,  It  is  clear 
that  merely  changing  the  length  of  the  lever 
from  AB  to  AC  will,  if  we  disregard  its  weight, 
increase  the  moment  of  the  force  tending  to 
produce  fracture  at  A  in  the  ratio  of  CA  to  BA. 
Hut,  besides  this,  the  weight  of  the  solid  portion 
BEy  added  to  the  weight  of  the  solid  AB  in¬ 
creases  the  moment  of  the  total  weight  in  the 
ratio  of  the  weight  of  the  prism  AE  to  that  of 
the  prism  ABy  which  is  the  same  as  the  ratio  of 
the  length  AC  to  AB. 

It  follows,  therefore,  that,  when  the  length 
and  weight  are  simultaneously  increased  in  any 
given  proportion,  the  moment,  which  is  the 
product  of  these  two,  is  increased  in  a  ratio  which 
is  the  square  of  the  preceding  proportion.  The 
conclusion  is  then  that  the  bending  moments 
due  to  the  weight  of  prisms  and  cylinders  which 
have  the  same  thickness  but  different  lengths, 


bear  to  each  other  a  ratio  which  is  the  square  of 
the  ratio  of  their  lengths,  or,  what  is  the  same 
thing,  the  ratio  of  the  squares  of  their  lengths. 

We  shall  next  show  in  what  ratio  the  resist¬ 
ance  to  fracture,  in  prisms  and  cylinders,  in¬ 
creases  with  increase  of  thickness  while  the 
length  remains  unchanged.  Here  I  say  that 

Proposition  IV 

In  pnsf7is  and  cylinders  of  equal  lengthy  but  of  un¬ 
equal  thichnesseSy  the  resistance  to  fracture  increases 
in  the  same  ratio  as  the  cube  of  the  diameter  of  the 
thickness  y  i.  e.y  of  the  base. 

Let  A  and  B  be  two  cylinders  of  equal  lengths 
DGy  FH'y  let  their  bases  be  circular  but  unequal, 
having  the  diameters  CD  and  EF.  Then  I  say 
that  the  resistance  to  fracture  offered  by  the 
cylinder  B  is  to  that  offered  by  A  as  the  cube  of 
the  diameter  FE  is  to  the  cube  of  the  diameter 
DC.  For,  if  we  consider  the  resistance  to  frac¬ 
ture  by  longitudinal  pull  as  dependent  upon  the 
bases,  i.e.y  upon  the  circles  EF  and  DC,  no  one 
can  doubt  that  the  strength  of  the  cylinder  B  is 
greater  than  that  of  A  in  the  same  proportion  in 
which  the  area  of  the  circle  EF  exceeds  that  of 
CD;  because  it  is  precisely  in  this  ratio  that  the 
number  of  fibres  binding  the  parts  of  the  solid 
together  in  the  one  cylinder  exceeds  that  in  the 
other  cylinder. 

But  in  the  case  of  a  force  acting  transversely 
it  must  be  remembered  that  we  are  employing 
two  levers  in  w^hich  the  forces  are  applied  at 
distances  DGy  FHy  and  the  ful- 
crums  are  located  at  the  points 
D  and  F;  but  the  resistances  are 
applied  at  distances  which  are 
equal  to  the  radii  of  the  circles 
DC  and  EFy  since  the  fibres  dis¬ 
tributed  over  these  entire  cross- 
sections  act  as  if  concentrated  at 
the  centres.  Remembering  this 
and  remembering  also  that  the 
arms,  DG  and  FHy  through 
w^hich  the  forces  G  and  H  act 
are  equal,  w’e  can  understand 
that  the  resistance,  located  at  the 
centre  of  the  base  EFy  acting 
against  the  force  at  f/,  is  more 
eflectiv’e  than  the  resistance  at 
the  centre  of  the  base  CD  op¬ 
posing  the  force  G,  in  the  ratio 
of  the  radius  FE  to  the  radius 
DC.  Accordingly,  the  resistance 
to  fracture  offered  by  the  cylin¬ 
der  B  is  greater  than  that  of  the 
cylinder  A  in  a  ratio  which  is 


Fig.  19 


THE  TWO  NEW 

C 


SCIENCES 


183 


Fig.  20 

compounded  of  that  of  the  area  of  the  circles 
EF  and  DC  and  that  of  their  radii,  i.e,,  of  their 
diameters;  but  the  areas  of  circles  are  as  the 
squares  of  their  diameters.  Therefore  the  ratio 
of  the  resistances,  being  the  product  of  the  two 
preceding  ratios,  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  cubes 
of  the  diameters.  This  is  what  I  set  out  to  prove. 
Also  since  the  volume  of  a  cube  varies  as  the 
third  power  of  its  edge  we  may  say  that  the  re¬ 
sistance  [strength]  of  a  cylinder  whose  length 
remains  constant  varies  as  the  third  power  of 
its  diameter. 

From  the  preceding  we  are  able  to  conclude 
Corollary 

The  resistance  of  a  prism  or  cylinder  of  con¬ 
stant  length  varies  in  the  sesquialteral  ratio  of 
its  volume. 

This  is  evident  because  the  volume  of  a  prism 
or  cylinder  of  constant  altitude  varies  directly 
as  the  area  of  its  base,  />.,  as  the  square  of  a 
side  or  diameter  of  this  base ;  but,  as  j  ust  demon¬ 
strated,  the  resistance  varies  as  the  cube  of  this 
same  side  or  diameter.  Hence  the  resistance 
varies  in  the  sesquialteral  ratio  of  the  volume — 
consequently  also  of  the  weight — of  the  solid 
itself. 

Simp.  Before  proceeding  further  I  should  like 
to  have  one  of  my  difficulties  removed.  Up  to 
this  point  you  have  not  taken  into  considera¬ 
tion  a  certain  other  kind  of  resistance  which,  it 
appears  to  me,  diminishes  as  the  solid  grows 
longer,  and  this  is  quite  as  true  in  the  case  of 
bending  as  in  pulling;  it  is  precisely  thus  that 
in  the  case  of  a  rope  we  observe  that  a  very  long 
one  is  less  able  to  support  a  large  weight  than  a 
short  one.  Whence,  I  believe,  a  short  rod  of 
wood  or  iron  will  support  a  greater  weight  than 
if  it  were  long,  provided  the  force  be  always  ap¬ 
plied  longitudinally  and  not  transversely,  and 
provided  also  that  we  take  into  account  the 
weight  of  the  rope  itself  which  increases  with 
its  length. 

Salv.  I  fear,  Simplicio,  if  I  correctly  catch 


your  meaning,  that  in  this  particular  you  are 
making  the  same  mistake  as  many  others;  that 
is  if  you  mean  to  say  that  a  long  rope,  one  of 
perhaps  40  cubits,  cannot  hold  up  so  great  a 
weight  as  a  shorter  length,  say  one  or  two  cu¬ 
bits,  of  the  same  rope. 

Simp.  That  is  what  I  meant,  and  as  far  as  I 
see  the  proposition  is  highly  probable. 

Salv.  On  the  contrary,  I  consider  it  not 
merely  improbable  but  false;  and  I  think  I  can 
easily  convince  you  of  your  error.  Let  AB  rep¬ 
resent  the  rope,  fastened  at  the  upper  end  A:  at 
the  lower  end  attach  a  weight  C  whose  force  is 
just  sufficient  to  break  the  rope.  Now,  Simpli¬ 
cio,  point  out  the  exact  place  where  you  think 
the  break  ought  to  occur. 

Simp.  Let  us  say  D. 

Salv.  And  why  at  D? 

Simp.  Because  at  this  point  the  rope  is  not 
strong  enough  to  support,  say,  100  pounds, 
made  up  of  the  portion  of  the  rope  DB  and  the 
stone  C. 

Salv.  Accordingly,  whenever  the  rope  is 
stretched  with  the  weight  of  100  pounds  at  D 
it  will  break  there. 

Simp.  I  think  so. 

Salv.  But  tell  me,  if  instead  of  attaching  the 
weight  at  the  end  of  the  rope,  B, 
one  fastens  it  at  a  point  nearer  D, 
say,  at  E:  or  if,  instead  of  fixing 
the  upper  end  of  the  rope  at  Ay 
one  fastens  it  at  some  point  F, 
just  above  D,  will  not  the  rope, 
at  the  point  D,  be  subject  to  the 
same  pull  of  1 00  pounds  ? 

Simp.  It  would,  provided  you 
include  with  the  stone  C  the  por¬ 
tion  of  rope  EB, 

Salv.  Let  us  therefore  suppose 
that  the  rope  is  stretched  at  the 
point  D  with  a  weight  of  100 
pounds,  then  according  to  your 
own  admission  it  will  break;  but 
FE  is  only  a  small  portion  of  AB; 
how  can  you  therefore  maintain 
that  the  long  rope  is  weaker  than 
the  short  one  ?  Give  up  then  this 
erroneous  view  which  you  share 
with  many  very  intelligent  peo¬ 
ple,  and  let  us  proceed. 

Now  having  demonstrated  that,  in  the  case 
of  prisms  and  cylinders  of  constant  thickness, 
the  moment  of  force  tending  to  produce  frac¬ 
ture  varies  as  the  square  of  the  length;  and  hav¬ 
ing  likewise  shown  that,  when  the  length  is  con¬ 
stant  and  the  thickness  varies,  the  resistance  to 


•B 


Fig.  21 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


184 

fracture  varies  as  the  cube  of  the  side,  or  di¬ 
ameter,  of  the  base,  let  us  pass  to  the  investiga¬ 
tion  of  the  case  of  solids  which  simultaneously 
vary  in  both  length  and  thickness.  Here  I  ob¬ 
serve  that,  ^ 

Proposition  V 

Prisms  and  cylinders  which  differ  in  both  length 
and  thickness  offer  resistances  to  fracture  which 
are  directly  proportional  to  the  cubes  of  the  di¬ 
ameters  of  their  bases  and  inversely  proportional 
to  their  lengths. 

Let  ABC  and  DBF  be  two  such  cylinders; 
then  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  AC  bears  to 
the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  DFa  ratio  which 
is  the  product  of  the  cube  of  the  diameter  AB 
divided  by  the  cube  of  the  diameter  DE,  and  of 


A« - «B 

Di - iE 

HI - » 

H - 1 


the  length  EF  divided  by  the  length  BG.  Make 
EG  equal  to  BC:  let  H  be  a  third  proportional 
to  the  lines  AB  and  DE\  let  I  be  a  fourth  pro¬ 
portional,  [ABfDE=HfI]:  and  let  7:5  = 
EF:BC. 

Now  since  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  AC 
is  to  that  of  the  cylinder  DG  as  the  cube  of  AB 
is  to  the  cube  of  DEy  that  is,  as  the  length  AB 
is  to  the  length  I;  and  since  the  resistance  of  the 
cylinder  DG  is  to  that  of  the  cylinder  DF  as 
the  length  FE  is  to  EG,  that  is,  as  /  is  to  S,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  length  is  to  5  as  the  resistance 
of  the  cylinder  is  to  that  of  the  cylinder  DF. 
But  the  line  AB  bears  to  5  a  ratio  which  is  the 
product  of  y^F//and  I/S.  Hence  the  resistance 
of  the  cylinder  bears  to  the  resistance  of  the 
cylinder  DF  a  ratio  which  is  the  product  of 
AB/I  (that  is,  AB^/DE^)  and  of  7/5  (that  is, 
EF/BC):  which  is  what  I  meant  to  prove. 

This  proposition  having  been  demonstrated. 


let  us  next  consider  the  case  of  prisms  and  cyl¬ 
inders  which  are  similar.  Concerning  these  we 
shall  show  that. 

Proposition  VI 

In  the  case  of  similar  cylinders  and  prisms,  the 
moments  [stretching  force s\  which  result  from 
multiplying  together  their  weight  and  length  [i.e. 
from  the  moments  produced  by  their  own  weight 
and  length],  which  latter  acts  as  a  lever- arm,  bear 
to  each  other  a  ratio  which  is  the  sesquialteral  of 
the  ratio  between  the  resistances  of  their  bases. 

In  order  to  prove  this  let  us  indicate  the  two 
similar  cylinders  by  AB  and  CD\  then  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  force  in  the  cylinder  AB,  oppos¬ 
ing  the  resistance  of  its  base  B,  bears  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  force  at  CD,  opposing  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  its  base  D,  a  ratio  which  is  the  ses¬ 
quialteral  of  the  ratio  between  the  resistance  of 
the  base  B  and  the  resistance  of  the  base  7).  And 


Fig-  23 

since  the  solids  AB  and  CD,  are  effective  in  op¬ 
posing  the  resistances  of  their  bases  B  and  D, 
in  proportion  to  their  weights  and  to  the  me¬ 
chanical  advantages  of  their  lever  arms  respec¬ 
tively,  and  since  the  advantage  of  the  lever 
arm  AB  is  equal  to  the  advantage  of  the  lever 
arm  CD  (this  is  true  because  in  virtue  of  the 
similarity  of  the  cylinders  the  length  AB  is  to 
the  radius  of  the  base  B  as  the  length  CD  is  to 
the  radius  of  the  base  D),  it  follows  that  the 
total  force  of  the  cylinder  AB  is  to  the  total 
force  of  the  cylinder  CD  as  the  weight  alone  of 
the  cylinder  AB  is  to  the  weight  alone  of  the 
cylinder  CD,  that  is,  as  the  volume  of  the  cyl¬ 
inder  AB  is  to  the  volume  CD:  but  these  are  as 
the  cubes  of  the  diameters  of  their  bases  B  and 
D;  and  the  resistances  of  the  bases,  being  to  each 
other  as  their  areas,  are  to  each  other  conse¬ 
quently  as  the  squares  of  their  diameters.  There¬ 
fore,  the  forces  of  the  cylinders  are  to  each  other 
in  the  sesquialteral  ratio  of  the  resistance  of 
their  bases. 

Simp.  This  proposition  strikes  me  as  both 
new  and  surprising:  at  first  glance  it  is  very  dif¬ 
ferent  from  anything  which  I  myself  should 
have  guessed:  for  since  these  figures  are  similar 


THE  TWO  NEW 

in  all  other  respects,  I  should  have  certainly 
thought  that  the  forces  and  the  resistances  of 
these  cylinders  would  have  borne  to  each  other 
the  same  ratio. 

Sagr.  This  is  the  proof  of  the  proposition  to 
which  I  referred,  at  the  very  beginning  of  our 
discussion,  as  one  imperfectly  understood 
by  me. 

Salv.  For  a  while,  Simplicio,  I  used  to  think, 
as  you  do,  that  the  resistances  of  similar  solids 
were  similar;  but  a  certain  casual  observation 
showed  me  that  similar  solids  do  not  exhibit  a 
strength  which  is  proportional  to  their  size,  the 
larger  ones  being  less  fitted  to  undergo  rough 
usage,  just  as  tall  men  are  more  apt  than  small 
children  to  be  injured  by  a  fall.  And,  as  we  re¬ 
marked  at  the  outset,  a  large  beam  or  column 
falling  from  a  given  height  will  go  to  pieces 
when  under  the  same  circumstances  a  small 
scantling  or  small  marble  cylinder  will  not 
break.  It  was  this  observation  which  led  me  to 
the  investigation  of  the  fact  which  I  am  about 
to  demonstrate  to  you:  it  is  a  very  remarkable 
thing  that,  among  the  infinite  variety  of  solids 
which  are  similar  one  to  another  there  are  no 
two  of  which  the  forces  and  the  resistances  of 
these  solids  are  related  in  the  same  ratio. 

Simp.  You  remind  me  now  of  a  passage  in 
Aristotle’s  Questions  in  Mechanics  in  which  he 
tries  to  explain  why  it  is  that  a  wooden  beam  be¬ 
comes  weaker  and  can  be  more  easily  bent  as  it 
grows  longer,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the 
shorter  beam  is  thinner  and  the  longer  one  thick¬ 
er:  and,  if  I  remember  correctly,  he  explains  it 
in  terms  of  the  simple  lever. 

Salv.  Very  true:  but,  since  this  solution 
seemed  to  leave  room  for  doubt,  Bishop  di 
Guevara,  whose  truly  learned  commentaries 
have  greatly  enriched  and  illuminated  this  work, 
indulges  in  additional  clever  speculations  with 
the  hope  of  thus  overcoming  all  difficulties;  nev¬ 
ertheless,  even  he  is  confused  as  regards  this  par¬ 
ticular  point,  namely  ,whether,  when  the  length 
and  thickness  of  these  solid  figures  increase  in 
the  same  ratio,  their  strength  and  resistance  to 
fracture,  as  well  as  to  bending,  remain  constant. 
After  much  thought  upon  this  subject,  I  have 
reached  the  following  result.  First  I  shall  show 
that, 

Proposition  VII 

Among  heavy  prisms  and  cylinders  of  similar  fig' 
ure,  there  is  one  and  only  one  which  under  the  stress 
of  its  own  weight  lies  just  on  the  limit  between 
breaking  and  not  breaking',  so  that  every  larger  one 
is  unable  to  carry  the  load  of  its  oivn  weight  and 


SCIENCES  185 

breaks;  while  every  smaller  one  is  able  to  withstand 
some  additional force  tending  to  breakit. 

Let  AB  be  a  heavy  prism,  the  longest  possible 
that  will  just  sustain  its  own  weight,  so  that  if  it 
be  lengthened  the  least  bit  it  will  break.  Then, 
I  say,  this  prism  is  unique  among  all  similar 
prisms — infinite  in  number — in  occupying  that 
boundary  line  between  breaking  and  not  break¬ 
ing;  so  that  every  larger  one  will  break  under  its 
own  weight,  and  every  smaller  one  will  not  break, 
but  will  be  able  to  withstand  some  force  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  its  own  weight. 

Let  the  prism  CE  be  similar  to,  but  larger 
than,  AB:  then,  I  say,  it  will  not  remain  intact 
but  will  break  under  its  own  weight.  Lay  off  the 
portion  CD,  equal  in  length  to  AB.  And,  since, 
the  resistance  of  CD  is  to  that  of  AB  as  the  cube 
of  the  thickness  of  CD  is  to  the  cube  of  the 
thickness  of  AB^  that  is,  as  the  prism  CE  is  to 
the  similar  prism  AB,  it  follows  that  the  weight 
of  CE  is  the  utmost  load  which  a  prism  of  the 
length  CD  can  sustain;  but  the  length  of  CE  is 
greater;  therefore  the  prism  CE  will  break.  Now 


D 

Fig.  24 


take  another  prism  EG  which  is  smaller  than 
AB.  Let  FH  equal  AB,  then  it  can  be  shown  in  a 
similar  manner  that  the  resistance  [bending 
strength]  of  FG  is  to  that  of  AB  as  the  prism  FG 
is  to  the  prism  AB  provided  the  distance  AB 
that  is  FHy  is  equal  to  the  distance  FG;  but  AB 
is  greater  than  FG,  and  therefore  the  moment 
of  the  prism  FG  applied  at  G  is  not  sufficient  to 
break  the  prism  FG. 

Sagr.  The  demonstration  is  short  and  clear; 
while  the  proposition  which,  at  first  glance,  ap¬ 
peared  improbable  is  now  seen  to  be  both  true 
and  inevitable.  In  order  therefore  to  bring  this 
prism  into  that  limiting  condition  which  sepa¬ 
rates  breaking  from  not  breaking,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  change  the  ratio  between  thickness 
and  length  either  by  increasing  the  thickness  or 
by  diminishing  the  length.  An  investigation  of 
this  limiting  state  will,  I  believe,  demand  equal 
ingenuity. 

Salv.  Nay,  even  more;  for  the  question  is 
more  difficult;  this  I  know  because  I  spent  no 
small  amount  of  time  in  its  discovery  which  I 
now  wish  to  share  with  you. 


1 86 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


Proposition  VIII 

Given  a  cylinder  or  prism  of  the  greatest  length  con¬ 
sistent  with  its  not  breaJ^ng  under  its  own  tveight; 
and  having  given  a  greater  length,  to  find  the  diam¬ 
eter  of  another  cylinder  or  prism  of  this  greater  length 
which  shall  be  the  only  and  largest  one  capable  of 
withstanding  its  own  weight. 

Let  BC  be  the  largest  cylinder  capable  of  sus¬ 
taining  its  own  weight;  and  let  DB  be  a  length 
greater  than  AC:  the  problem  is  to  find  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  the  cylinder  which,  having  the  length 
DHy  shall  be  the  largest  one  just  able  to  with¬ 
stand  its  own  weight.  Let  /  be  a  third  propor- 
lional  to  the  lengths  DE  and  AC:  let  the  diam¬ 
eter  FD  be  to  the  diameter  BA  as  DE  is  to  /; 
draw  the  cylinder  FE;  then,  among  all  cylinders 
liaving  the  same  proportions,  this  is  the  largest 
and  only  one  just  capable  of  sustaining  its  own 
weight. 

Let  M  be  a  third  proportional  to  DE  and  I: 
also  let  O  be  a  fourth  proportional  to  DE,  /,  and 
A/;  lay  off  FG  equal  to  AC,  Now  since  the  di¬ 
ameter  FD  is  to  the  diameter  AB  as  the  length 
DE  is  to  I,  and  since  O  is  a  fourth  proportional 
toZ)£,/and  M,  it  followsthat  FD^'BA^  =  DE:0, 
But  the  resistance  [bending  strength]  of  the  cyl- 

B 


I' - 1 

M* - 1 

Oi - ^ 

Fig.  25 

inder  DG  is  to  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  BG 
as  the  cube  of  FD  is  to  the  cube  of  BA:  hence 
the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  DG  is  to  that  of 
cylinder  BC  as  the  length  DE  is  to  O.  And  since 
ihc  moment  of  the  cylinder  BC  is  held  in  equil¬ 
ibrium  by  its  resistance,  we  shall  accomplish  our 
end  (which  is  to  prove  that  the  moment  of  the 
cylinder  FE  is  equal  to  the  resistance  located  at 
FD),  if  we  show  that  the  moment  of  the  cyl¬ 
inder  FE  is  to  the  moment  of  the  cylinder  BC  as 
the  resistance  DF  is  to  the  resistance  BA,  that 
is,  as  the  cube  of  FD  is  to  the  cube  of  BA,  or  as 
the  length  DE  is  to  O.  The  moment  of  the  cyl¬ 
inder  FE  is  to  the  moment  of  the  cylinder  DG 


as  the  square  of  DE  is  to  the  square  of  AC,  that 
is,  as  the  length  DE  is  to  /;  but  the  moment  of 
the  cylinder  DG  is  to  the  moment  of  the  cyl¬ 
inder  BC,  as  the  square  of  DF  is  to  the  square  of 
BA,  that  is,  as  the  square  of  DE  is  to  the  square 
of  I,  or  as  the  square  of  /  is  to  the  square  of  M, 
or,  as  /  is  to  O.  Therefore  by  equating  ratios,  it 
results  that  the  moment  of  the  cylinder  FE  is  to 
the  moment  of  the  cylinder  BC  as  the  length 
DE  is  to  O,  that  is,  as  the  cube  of  DF  is  to  the 
cube  of  BA,  or  as  the  resistance  of  the  base  DF 
is  to  the  resistance  of  the  base  BA:  which  was  to 
be  proven. 

Sagr.  This  demonstration,  Salviati,  is  rather 
long  and  difficult  to  keep  in  mind  from  a  single 
hearing.  Will  you  not,  therefore,  be  good 
enough  to  repeat  it  ? 

Salv.  As  you  like;  but  I  would  suggest  in¬ 
stead  a  more  direct  and  a  shorter  proof:  this 
will,  however,  necessitate  a  different  figure. 

Sagr.  The  favor  will  be  that  much  greater: 
nevertheless,  I  hope  you  will  oblige  me  by  put¬ 
ting  into  written  form  the  argument  just  given 
so  that  I  may  study  it  at  my  leisure. 

Salv.  I  shall  gladly  do  so.  Let  A  denote  a  cyl¬ 
inder  of  diameter  DC  and  the  largest  capable  of 
sustaining  its  own  weight:  the  problem  is  to 
determine  a  larger  cylinder  which  shall  be  at 
once  the  maximum  and  the  unique  one  capable 
of  sustaining  its  own  weight. 

Let  E  be  such  a  cylinder,  similar  to  A,  having 
the  assigned  length,  and  having  a  diameter  KL, 
Let  MN  be  a  third  proportional  to  the  two 


lengths  DC  and  KL:  let  MN  also  be  the  diame¬ 
ter  of  another  cylinder.  A',  having  the  same 
length  as  E:  then,  I  say,  X  is  the  cylinder  sought. 
Now  since  the  resistance  of  the  base  DC  is  to 
the  resistance  of  the  base  KL  as  the  square  of 
DC  is  to  the  square  of  KL,  that  is,  as  the  square 
of  A'L  is  to  the  square  of  MN,  or,  as  the  cylinder 
E  is  to  the  cylinder  X,  that  is,  as  the  moment  E 
is  to  the  moment  X;  and  since  also  the  resist- 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


ance  of  the  base  KL  is  to  the  resistance  of  the 
base  MN  as  the  cube  of  KL  is  to  the  cube  of 
MNy  that  is,  as  the  cube  of  DC  is  to  the  cube  of 
KL,  or,  as  the  cylinder  A  is  to  the  cylinder  E, 
that  is,  as  the  moment  of  A  is  to  the  moment 
of  E;  hence  it  follows,  ex  sequali  in  proportione 
perturbata,  that  the  moment  of  A  is  to  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  X  as  the  resistance  of  the  base  DC  is 
to  the  resistance  of  the  base  MN\  therefore 
moment  and  resistance  are  related  to  each  other 
in  prism  X  precisely  as  they  are  in  prism  A, 
Let  us  now  generalize  the  problem;  then  it 
will  read  as  follows: 

Given  a  cylinder  AC  in  which  moment  and  resist' 
ance  are  related  in  any  manner  whatsoever;  let 
DE  be  the  length  of  another  cylinder;  then  deter' 
mine  what  its  thickness  must  be  in  order  that  the 
relation  between  its  moment  and  resistance  shall 
be  identical  with  that  of  the  cylinder  AC, 

Using  Fig.  25  in  the  same  manner  as  above, 
we  may  say  that,  since  the  moment  of  the  cyl¬ 
inder  FE  is  to  the  moment  of  the  portion  DG 
as  the  square  of  ED  is  to  the  square  of  FG,  that 
is,  as  the  length  DE  is  to  /;  and  since  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  the  cylinder  FG  is  to  the  moment  of 
the  cylinder  AC  the  square  of  FD  is  to  the 
square  of  AB,  or,  as  the  square  of  ED  is  to  the 
square  of  /,  or,  as  the  square  of  I  is  to  the  square 
of  M,  that  is,  as  the  length  I  is  to  O;  it  follows, 
ex  sequali,  that  the  moment  of  the  cylinder  FE 
is  to  the  moment  of  the  cylinder  AC  as  the 
length  DE  is  to  O,  that  is,  as  the  cube  of  DE  is 
to  the  cube  of  /,  or,  as  the  cube  of  FD  is  to  the 
cube  of  AB,  that  is,  as  the  resistance  of  the 
base  FD  is  to  the  resistance  of  the  base  AB; 
which  was  to  be  proven. 

From  what  has  already  been  demonstrated, 
you  can  plainly  see  the  impossibility  of  increas¬ 
ing  the  size  of  structures  to  vast  dimensions 
either  in  art  or  in  nature;  likewise  the  impossi¬ 
bility  of  building  ships,  palaces,  or  temples  of 
enormous  size  in  such  a  way  that  their  oars, 
yards,  beams,  iron- bolts,  and,  in  short,  all  their 
other  parts  will  hold  together;  nor  can  nature 
produce  trees  of  extraordinary  size  because  the 
branches  would  break  down  under  their  own 
weight;  so  also  it  would  be  impossible  to  build 
up  the  bony  structures  of  men,  horses,  or  other 
animals  so  as  to  hold  together  and  perform 
their  normal  functions  if  these  animals  were  to 
be  increased  enormously  in  height;  for  this  in¬ 
crease  in  height  can  be  accomplished  only  by 
employing  a  material  which  is  harder  and 
stronger  than  usual,  or  by  enlarging  the  size  of 
the  bones,  thus  changing  their  shape  until  the 
form  and  appearance  of  the  animals  suggest  a 


187 

monstrosity.  This  is  perhaps  what  our  wise 
Poet  had  in  mind,  when  he  says,  in  describing  a 
huge  giant: 

Impossible  it  is  to  reckon  his  height 
So  beyond  measure  is  his  size} 

To  illustrate  briefly,  I  have  sketched  a  bone 
whose  natural  length  has  been  increased  three 
times  and  whose  thickness  has  been  multiplied 
until,  for  a  correspondingly  large  animal,  it 
would  perform  the  same  function  which  the 
small  bone  performs  for  its  small  animal.  From 
the  figures  here  shown  you  can  see  how  out  of 
proportion  the  enlarged  bone  appears.  Clearly 
then  if  one  wishes  to  maintain  in  a  great  giant 
the  same  proportion  of  limb  as  that  found  in  an 


ordinary  man  he  must  either  find  a  harder  and 
stronger  material  for  making  the  bones,  or  he 
must  admit  a  diminution  of  strength  in  com¬ 
parison  with  men  of  medium  stature;  for  if  his 
height  be  increased  inordinately  he  will  fall 
and  be  crushed  under  his  own  weight.  Where¬ 
as,  if  the  size  of  a  body  be  diminished,  the 
strength  of  that  body  is  not  diminished  in  the 
same  proportion;  indeed  the  smaller  the  body 
the  greater  its  relative  strength.  Thus  a  small 
dog  could  probably  carry  on  his  back  two  or 
three  dogs  of  his  own  size;  but  I  believe  that  a 
horse  could  not  carry  even  one  of  his  own  size. 

Simp.  This  may  be  so;  but  I  am  led  to  doubt 
it  on  account  of  the  enormous  size  reached  by 
certain  fish,  such  as  the  whale  which,  I  under¬ 
stand,  is  ten  times  as  large  as  an  elephant;  yet 
they  all  support  themselves. 

Salv.  Your  question,  Simplicio,  suggests  an¬ 
other  principle,  one  which  had  hitherto  escaped 
my  attention  and  which  enables  giants  and  other 
animals  of  vast  size  to  support  themselves  and 
to  move  about  as  well  as  smaller  animals  do. 
This  result  may  be  secured  either  by  increasing 
the  strength  of  the  bones  and  other  parts  in¬ 
tended  to  carry  not  only  their  weight  but  also 
the  superincumbent  load;  or,  keeping  the  pro- 

*  Ariosto,  Orlando  Fttrioso,  xvii.  30. 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


i88 

portions  of  the  bony  structure  constant,  the 
skeleton  will  hold  together  in  the  same  manner 
or  even  more  easily,  provided  one  diminishes,  in 
the  proper  proportion,  the  weight  of  the  bony 
material,  of  the  flesh,  and  of  anything  else  which 
the  skeleton  has  to  carry.  It  is  this  second  prin¬ 
ciple  which  is  employed  by  nature  in  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  fish,  making  their  bones  and  muscles  not 
merely  light  but  entirely  devoid  of  weight. 

Simp.  The  trend  of  your  argument,  Salviati, 
is  evident.  Since  fish  live  in  water  which  on  ac¬ 
count  of  its  density  or,  as  others  would  say, 
heaviness  diminishes  the  weight  of  bodies  im¬ 
mersed  in  it,  you  mean  to  say  that,  for  this  rea¬ 
son,  the  bodies  of  fish  will  be  devoid  of  weight 
and  will  be  supported  without  injury  to  their 
bones.  But  this  is  not  all;  for  although  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  the  body  of  the  fish  may  be  without 
weight,  there  can  be  no  question  but  that  their 
bones  have  weight.  Take  the  case  of  a  whale’s 
rib,  having  the  dimensions  of  a  beam;  who  can 
deny  its  great  weight  or  its  tendency  to  go  to 
the  bottom  when  placed  in  water.?  One  would, 
therefore,  hardly  expect  these  great  masses  to 
sustain  themselves. 

Salv.  a  very  shrewd  objection!  And  now,  in 
reply,  tell  me  whether  you  have  ever  seen  fish 
stand  motionless  at  will  under  water,  neither 
descending  to  the  bottom  nor  rising  to  the  top, 
without  the  exertion  of  force  by  swimming? 

Simp.  This  is  a  well-known  phenomenon. 

Salv.  The  fact  then  that  fish  are  able  to  re¬ 
main  motionless  under  water  is  a  conclusive  rea¬ 
son  for  thinking  that  the  material  of  their  bodies 
has  the  same  specific  gravity  as  that  of  water; 
accordingly,  if  in  their  make-up  there  are  cer¬ 
tain  parts  which  are  heavier  than  w^ater  there 
must  be  others  which  are  lighter,  for  otherwise 
they  would  not  produce  equilibrium. 

Hence,  if  the  bones  are  heavier,  it  is  necessary 
that  the  muscles  or  other  constituents  of  the 
body  should  be  lighter  in  order  that  their  buoy¬ 
ancy  may  counterbalance  the  weight  of  the 
bones.  In  aquatic  animals  therefore,  circum¬ 
stances  are  just  reversed  from  what  they  are 
with  land  animals  inasmuch  as,  in  the  latter,  the 
bones  sustain  not  only  their  own  weight  but  also 
that  of  the  flesh,  while  in  the  former  it  is  the 
flesh  which  supports  not  only  its  own  weight 
but  also  that  of  the  bones.  We  must  therefore 
cease  to  wonder  why  these  enormously  large 
animals  inhabit  the  water  rather  than  the  land, 
that  is  to  say,  the  air. 

Simp.  I  am  convinced  and  I  only  wish  to  add 
that  what  we  call  land  animals  ought  really 
to  be  called  air  animals,  seeing  that  they  live  in 


the  air,  are  surrounded  by  air,  and  breathe  air. 

Sagr.  I  have  enjoyed  Simplicio’s  discussion 
including  both  the  question  raised  and  its  an¬ 
swer.  Moreover,  I  can  easily  understand  that 
one  of  these  giant  fish,  if  pulled  ashore,  would 
not  perhaps  sustain  itself  for  any  great  length  of 
time,  but  would  be  crushed  under  its  own  mass 
as  soon  as  the  connections  between  the  bones 
gave  way. 

Salv.  1  am  inclined  to  your  opinion;  and,  in¬ 
deed,  I  almost  think  that  the  same  thing  would 
happen  in  the  case  of  a  very  big  ship  which  floats 
on  the  sea  without  going  to  pieces  under  its  load 
of  merchandise  and  armament,  but  which  on 
dry  land  and  in  air  would  probably  fall  apart. 
But  let  us  proceed  and  show  how: 

Gwen  a  prism  or  cylinder,  also  its  own  weight  and 
the  maximum  load  which  it  can  carry,  it  is  then 
possible  to  find  a  maximum  length  beyond  which 
the  cylinder  cannot  be  prolonged  without  breaking 
under  its  own  weight. 

Let  AC  indicate  both  the  prism  and  its  own 
weight;  also  let  D  represent  the  maximum  load 
which  the  prism  can  carry  at  the  end  C  without 
fracture;  it  is  required  to  find  the  maximum  to 
which  the  length  of  the  said  prism  can  be  in¬ 
creased  without  breaking.  Draw  AH  of  such  a 
length  that  the  weight  of  the  prism  is  to  the 
sum  oi  AC  and  twice  the  weight  D  as  the  length 
CA  is  to  AH;  and  let  AG  he  a.  mean  proportion¬ 
al  between  CA  and  AH;  then,  I  say,  AG  is  the 
length  sought.  Since  the  moment  of  the  weight 
D  attached  at  the  point  C  is  equal  to  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  a  weight  twice  as  large  as  D  placed  at 
the  middle  point  AC,  through  which  the  weight 


of  the  prism  acts,  it  follows  that  the  moment 
of  the  resistance  of  the  prism  AC  located  at  A  is 
equivalent  to  nvice  the  weight  £)  plus  the  weight 
oiAC,  both  acting  through  the  middle  point  of 
AC,  And  since  we  have  agreed  that  the  moment 
of  the  weights  thus  located,  namely,  twice  D 
plus  AC,  bears  to  the  moment  oi  AC  the  same 
ratio  which  the  length  HA  bears  to  CA  and 
since  AG  is  a  mean  proportional  between  these 
two  lengths,  it  follows  that  the  moment  of  twice 
D  plus  AC  is  to  the  moment  o{  AC  as  the  square 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


of  GA  is  to  the  square  of  CA.  But  the  moment 
arising  from  the  weight  of  the  prism  GA  is  to 
the  moment  of  as  the  square  of  GA  is  to  the 
square  of  CA ;  thence  AG  is  the  maximum  length 
sought,  that  is,  the  length  up  to  which  the  prism 
AC  may  be  prolonged  and  still  support  itself, 
but  beyond  which  it  will  break. 

Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  moments 
and  resistances  of  prisms  and  solid  cylinders 
fixed  at  one  end  with  a  weight  applied  at  the 
other  end;  three  cases  were  discussed,  namely, 
that  in  which  the  applied  force  was  the  only 
one  acting,  that  in  which  the  weight  of  the 
prism  itself  is  also  taken  into  consideration,  and 
that  in  which  the  weight  of  the  prism  alone  is 
taken  into  consideration.  Let  us  now  consider 
these  same  prisms  and  cylinders  when  sup- 
ported  at  both  ends  or  at  a  single  point  placed 
somewhere  between  the  ends.  In  the  first  place, 
I  remark  that  a  cylinder  carrying  only  its  own 
weight  and  having  the  maximum  length,  be¬ 
yond  which  it  will  break,  will,  when  supported 
either  in  the  middle  or  at  both  ends,  have 
twice  the  length  of  one  which  is  mortised  into 
a  wall  and  supported  only  at  one  end.  This  is 
very  evident  because,  if  we  denote  the  cylinder 
by  ABC  and  if  we  assume  that  one-half  of  it, 
ABj  is  the  greatest  possible  length  capable  of 
supporting  its  own  weight  with  one  end  fixed 
at  By  then,  for  the  same  reason,  if  the  cylinder 
is  carried  on  the  point  Gy  the  first  half  will  be 
counterbalanced  by  the  other  half  BC»  So  also 
in  the  case  of  the  cylinder  DEFy  if  its  length  be 


such  that  it  will  support  only  one-half  this 
length  when  the  end  D  is  held  fixed,  or  the 
other  half  when  the  end  F  is  fixed,  then  it  is 
evident  that  when  supports,  such  as  H  and  7, 
are  placed  under  the  ends  D  and  F  respectively 
the  moment  of  any  additional  force  or  weight 
placed  at  E  will  produce  fracture  at  this  point. 

A  more  intricate  and  difficult  problem  is  the 
following:  neglect  the  weight  of  a  solid  such  as 
the  preceding  and  find  whether  the  same  force 


189 

or  weight  which  produces  fracture  when  ap¬ 
plied  at  the  middle  of  a  cylinder,  supported  at 
both  ends,  will  also  break  the  cylinder  when  ap¬ 
plied  at  some  other  point  nearer  one  end  than 
the  other. 

Thus,  for  example,  if  one  wished  to  break  a 
stick  by  holding  it  with  one  hand  at  each  end 
and  applying  his  knee  at  the  middle,  would  the 
same  force  be  required  to  break  it  in  the  same 
manner  if  the  knee  were  applied,  not  at  the 
middle,  but  at  some  point  nearer  to  one  end? 

Sagr.  This  problem,  I  believe,  has  been 
touched  upon  by  Aristotle  in  his  Questions  in 
Mechanics, 

Salv.  His  inquiry  however  is  not  quite  the 
same;  for  he  seeks  merely  to  discover  why  it  is 
that  a  stick  may  be  more  easily  broken  by  tak¬ 
ing  hold,  one  hand  at  each  end  of  the  stick,  that 
is,  far  removed  from  the  knee,  than  if  the  hands 
were  closer  together.  He  gives  a  general  ex¬ 
planation,  referring  it  to  the  lengthened  lever 
arms  which  are  secured  by  placing  the  hands  at 
the  ends  of  the  stick.  Our  inquiry  calls  for 
something  more:  what  we  want  to  knovv  is 
whether,  when  the  hands  are  retained  at  the 
ends  of  the  stick,  the  same  force  is  required  to 
break  it  wherever  the  knee  be  placed. 

Sagr.  At  first  glance  this  would  appear  to  be 
so,  because  the  two  level"  arms  exert,  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  way,  the  same  moment,  seeing  that  as  one 
grows  shorter  the  other  grows  correspondingly 
longer. 

Salv.  Now  you  see  how  readily  one  falls  into 
errorand  what  caution  and  circum¬ 
spection  are  required  to  avoid  it. 
What  you  have  just  said  appears  at 
first  glance  highly  probable,  but  on 
closer  examination  it  proves  to  be 
quite  far  from  true;  as  will  be  seen 
from  the  fact  that  whether  the  knee 
— the  fulcrum  of  the  two  levers — 
be  placed  in  the  middle  or  not 
makes  such  a  difference  that,  if  frac¬ 
ture  is  to  be  produced  at  any  other 
point  than  the  middle,  the  break¬ 
ing  force  at  the  middle,  even  when 
multiplied  four,  ten,  a  hundred,  or  a  thousand 
times  would  not  suffice.  To  begin  with  we  shall 
offer  some  general  considerations  and  then  pass 
to  the  determination  of  the  ratio  in  which  the 
breaking  force  must  change  in  order  to  produce 
fracture  at  one  point  rather  than  another. 

Let  AB  denote  a  wooden  cylinder  which  is  to 
be  broken  in  the  middle,  over  the  supporting 
point  Cy  and  let  DE  represent  an  identical  cyl¬ 
inder  which  is  to  be  broken  just  over  the  sup- 


Fig.  29 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


porting  point  F  which  is  not  in  the  middle. 
First  of  all  it  is  clear  that,  since  the  distances 
AC  and  CB  are  equal,  the  forces  applied  at  the 
extremities  B  and  A  must  also  be  equal.  Sec- 
ondly  since  the  distance  DF  is  less  than  the  dis¬ 
tance  AC  the  moment  of  any  force  acting  at  D 
is  less  than  the  moment  of  the  same  force  at  Ay 
that  is,  applied  at  the  distance  CA  \  and  the  mo¬ 
ments  are  less  in  the  ratio  of  the  length  DF  to 
AC;  consequently  it  is  necessary  to  increase  the 
force  at  D  in  order  to  overcome,  or  even  to 
balance,  the  resistance  at  F;  but  in  comparison 
with  the  length  AC  the  distance  DF  can  be 
diminished  indefinitely:  in  order  therefore  to 
counterbalance  the  resistance  at  F  it  will  be 
necessaiy’  to  increase  indefinitely  the  force  ap¬ 


plied  at  Z).  On  the  other  hand,  in  proportion 
as  we  increase  the  distance  FE  over  that  of  CBy 
we  must  diminish  the  force  at  E  in  order  to 
counterbalance  the  resistance  at  F;  but  the  dis¬ 
tance  FEy  measured  in  terms  of  CBy  cannot  be 
increased  indefinitely  by  sliding  the  fulcrum  F 
toward  the  end  D;  indeed,  it  cannot  even  be 
made  double  the  length  CB,  Therefore  the 
force  required  at  E  to  balance  the  resistance  at 
F  will  always  be  more  than  half  that  required 
at  B.  It  is  clear  then  that,  as  the  fulcrum  F  ap¬ 
proaches  the  end  D,  we  must  of  necessity  in¬ 
definitely  increase  the  sum  of  the  forces  applied 
at  E  and  D  in  order  to  balance,  or  overcome, 
the  resistance  at  F. 

Sagr.  What  shall  we  say,  Simplicio?  Must 
we  not  confess  that  geometry  is  the  most  pow¬ 
erful  of  all  instruments  for  sharpening  the  wit 
and  training  the  mind  to  think  correctly  Was 
not  Plato  perfectly  right  when  he  wished  that 
his  pupils  should  be  first  of  all  well  grounded  in 
mathematics.?  As  for  myself,  I  quite  understood 
the  property  of  the  lever  and  how,  by  increas¬ 
ing  or  diminishing  its  length,  one  can  increase 
or  diminish  the  moment  of  force  and  of  resist¬ 
ance;  and  yet,  in  the  solution  of  the  present 
problem  I  was  not  slightly,  but  greatly,  de¬ 
ceived. 


Simp.  Indeed  I  begin  to  understand  that 
while  logic  is  an  excellent  guide  in  discourse,  it 
does  not,  as  regards  stimulation  to  discovery, 
compare  with  the  power  of  sharp  distinction 
which  belongs  to  geometry. 

Sagr.  Logic,  it  appears  to  me,  teaches  us  how 
to  test  the  conclusiveness  of  any  argument  or 
demonstration  already  discovered  and  com¬ 
pleted;  but  I  do  not  believe  that  it  teaches 
us  to  discover  correct  arguments  and  demon¬ 
strations.  But  it  would  be  better  if  Salviati 
were  to  show  us  in  just  what  proportion  the 
forces  must  be  increased  in  order  to  produce 
fracture  as  the  fulcrum  is  moved  from  one 
point  to  another  along  one  and  the  same  wood¬ 
en  rod. 

Salv.  The  ratio  which  you  desire  is  deter¬ 
mined  as  follows: 

If  upon  a  cylinder  one  marJ^s  two  points  at  which 
fracture  is  to  be  proditcedy  then  the  resistances  at 
these  two  points  will  bear  to  each  other  the  in^ 
verse  ratio  of  the  rectangles  formed  by  the  dis¬ 
tances  from  the  respective  points  to  the  ends  of  the 
cylinder. 

Let  A  and  B  denote  the  least  forces  which 
will  bring  about  fracture  of  the  cylinder  at  C; 
likewise  E  and  F  the  smallest  forces  which  will 
break  it  at  D.  Then,  I  say,  that  the  sum  of  the 
forces  A  and  B  is  to  the  sum  of  the  forces  E  and 
F  as  the  area  of  the  rectangle  AD,DB  is  to  the 
area  of  the  rectangle  AC.CB,  Because  the  sum 
of  the  forces  A  and  B  bears  to  the  sum  of  the 
forces  E  and  F  a  ratio  which  is  the  product  of 
the  three  following  ratios,  namely,  {A-\-B)/By 
S/F,andF/(F+£);  but  the  length  BA  is  to  the 
length  CA  as  the  sum  of  the  forces  A  and  B  is 


to  the  force  B;  and,  as  the  length  DB  is  to  the 
length  CBy  so  is  the  force  B  to  the  force  F;  also 
as  the  length  AD  is  to  ABy  so  is  the  force  F  to 
the  sum  of  the  forces  F  and  E, 

Hence  it  follows  that  the  sum  of  the  forces  A 
and  B  bears  to  the  sum  of  the  forces  E  and  F  a 
ratio  which  is  the  product  of  the  three  follow¬ 
ing  ratios,  namely,  BAjCAy  BD/BCy  and  AD/ 
AB,  But  DA/CA  is  the  product  of  DA /BA  and 
BA/CA.  Therefore  the  sum  of  the  forces  A  and 
B  bears  to  the  sum  of  the  forces  E and  Fa  ratio 
which  is  the  product  of  DA:CA  and  DB:CB, 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


But  the  rectangle  AD,DB  bears  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AC,CB  a  ratio  which  is  the  product  of 
DAjCA  and  DBfCB,  Accordingly,  the  sum  of 
the  forces  A  and  B  is  to  the  sum  of  the  forces  E 
and  F  as  the  rectangle  AD.DB  is  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AG,  CB,  that  is,  the  resistance  to  frac¬ 
ture  at  G  is  to  the  resistance  to  fracture  at  Z)  as 
the  rectangle  AD.DB  is  to  the  rectangle 
AG.GB.  Q.  E.  D. 

Another  rather  interesting  problem  may  be 
solved  as  a  consequence  of  this  theorem, 
namely. 

Given  the  maximum  weight  which  a  cylinder  or 
prism  can  support  at  its  middk'point  where  the 
resistance  is  a  minimum,  and  given  also  a  larger 
weight,  find  that  point  in  the  cylinder  for  which  this 
larger  weight  is  the  maximum  load  that  can  be 
supported. 

Let  that  one  of  the  given  weights  which  is 
larger  than  the  maximum  weight  supported  at 
the  middle  of  the  cvlinder  AB  bear  to  this  max¬ 
imum  weight  the  same  ratio  which  the  length 
E  bears  to  the  length  F.  The  problem  is  to  find 
that  point  in  the  cylinder  at  which  this  larger 
weight  becomes  the  maximum  that  can  be  sup¬ 
ported.  Let  G  be  a  mean  proportional  between 
the  lengths  E  and  F,  Draw  AD  and  S  so  that 
they  bear  to  each  other  the  same  ratio  as  E  to 
G;  accordingly  S  will  be  less  than  AD. 

Let  AD  be  the  diameter  of  a  semicircle  AHD, 
in  which  take  AFl  equal  to  S;  join  the  points  H 
and  D  and  lay  off  DR  equal  to  HD.  Then,  I 
say,  R  is  the  point  sought,  namely,  the  point  at 
which  the  given  weight,  greater  than  the  max¬ 
imum  supported  at  the  middle  of  the  cylinder 
D,  would  become  the  maximum  load. 

On  AB  as  diameter  draw  the  semicircle 
ANB:  erect  the  perpendicular  RN  ^nd  join  the 
points  N  and  D.  Now  since  the  sum  of  the 
squares  on  NR  and  RD  is  equal  to  the  square  of 
ND,  that  is,  to  the  square  of  AD,  or  to  the  sum 
of  the  squares  of  AH  and  HD;  and,  since  the 
square  of  HD  is  equal  to  the  square  of  DR,  it 
follows  that  the  square  of  NR,  that  is,  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AR.RB,  is  equal  to  the  square  of  AH, 
also  therefore  to  the  square  of  S;  but  the  square 
of  S  is  to  the  square  of  AD  as  the  length  F  is  to 
the  length  E,  that  is,  as  the  maximum  weight 
supported  at  D  is  to  the  larger  of  the  two  given 
weights.  Hence  the  latter  will  be  the  maximum 
load  which  can  be  carried  at  the  point  R;  which 
is  the  solution  sought. 

Sagr.  Now  I  understand  thoroughly;  and  I 
am  thinking  that,  since  the  prism  AB  grows 
constantly  stronger  and  more  resistant  to  the 
pressure  of  its  load  at  points  which  are  more 


and  more  removed  from  the  middle,  we  could 
in  the  case  of  large  heavy  beams  cut  away  a 
considerable  portion  near  the  ends  which  would 
notably  lessen  the  weight,  and  which,  in  the 
beam  work  of  large  rooms,  would  prove  to  be 
of  great  utility  and  convenience. 

It  would  be  a  fine  thing  if  one  could  discover 
the  proper  shape  to  give  a  solid  in  order  to 
make  it  equally  resistant  at  every  point,  in 
which  case  a  load  placed  at  the  middle  would 
not  produce  fracture  more  easily  than  if  placed 
at  any  other  point. 

Salv.  I  was  just  on  the  point  of  mentioning 
an  interesting  and  remarkable  fact  connected 
with  this  very  question.  My  meaning  will  be 
clearer  if  I  draw  a  figure.  Let  DB  represent  a 
prism;  then,  as  we  have  already  shown,  its  re¬ 
sistance  to  fracture  at  the  end  AD,  owing  to  a 
load  placed  at  the  end  B,  will  be  less  than  the 
resistance  at  GI  in  the  ratio  of  the  length  GB  to 
AB.  Now  imagine  this  same  prism  to  be  cut 
through  diagonally  along  the  line  FB  so  that 
the  opposite  faces  will  be  triangular;  the  side 
facing  us  will  be  FAB.  Such  a  solid  will  have 
properties  different  from  those  of  the  prism; 
for,  if  the  load  remain  at  B,  the  resistance 
against  fracture  [bending  strength]  at  G  will  be 
less  than  that  at  A  in  the  ratio  of  the  length  GB 
to  the  length  AB.  This  is  easily  proved:  for  if 
GNO  represents  a  cross-section  parallel  to  AFD, 
then  the  length  FA  bears  to  the  length  GN,  in 


I 


Pj/  i  “ . . 

! . N 

y 

A  C 

:  B 

Eig.  33 


the  triangle  FAB,  the  same  ratio  which  the 
length  AB  bears  to  the  length  GB.  Therefore, 
if  we  imagine  A  and  G  to  be  the  points  at  which 
the  fulcrum  is  placed,  the  lever  arms  in  the  two 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


cases  BAy  AF  and  BC,  CN  will  be  proportional. 
Hence  the  moment  of  any  force  applied  at  B 
and  acting  through  the  arm  BA,  against  a  re¬ 
sistance  placed  at  a  distance  AF  will  be  equal 
to  that  of  the  same  force  at  B  acting  through 
the  arm  BC  against  the  same  resistance  located 
at  a  distance  CN,  But  now,  if  the  force  still  be 
applied  at  B,  the  resistance  to  be  overcome 
when  the  fulcrum  is  at  C,  acting  through  the 
arm  CN,  is  less  than  the  resistance  with  the  ful¬ 
crum  at  A  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  rec¬ 
tangular  cross-section  CO  is  less  than  the  rec¬ 
tangular  cross-section  AD,  that  is,  as  the  length 
CN  is  less  than  AF,  or  CB  than  BA, 

Consequently  the  resistance  to  fracture  at 
C,  offered  by  the  portion  OBC,  is  less  than  the 
resistance  to  fracture  at  A,  offered  by  the  en¬ 
tire  block  DAB,  in  the  same  proportion  as 
the  length  CB  is  smaller  than  the  length  AB, 

By  this  diagonal  saw-cut  we  have  now  re¬ 
moved  from  the  beam,  or  prism  DB,  a  portion, 
t.e.,  a  half,  and  have  left  the  wedge,  or  triangu¬ 
lar  prism,  FBA,  We  thus  have  two  solids  pos¬ 
sessing  opposite  properties;  one  body  grows 
stronger  as  it  is  shortened  while  the  other  grows 
weaker.  This  being  so  it  would  seem  not  merely 
reasonable,  but  inevitable,  that  there  exists  a 
line  of  section  such  that,  when  the  superfluous 
material  has  been  removed,  there  will  remain 
a  solid  of  such  figure  that  it  will  offer  the  same 
resistance  at  all  points. 

Simp.  Evidently  one  must,  in  passing  from 
greater  to  less,  encounter  equality. 

Sagr.  But  now  the  question  is  what  path  the 
saw  should  follow  in  making  the  cut. 

Simp.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  ought  not  to 
be  a  difficult  task:  for  if  by  sawing  the  prism 
along  the  diagonal  line  and  removing  half  of  the 
material,  the  remainder  acquires  a  property 
Just  the  opposite  to  that  of  the  entire  prism,  so 
that  at  every  point  where  the  latter  gains 
strength  the  former  becomes  weaker,  then  it 
seems  to  me  that  by  taking  a  middle  path,  /.<?., 
by  removing  half  the  former  half,  or  one-quar¬ 
ter  of  the  whole,  the  strength  of  the  remaining 
figure  will  be  constant  at  all  those  points  where, 
in  the  two  previous  figures,  the  gain  in  one  was 
equal  to  the  loss  in  the  other. 

Salv.  You  have  missed  the  mark,  Simplicio. 
For,  as  I  shall  presently  show  you,  the  amount 
which  you  can  remove  from  the  prism  without 
weakening  it  is  not  a  quarter  but  a  third.  It  now 
remains,  as  suggested  by  Sag  redo,  to  discover  the 
path  along  which  the  saw  must  travel:  this,  as  I 
shall  prove,  must  be  a  parabola.  But  it  is  first 
necessary  to  demonstrate  the  following  lemma: 


If  the  fulcrums  are  so  placed  under  two  levers  or 
balances  that  the  arms  through  which  the  forces 
act  are  to  each  other  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  squares 
of  the  arms  through  which  the  resistances  act,  and 
tf  these  resistances  are  to  each  other  in  the  same 
ratio  as  the  arms,  through  which  they  act,  then  the 
forces  will  be  equal. 

Let  AB  and  CD  represent  two  levers  whose 
lengths  are  divided  by  their  fulcrums  in  such  a 

A  E _ G  ^ 

C  F _ p 

Fig-  34 

way  as  to  make  the  distance  EB  bear  to  the 
distance  FD  a  ratio  which  is  equal  to  the  square 
of  the  ratio  between  the  distances  EA  and  FC, 
Let  the  resistances  located  at  A  and  C  be  to 
each  other  as  EA  is  to  FC,  Then,  I  say,  the 
forces  which  must  be  applied  at  B  and  D  in 
order  to  hold  in  equilibrium  the  resistances  at 
A  and  C  are  equal.  Let  EG  be  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  EB  and  FD,  Then  we  shall  have 
BEiEG  =  EGiFD  =  AEiCF,  But  this  last  ratio 
is  precisely  that  which  we  have  assumed  to 
exist  between  the  resistances  at  A  and  C,  And 
since  EG.FD  =  AEiCF,  it  follows,  permutando, 
that  EG:AE  =  FD:CF,  Seeing  that  the  dis¬ 
tances  DC  and  GA  are  divided  in  the  same 
ratio  by  the  points  F  and  E,  it  follows  that  the 
same  force  which,  when  applied  at  D,  will 
equilibrate  the  resistance  at  C,  would  if  applied 
at  G  equilibrate  at  ^  a  resistance  equal  to  that 
found  at  C. 

But  one  datum  of  the  problem  is  that  the 
resistance  at  A  is  to  the  resistance  at  C  as  the 
distance  AE  is  to  the  distance  CF,  or  as  BE  is  to 
EG,  Therefore  the  force  applied  at  G,  or  rather 
at  D,  will,  when  applied  at  B,  just  balance  the 
resistance  located  at  A,  q.  e.  d. 

This  being  clear  draw  the  parabola  FNB  in 
the  face  FB  of  the  prism  DB.  Let  the  prism  be 
sawed  along  this  parabola  whose  vertex  is  at  B. 
The  portion  of  the  solid  which  remains  will  be 
included  between  the  base  AD,  the  rectangular 
plane  AG,  the  straight  line  BG  and  the  surface 
DGBF,  whose  curvature  is  identical  with  that 
of  the  parabola  FNB.  This  solid  will  have,  I  say, 
the  same  strength  at  every  point.  Let  the  solid 
be  cut  by  a  plane  CO  parallel  to  the  plane  AD. 
Imagine  the  points  A  and  C  to  be  the  fulcrums 
of  two  levers  of  which  one  will  have  the  arms 
BA  and  AF;  the  other  BC  and  CN.  Then  since 
in  the  parabola  FBA,  we  have  BA:BC=  AF^: 
CN^i  it  is  clear  that  the  arm  BA  of  one  lever  is 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


193 


to  the  arm  BC  of  the  other  lever  as  the  square 
of  the  arm  AF  is  to  the  square  of  the  other  arm 
CN.  Since  the  resistance  to  be  balanced  by  the 
lever  BA  is  to  the  resistance  to  be  balanced  by 
the  lever  BC  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  rectangle 
DA  is  to  the  rectangle  OC,  that  is  as  the  length 
AF  is  to  the  length  CN,  which  two  lengths  are 
the  other  arms  of  the  levers,  it  follows,  by  the 
lemma  just  demonstrated,  that  the  same  force 
which,  when  applied  at  BG  will  equilibrate  the 
resistance  at  DA,  will  also  balance  the  resist¬ 
ance  at  CO,  The  same  is  true  for  any  other  sec¬ 
tion.  Therefore  this  parabolic  solid  is  equally 
strong  throughout. 

It  can  now  be  shown  that,  if  the  prism  be 
sawed  along  the  line  of  the  parabola  FNB,  one- 
third  part  of  it  will  be  removed;  because  the 
rectangle  FB  and  the  surface  FNB  A  bounded 
by  the  parabola  are  the  bases  of  two  solids  in¬ 
cluded  between  two  parallel  planes,  />.,  be¬ 
tween  the  rectangles  FB  and  DG\  consequently 
the  volumes  of  these  two  solids  bear  to  each 
other  the  same  ratio  as  their  bases.  But  the  area 
of  the  rectangle  is  one  and  a  half  times  as  large 
as  the  area  FNB  A  under  the  parabola;  hence  by 
cutting  the  prism  along  the  parabola  we  remove 
one- third  of  the  volume.  It  is  thus  seen  how  one 
can  diminish  the  weight  of  a  beam  by  as  much 
as  thirty-three  per  cent  without  diminishing  its 
strength;  a  fact  of  no  small  utility  in  the  con¬ 
struction  of  large  vessels,  and  especially  in  sup¬ 
porting  the  decks,  since  in  such  structures 
lightness  is  of  prime  importance. 

Sagr.  The  advantages  derived  from  this  fact 
are  so  numerous  that  it  would  be  both  weari¬ 
some  and  impossible  to  mention  them  all;  but 
leaving  this  matter  to  one  side,  I  should  like  to 
learn  just  how  it  happens  that  diminution  of 
weight  is  possible  in  the  ratio  above  stated.  I 
can  readily  understand  that,  when  a  section  is 
made  along  the  diagonal,  one-half  the  weight  is 
removed;  but,  as  for  the  parabolic  section  re¬ 
moving  one-third  of  the  prism,  this  I  can  only 
accept  on  the  word  of  Salviati  who  is  always 
reliable;  however,  I  prefer  first-hand  knowledge 
to  the  word  of  another. 

Salv.  You  would  like  then  a  demonstration 
of  the  fact  that  the  excess  of  the  volume  of  a 


prism  over  the  volume  of  what  we  have  called 
the  parabolic  solid  is  one-third  of  the  entire 
prism.  This  I  have  already  given  you  on  a  pre¬ 
vious  occasion;  however  I  shall  now  try  to  re¬ 
call  the  demonstration  in  which  I  remember 
having  used  a  certain  lemma  from  Archimedes’ 
book  On  Spirals,^  namely.  Given  any  number 
of  lines,  differing  in  length  one  from  another  by 
a  common  difference  which  is  equal  to  the 
shortest  of  these  lines;  and  given  also  an  equal 
number  of  lines  each  of  which  has  the  same 
length  as  the  longest  of  the  first-mentioned 
series;  then  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  lines 
of  this  second  group  will  be  less  than  three 
times  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  lines  in  the 
first  group.  But  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the 
second  group  will  be  greater  than  three  times 
the  sum  of  the  squares  of  all  excepting  the 
longest  of  the  first  group. 

Assuming  this,  inscribe  in  the  rectangle  ydfCBP 
the  parabola  AB,  We  have  now  to  prove  that 
the  mixed  triangle  BAP  whose  sides  are  BP  and 
PA,  and  whose  base  is  the  parabola  BA,  is  a 
third  part  of  the  entire  rectangle  CP.  If  this  is 
not  true  it  will  be  either  greater  or  less  than  a 
third.  Suppose  it  to  be  less  by  an  area  which  is 
represented  by  X,  By  drawing  lines  parallel  to 
the  sides  BP  and  CA,  we  can  divide  the  rec¬ 
tangle  CP  in  to  equal  parts;  and  if  the  process  be 
continued  we  shall  finally  reach  a  division  into 
parts  so  small  that  each  of  them  will  be  smaller 


X 

Fig-  36 


than  the  area  X;  let  the  rectangle  OB  represent 
one  of  these  parts  and,  through  the  points 
where  the  other  parallels  cut  the  parabola,  draw 
lines  parallel  to  AP.  Let  us  now  describe  about 
our  “mixed  triangle”  a  figure  made  up  of  rec¬ 
tangles  such  as  BO,  IN,  HM,  FL,  EK,  and  GA\ 
this  figure  will  also  be  less  than  a  third  part  of 
the  rectangle  CP  because  the  excess  of  this  fig¬ 
ure  above  the  area  of  the  “mixed  triangle”  is 
much  smaller  than  the  rectangle  BO  which  we 
have  already  made  smaller  than  X. 

^  See  Archimedes,  On  Spirals,  p.  482. 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


Sagr.  More  slowly,  please;  for  I  do  not  see 
how  the  excess  of  this  figure  described  about 
the  “mixed  triangle”  is  much  smaller  than  the 
rectangle  BO, 

Salv.  Does  not  the  rectangle  BO  have  an 
area  which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  areas  of 
all  the  little  rectangles  through  which  the  parab¬ 
ola  passes?  I  mean  the  rectangles  BU  IHy  HFy 
FEy  EGy  and  GA  of  which  only  a  part  lies  out¬ 
side  the  “mixed  triangle.”  Have  we  not  taken 
the  rectangle  BO  smaller  than  the  area  X? 
Therefore  if,  as  our  opponent  might  say,  the 
triangle  plus  X  is  equal  to  a  third  part  of  this 
rectangle  CP,  the  circumscribed  figure,  which 
adds  to  the  triangle  an  area  less  than  X,  will 
still  remain  smaller  than  a  third  part  of  the 
rectangle,  CP.  But  this  cannot  be,  because  this 
circumscribed  figure  is  larger  than  a  third  of 
the  area.  Hence  it  is  not  true  that  our  “mixed 
triangle”  is  less  than  a  third  of  the  rectangle. 

Sagr.  You  have  cleared  up  my  difficulty; 
but  it  still  remains  to  be  shown  that  the  cir¬ 
cumscribed  figure  is  larger  than  a  third  part  of 
the  rectangle  CP,  a  task  which  will  not,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  prove  so  easy. 

Salv.  There  is  nothing  very  difficult  about 
it.  Since  in  the  parabola  DE^:ZG'^=^DA:AZ=z 
rectangle  KE:  rectangle  AGy  seeing  that  the 
altitudes  of  these  two  rectangles,  AK  and  KL, 
are  equal,  it  follows  that  ==  LA'^iAK^^ 

rectangle  KE:  rectangle  KZ,  In  precisely  the 
same  manner  it  may  be  shown  that  the  other 
rectangles  LP,  MHy  NIy  OP,  stand  to  one  an¬ 
other  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  squares  of  the 
lines  MAy  NAy  OX,  PA, 

Let  us  now  consider  the  circumscribed  fig¬ 
ure,  composed  of  areas  which  bear  to  each  other 
the  same  ratio  as  the  squares  of  a  series  of  lines 
whose  common  difference  in  length  is  equal  to 
the  shortest  one  in  the  series;  note  also  that  the 
rectangle  CP  is  made  up  of  an  equal  number  of 
areas  each  equal  to  the  largest  and  each  equal 
to  the  rectangle  OP.  Consequently,  according 
to  the  lemma  of  Archimedes,  the  circumscribed 
figure  is  larger  than  a  third  part  of  the  rec¬ 
tangle  CP;  but  it  was  also  smaller,  which  is  im¬ 
possible.  Hence  the  “mixed  triangle”  is  not  less 
than  a  third  part  of  the  rectangle  CP. 

Likewise,  I  say,  it  cannot  be  greater.  For,  let 
us  suppose  that  it  is  greater  than  a  third  part  of 
the  rectangle  CP  and  let  the  area  X  represent 
the  excess  of  the  triangle  over  the  third  part  of 
the  rectangle  CP;  subdivide  the  rectangle  into 
equal  rectangles  and  continue  the  process  until 
one  of  these  subdivisions  is  smaller  than  the 
area  X.  Let  BO  represent  such  a  rectangle 


smaller  than  X.  Using  the  above  figure,  we  have 
in  the  “mixed  triangle”  an  inscribed  figure, 
made  up  of  the  rectangles  KO,  TNy  SMy  RLy 
and  QKy  which  will  not  be  less  than  a  third 
part  of  the  large  rectangle  CP. 

For  the  “mixed  triangle”  exceeds  the  in¬ 
scribed  figure  by  a  quantity  less  than  that  by 
which  it  exceeds  the  third  part  of  the  rectangle 
CP;  to  see  that  this  is  true  we  have  only  to  re¬ 
member  that  the  excess  of  the  triangle  over  the 
third  part  of  the  rectangle  CP  is  equal  to  the 
area  X,  which  is  less  than  the  rectangle  PO, 
which  in  turn  is  much  less  than  the  excess  of  the 
triangle  over  the  inscribed  figure.  For  the  rec¬ 
tangle  PO  is  made  up  of  the  small  rectangles 
AGy  GEy  EFy  FHy  Hly  and  IB;  and  the  excess  of 
the  triangle  over  the  inscribed  figure  is  less  than 
half  the  sum  of  these  little  rectangles.  Thus 
since  the  triangle  exceeds  the  third  part  of  the 
rectangle  CP  by  an  amount  X,  which  is  more 
than  that  by  which  it  exceeds  the  inscribed  fig¬ 
ure,  the  latter  will  also  exceed  the  third  part  of 
the  rectangle,  CP.  But,  by  the  lemma  which  we 
have  assumed,  it  is  smaller.  For  the  rectangle 
CP,  being  the  sum  of  the  largest  rectangles, 
bears  to  the  component  rectangles  of  the  in¬ 
scribed  figure  the  same  ratio  which  the  sum  of 
all  the  squares  of  the  lines  equal  to  the  longest 
bears  to  the  squares  of  the  lines  which  have  a 
common  difference,  after  the  square  of  the 
longest  has  been  subtracted. 

Therefore,  as  in  the  case  of  squares,  the  sum 
total  of  the  largest  rectangles,  t,e.y  the  rectangle 
CP,  is  greater  than  three  times  the  sum  total  of 
those  having  a  common  difference  minus  the 
largest;  but  these  last  make  up  the  inscribed 
figure.  Hence  the  “mixed  triangle”  is  neither 
greater  nor  less  than  the  third  part  of  rectangle 
CP;  it  is  therefore  equal  to  it. 

Sagr.  A  fine,  clever  demonstration;  and  all 
the  more  so  because  it  gives  us  the  quadrature 
of  the  parabola,  proving  it  to  be  four-thirds  of 
the  inscribed  triangle,  a  fact  which  Archimedes 
demonstrates  by  means  of  two  different,  but 
admirable,  series  of  many  propositions.  This 
same  theorem  has  also  been  recently  estab¬ 
lished  by  Luca  Valerio,  the  Archimedes  of  our 
age;  his  demonstration  is  to  be  found  in  his 
book  dealing  with  the  centres  of  gravity  of 
solids. 

Salv.  A  book  which,  indeed,  is  not  to  be 
placed  second  to  any  produced  by  the  most 
eminent  geometers  cither  of  the  present  or  of 
the  past;  a  book  which,  as  soon  as  it  fell  into  the 
hands  of  our  Academician,  led  him  to  abandon 
his  own  researches  along  these  lines;  for  he  saw 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


how  happily  everything  had  been  treated  and 
demonstrated  by  Valerio. 

Sagr.  When  I  was  informed  of  this  event  by 
the  Academician  himself,  I  begged  of  him  to 
show  the  demonstrations  which  he  had  discov¬ 
ered  before  seeing  Valerio’s  book;  but  in  this  I 
did  not  succeed. 

Salv.  I  have  a  copy  of  them  and  will  show 
them  to  you;  for  you  will  enjoy  the  diversity  of 
method  employed  by  these  two  authors  in 
reaching  and  proving  the  same  conclusions;  you 
will  also  find  that  some  of  these  conclusions  are 
explained  in  different  ways,  although  both  are 
in  fact  equally  correct. 

Sagr.  I  shall  be  much  pleased  to  see  them 
and  will  consider  it  a  great  favor  if  you  will 
bring  them  to  our  regular  meeting.  But  in  the 
meantime,  considering  the  strength  of  a  solid 
formed  from  a  prism  by  means  of  a  parabolic 
section,  would  it  not,  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
this  result  promises  to  be  both  interesting  and 
useful  in  many  mechanical  operations,  be  a  fine 
thing  if  you  were  to  give  some  quick  and  easy 
rule  by  which  a  mechanician  might  draw  a  parab¬ 
ola  upon  a  plane  surface  ? 

Salv.  There  are  many  ways  of  tracing  these 
curves;  I  will  mention  merely  the  two  which 
are  the  quickest  of  all.  One  of  these  is  really  re¬ 
markable;  because  by  it  I  can  trace  thirty  or 
forty  parabolic  curves  with  no  less  neatness  and 
precision,  and  in  a  shorter  time  than  another 
man  can,  by  the  aid  of  a  compass,  neatly  draw 
four  or  six  circles  of  different  sizes  upon  paper. 
I  take  a  perfectly  round  brass  ball  about  the 
size  of  a  walnut  and  project  it  along  the  surface 
of  a  metallic  mirror  held  in  a  nearly  upright 
position,  so  that  the  ball  in  its  motion  will  press 
slightly  upon  the  mirror  and  trace  out  a  fine 
sharp  parabolic  line;  this  parabola  will  grow 
longer  and  narrower  as  the  angle  of  elevation 
increases.  The  above  experiment  furnishes  clear 
and  tangible  evidence  that  the  path  of  a  pro¬ 
jectile  is  a  parabola;  a  fact  first  observed  by  our 
friend  and  demonstrated  by  him  in  his  book  on 
motion  which  we  shall  take  up  at  our  next 
meeting.  In  the  execution  of  this  method,  it  is 
advisable  to  slightly  heat  and  moisten  the  ball 
by  rolling  in  the  hand  in  order  that  its  trace 
upon  the  mirror  may  be  more  distinct. 

The  other  method  of  drawing  the  desired 
curve  upon  the  face  of  the  prism  is  the  follow¬ 
ing:  Drive  two  nails  into  a  wall  at  a  convenient 
height  and  at  the  same  level;  make  the  distance 
between  these  nails  twice  the  width  of  the  rec¬ 
tangle  upon  which  it  is  desired  to  trace  the 
semiparabola.  Over  these  two  nails  hang  a  light 


chain  of  such  a  length  that  the  depth  of  its  sag 
is  equal  to  the  length  of  the  prism.  This  chain 
will  assume  the  form  of  a  parabola,'  so  that  if 
this  form  be  marked  by  points  on  the  wall  we 
shall  have  described  a  complete  parabola  which 
can  be  divided  into  two  equal  parts  by  drawing 
a  vertical  line  through  a  point  midway  between 
the  two  nails.  The  transfer  of  this  curve  to  the 
two  opposing  faces  of  the  prism  is  a  matter  of 
no  difficulty;  any  ordinary  mechanic  will  know 
how  to  do  it. 

By  use  of  the  geometrical  lines  drawn  upon 
our  friend’s  compass,  one  may  easily  lay  off 
those  points  which  will  locate  this  same  curve 
upon  the  same  face  of  the  prism. 

Hitherto  we  have  demonstrated  numerous 
conclusions  pertaining  to  the  resistance  which 
solids  offer  to  fracture.  As  a  starting  point  for 
this  science,  we  assumed  that  the  resistance 
offered  by  the  solid  to  a  straight-away  pull  was 
known;  from  this  base  one  might  proceed  to  the 
discovery  of  many  other  results  and  their  dem¬ 
onstrations;  of  these  results  the  number  to  be 
found  in  nature  is  infinite.  But,  in  order  to 
bring  our  daily  conference  to  an  end,  I  wish  to 
discuss  the  strength  of  hollow  solids,  which  are 
employed  in  art — and  still  oftener  in  nature — 
in  a  thousand  operations  for  the  purpose  of 
greatly  increasing  strength  without  adding  to 
weight;  examples  of  these  are  seen  in  the  bones 
of  birds  and  in  many  kinds  of  reeds  which  are 
light  and  highly  resistant  both  to  bending  and 
breaking.  For  if  a  stem  of  straw  which  carries 
a  head  of  wheat  heavier  than  the  entire  stalk 
were  made  up  of  the  same  amount  of  material 
in  solid  form  it  would  offer  less  resistance  to 
bending  and  breaking.  This  is  an  experience 
which  has  been  verified  and  confirmed  in  prac¬ 
tice,  where  it  is  found  that  a  hollow  lance  or  a 
tube  of  wood  or  metal  is  much  stronger  than 
would  be  a  solid  one  of  the  same  length  and 
weight,  one  which  would  necessarily  be  thinner; 
men  have  discovered,  therefore,  that  in  order 
to  make  lances  strong  as  well  as  light  they  must 
make  them  hollow.  We  shall  now  show  that: 

In  the  case  of  two  cylinders^  one  hollow  the  other 
solid  but  having  equal  volumes  and  equal  lengths^ 
their  resistances  are  to  each  other  in  the  ratio  of 
their  diameters. 

Let  AE  denote  a  hollow  cylinder  and  IN  a  solid 
one  of  the  same  weight  and  length;  then,  I  say, 
that  the  resistance  against  fracture  exhibited  by 
the  tube  AE  bears  to  that  of  the  solid  cylinder 
IN  the  same  ratio  as  the  diameter  AB  to  the 

^  It  is  now  known  that  this  curve  is  not  a  parabola  but 
a  catenary.  Trans. 


106  GALILEO  GALILEI 


diameter  IL.  This  is  very  evident;  for  since  the 
tube  and  the  solid  cylinder  IN  have  the  same 


A 


Fig-  37 

volume  and  length,  the  area  of  the  circular  base 
IL  will  be  equal  to  that  of  the  annulus  AB 
which  is  the  base  of  the  tube  AE,  (By  annulus 
is  here  meant  the  area  which  lies  between  two 
concentric  circles  of  different  radii.)  Hence  their 
resistances  to  a  straight-away  pull  are  equal; 
but  in  producing  fracture  by  a  transverse  pull 
we  employ,  in  the  case  of  the  cylinder  IN^  the 
length  LN  as  one  lever  arm,  the  point  L  as  a 
fulcrum,  and  the  diameter  LI,  or  its  half,  as  the 
opposing  lever  arm:  while  in  the  case  of  the 
tube,  the  length  BE  which  plays  the  part  of  the 
first  lever  arm  is  equal  to  LN,  the  opposing 
lever  arm  beyond  the  fulcrum,  B,  is  the  diam¬ 
eter  AB,  or  its  half.  Manifestly  then  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  the  tube  exceeds  that  of  the  solid 
cylinder  in  the  proportion  in  which  the  diam¬ 
eter  AB  exceeds  the  diameter  IL  which  is  the 
desired  result.  Thus  the  strength  of  a  hollow 
tube  exceeds  that  of  a  solid  cylinder  in  the  ra¬ 
tio  of  their  diameters  whenever  the  two  are 
made  of  the  same  material  and  have  the  same 
weight  and  length. 

It  may  be  well  next  to  investigate  the  general 
case  of  tubes  and  solid  cylinders  of  constant 
length,  but  with  the  weight  and  the  hollow  por¬ 
tion  variable.  First  we  shall  show  that: 

Given  a  holloiv  tube,  a  solid  cylinder  may  be  de^ 
termined  which  will  be  equal  to  it. 


A 


Fig.  38 


The  method  is  very  simple.  Let  AB  denote 
the  external  and  CD  the  internal  diameter  of 
the  tube.  In  the  larger  circle  lay  off  the  line  AE 
equal  in  length  to  the  diameter  CD\  join  the 
points  E  and  B.  Now  since  the  angle  at  E  in¬ 
scribed  in  a  semicircle,  AEB,  is  a  right-angle, 
the  area  of  the  circle  whose  diameter  is  AB  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  areas  of  the  two  circles 
whose  respective  diameters  are  AE  and  EB, 
But  AE  is  the  diameter  of  the  hollow  portion 
of  the  tube.  Therefore  the  area  of  the  circle 
whose  diameter  is  EB  is  the  same  as  the  area  of 
the  annulus  ACBD.  Hence  a  solid  cylinder  of 
circular  base  having  a  diameter  EB  will  have 
the  same  volume  as  the  walls  of  the  tube  of 
equal  length. 

By  use  of  this  theorem,  it  is  easy:  To  find  the 
ratio  between  the  resistance  of  any  tube  and  that  of 
any  cylinder  of  equal  length.  Let  ABE  denote  a 
tube  and  RSM  a  cylinder  of  equal  length:  it 
is  required  to  find  the  ratio  between  their  re¬ 
sistances.  Using  the  preceding  proposition,  de¬ 
termine  a  cylinder  ILN  which  shall  have  the 


Fig.  39 


same  volume  and  length  as  the  tube.  Draw  a 
line  V  of  such  a  length  that  it  will  be  related  to 
IL  and  RS  (diameters  of  the  bases  of  the  cylin¬ 
ders  IN  and  RM),  as  follows:  V\RS  =  RS:IL, 
Then,  I  say,  the  resistance  of  the  tube  AE  is  to 
that  of  the  cylinder  RM  as  the  length  of  the  line 
AB  is  to  the  length  V,  For,  since  the  tube  AE 
is  equal  both  in  volume  and  length,  to  the 
cylinder  IN,  the  resistance  of  the  tube  will  bear 
to  the  resistance  of  the  cylinder  the  same  ratio 
as  the  line  AB  to  IL;  but  the  resistance  of  the 
cylinder  IN  is  to  that  of  the  cylinder  RM  as  the 
cube  of  IL  is  to  the  cube  of  RS,  that  is,  as  the 
length  IL  is  to  length  V:  therefore,  ex  aeqttali, 
the  resistance  of  the  tube  AE  bears  to  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  the  cylinder  RM  the  same  ratio  as 
the  length  AB  to  V.  Q.  e.  d. 


THIRD  DAY 


CHANGE  OF  POSITION 

My  purpose  is  to  set  forth  a  very  new  science 
dealing  with  a  very  ancient  subject.  There  is, 
in  nature,  perhaps  nothing  older  than  motion, 
concerning  which  the  books  written  by  philoso¬ 
phers  are  neither  few  nor  small;  nevertheless,  I 
have  discovered  by  experiment  some  properties 
of  it  which  are  worth  knowing  and  which  have 
not  hitherto  been  either  observed  or  demon¬ 
strated.  Some  superficial  observations  have  been 
made,  as,  for  instance,  that  the  free  motion  of  a 
heavy  falling  body  is  continuously  accelerated; 
but  to  just  what  extent  this  acceleration  occurs 
has  not  yet  been  announced;  for  so  far  as  I 
know,  no  one  has  yet  pointed  out  that  the  dis¬ 
tances  traversed,  during  equal  intervals  of  time, 
by  a  body  falling  from  rest,  stand  to  one  another 
in  the  same  ratio  as  the  odd  numbers  beginning 
with  unity. 

It  has  been  observed  that  missiles  and  pro¬ 
jectiles  describe  a  curved  path  of  some  sort; 
however,  no  one  has  pointed  out  the  fact  that 
this  path  is  a  parabola.  But  this  and  other  facts, 
not  few  in  number  or  less  worth  knowing,  I 
have  succeeded  in  proving;  and  what  I  consider 
more  important,  there  have  been  opened  up  to 
this  vast  and  most  excellent  science,  of  which  my 
work  is  merely  the  beginning,  ways  and  means 
by  which  other  minds  more  acute  than  mine  will 
explore  its  remote  corners. 

This  discussion  is  divided  into  three  parts;  the 
first  part  deals  with  motion  which  is  steady  or 
uniform;  the  second  treats  of  motion  as  we  find 
it  accelerated  in  nature;  the  third  deals  with  the 
so-called  violent  motions  and  with  projectiles. 

UNIFORM  MOTION 

In  dealing  with  steady  or  uniform  motion, 
we  need  a  single  definition  which  I  give  as 

follows:  ^ 

Definition 

By  steady  or  uniform  motion,  I  mean  one  in 
which  the  distances  traversed  by  the  moving 
particle  during  any  equal  intervals  of  time,  are 
themselves  equal. 


Caution 

We  must  add  to  the  old  definition  (which  de¬ 
fined  steady  motion  simply  as  one  in  which 
equal  distances  are  traversed  in  equal  times)  the 
word  “any,”  meaning  by  this,  all  equal  inter¬ 
vals  of  time;  for  it  may  happen  that  the  moving 
body  will  traverse  equal  distances  during  some 
equal  intervals  of  time  and  yet  the  distances  tra¬ 
versed  during  some  small  portion  of  these  time- 
intervals  may  not  be  equal,  even  though  the 
time-intervals  be  equal. 

From  the  above  definition,  four  axioms  fol¬ 
low,  namely: 

Axiom  I 

In  the  case  of  one  and  the  same  uniform  mo¬ 
tion,  the  distance  traversed  during  a  longer  in¬ 
terval  of  time  is  greater  than  the  distance  tra¬ 
versed  during  a  shorter  interval  of  time. 

Axiom  II 

In  the  case  of  one  and  the  same  uniform  mo¬ 
tion,  the  time  required  to  traverse  a  greater 
distance  is  longer  than  the  time  required  for  a 

less  distance.  .  ,,, 

Axiom  III 

In  one  and  the  same  interval  of  time,  the  dis¬ 
tance  traversed  at  a  greater  speed  is  larger  than 
the  distance  traversed  at  a  less  speed. 

Axiom  IV 

The  speed  required  to  traverse  a  longer  dis¬ 
tance  is  greater  than  that  required  to  traverse 
a  shorter  distance  during  the  same  time-interval. 

Theorem  I,  Proposition  I 

If  a  moving  particle^  carried  uniformly  at  a  con¬ 
stant  speedy  traverses  two  distances  the  time-inter¬ 
vals  required  are  to  each  other  in  the  ratio  of  these 
distances. 

Let  a  particle  move  uniformly  with  constant 
speed  through  two  distances  ABy  BCy  and  let 
the  time  required  to  traverse  AB  be  represented 
by  DE;  the  time  required  to  traverse  BCy  by 
EF;  then  I  say  that  the  distance  AB  is  to  the 
distance  BC  as  the  time  DE  is  to  the  time  EF. 

Let  the  distances  and  times  be  extended  on 


197 


198  GALILEO  GALILEI 

— £) - 1 - 1 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 

-G, - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - — [B - - 1 - 1 - 1— 

Fig.  40 


both  sides  towards  G,  H  and  /,  K;  let  AG  ht  di¬ 
vided  into  any  number  whatever  of  spaces  each 
equal  to  AB,  and  in  like  manner  lay  off  in  DI 
exactly  the  same  number  of  time-intervals  each 
equal  to  DE,  Again  lay  off  in  CH  any  number 
whatever  of  distances  each  equal  to  BC\  and  in 
FK  exactly  the  same  number  of  time-intervals 
each  equal  to  EF\  then  will  the  distance  BG  and 
the  time  El  be  equal  and  arbitrary  multiples  of 
the  distance  BA  and  the  time  ED;  and  likewise 
the  distance  HB  and  the  time  KE  are  equal  and 
arbitrary  multiples  of  the  distance  CB  and  the 
time  FE, 

And  since  DE  is  the  time  required  to  traverse 
ABy  the  whole  time  El  will  be  required  for  the 
whole  distance  BG,  and  when  the  motion  is  uni¬ 
form  there  will  be  in  El  as  many  time-intervals 
each  equal  to  DE  as  there  are  distances  in  BG 
each  equal  to  BA;  and  likewise  it  follows  that 
KE  represents  the  time  required  to  traverse  HB, 

Since,  however,  the  motion  is  uniform,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  if  the  distance  GB  is  equal  to  the  dis¬ 
tance  BHy  then  must  also  the  time  IE  be  equal 
to  the  time  EK;  and  if  GB  is  greater  than  BHy 
then  also  IE  will  be  greater  than  EK;  and  if  less, 
lessd  There  are  then  four  quantities,  the  first 
ABy  the  second  BCy  the  third  DEy  and  the 
fourth  EF;  the  time  IE  and  the  distance  GB 
are  arbitrary  multiples  of  the  first  and  the  third, 
namely  of  the  distance  AB  and  the  time  DE, 

But  it  has  been  proved  that  both  of  these  lat¬ 
ter  quantities  are  either  equal  to,  greater  than, 
or  less  than  the  time  EK  and  the  space  BHy 
which  are  arbitrary  multiples  of  the  second  and 
the  fourth.  Therefore  the  first  is  to  the  second, 
namely  the  distance  AB  is  to  the  distance  BCy 
as  the  third  is  to  the  fourth,  namely  the  time 
DE  is  to  the  time  EF.  q.  e.  d. 

Theorem  II,  Proposition  II 

If  a  moving  particle  traverses  two  distances  in  equal 
intervals  of  timey  these  distances  will  bear  to  each 
other  the  same  ratio  as  the  speeds.  And  conversely 
if  the  distances  are  as  the  speeds  then  the  times  are 
equal. 

Referring  to  Fig.  40,  let  AB  and  BC  represent 
the  two  distances  traversed  in  equal  time-inter¬ 
vals,  the  distance  AB  for  instance  with  the 
velocity  DE,  and  the  distance  BC  with  the  ve- 
^See  Riiclid,  V.  5. 


locity  EF,  Then,  I  say,  the  distance  AB  is  to  the 
distance  BC  as  the  velocity  DE  is  to  the  velocity 
EF,  For  if  equal  multiples  of  both  distances  and 
speeds  be  taken,  as  above,  namely,  GB  and 
IE  of  AB  and  DE  respectively,  and  in  like  man¬ 
ner  HB  and  KE  of  BC  and  EE,  then  one  may  in¬ 
fer,  in  the  same  manner  as  above,  that  the 
multiples  GB  and  IE  are  either  less  than,  equal 
to,  or  greater  than  equal  multiples  of  BH  and 
EK,  Hence  the  theorem  is  established. 

Theorem  III,  Proposition  III 

In  the  case  of  unequal  speedSy  the  time-intervals 
required  to  traverse  a  given  space  are  to  each 
other  inversely  as  the  speeds. 

Let  the  larger  of  the  two  unequal  speeds  be 
indicated  by  A;  the  smaller,  by  B;  and  let  the 
motion  corresponding  to  both  traverse  the  given 
space  CD,  Then,  I  say,  the  time  required  to  trav- 
Ai - - 


Bi - 1 

Fig.  41 

erse  the  distance  CD  at  speed  A  is  to  the  time 
required  to  traverse  the  same  distance  at  speed 
By  as  the  speed  B  is  to  the  speed  A.  For  let  CD 
be  to  CE as  ^  is  to  E;  then,  from  the  preceding, 
it  follows  that  the  time  required  to  complete 
the  distance  CD  at  speed  A  is  the  same  as  the 
time  necessary  to  complete  CE  at  speed  B;  but 
the  time  needed  to  traverse  the  distance  CE  at 
speed  B  is  to  the  time  required  to  traverse  the 
distance  CD  at  the  same  speed  as  CE  is  to  CD; 
therefore,  the  time  in  which  CD  is  covered  at 
speed  A  is  to  the  time  in  which  CD  is  covered 
at  speed  B  as  CE  is  to  GD,  that  is,  as  speed  B  is 
to  speed  A.  Q.  e.  d. 

Theorem  IV,  Proposition  IV 

If  two  particles  are  carried  with  uniform  motiony 
but  each  with  a  different  speedy  the  distances  covered 
by  them  during  unequal  intervals  of  time  bear  to 
each  other  the  compound  ratio  of  the  speeds  and 
time  intervals. 

Let  the  two  particles  which  are  carried  \yith 
uniform  motion  be  E  and  Eand  let  the  ratio  of 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


the  speed  of  the  body  E  be  to  that  of  the  body 
Fas  A  IS  to  B;  but  let  the  ratio  of  the  time  con¬ 
sumed  by  the  motion  of  E  be  to  the  time  con¬ 
sumed  by  the  motion  of  F  as  C  is  to  D.  Then, 
I  say,  that  the  distance  covered  by  F,  with 
speed  A  in  time  C,  bears  to  the  space  traversed 
by  F  with  speed  B  in  time  D  a  ratio  which  is  the 
product  of  the  ratio  of  the  speed  A  to  the  speed 
B  by  the  ratio  of  the  time  C  to  the  time  D,  For 
if  G  is  the  distance  traversed  by  E  at  speed  A 

A' - •  G- - • 

E 

C* - •  I« - • 


Di - - 

Fig.  42 

during  the  time-interval  C,  and  if  G  is  to  7  as 
the  speed  A  is  to  the  speed  B;  and  if  also  the 
time-interval  C  is  to  the  time-interval  Z)  as  7  is 
to  L,  then  it  follows  that  7  is  the  distance  trav¬ 
ersed  by  F  in  the  same  time  that  G  is  traversed 
by  F since  G  is  to  7  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  speed 
A  to  the  speed  B,  And  since  7  is  to  L  in  the  same 
ratio  as  the  time-intervals  C  and  7),  if  7  is  the 
distance  traversed  by  F  during  the  interval  C, 
then  L  will  be  the  distance  traversed  by  F  dur¬ 
ing  the  interval  D  at  the  speed  B. 

But  the  ratio  of  G  to  L  is  the  product  of  the 
ratios  G  to  7  and  7  to  L,  that  is,  of  the  ratios 

of  the  speed  A  to  the  speed  B  and  of  y, _ 

the  time-interval  C  to  the  time-in- 
terval  D.  q.  e.  d.  S‘ - 


the  product  of  the  ratio  of  the  speed  T  to  the 
speed  V  by  the  ratio  of  the  distance  S  to  the 
distance  R, 

Let  C  be  the  time-interval  occupied  by  the 
motion  of  A,  and  let  the  time-interval  C  bear 
to  a  time-interval  F  the  same  ratio  as  the  speed 
T  to  the  speed  F. 

And  since  C  is  the  time-interval  during  which 
A,  with  speed  F,  traverses  the  distance  5,  and 
since  T,  the  speed  of  F,  is  to  the  speed  F,  as 
the  time-interval  C  is  to  the  time-interval  F, 
then  F  will  be  the  time  required  by  the  particle 
B  to  traverse  the  distance  S.  If  now  we  let  the 
time-interval  F  be  to  the  time-interval  G  as  the 
distance  S  is  to  the  distance  F,  then  it  follows 
that  G  is  the  time  required  by  B  to  traverse  the 
space  R.  Since  the  ratio  of  C  to  G  is  the  product 
of  the  ratios  C  to  F  and  F  to  G  (while  also  the 
ratio  of  C  to  F  is  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  speeds 
of  A  and  B  respectively,  />.,  the  ratio  of  T  to 
F) ;  and  since  the  ratio  of  F  to  G  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  distances  S  and  R  respectively,  the 
proposition  is  proved. 

Theorem  VI,  Proposition  VI 

If  two  particles  are  carried  at  a  uniform  rate^  the 
ratio  of  their  speeds  will  be  the  product  of  the 
ratio  of  the  distances  traversed  by  the  inverse  ratio 
of  the  time- intervals  occupied. 

Let  A  and  B  be  the  two  particles  which  move 
at  a  uniform  rate;  and  let  the  respective  dis- 

- O - - - . 

— »  E* - - 


Theorem  V,  Proposition  V  T« - 

R 

If  two  particles  are  moved  at  a  uniform  ^  _ 

ratey  but  with  unequal  speedsy  through 
unequal  distanceSy  then  the  ratio  of  the 
time-intervals  occupied  will  be  the  product  of  the 
ratio  of the  distances  by  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  speeds. 
Let  the  two  moving  particles  be  denoted  by 

V* - -  C - • 

A 

S« - -  Ei - 

T- - -  G' - » 

B 

R' - i 

Fig-  43 

A  and  By  and  let  the  speed  of  A  be  to  the  speed 
of  B  in  the  ratio  of  F  to  T;  in  like  manner  let 
the  distances  traversed  be  in  the  ratio  of  5  to  F; 
then,  I  say,  that  the  ratio  of  the  time-interval 
during  which  the  motion  of  A  occurs  to  the 
time-interval  occupied  by  the  motion  of  B  is 


G' 


Fig-  44 

tances  traversed  by  them  have  the  ratio  of  F 
to  Ty  but  let  the  time-intervals  be  as  S  to  F. 
Then,  I  say,  the  speed  of ^  will  bear  to  the  speed 
of  F  a  ratio  which  is  the  product  of  the  ratio 
of  the  distance  F  to  the  distance  T  and  the 
_ ,  time-interval  F  to  the  time-interval  S. 

Let  Cbe  the  speed  at  which  A  traverses 
the  distance  F  during  the  time-interval  S; 
and  let  the  speed  C  bear  the  same  ratio  to 
another  speed  F  as  F  bears  to  T;  then  F 
will  be  the  speed  at  which  F  traverses  the 
distance  T  during  the  time-interval  S.  If  now 
the  speed  F  is  to  another  speed  G  as  the  time- 
interval  F  is  to  the  time-interval  Sy  then  G 
will  be  the  speed  at  which  the  particle  F  tra¬ 
verses  the  distance  T  during  the  time-inter¬ 
val  R.  Thus  we  have  the  speed  C  at  which 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


200 

the  particle  A  covers  the  distance  V  during  the 
time  S  and  also  the  speed  G  at  which  the  par¬ 
ticle  B  traverses  the  distance  T  during  the  time 
R,  The  ratio  of  C  to  G  is  the  product  of  the  ratio 
C  to  E  and  E  to  G;  the  ratio  of  C  to  E  is  by 
definition  the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  distance 
V  to  distance  T ;  and  the  ratio  of  E  to  G  is  the 
same  as  the  ratio  of  R  to  S.  Hence  follows  the 
proposition. 

Salv.  The  preceding  is  what  our  Author  has 
written  concerning  uniform  motion.  We  pass 
now  to  a  new  and  more  discriminating  con¬ 
sideration  of  naturally  accelerated  motion,  such 
as  that  generally  experienced  by  heavy  falling 
bodies;  following  is  the  title  and  introduction. 

NATURALLY  ACCELERATED  MOTION 

The  properties  belonging  to  uniform  motion 
have  been  discussed  in  the  preceding  section ;  but 
accelerated  motion  remains  to  be  considered. 

And  first  of  all  it  seems  desirable  to  find  and 
explain  a  definition  best  fitting  natural  phe¬ 
nomena.  For  anyone  may  invent  an  arbitrary 
type  of  motion  and  discuss  its  properties;  thus, 
for  instance,  some  have  imagined  helices  and 
conchoids  as  described  by  certain  motions  which 
are  not  met  with  in  nature,  and  have  very  com- 
mendably  established  the  properties  which  these 
curves  possess  in  virtue  of  their  definitions;  but 
we  have  decided  to  consider  the  phenomena  of 
bodies  falling  with  an  acceleration  such  as  ac¬ 
tually  occurs  in  nature  and  to  make  this  defini¬ 
tion  of  accelerated  motion  exhibit  the  essential 
features  of  observed  accelerated  motions.  And 
this,  at  last,  after  repeated  efforts  we  trust  we 
have  succeeded  in  doing.  In  this  belief  we  are 
confirmed  mainly  by  the  consideration  that  ex¬ 
perimental  results  are  seen  to  agree  with  and  ex¬ 
actly  correspond  with  those  properties  which 
have  been,  one  after  another,  demonstrated  by 
us.  Finally,  in  the  investigation  of  naturally 
accelerated  motion  we  were  led,  by  hand  as  it 
were,  in  following  the  habit  and  custom  of  na¬ 
ture  herself,  in  all  her  various  other  processes, 
to  employ  only  those  means  which  are  most 
common,  simple  and  easy. 

For  I  think  no  one  believes  that  swimming  or 
flying  can  be  accomplished  in  a  manner  simpler 
or  easier  than  that  instinctively  employed  by 
fishes  and  birds. 

When,  therefore,  1  observe  a  stone  initially  at 
rest  falling  from  an  elevated  position  and  con¬ 
tinually  acquiring  new  increments  of  speed,  why 
should  I  not  believe  that  such  increases  take 
place  in  a  manner  which  is  exceedingly  simple 


and  rather  obvious  to  everybody  ?  If  now  we  ex¬ 
amine  the  matter  carefully  we  find  no  addition 
or  increment  more  simple  than  that  which  re¬ 
peats  itself  always  in  the  same  manner.  This  we 
readily  understand  when  we  consider  the  inti¬ 
mate  relationship  between  time  and  motion;  for 
just  as  uniformity  of  motion  is  defined  by  and 
conceived  through  equal  times  and  equal  spaces 
(thus  we  call  a  motion  uniform  when  equal  dis¬ 
tances  are  traversed  during  equal  time-inter¬ 
vals)  ,  soalso  we  may,  in  a  similar  manner,  through 
equal  time-intervals,  conceive  additions  of 
speed  as  taking  place  without  complication; 
thus  w^e  may  picture  to  our  mind  a  motion  as 
uniformly  and  continuously  accelerated  when, 
during  any  equal  intervals  of  time  whatever, 
equal  increments  of  speed  are  given  to  it.  Thus, 
if  any  equal  intervals  of  time  w^hatever  have 
elapsed,  counting  from  the  time  at  which  the 
moving  body  left  its  position  of  rest  and  began 
to  descend,  the  amount  of  speed  acquired  during 
the  first  two  time-intervals  will  be  double  that 
acquired  during  the  first  time-interval  alone;  so 
the  amount  added  during  three  of  these  time- 
intervals  will  be  treble;  and  that  in  four,  quad¬ 
ruple  that  of  the  first  time-interval.  To  put  the 
matter  more  clearly,  if  a  body  were  to  continue 
its  motion  with  the  same  speed  which  it  had 
acquired  during  the  first  time-interval  and  were 
to  retain  this  same  uniform  speed,  then  its  mo¬ 
tion  would  be  twice  as  slow  as  that  which  it 
would  have  if  its  velocity  had  been  acquired 
during  two  time-intervals. 

And  thus,  it  seems,  we  shall  not  be  far  wrong 
if  we  put  the  increment  of  speed  as  proportional 
to  the  increment  of  time;  hence  the  definition 
of  motion  which  we  are  about  to  discuss  may  be 
stated  as  follows:  A  motion  is  said  to  be  uni¬ 
formly  accelerated,  when  starting  from  rest,  it 
acquires,  during  equal  time-intervals,  equal  in¬ 
crements  of  speed. 

Sagr.  Although  I  can  offer  no  rational  objec¬ 
tion  to  this  or  indeed  to  any  other  definition, 
devised  by  any  author  whomsoever,  since  all 
definitions  are  arbitrary,  1  may  nevertheless 
without  offense  be  allowed  to  doubt  whether 
such  a  definition  as  the  above,  established  in  an 
abstract  manner,  corresponds  to  and  describes 
that  kind  of  accelerated  motion  wTich  we  meet 
in  nature  in  the  case  of  freely  falling  bodies. 
And  since  the  Author  apparently  maintains  that 
the  motion  described  in  his  definition  is  that  of 
freely  falling  bodies,  I  would  like  to  clear  my 
mind  of  certain  difficulties  in  order  that  I  may 
later  apply  myself  more  earnestly  to  the  propo¬ 
sitions  and  their  demonstrations. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


Salv.  It  is  well  that  you  and  Simplicio  raise 
these  difficulties.  They  are,  I  imagine,  the  same 
which  occurred  to  me  when  I  first  saw  this  trea¬ 
tise,  and  which  were  removed  either  by  discus¬ 
sion  with  the  Author  himself,  or  by  turning  the 
matter  over  in  my  own  mind. 

Sagr.  When  I  think  of  a  heavy  body  falling 
from  rest,  that  is,  starting  with  zero  speed  and 
gaining  speed  in  proportion  to  the  time  from  the 
beginning  of  the  motion ;  such  a  motion  as  would, 
for  instance,  in  eight  beats  of  the  pulse  acquire 
eight  degrees  of  speed;  having  at  the  end  of  the 
fourth  beat  acquired  four  degrees;  at  the  end  of 
the  second,  two;  at  the  end  of  the  first,  one:  and 
since  time  is  divisible  without  limit,  it  follows 
from  all  these  considerations  that  if  the  earlier 
speed  of  a  body  is  less  than  its  present  speed  in  a 
constant  ratio,  then  there  is  no  degree  of  speed 
however  small  (or,  one  may  say,  no  degree  of 
slowness  however  great)  with  which  we  may  not 
find  this  body  travelling  after  starting  from  in¬ 
finite  slowness,  from  rest.  So  that  if  that 
speed  which  it  had  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  beat 
was  such  that,  if  kept  uniform,  the  body  would 
traverse  two  miles  in  an  hour,  and  if  keeping 
the  speed  which  it  had  at  the  end  of  the  second 
beat,  it  would  traverse  one  mile  an  hour,  we 
must  infer  that,  as  the  instant  of  starting  is  more 
and  more  nearly  approached,  the  body  moves 
so  slowly  that,  if  it  kept  on  moving  at  this  rate, 
it  would  not  traverse  a  mile  in  an  hour,  or  in  a 
day,  or  in  a  year  or  in  a  thousand  years;  indeed, 
it  would  not  traverse  a  span  in  an  even  greater 
time;  a  phenomenon  which  baffles  the  imagina¬ 
tion,  while  our  senses  show  us  that  a  heavy  fall¬ 
ing  body  suddenly  acquires  great  speed. 

Salv.  This  is  one  of  the  difficulties  which  I 
also  at  the  beginning,  experienced,  but  which  I 
shortly  afterwards  removed;  and  the  removal 
was  effected  by  the  very  experiment  which  cre¬ 
ates  the  difficulty  for  you.  You  say  the  experi¬ 
ment  appears  to  show  that  immediately  after  a 
heavy  body  starts  from  rest  it  acquires  a  very 
considerable  speed:  and  I  say  that  the  same  ex¬ 
periment  makes  clear  the  fact  that  the  initial 
motions  of  a  falling  body,  no  matter  how  heavy, 
are  very  slow  and  gentle.  Place  a  heavy  body 
upon  a  yielding  material,  and  leave  it  there  with¬ 
out  any  pressure  except  that  owing  to  its  own 
weight;  it  is  clear  that  if  one  lifts  this  body  a 
cubit  or  two  and  allows  it  to  fall  upon  the  same 
material,  it  will,  with  this  impulse,  exert  a  new 
and  greater  pressure  than  that  caused  by  its  mere 
weight;  and  this  effect  is  brought  about  by  the 
falling  body  together  with  the  velocity  acquired 
during  the  fall,  an  effect  which  will  be  greater 


201 

and  greater  according  to  the  height  of  the  fall, 
that  is  according  as  the  velocity  of  the  falling 
body  becomes  greater.  From  the  quality  and  in¬ 
tensity  of  the  blow  we  are  thus  enabled  to  ac¬ 
curately  estimate  the  speed  of  a  falling  body. 
But  tell  me,  gentlemen,  is  it  not  true  that  if  a 
block  be  allowed  to  fall  upon  a  stake  from  a 
height  of  four  cubits  and  drives  it  into  the 
earth,  say,  four  finger-breadths,  that  coming 
from  a  height  of  two  cubits  it  will  drive  the 
stake  a  much  less  distance,  and  from  the  height 
of  one  cubit  a  still  less  distance;  and  finally  if 
the  block  be  lifted  only  one  finger-breadth  how 
much  more  will  it  accomplish  than  if  merely  laid 
on  top  of  the  stake  without  percussion  .f'  Cer¬ 
tainly  very  little.  If  it  be  lifted  only  the  thick¬ 
ness  of  a  leaf,  the  effect  will  be  altogether  im¬ 
perceptible.  And  since  the  effect  of  the  blow  de¬ 
pends  upon  the  velocity  of  this  striking  body, 
can  any  one  doubt  the  motion  is  very  slow  and 
the  speed  more  than  small  whenever  the  effect 
is  imperceptible.?  See  now  the  power  of  truth; 
the  same  experiment  which  at  first  glance  seemed 
to  show  one  thing,  when  more  carefully  exam¬ 
ined,  assures  us  of  the  contrary. 

But  without  depending  upon  the  above  ex¬ 
periment,  which  is  doubtless  very  conclusive,  it 
seems  to  me  that  it  ought  not  to  be  difficult  to 
establish  such  a  fact  by  reasoning  alone.  Imagine 
a  heavy  stone  held  in  the  air  at  rest;  the  support 
is  removed  and  the  stone  set  free;  then  since  it 
is  heavier  than  the  air  it  begins  to  fall,  and  not 
with  uniform  motion  but  slowly  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  and  with  a  continuously  accelerated  mo¬ 
tion.  Now  since  velocity  can  be  increased  and 
diminished  without  limit,  what  reason  is  there 
to  believe  that  such  a  moving  body  starting 
with  infinite  slowness,  that  is,  from  rest,  imme¬ 
diately  acquires  a  speed  of  ten  degrees  rather 
than  one  of  four,  or  of  two,  or  of  one,  or  of  a 
half,  or  of  a  hundredth;  or,  indeed,  of  any  of  the 
infinite  number  of  small  values  ?  Pray  listen.  I 
hardly  think  you  will  refuse  to  grant  that  the 
gain  of  speed  of  the  stone  falling  from  rest  fol¬ 
lows  the  same  sequence  as  the  diminution  and 
loss  of  this  same  speed  when,  by  some  impelling 
force,  the  stone  is  thrown  to  its  former  eleva¬ 
tion:  but  even  if  you  do  not  grant  this,  I  do  not 
see  how  you  can  doubt  that  the  ascending  stone, 
diminishing  in  speed,  must  before  coming  to 
rest  pass  through  every  possible  degree  of  slow¬ 
ness. 

Simp.  But  if  the  number  of  degrees  of  greater 
and  greater  slowness  is  limitless,  they  will  never 
be  all  exhausted,  therefore  such  an  ascending 
heavy  body  will  never  reach  rest,  but  will  con- 


202 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


tinue  to  move  without  limit  always  at  a  slower 
rate;  but  this  is  not  the  observed  fact. 

Salv.  This  would  happen,  Simplicio,  if  the 
moving  body  were  to  maintain  its  speed  for  any 
length  of  time  at  each  degree  of  velocity;  but  it 
merely  passes  each  point  without  delaying  more 
than  an  instant:  and  since  each  time-interval 
however  small  may  be  divided  into  an  infinite 
number  of  instants,  these  will  always  be  suffi¬ 
cient  to  correspond  to  the  infinite  degrees  of 
diminished  velocity. 

That  such  a  heavy  rising  body  does  not  re¬ 
main  for  any  length  of  time  at  any  given  degree 
of  velocity  is  evident  from  the  following:  be¬ 
cause  if,  some  time-interval  having  been  assigned, 
the  body  moves  with  the  same  speed  in  the  last 
as  in  the  first  instant  of  that  time-interval,  it 
could  from  this  second  degree  of  elevation  be  in 
like  manner  raised  through  an  equal  height,  just 
as  it  was  transferred  from  the  first  elevation  to 
the  second,  and  by  the  same  reasoning  would 
pass  from  the  second  to  the  third  and  would 
finally  continue  in  uniform  motion  forever. 

Sagr.  From  these  considerations  it  appears  to 
me  that  we  may  obtain  a  proper  solution  of  the 
problem  discussed  by  philosophers,  namely, 
what  causes  the  acceleration  in  the  natural  mo¬ 
tion  of  heavy  bodies?  Since,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
the  force  impressed  by  the  agent  projecting  the 
body  upwards  diminishes  continuously,  this 
force,  so  long  as  it  was  greater  than  the  contrary 
force  ofgravitation,  impelled  the  body  upwards; 
when  the  two  are  in  equilibrium  the  body  ceases 
to  rise  and  passes  through  the  state  of  rest  in 
which  the  impressed  impetus  is  not  destroyed, 
but  only  its  excess  over  the  weight  of  the  body 
has  been  consumed — the  excess  which  caused 
the  body  to  rise.  Then  as  the  diminution  of  the 
outside  impetus  continues,  and  gravitation  gains 
the  upper  hand,  the  fall  begins,  but  slowly  at 
first  on  account  of  the  opposing  impetus,  a  large 
portion  of  which  still  remains  in  the  body;  but 
as  this  continues  to  diminish  it  also  continues  to 
be  more  and  more  overcome  by  gravity,  hence 
the  continuous  acceleration  of  motion. 

Simp.  The  idea  is  clever,  yet  more  subtle  than 
sound;  for  even  if  the  argument  were  conclu¬ 
sive,  it  w^ould  explain  only  the  case  in  w  hich  a 
natural  motion  is  preceded  by  a  violent  motion, 
in  which  there  still  remains  active  a  portion  of 
the  external  force;  but  where  there  is  no  sueh 
remaining  portion  and  the  body  starts  from  an 
antecedent  state  of  rest,  the  cogency  of  the  whole 
argument  fails. 

Sagr.  1  believe  that  you  arc  mistaken  and 
that  this  distinction  betw^een  cases  wTich  you 


make  is  superfluous  or  rather  nonexistent.  But, 
tell  me,  cannot  a  projectile  receive  from  the 
projector  either  a  large  or  a  small  force  such  as 
will  throw  it  to  a  height  of  a  hundred  cubits, 
and  even  tw  enty  or  four  or  one  ? 

Simp.  Undoubtedly,  yes. 

Sagr.  So  therefore  this  impressed  force  may 
exceed  the  resistance  of  gravity  so  slightly  as  to 
raise  it  only  a  finger- breadth;  and  finally  the 
force  of  the  projector  may  be  just  large  enough 
to  exactly  balance  the  resistance  of  gravity  so 
that  the  body  is  not  lifted  at  all  but  merely  sus¬ 
tained.  When  one  holds  a  stone  in  his  hand  does 
he  do  anything  but  give  it  a  force  impelling  it 
upwards  equal  to  the  pow  er  of  gravity  drawing 
it  downwards?  And  do  you  not  continuously 
impress  this  force  upon  the  stone  as  long  as  you 
hold  it  in  the  hand?  Does  it  perhaps  diminish 
with  the  time  during  which  one  holds  the  stone  ? 

And  what  does  it  matter  whether  this  support 
which  prevents  the  stone  from  falling  is  fur¬ 
nished  by  one’s  hand  or  by  a  table  or  by  a  rope 
from  which  it  hangs?  Certainly  nothing  at  all. 
You  must  conclude,  therefore,  Simplicio,  that 
it  makes  no  difference  whatever  whether  the 
fall  of  the  stone  is  preceded  by  a  period  of  rest 
which  is  long,  short,  or  instantaneous  provided 
only  the  fall  does  not  take  place  so  long  as  the 
stone  is  acted  upon  by  a  force  opposed  to  its 
w^eight  and  sufficient  to  hold  it  at  rest. 

Salv.  The  present  does  not  seem  to  be  the 
proper  time  to  investigate  the  cause  of  the  ac¬ 
celeration  of  natural  motion  concerning  which 
various  opinions  have  been  expressed  by  various 
philosophers,  some  explaining  it  by  attraction 
to  the  centre,  others  to  repulsion  between  the 
very  small  parts  of  the  body,  wTile  still  others 
attribute  it  to  a  certain  stress  in  the  surrounding 
medium  which  closes  in  behind  the  falling  body 
and  drives  it  from  one  of  its  positions  to  an¬ 
other.  Now%  all  these  fantasies,  and  others  too, 
ought  to  be  examined;  but  it  is  not  really  w  orth¬ 
while.  At  present  it  is  the  purpose  ofour  .\uthor 
merely  to  investigate  and  to  demonstrate  some 
of  the  properties  of  accelerated  motion  (what¬ 
ever  the  cause  of  this  acceleration  may  be) — 
meaning  thereby  a  motion,  such  that  the  mo¬ 
mentum  of  its  velocity  goes  on  increasing  after 
departure  from  rest,  in  simple  proportionality 
to  the  time,  which  is  the  same  as  saying  that  in 
equal  time-intervals  the  body  receives  equal  in¬ 
crements  of  velocity;  and  if  w^e  find  the  proper¬ 
ties  which  will  be  demonstrated  later  are  real¬ 
ized  in  freely  falling  and  accelerated  bodies,  w^e 
may  conclude  that  the  assumed  definition  in¬ 
cludes  such  a  motion  of  falling  bodies  and  that 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


their  speed  goes  on  increasing  as  the  time  and 
the  duration  of  the  motion. 

Sagr.  So  far  as  I  see  at  present,  the  definition 
might  have  been  put  a  little  more  clearly  per¬ 
haps  without  changing  the  fundamental  idea, 
namely,  uniformly  accelerated  motion  is  such 
that  its  speed  increases  in  proportion  to  the  space 
traversed;  so  that,  for  example,  the  speed  ac¬ 
quired  hy  a  body  in  falling  four  cubits  would  be 
double  that  acquired  in  falling  two  cubits  and 
this  latter  speed  would  be  double  that  acquired 
in  the  first  cubit.  Because  there  is  no  doubt  but 
that  a  heavy  body  falling  from  the  height  of  six 
cubits  has,  and  strikes  with,  a  momentum  dou¬ 
ble  that  it  had  at  the  end  of  three  cubits,  triple 
that  which  it  would  have  if  it  had  fallen  from 
two,  and  sextuple  that  which  it  would  have 
had  at  the  end  of  one. 

Salv.  It  is  very  comforting  to  me  to  have  had 
such  a  companion  in  error;  and  moreover  let  me 
tell  you  that  your  proposition  seems  so  highly 
probable  that  our  Author  himself  admitted, 
when  I  advanced  this  opinion  to  him,  that  he  had 
for  some  time  shared  the  same  fallacy.  But  what 
most  surprised  me  was  to  see  two  propositions 
so  inherently  probable  that  they  commanded 
the  assent  of  everyone  to  whom  they  were  pre¬ 
sented,  proven  in  a  few  simple  words  to  be  not 
only  false,  but  impossible. 

Simp.  I  am  one  of  those  who  accept  the  prop¬ 
osition,  and  believe  that  a  falling  body  acquires 
force  in  its  descent,  its  velocity  increasing  in 
proportion  to  the  space,  and  that  the  momen¬ 
tum  of  the  falling  body  is  doubled  when  it  falls 
from  a  doubled  height;  these  propositions,  it  ap¬ 
pears  to  me,  ought  to  be  conceded  without  hesi¬ 
tation  or  controversy. 

Salv.  And  yet  they  are  as  false  and  impossible 
as  that  motion  should  be  completed  instantane¬ 
ously;  and  here  is  a  very  clear  demonstration  of 
it.  If  the  velocities  are  in  proportion  to  the  spaces 
traversed,  or  to  be  traversed,  then  these  spaces 
are  traversed  in  equal  intervals  of  time ;  if,  there¬ 
fore,  the  velocity  with  which  the  falling  body 
traverses  a  space  of  eight  feet  were  double  that 
with  which  it  covered  the  first  four  feet  (just  as 
the  one  distance  is  double  the  other),  then  the 
time-intervals  required  for  these  passages  would 
be  equal.  But  for  one  and  the  same  body  to  fall 
eight  feet  and  four  feet  in  the  same  time  is  pos¬ 
sible  only  in  the  case  of  instantaneous  motion; 
but  observation  shows  us  that  the  motion  of  a 
falling  body  occupies  time,  and  less  of  it  in  cov¬ 
ering  a  distance  of  four  feet  than  of  eight  feet; 
therefore  it  is  not  true  that  its  velocity  increases 
in  proportion  to  the  space. 


203 

The  falsity  of  the  other  proposition  may  be 
shown  with  equal  clearness.  For  if  we  consider 
a  single  striking  body  the  difference  of  momen¬ 
tum  in  its  blows  can  depend  only  upon  differ¬ 
ence  of  velocity;  for  if  the  striking  body  falling 
from  a  double  height  were  to  deliver  a  blow  of 
double  momentum,  it  would  be  necessary  for 
this  body  to  strike  with  a  doubled  velocity;  but 
with  this  doubled  speed  it  would  traverse  a 
doubled  space  in  the  same  time-interval;  obser¬ 
vation  however  shows  that  the  time  required  for 
fall  from  the  greater  height  is  longer. 

Sagr.  You  present  these  recondite  matters 
with  too  much  evidence  and  ease;  this  great  fa¬ 
cility  makes  them  less  appreciated  than  they 
would  be  had  they  been  presented  in  a  more  ab¬ 
struse  manner.  For,  in  my  opinion,  people  es¬ 
teem  more  lightly  that  knowledge  which  they 
acquire  with  so  little  labor  than  that  acquired 
through  long  and  obscure  discussion. 

Salv.  If  those  who  demonstrate  with  brevity 
and  clearness  the  fallacy  of  many  popular  be¬ 
liefs  were  treated  with  contempt  instead  of  grat¬ 
itude  the  injury  would  be  quite  bearable;  but 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  very  unpleasant  and  an¬ 
noying  to  see  men,  who  claim  to  be  peers  of  any¬ 
one  in  a  certain  field  of  study,  take  for  granted 
certain  conclusions  which  later  are  quickly  and 
easily  shown  by  another  to  be  false.  I  do  not  de¬ 
scribe  such  a  feeling  as  one  of  envy,  which  usual¬ 
ly  degenerates  into  hatred  and  anger  against 
those  who  discover  such  fallacies;  I  would  call  it 
a  strong  desire  to  maintain  old  errors,  rather 
than  accept  newly  discovered  truths.  This  de¬ 
sire  at  times  induces  them  to  unite  against  these 
truths,  although  at  heart  believing  in  them, 
merely  for  the  purpose  of  lowering  the  esteem 
in  which  certain  others  are  held  by  the  unthink¬ 
ing  crowd.  Indeed,  I  have  heard  from  our  Acad¬ 
emician  many  such  fallacies  held  as  true  but 
easily  refutable;  some  of  these  I  have  in  mind. 

Sagr.  You  must  not  withhold  them  from  us, 
but,  at  the  proper  time,  tell  us  about  them  even 
though  an  extra  session  be  necessary.  But  now, 
continuing  the  thread  of  our  talk,  it  would  seem 
that  up  to  the  present  we  have  established  the 
definition  of  uniformly  accelerated  motion  which 
is  expressed  as  follows: 

A  motion  is  said  to  be  equally  or  uniformly  acceh 
erated  when,  starting  from  rest,  its  momentum  re¬ 
ceives  equal  increments  in  equal  times. 

Salv.  This  definition  established,  the  Author 
makes  a  single  assumption,  namely. 

The  speeds  acquired  by  one  and  the  same  body 
moving  down  planes  of  different  inclinations  are 
equal  when  the  heights  of  these  planes  are  equal. 


204 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


By  the  height  of  an  inclined  plane  we  mean 
the  perpendicular  let  fall  from  the  upper  end  of 
the  plane  upon  the  horizontal  line  drawn  through 
the  lower  end  of  the  same  plane.  Thus,  to  illus¬ 
trate,  let  the  line  AB  be  horizontal,  and  let  the 
planes  CA  and  CD  be  inclined  to  it;  then  the 
Author  calls  the  perpendicular  CB  the  “height” 
of  the  planes  CA  and  CD;  he  supposes  that  the 
speeds  acquired  by  one  and  the  same  body,  de¬ 
scending  along  the  planes  CA  and  CD  to  the 
terminal  points  A  and  D  are  equal  since  the 
heights  of  these  planes  are  the  same,  CB;  and 
also  it  must  be  understood  that  this  speed  is  that 
which  would  be  acquired  by  the  same  body  fall¬ 
ing  from  C  to  B. 

Sagr.  Your  assumption  appears  to  me  so  rea¬ 
sonable  that  it  ought  to  be  conceded  without 
question,  provided  of  course  there  are  no 
chance  or  outside  resistances,  and  that  the 
planes  are  hard  and  smooth,  and  that  the  figure 
of  the  moving  body  is  perfectly  round,  so  that 


fer  that  the  ball  in  its  descent  through  the  arc 
CB  acquired  a  momentum  on  reaching  By 
which  was  just  sufficient  to  carry  it  through  a 
similar  arc  BD  to  the  same  height.  Having  re¬ 
peated  this  experiment  many  times,  let  us  now 
drive  a  nail  into  the  wall  close  to  the  perpendic¬ 
ular  ABy  say  at  E  or  F,  so  that  it  projects  out 
some  five  or  six  finger- breadths  in  order  that 
the  thread,  again  carrying  the  bullet  through 
the  arc  CB,  may  strike  upon  the  nail  E  when 
the  bullet  reaches  By  and  thus  compel  it  to 
traverse  the  arc  BGy  described  about  E  as  cen¬ 
tre.  From  this  we  can  see  what  can  be  done  by 
the  same  momentum  which  previously  start¬ 
ing  at  the  same  point  B  carried  the  same  body 
through  the  arc  BD  to  the  horizontal  CD, 
Now,  gentlemen,  you  will  observe  with  pleas¬ 
ure  that  the  ball  swings  to  the  point  G  in  the 
horizontal,  and  you  would  see  the  same  thing 
happen  if  the  obstacle  were  placed  at  some  low¬ 
er  point,  say  at  F,  about  which  the  ball  would 


A;^ 


Fig*  45 

neither  plane  nor  moving  body  is  rough. 

All  resistance  and  opposition  having 
been  removed,  my  reason  tells  me  at 
once  that  a  heavy  and  perfectly  round 
ball  descending  along  the  lines  CAy 
CDy  CF  would  reach  the  terminal  points 
Ay  Dy  By  with  equal  momenta. 

Salv.  Your  words  are  very  plausible;  but  I 
hope  by  experiment  to  increase  the  probability 
to  an  extent  which  shall  be  little  short  of  a 
rigid  demonstration. 

Imagine  this  page  to  represent  a  vertical 
wall,  with  a  nail  driven  into  it;  and  from  the 
nail  let  there  be  suspended  a  lead  bullet  of  one 
or  two  ounces  by  means  of  a  fine  vertical  thread, 
ABy  say  from  four  to  six  feet  long,  on  this  wall 
draw  a  horizontal  line  DC,  at  right  angles  to 
the  vertical  thread  ABy  which  hangs  about  two 
finger-breadths  in  front  of  the  wall.  Now  bring 
the  thread  AB  with  the  attached  ball  into  the 
position  AC  and  set  it  free;  first  it  will  be  ob¬ 
served  to  descend  along  the  arc  CBDy  to  pass 
the  point  F,  and  to  travel  along  the  arc  FD,  till 
it  almost  reaches  the  horizontal  CD,  a  slight 
shortage  being  caused  by  the  resistance  of  the 
air  and  the  string;  from  this  we  may  rightly  in¬ 


E 

dX  I 

Xc 

F 

Fig 

.46 

describe  the  arc  F/,  the  rise  of  the  ball  always 
terminating  exactly  on  the  line  CD.  But  when 
the  nail  is  placed  so  low  that  the  remainder  of 
the  thread  below  it  will  not  reach  to  the  height 
CD  (which  would  happen  if  the  nail  were 
placed  nearer  F  than  to  the  intersection  of  AB 
with  the  horizontal  CD),  then  the  thread  leaps 
over  the  nail  and  twists  itself  about  it. 

This  experiment  leaves  no  room  for  doubt 
as  to  the  truth  of  our  supposition;  for  since  the 
two  arcs  CB  and  DF  are  equal  and  similarly 
placed,  the  momentum  acquired  by  the  fall 
through  the  arc  CB  is  the  same  as  that  gained 
by  fall  through  the  arc  DF:  but  the  momentum 
acquired  at  F,  owing  to  fall  through  CF,  is  able 
to  lift  the  same  body  through  the  arc  BD; 
therefore,  the  momentum  acquired  in  the  fall 
BD  is  equal  to  that  which  lifts  the  same  body 
through  the  same  arc  from  F  to  D;  so,  in  gen- 


THE  TWO  NEW 

eral,  every  momentum  acquired  by  fall  through 
an  arc  is  equal  to  that  which  can  lift  the  same 
body  through  the  same  arc.  But  all  these  mo¬ 
menta  which  cause  a  rise  through  the  arcs  BZ), 
BGy  and  BI  are  equal,  since  they  are  produced 
by  the  same  momentum,  gained  by  fall  through 
CBy  as  experiment  shows.  Therefore  all  the  mo¬ 
menta  gained  by  fall  through  the  arcs  DBy  GBy 
IB  are  equal. 

Sagr.  The  argument  seems  to  me  so  conclu¬ 
sive  and  the  experiment  so  well  adapted  to  es¬ 
tablish  the  hypothesis  that  we  may,  indeed, 
consider  it  as  demonstrated. 

Salv.  I  do  not  wish,  Sagredo,  that  we  trouble 
ourselves  too  much  about  this  matter,  since  we 
are  going  to  apply  this  principle  mainly  in  mo¬ 
tions  which  occur  on  plane  surfaces,  and  not 
upon  curved,  along  which  acceleration  varies 
in  a  manner  greatly  different  from  that  which 
we  have  assumed  for  planes. 

So  that,  although  the  above  experiment 
shows  us  that  the  descent  of  the  moving  body 
through  the  arc  CB  confers  upon  it  momentum 
just  sufficient  to  carry  it  to  the  same  height 
through  any  of  the  arcs  BDy  BGy  Bly  we  are  not 
able,  by  similar  means,  to  show  that  the  event 
would  be  identical  in  the  case  of  a  perfectly 
round  ball  descending  along  planes  whose  in¬ 
clinations  are  respectively  the  same  as  the 
chords  of  these  arcs.  It  seems  likely,  on  the 
other  hand,  that,  since  these  planes  form  angles 
at  the  point  By  they  will  present  an  obstacle  to  the 
ball  which  has  descended  along  the  chord  CB, 
and  starts  to  rise  along  the  chord  BDy  BGy  BI. 

In  striking  these  planes  some  of  its  momen¬ 
tum  will  be  lost  and  it  will  not  be  able  to  rise  to 
the  height  of  the  line  CD;  but  this  obstacle, 
which  interferes  with  the  experiment,  once  re¬ 
moved,  it  is  clear  that  the  momentum  (which 
gains  in  strength  with  descent)  will  be  able  to 
carry  the  body  to  the  same  height.  Let  us  then, 
for  the  present,  take  this  as  a  postulate,  the  ab¬ 
solute  truth  of  which  will  be  established  when 
we  find  that  the  inferences  from  it  correspond 
to  and  agree  perfectly  with  experiment.  The 
Author  having  assumed  this  single  principle 
passes  next  to  the  propositions  which  he  clearly 
demonstrates;  the  first  of  these  is  as  follows: 

Theorem  I,  Proposition  I 

The  time  in  which  any  space  is  traversed  hy  a  body 
starting  from  rest  and  uniformly  acceleratedy  is 
equal  to  the  time  in  which  that  same  space  would 
he  traversed  by  the  same  body  moving  at  a  uniform 
speed  whose  value  is  the  mean  of  the  highest  speed 
and  the  speed  just  before  acceleration  began. 


SCIENCES 


205 


Let  us  represent  by  the  line  AB  the  time  in 
which  the  space  CD  is  traversed  by  a  body 
which  starts  from  rest  at  C  and  is  uniformly  ac¬ 
celerated;  let  the  final  and  highest  value  of  the 
speed  gained  during  the  interval  AB  be  rep¬ 
resented  by  the  line  EB  drawn  at  right  angles 
to  AB;  draw  the  line  AEy  then  all  lines  drawn 
from  equidistant  points  on  AB  and  parallel  to 
BE  will  represent  the  in-  ^ 

creasing  values  of  the  speed, 
beginning  with  the  instant 
A.  Let  the  point  F  bisect 
the  line  EB;  draw  EG  par¬ 
allel  to  BAy  and  GA  parallel 
to  FBy  thus  forming  a  par¬ 
allelogram  AGFB  which 
will  be  equal  in  area  to  the 
triangle  AEBy  since  the  side 
GF  bisects  the  side  AE  at 
the  point  I;  for  if  the  paral¬ 
lel  lines  in  the  triangle  AEB 
are  extended  to  G/,  then 
the  sum  of  all  the  parallels 
contained  in  the  quadrila¬ 
teral  is  equal  to  the  sum  of 
those  contained  in  the  tri¬ 
angle  AEB;  for  those  in  the 
triangle  lEF  are  equal  to 
those  contained  in  the  tri- 


/ 

/ 

/ 

I 

/ 

/ 

/ 

r 

1 

F  B 
Fig-  47 

angle  GIAy  while  those  included  in  the  trape¬ 
zium  AIFB  are  common.  Since  each  and  every 
instant  of  time  in  the  time-interval  AB  has  its 
corresponding  point  on  the  line  ^B,from  which 
points  parallels  drawn  in  and  limited  by  the 
triangle  AEB  represent  the  increasing  values  of 
the  growing  velocity,  and  since  parallels  con¬ 
tained  within  the  rectangle  represent  the  val¬ 
ues  of  a  speed  which  is  not  increasing,  but  con¬ 
stant,  it  appears,  in  like  manner,  that  the  mo¬ 
menta  assumed  by  the  moving  body  may  also 
be  represented,  in  the  case  of  the  accelerated 
motion,  by  the  increasing  parallels  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  AEBy  and,  in  the  case  of  the  uniform  mo¬ 
tion,  by  the  parallels  of  the  rectangle  GB.  For, 
what  the  momenta  may  lack  in  the  first  part  of 
the  accelerated  motion  (the  deficiency  of  the 
momenta  being  represented  by  the  parallels  of 
the  triangle  AGI)  is  made  up  by  the  momenta 
represented  by  the  parallels  of  the  triangle  lEF. 

Hence  it  is  clear  that  equal  spaces  will  be 
traversed  in  equal  times  by  two  bodies,  one  of 
which,  starting  from  rest,  moves  with  a  uni¬ 
form  acceleration,  while  the  momentum  of  the 
other,  moving  with  uniform  speed,  is  one-half 
its  maximum  momentum  under  accelerated  mo¬ 
tion.  Q.  E.  D. 


2o6 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


Theorem  II,  Proposition  II 

The  spaces  described  by  a  body  falling  from  rest 
with  a  uniformly  accelerated  motion  are  to  each 
other  as  the  squares  of  the  timedntervals  em¬ 
ployed  in  traversing  these  distances. 

Let  the  time  beginning  with  any  instant  A  be 
represented  by  the  straight  line  AB  in  which 
are  taken  any  two  time-intervals  AD  and  AB. 
Let  HI  represent  the  distance  through  which 
the  body,  starting  from  rest  at  //,  falls  with 
uniform  acceleration.  If  HL  represents  the 
space  traversed  during  the  time-interval  AD^ 
and  HM  that  covered  during  the  interval  AE^ 
then  the  space  MH  stands  to  the  space  LH  in  a 
ratio  which  is  the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the 
time  AE  to  the  time  AD\  or  we  may  say  sim¬ 
ply  that  the  distances  HM  and  HL  are  related 
as  the  squares  oi  AE  and  AD. 

Draw  the  line  AC  making  any  angle  what¬ 
ever  with  the  line  AB\  and  from  the  points  D 
and  £,  draw  the  parallel  lines  DO  and  EP\  of 
these  two  lines,  DO  represents  the  greatest 
velocity  attained  during  the  interval  AD^  while 
EP  represents  the  maximum  velocity  acquired 
during  the  interval  AE.  But  it  has  just  been 
proved  that  so  far  as  distances  traversed  are 
concerned  it  is  precisely  the  same  whether  a 
body  falls  from  rest  with  a  uniform  accelera¬ 
tion  or  whether  it  falls  during  an  equal  time- 
interval  with  a  constant  speed  which  is  one- 


half  the  maximum  speed  attained  during  the 
accelerated  motion.  It  follows  therefore  that 
the  distances  HM  and  HL  are  the  same  as 
would  be  traversed,  during  the  time-intervals 
AE  and  /ID,  by  uniform  velocities  equal  to 
one-half  those  represented  by  DO  and  EP  re¬ 
spectively.  If,  therefore,  one  can  show  that  the 
distances  HM  and  HL  are  in  the  same  ratio  as 
the  squares  of  the  time-intervals  AE  and  ADy 
our  proposition  will  be  proven. 

But  in  the  fourth  proposition  of  the  first 
book  [p.  198  above]  it  has  been  shown  that  the 
spaces  traversed  by  two  particles  in  uniform 
motion  bear  to  one  another  a  ratio  which  is 
equal  to  the  product  of  the  ratio  of  the  veloci¬ 
ties  by  the  ratio  of  the  times.  But  in  this  case 
the  ratio  of  the  velocities  is  the  same  as  the  ra¬ 
tio  of  the  time-intervals  (for  the  ratio  of  AE  to 
AD  is  the  same  as  that  of  p2  EP  to  y^DO  or  of 
EP  to  DO).  Hence  the  ratio  of  the  spaces  trav¬ 
ersed  is  the  same  as  the  squared  ratio  of  the 
time- intervals.  q.  e.  d. 

Evidently  then  the  ratio  of  the  distances  is 
the  square  of  the  ratio  of  the  final  velocities, 
that  is,  of  the  lines  EP  and  DO,  since  these  are 
to  each  other  as  AE  to  AD. 

Corollary  I 

Hence  it  is  clear  that  if  we  take  any  equal  in¬ 
tervals  of  time  whatever,  counting  from  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  motion,  such  as  ADy  DEy  EFy 
FGy  in  which  the  spaces  HLy  LM,  MNy  NI  are 
traversed,  these  spaces  will  bear  to  one  another 
the  same  ratio  as  the  series  of  odd  numbers,  i, 
3,  5,  7;  for  this  is  the  ratio  of  the  differences  of 
the  squares  of  the  lines,  differences  which  ex¬ 
ceed  one  another  by  equal  amounts,  this  ex¬ 
cess  being  equal  to  the  smallest  line:  or  we 
may  say  of  the  differences  of  the  squares  of  the 
natural  numbers  beginning  with  unity. 

While,  therefore,  during  equal  intervals  of 
time  the  velocities  increase  as  the  natural  num¬ 
bers,  the  increments  in  the  distances  traversed 
during  these  equal  time-intervals  are  to  one  an¬ 
other  as  the  odd  numbers  beginning  with  unity. 

Sagr.  Please  suspend  the  discussion  for  a  mo¬ 
ment  since  there  just  occurs  to  me  an  idea  which 
I  want  to  illustrate  by  means  of  a  diagram  in  or¬ 
der  that  it  may  be  clearer  both  to  you  and  to 
me. 

Let  the  line  AI  represent  the  lapse  of  time 
measured  from  the  initial  instant  A;  through  A 
draw  the  straight  line  AF  making  any  angle 
whatever;  join  the  terminal  points  /  and  F; 
divide  the  time  AI  in  half  at  C;  draw  CB  par- 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


D  A 


allel  to  IF,  Let  us  consider  CB  as  the  maximum 
value  of  the  velocity  which  increases  from  zero 
at  the  beginning,  in  simple  proportionality  to 
the  intercepts  on  the  triangle  ABC  of  lines 
drawn  parallel  to  BC;  or  what  is  the  same 
thing,  let  us  suppose  the  velocity  to  increase  in 
proportion  to  the  time;  then  I  admit  without 
question,  in  view  of  the  preceding  argument, 
that  the  space  described  by  a  body  falling  in 
the  aforesaid  manner  will  be  equal  to  the  space 
traversed  by  the  same  body  during  the  same 
length  of  time  travelling  with  a  uniform  speed 
equal  to  EC,  the  half  of  BC.  Further  let  us  ima¬ 
gine  that  the  body  has  fallen  with  accelerated 
motion  so  that,  at  the  instant  C,  it  has  the 
velocity  BC.  It  is  clear  that  if  the  body  con¬ 
tinued  to  descend  with  the  same  speed  BC, 
without  acceleration,  it  would  in  the  next  time- 
interval  Cl  traverse  double  the  distance  cov¬ 
ered  during  the  interval  AC,  with  the  uniform 
speed  EC  which  is  half  of  BC;  but  since  the 
falling  body  acquires  equal  increments  of  speed 
during  equal  increments  of  time,  it  follows  that 
the  velocity  BC,  during  the  next  time-interval 
Cl  will  be  increased  by  an  amount  represented 
by  the  parallels  of  the  triangle  BFG  which  is 
equal  to  the  triangle  ABC.  If,  then,  one  adds  to 
the  velocity  GI  half  of  the  velocity  FG,  the 
highest  speed  acquired  by  the  accelerated  mo¬ 
tion  and  determined  by  the  parallels  of  the 
triangle  BFG,  he  will  have  the  uniform  velocity 
with  which  the  same  space  would  have  been 
described  in  the  time  Cl;  and  since  this  speed 
IN  is  three  times  as  great  as  EC  it  follows  that 


the  space  described  during  the  interval  Cl  is 
three  times  as  great  as  that  described  during 
the  interval  AC.  Let  us  imagine  the  motion  ex¬ 
tended  over  another  equal  time-interval  70, 
and  the  triangle  extended  to  APO;  it  is  then 
evident  that  if  the  motion  continues  during 
the  interval  70,  at  the  constant  rate  IF  ac¬ 
quired  by  acceleration  during  the  time  AI,  the 
space  traversed  during  the  interval  70  will  be 
four  times  that  traversed  during  the  first  inter¬ 
val  A  C,  because  the  speed  IF  is  four  times  the 
speed  EC.  But  if  we  enlarge  our  triangle  so  as  to 
include  FPQ  which  is  equal  to  ABC,  still  assum¬ 
ing  the  acceleration  to  be  constant,  we  shall 
add  to  the  uniform  speed  an  increment  RQ, 
equal  to  EC;  then  the  value  of  the  equivalent 
uniform  speed  during  the  time-interval  70  will 
be  five  times  that  during  the  first  time-interval 
AC;  therefore  the  space  traversed  will  be  quin¬ 
tuple  that  during  the  first  interval  AC.  It  is 
thus  evident  by  simple  computation  that  a 
moving  body  starting  from  rest  and  acquiring 
velocity  at  a  rate  proportional  to  the  time,  will, 
during  equal  intervals  of  time,  traverse  dis¬ 
tances  which  are  related  to  each  other  as  the 
odd  numbers  beginning  with  unity,  i,  3,  5;  or 
considering  the  total  space  traversed,  that  cov¬ 
ered  in  double  time  will  be  quadruple  that  cov¬ 
ered  during  unit  time;  in  triple  time,  the  space 
is  nine  times  as  great  as  in  unit  time.  And  in 
general  the  spaces  traversed  are  in  the  duplicate 
ratio  of  the  times,  i.e.,  in  the  ratio  of  the  squares 
of  the  times. 

Simp.  In  truth,  I  find  more  pleasure  in  this 
simple  and  clear  argument  of  Sagredo  than  in 
the  Author’s  demonstration  which  to  me  ap¬ 
pears  rather  obscure;  so  that  I  am  convinced 
that  matters  are  as  described,  once  having  ac¬ 
cepted  the  definition  of  uniformly  accelerated 
motion.  But  as  to  whether  this  acceleration  is 
that  which  one  meets  in  nature  in  the  case  of 
falling  bodies,  I  am  still  doubtful;  and  it  seems 
to  me,  not  only  for  my  own  sake  but  also  for  all 
those  who  think  as  I  do,  that  this  would  be  the 
proper  moment  to  introduce  one  of  those  ex¬ 
periments — and  there  are  many  of  them,  I  un¬ 
derstand — which  illustrate  in  several  ways  the 
conclusions  reached. 

Salv.  The  request  which  you,  as  a  man  of 
science,  make,  is  a  very  reasonable  one;  for  this 
is  the  custom — and  properly  so — in  those  sci¬ 
ences  where  mathematical  demonstrations  are 
applied  to  natural  phenomena,  as  is  seen  in  the 
case  of  perspective,  astronomy,  mechanics,  mu¬ 
sic,  and  others  where  the  principles,  once  es¬ 
tablished  by  well-chosen  experiments,  become 


2o8 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


the  foundations  of  the  entire  superstructure.  I 
hope  therefore  it  will  not  appear  to  be  a  waste 
of  time  if  we  discuss  at  considerable  length  this 
first  and  most  fundamental  question  upon 
which  hinge  numerous  consequences  of  which 
we  have  in  this  book  only  a  small  number, 
placed  there  by  the  Author,  who  has  done  so 
much  to  open  a  pathway  hitherto  closed  to 
minds  of  speculative  turn.  So  far  as  experiments 
go  they  have  not  been  neglected  by  the  Author; 
and  often,  in  his  company,  I  have  attempted  in 
the  following  manner  to  assure  myself  that  the 
acceleration  actually  experienced  by  falling 
bodies  is  that  above  described. 

A  piece  of  wooden  moulding  or  scantling, 
about  12  cubits  long,  half  a  cubit  wide,  and 
three  finger-breadths  thick,  was  taken;  on  its 
edge  was  cut  a  channel  a  little  more  than  one 
finger  in  breadth;  having  made  this  groove  very 
straight,  smooth,  and  polished,  and  having 
lined  it  with  parchment,  also  as  smooth  and 
polished  as  possible,  we  rolled  along  it  a  hard, 
smooth,  and  very  round  bronze  ball.  Having 
placed  this  board  in  a  sloping  position,  by  lift¬ 
ing  one  end  some  one  or  two  cubits  above  the 
other,  we  rolled  the  ball,  as  I  was  just  saying, 
along  the  channel,  noting,  in  a  manner  present¬ 
ly  to  be  described,  the  time  required  to  make 
the  descent.  We  repeated  this  experiment  more 
than  once  in  order  to  measure  the  time  with  an 
accuracy  such  that  the  deviation  between  two 
observations  never  exceeded  one-tenth  of  a 
pulse-beat.  Having  performed  this  operation 
and  having  assured  ourselves  of  its  reliability, 
we  now  rolled  the  ball  only  one-quarter  the 
length  of  the  channel;  and  having  measured 
the  time  of  its  descent,  we  found  it  precisely 
one-half  of  the  former.  Next  we  tried  other  dis¬ 
tances,  comparing  the  time  for  the  whole 
length  with  that  for  the  half,  or  with  that  for 
two- thirds,  or  three-fourths,  or  indeed  for  any 
fraction;  in  such  experiments,  repeated  a  full 
hundred  times,  we  always  found  that  the  spaces 
traversed  were  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of 
the  times,  and  this  was  true  for  all  inclinations 
of  the  plane,  of  the  channel,  along  which 
we  rolled  the  ball.  We  also  observed  that  the 
times  of  descent,  for  various  inclinations  of  the 
plane,  bore  to  one  another  precisely  that  ratio 
which,  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  Author  had 
predicted  and  demonstrated  for  them. 

For  the  measurement  of  time,  we  employed 
a  large  vessel  of  water  placed  in  an  elevated 
position;  to  the  bottom  of  this  vessel  was  sold¬ 
ered  a  pipe  of  small  diameter  giving  a  thin  jet 
of  water,  which  we  collected  in  a  small  glass 


during  the  time  of  each  descent,  whether  for 
the  whole  length  of  the  channel  or  for  a  part  of 
its  length;  the  water  thus  collected  was 
weighed,  after  each  descent,  on  a  very  accurate 
balance;  the  differences  and  ratios  of  these 
weights  gave  us  the  differences  and  ratios  of  the 
times,  and  this  with  such  accuracy  that  al¬ 
though  the  operation  was  repeated  many, 
many  times,  there  was  no  appreciable  discrep¬ 
ancy  in  the  results. 

Simp.  I  would  like  to  have  been  present  at 
these  experiments;  but  feeling  confidence  in 
the  care  with  which  you  performed  them,  and 
in  the  fidelity  with  which  you  relate  them,  I  am 
satisfied  and  accept  them  as  true  and  valid. 

Salv.  Then  we  can  proceed  without  dis¬ 
cussion. 


Corollary  II 

Secondly,  it  follows  that,  starting  from  any 
initial  point,  if  we  take  any  two  distances, 
traversed  in  any  time-intervals  whatsoever, 
these  time-intervals  bear  to  one  another  the 
same  ratio  as  one  of  the  distances  to  the  mean 
proportional  of  the  two  distances. 

For  if  we  take  two  distances  ST  and  SY 
measured  from  the  initial  point  S,  the 
mean  proportional  of  which  is  SX,  the 
time  of  fall  through  ST  is  to  the  time  of 
fall  through  ST  as  5 T  is  to  SX;  or  one 
may  say  the  time  of  fall  through  5 Y  is  to 
the  time  of  fall  through  ST  as  SY  is  to  SX, 

Now  since  it  has  been  shown  that  the 
spaces  traversed  are  in  the  same  ratio  as  the 
squares  of  the  times;  and  since,  moreover, 
the  ratio  of  the  space  to  the  space  ST 
is  the  square  of  the  ratio  SY  to  SX^  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  ratio  of  the  times  of  fall  p. 
through  SY  and  ST  is  the  ratio  of  the  re- 
spective  distances  SY  and  SX,  ^ 

Scholium 

The  above  corollary  has  been  proven  for  the 
case  of  vertical  fall;  but  it  holds  also  for  plane§ 
inclined  at  any  angle;  for  it  is  to  be  assumed 
that  along  these  planes  the  velocity  increases  in 
the  same  ratio,  that  is,  in  proportion  to  the 
time,  or,  if  you  prefer,  as  the  series  of  natural 
numbers. 

[The  dialogue  which  intervenes  between  this 
Scholium  and  the  following  theorem  was  elaborated 
by  Viviani,  at  the  suggestion  of  Galileo.  Trans.] 

Salv.  Here,  Sagredo,  I  should  like,  if  it  be  not  too 
tedious  to  Simplicio,  to  interrupt  for  a  moment  the 
present  discussion  in  order  to  make  some  additions 


T 

X 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


on  the  basis  of  what  has  already  been  proved  and  of 
what  mechanical  principles  we  have  already  learned 
from  our  Academician.  This  addition  I  make  for  the 
better  establishment  on  logical  and  experimental 
grounds,  of  the  principle  which  we  have  above  con¬ 
sidered;  and  what  is  more  important,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  deriving  it  geometrically,  after  first  demon¬ 
strating  a  single  lemma  which  is  fundamental  in  the 
science  of  motion. 

Sagr.  If  the  advance  which  you  propose  to  make 
is  such  as  will  confirm  and  fully  establish  these  scien¬ 
ces  of  motion,  I  will  gladly  devote  to  it  any  length 
of  time.  Indeed,  I  shall  not  only  be  glad  to  have  you 
proceed,  but  I  beg  of  you  at  once  to  satisfy  the  curi¬ 
osity  which  you  have  awakened  in  me  concerning 
your  proposition;  and  I  think  that  Simplicio  is  of 
the  same  mind. 

Simp.  Quite  right. 

Salv.  Since  then  I  have  your  permission,  let  us 
first  of  all  consider  this  notable  fact,  that  the  mo¬ 
menta  or  speeds  of  one  and  the  same  moving  body 
vary  with  the  inclination  of  the  plane. 

The  speed  reaches  a  maximum  along  a  vertical  di¬ 
rection,  and  for  other  directions  diminishes  as  the 
plane  diverges  from  the  vertical.  Therefore  the  im¬ 
petus,  ability,  energy,  or,  one  might  say,  the  momen¬ 
tum  of  descent  of  the  moving  body  is  diminished  by 
the  plane  upon  which  it  is  supported  and  along 
which  it  rolls. 

For  the  sake  of  greater  clearness  erect  the  line  AB 
perpendicular  to  the  horizontal  AC;  next  draw  AD, 
AEy  AF,  etc.,  at  different  inclinations  to  the  hori¬ 
zontal.  Then  I  say  that  all  the  momentum  of  the 
falling  body  is  along  the  vertical  and  is  a  maximum 
when  it  falls  in  that  direction;  the  momentum  is  less 
along  DA  and  still  less  along  EA,  and  even  less  yet 
along  the  more  inclined  plane  FA.  Finally  on  the 


horizontal  plane  the  momentum  vanishes  altogether; 
the  body  finds  itself  in  a  condition  of  indifference  as 
to  motion  or  rest;  has  no  inherent  tendency  to  move 
in  any  direction,  and  offers  no  resistance  to  being 
set  in  motion.  For  just  as  a  heavy  body  or  system  of 
bodies  cannot  of  itself  move  upwards,  or  recede 
from  the  common  centre  toward  which  all  heavy 
things  tend,  so  it  is  impossible  for  any  body  of  its 
own  accord  to  assume  any  motion  other  than  one 
which  carries  it  nearer  to  the  aforesaid  common 
centre.  Hence,  along  the  horizontal,  by  which  we 


understand  a  surface,  every  point  of  which  is  equi¬ 
distant  from  this  same  common  centre,  the  body 
will  have  no  momentum  whatever. 

This  change  of  momentum  being  clear,  it  is  here 
necessary  for  me  to  explain  something  which  our 
Academician  wrote  when  in  Padua,  embodying  it 
in  a  treatise  on  mechanics  prepared  solely  for  the 
use  of  his  students,  and  proving  it  at  length  and  con¬ 
clusively  when  considering  the  origin  and  nature  of 
that  marvellous  machine,  the  screw.  What  he 
proved  is  the  manner  in  which  the  momentum  varies 
with  the  inclination  of  the  plane,  as  for  instance  that 
of  the  plane  FA,  one  end  of  which  is  elevated 
through  a  vertical  distance  FC.  This  direction  FC  is 
that  along  which  the  momentum  of  a  heavy  body 
becomes  a  maximum;  let  us  discover  what  ratio  this 
momentum  bears  to  that  of  the  same  body  moving 
along  the  inclined  plane  FA.  This  ratio,  I  say,  is  the 
inverse  of  that  of  the  aforesaid  lengths.  Such  is  the 
lemma  preceding  the  theorem  which  I  hope  to 
demonstrate  a  little  later. 

It  is  clear  that  the  impelling  force  acting  on  a 
body  in  descent  is  equal  to  the  resistance  or  least 
force  sufficient  to  hold  it  at  rest.  In  order  to  measure 
this  force  and  resistance  I  propose  to  use  the  weight 
of  another  body.  Let  us  place  upon  the  plane  FA  a 
body  G  connected  to  the  weight  H  by  means  of  a 
cord  passing  over  the  point  F;  then  the  body  H  will 
ascend  or  descend,  along  the  perpendicular,  the 
same  distance  which  the  body  G  ascends  or  descends 
along  the  inclined  plane  FA;  but  this  distance  will 
not  be  equal  to  the  rise  or  fall  of  G  along  the  verti¬ 
cal  in  which  direction  alone  G,  as  other  bodies,  ex¬ 
erts  its  force.  This  is  clear.  For  if  we  consider  the 
motion  of  the  body  G,  from  A  to  F,  in  the  triangle 
AFC  to  be  made  up  of  a  horizontal  component  AC 
and  a  vertical  component  CF,  and  remember  that 
this  body  experiences  no  resistance  to  motion  along 
the  horizontal  (because  by  such  a  motion  the  body 
neither  gains  nor  loses  distance  from  the  common 
centre  of  heavy  things),  it  follows  that  resistance  is 
met  only  in  consequence  of  the  body  rising  through 
the  vertical  distance  CF.  Since  then  the  body  G  in 
moving  from  A  to  F  offers  resistance  only  in  so  far 
as  it  rises  through  the  vertical  distance  CF,  while  the 
other  body  H  must  fall  vertically  through  the  en¬ 
tire  distance  FA,  and  since  this  ratio  is  maintained 
whether  the  motion  be  large  or  small,  the  two  bodies 
being  inextensibly  connected,  we  are  able  to  assert 
positively  that,  in  case  of  equilibrium  (bodies  at 
rest)  the  momenta,  the  velocities,  or  their  tend¬ 
ency  to  motion  i.e.,  the  spaces  which  would  be  trav¬ 
ersed  by  them  in  equal  times,  must  be  in  the  in¬ 
verse  ratio  to  their  weights.  This  is  what  has  been 
demonstrated  in  every  case  of  mechanical  motion. 
So  that,  in  order  to  hold  the  weight  G  at  rest,  one 
must  give  H  a  weight  smaller  in  the  same  ratio  as 
the  distance  CF  is  smaller  than  FA.  If  we  do  this, 
F.^:FC=  weight  G:  weight  H;  then  equilibrium  will 
occur,  that  is,  the  weights  H  and  G  will  have  the 
same  impelling  forces,  and  the  two  bodies  will  come 
to  rest. 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


210 

And  since  we  are  agreed  that  the  impetus,  energy, 
momentum  or  tendency  to  motion  of  a  moving 
body  is  as  great  as  the  force  or  least  resistance  suffici¬ 
ent  to  stop  it,  and  since  we  have  found  that  the 
weight  77  is  capable  of  preventing  motion  in  the 
weight  G,  it  follows  that  the  less  weight  77  whose  en¬ 
tire  force  is  along  the  perpendicular,  7'C,  will  be  an 
exact  measure  of  the  component  of  force  which  the 
larger  weight  G  exerts  along  the  plane  FA.  But  the 
measure  of  the  total  force  on  the  body  G  is  its  own 
weight,  since  to  prevent  its  fall  it  is  only  necessary 
to  balance  it  with  an  equal  weight,  provided  this 
second  weight  be  free  to  move  vertically;  therefore 
the  component  of  the  force  on  G  along  the  inclined 
plane  FA  will  bear  to  the  maximum  and  total  force 
on  this  same  body  G  along  the  perpendieular  FC 
the  same  ratio  as  the  weight  77  to  the  weight  G.  This 
ratio  is,  by  eonstruetion,  the  same  whieh  the  height 
FG,  of  the  inclined  plane  bears  to  the  length  FA.  We 
have  here  the  lemma  which  I  proposed  to  demon¬ 
strate  and  which,  as  you  will  see,  has  been  assumed 
by  our  Author  in  the  second  part  of  the  sixth  propo¬ 
sition  of  the  present  treatise. 

Sagr.  From  what  you  have  shown  thus  far,  it  ap¬ 
pears  to  me  that  one  might  infer,  arguing  ex  aequali 
con  la  proportione  perturbata,  that  the  tendencies  of 
one  and  the  same  body  to  move  along  planes  differ¬ 
ently  inclined,  but  having  the  same  vertical  height, 
as  FA  and  F7,  are  to  each  other  inversely  as  the 
lengths  of  the  planes. 

Salv.  Perfectly  right.  This  point  established,  I 
pass  to  the  demonstration  of  the  following  theorem: 
If  a  body  falls  freely  along  smooth  planes  inclined 
at  any  angle  ivhatsoet'er,  but  of  the  same  height,  the 
speeds  with  which  it  reaches  the  bottom  are  the  same. 
First  we  must  recall  the  fact  that  on  a  plane  of  any 
inclination  whatever  a  body  starting  from  rest  gains 
speed  or  momentum  in  direct  proportion  to  the 
time,  in  agreement  with  the  definition  of  naturally 
accelerated  motion  given  by  the  Author.  Hence,  as 
he  has  shown  in  the  preceding  proposition,  the  dis¬ 
tances  traversed  are  proportional  to  the  squares  of 
the  times  and  therefore  to  the  squares  of  the  speeds. 
The  speed  relations  are  here  the  same  as  in  the  mo¬ 
tion  first  studied,  since  in  each  case  the  gain  of  speed 
is  proportional  to  the  time. 

Let  AB  be  an  inclined  plane  whose  height  above 
the  level  BC  is  AC.  As  we  have  seen  above  the  force 
impelling  a  body  to  fall  along  the  vertical  AC  is  to 


the  force  which  drives  the  same  body  along  the  in¬ 
clined  plane  AB  as  AB  is  to  AC.  On  the  incline  AB, 
lay  off  AD  a  third  proportional  to  A  Band  AC;  then 


the  force  producing  motion  along  AC  is  to  that 
along  AB  {i.e.,  along  AD)  as  the  length  AC  is  to 
the  length  AD.  And  therefore  the  body  will  trav¬ 
erse  the  space  AD,  along  the  incline  AB,  in  the 
same  time  which  it  would  occupy  in  falling  the  ver¬ 
tical  distance  AC,  (since  the  forces  are  in  the  same 
ratio  as  these  distances) ;  also  the  speed  at  C  is  to  the 
speed  at  D  as  the  distance  is  to  the  distance  AD. 
But,  according  to  the  definition  of  accelerated  mo¬ 
tion,  the  speed  at  B  is  to  the  speed  of  the  same  body 
at  D  as  the  time  required  to  traverse  AB  is  to  the 
time  required  for  AD;  and,  according  to  the  last 
corollary  of  the  second  proposition,  the  time  of  pass¬ 
ing  through  the  distance  AB  bears  to  the  time  of 
passing  through  AD  the  same  ratio  as  the  distance 
AC  {a  mean  proportional  betw'een  AB  and  AD)  to 
AD.  Accordingly  the  two  speeds  at  B  and  C  each 
bear  to  the  speed  at  D  the  same  ratio,  namely,  that 
of  the  distances  /7G  and  AD;  hence  they  are  equal. 
This  is  the  theorem  wLich  I  set  out  to  prove. 

From  the  above  we  are  better  able  to  demon¬ 
strate  the  follow  ing  third  proposition  of  the  Author 
in  which  he  employs  the  following  principle,  name¬ 
ly,  the  time  required  to  traverse  an  inclined  plane 
is  to  that  required  to  fall  through  the  vertical 
height  of  the  plane  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  length 
of  the  plane  to  its  height. 

For,  according  to  the  second  corollary  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  proposition,  if  represents  the  time  required 
to  pass  over  the  distance  BA,  the  time  required  to 
pass  the  distance  AD  will  be  a  mean  proportional 
between  these  two  distances  and  w’ill  be  represented 
by  the  line  AC;  but  if  represents  the  time  need¬ 
ed  to  traverse  AD  it  will  also  represent  the  time  re¬ 
quired  to  fall  through  the  distance  AC,  since  the 
distances  AC  and  AD  are  traversed  in  equal  times; 
consequently,  if  AB  represents  the  time  required 
for  AB  then  AC  will  represent  the  time  required 
for  A C.  Hence  the  times  required  to  traverse  AB  and 
AC  art  to  each  other  as  the  distances  AB  and  AC. 

In  like  manner,  it  can  be  showm  that  the  time  re¬ 
quired  to  fall  through  ^G  is  to  the  time  required  for 
any  other  incline  AE  as  the  length  AC  is  to  the 
length  AE;  therefore,  ex  aequali,  the  time  of  fall 
along  the  incline  AB  is  to  that  along  AE  as  the  dis¬ 
tance  AB  is  to  the  distance  AE,  etc. 

One  might  by  application  of  this  same  theorem, 
as  Sagredo  will  readily  see,  immediately  demon¬ 
strate  the  sixth  proposition  of  the  Author;  but  let 
us  here  end  this  digression  which  Sagredo  has  per¬ 
haps  found  rather  tedious,  though  I  consider  it  quite 
important  for  the  theory  of  motion. 

Sagr.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  given  me  great  satis¬ 
faction,  and  indeed  I  find  it  necessary  for  a  complete 
grasp  of  this  principle. 

Salv.  I  will  now  resume  the  reading  of  the  text. 

Theorem  III,  Proposition  III 

If  one  and  the  same  body,  starting  from  rest,  falls 
along  an  inclined  plane  and  also  along  a  vertical^ 
each  having  the  same  height,  the  times  of  descent 


2II 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


will  be  to  each  other  as  the  lengths  of  the  inclined 
plane  and  the  vertical. 

Let  be  the  inclined  plane  and  AB  the  per¬ 
pendicular,  each  having  the  same  vertical  height 
above  the  horizontal,  namely,  BA\  then,  I  say, 
the  time  of  descent  of  one  and  the  same  body 
along  the  plane  AC  bears  a  ratio  to  the  time  of 
fall  along  the  perpendicular  AB.,  which  is  the 
same  as  the  ratio  of  the  length  AC  to  the  length 
AB.  Let  DG,  El  and  LF  be  any  lines  parallel 


to  the  horizontal  CB;  then  it  follows  from  what 
has  preceded  that  a  body  starting  from  A  will 
acquire  the  same  speed  at  the  point  G  as  at  Z>, 
since  in  each  case  the  vertical  fall  is  the  same;  in 
like  manner  the  speeds  at  I  and  E  will  be  the 
same;  so  also  those  at  L  and  F.  And  in  general 
the  speeds  at  the  two  extremities  of  any  parallel 
drawn  from  any  point  on  AB  to  the  correspond¬ 
ing  point  on  will  be  equal. 

Thus  the  two  distances  AC  and  AB  are  trav¬ 
ersed  at  the  same  speed.  But  it  has  already  been 
proved  that  if  two  distances  are  traversed  by  a 
body  moving  with  equal  speeds,  then  the  ratio 
of  the  times  of  descent  will  be  the  ratio  of  the 
distances  themselves;  therefore,  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  along  AC  is  to  that  along  AB  as  the  length 
of  the  plane  AC  is  to  the  vertical  distance  AB. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Sagr.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  above  could 
have  been  proved  clearly  and  briefly  on  the 
basis  of  a  proposition  already  demonstrated, 
namely,  that  the  distance  traversed  in  the  case 
of  accelerated  motion  along  AC  or  AB  is  the 
same  as  that  covered  by  a  uniform  speed  whose 
value  is  one-half  the  maximum  speed,  CB;  the 
two  distances  AC  and  AB  having  been  trav¬ 
ersed  at  the  same  uniform  speed  it  is  evident, 
from  Proposition  I,  that  the  times  of  descent 
will  be  to  each  other  as  the  distances. 

Corollary 

Hence  we  may  infer  that  the  times  of  descent 
along  planes  having  different  inclinations,  but 
the  same  vertical  height  stand  to  one  another 


in  the  same  ratio  as  the  lengths  of  the  planes. 
For  consider  any  plane  AM  extending  from  A 
to  the  horizontal  CB;  then  it  may  be  demon¬ 
strated  in  the  same  manner  that  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  along  AM  is  to  the  time  along  AB  as  the 
distance  AM  is  to  AB;  but  since  the  time  along 
AB  is  to  that  along  AC  as  the  length  AB  is  to 
the  length  AC,  it  follows,  ex  aeqtiali,  that  as 
AM  is  to  so  is  the  time  along  AM  to  the 
time  along  AC. 

Theorem  IV,  Proposition  IV 

The  times  of  descent  along  planes  of  the  same 
length  but  of  different  inclinations  are  to  each  other 
in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  roots  of  their 
heights. 

From  a  single  point  B  draw  the  planes  BA 
and  BCy  having  the  same  length  but  different 
inclinations;  let  AE  and  CD  be  horizontal  lines 
drawn  to  meet  the  perpendicular  BD;  and  let 
BE  represent  the  height  of  the  plane  AB,  and 
BD  the  height  of  BC;  also  let  BI  be  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  to  BD  and  BE;  then  the  ratio  of  BD 


to  BI  is  equal  to  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of 
BD  to  BE.  Now,  I  say,  the  ratio  of  the  times  of 
descent  along  BA  and  BC  is  the  ratio  of  BD  to 
BI;  so  that  the  time  of  descent  along  BA  is  re¬ 
lated  to  the  height  of  the  other  plane  BC,  namely 
BD  as  the  time  along  BC  is  related  to  the  height 
BI.  Now  it  must  be  proved  that  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  along  BA  is  to  that  along  BC  as  the  length 
BD  is  to  the  length  BI. 

Draw  IS  parallel  to  DC;  and  since  it  has  been 
shown  that  the  time  of  fall  along  BA  is  to  that 
along  the  vertical  BE  as  BA  is  to  BE;  and  also 
that  the  time  along  BE  is  to  that  along  BD  as 
BE  is  to  BI;  and  likewise  that  the  time  along 
BD  is  to  that  along  BC  as  BD  is  to  BC,  or  as  BI 
to  BS;  it  follows,  ex  aequali,  that  the  time  along 
BA  is  to  that  along  BC  as  BA  to  BS,  or  BC  to 
BS.  However,  BC  is  to  BS  as  BD  is  to  BI;  hence 
follows  our  proposition. 


212 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


Theorem  V,  Proposition  V 

The  times  of  descent  along  planes  of  different 
length,  slope  and  height  bear  to  one  another  a  ratio 
which  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  ratio  of  the 
lengths  by  the  square  root  of  the  inverse  ratio  of 
their  heights. 

Draw  the  planes  AB  and  AC,  having  differ¬ 
ent  inclinations,  lengths,  and  heights.  My  theo- 
rem  then  is  that  the  ratio 
of  the  time  of  descent 
along  AC  to  that  along 
AB  is  equal  to  the  product 
of  the  ratio  of  to  AB 
by  the  square  root  of  the 
inverse  ratio  of  their 
heights. 

For  let  AD  be  a  per¬ 
pendicular  to  which  are 
drawn  the  horizontal  lines 
BG  and  CD;  also  let  AL 
be  a  mean  proportional  to 
^  the  heights  ^Gand  AD; 
from  the  point  L  draw  a 
horizontal  line  meeting  AC 'm  F;  accordingly 
AF  will  be  a  mean  proportional  between  AC 
and  AE,  Now  since  the  time  of  descent  along 
is  to  that  along  AE  as  the  length  AF  is  to 
AE;  and  since  the  time  along  AE  is  to  that  along 
ABzsAE is  to  AB,  it  is  clear  that  the  time  along 
AC  is  to  that  along  AB  zs  AF  is  to  AB, 

Thus  it  remains  to  be  shown  that  the  ratio  of 
AF  to  AB  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  ratio  of 
AC  to  AB  by  the  ratio  of  AG  to  AL,  which  is 
the  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  roots  of  the 
heights  DA  and  GA.  Now  it  is  evident  that,  if 
we  consider  the  line  AC  'in  connection  with  AF 
and  AB,  the  ratio  of  AF  to  AC  is  the  same  as 
that  of  AL  to  AD,  or  AG  to  AL  which  is  the 
square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  heights  AG  and 
AD;  but  the  ratio  of  AC  to  A B  is  the  ratio  of 
the  lengths  themselves.  Hence  follows  the 
theorem. 


Theorem  VI,  Proposition  VI 

If  from  the  highest  or  lowest  point  in  a  vertical 
circle  there  be  dratvn  any  inclined  planes  meeting 
the  circumference  the  times  of  descent  along  these 
chords  are  each  equal  to  the  other. 

On  the  horizontal  line  GH  construct  a  ver¬ 
tical  circle.  From  its  lowest  point — the  point  of 
tangency  with  the  horizontal — draw  the  diam¬ 
eter  FA  and  from  the  highest  point,  A,  draw 
inclined  planes  to  B  and  C,  any  points  what¬ 
ever  on  the  circumference;  then  the  times  of 
descent  along  these  are  equal.  Draw  BD  and  CE 


A 


perpendicular  to  the  diameter;  make  Ala.  mean 
proportional  between  the  heights  of  the  planes, 
AE  and  AD;  and  since  the  rectangles  FA.AE 
and  FA ,  AD  are  respectively  equal  to  the  squares 
of  AC  and  AB,  while  the  rectangle  FA .  AE  is  to 
the  rectangle  FA .  AD  as  AE  is  to  AD,  it  follows 
that  the  square  of  AC  is  to  the  square  of  AB  as 
the  length  AE  is  to  the  length  AD.  But  since 
the  length  AE  is  to  AD  as  the  square  of  AI  is  to 
the  square  of  AD,  it  follows  that  the  squares  on 
the  lines  AC  and  AB  are  to  each  other  as  the 
squares  on  the  lines  AI  and  AD,  and  hence  also 
the  length  AC  is  to  the  length  AB  as  AI  is  to 
AD.  But  it  has  previously  been  demonstrated 
that  the  ratio  of  the  time  of  descent  along  AC 
to  that  along  AB  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the 
two  ratios  AC  to  AB  and  AD  to  AI;  but  this 
last  ratio  is  the  same  as  that  of  AB  to  AC.  There¬ 
fore,  the  ratio  of  the  time  of  descent  along  AC 
to  that  along  AB  is  the  product  of  the  two  ra¬ 
tios,  AC  to  AB  and  AB  to  AC.  The  ratio  of 
these  times  is  therefore  unity.  Hence  follows 
our  proposition. 

By  use  of  the  principles  of  mechanics  one 
may  obtain  the  same  result,  namely,  that  a  fall¬ 
ing  body  will  require  equal  times  to  traverse 
the  distances  CA  and  DA,  indicated  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  figure.  Lay  off  BA  equal  to  DA,  and  let 
fall  the  perpendiculars  BE  and  DF;  it  follows 
from  the  principles  of  mechanics  that  the  com¬ 
ponent  of  the  momentum  acting  along  the  in¬ 
clined  plane  ABC  is  to  the  total  momentum  as 
BE  is  to  BA;  in  like  manner  the  momentum 
along  the  plane  AD  is  to  its  total  momentum  as 
DF  is  to  DA,  or  to  BA.  Therefore  the  momen¬ 
tum  of  this  same  weight  along  the  plane  DA  is 
to  that  along  the  plane  ABC  as  the  length  DF 
is  to  the  length  BE;  for  this  reason,  this  same 
weight  will  in  equal  times  according  to  the  sec¬ 
ond  proposition  of  the  first  book,  traverse  spaces 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


along  the  planes  CA  and  DA  which  are  to  each 
other  as  the  lengths  BE  and  Z>E.  But  it  can  be 
shown  that  CA  is  to  DA  as  BE  is  to  DF,  Hence 
the  falling  body  will  traverse  the  two  paths  CA 
and  DA  in  equal  times. 

Moreover  the  fact  that  CA  is  to  DA  as  BE 
is  to  DF  may  be  demonstrated  as  follows:  Join 
Cand  D;  through  Z),  draw  the  line  DGL  paral¬ 
lel  to  AF  and  cutting  the  line  AC  in  I;  through 
B  draw  the  line  BHy  also  parallel  to  AF,  Then 
the  angle  ADI  will  be  equal  to  the  angle  DCAy 
since  they  subtend  equal  arcs  LA  and  DA,  and 
since  the  angle  DAC  is  common,  the  sides  of 
the  triangles,  CAD  and  DAL  about  the  com¬ 
mon  angle  will  be  proportional  to  each  other; 
accordingly  as  CA  is  to  DA  so  is  DA  to  lA,  that 
is  as  BA  is  to  lA,  or  as  HA  is  to  GAy  that  is  as 
BE  is  to  DF,  Q.  E.  D. 

The  same  proposition  may  be  more  easily 
demonstrated  as  follows:  On  the  horizontal  line 
AB  draw  a  circle  whose  diameter  DC  is  vertical. 
From  the  upper  end  of  this  diameter  draw  any 
inclined  plane,  DFy  extending  to  meet  the  cir- 


D 


cumference;  then,  I  say,  a  body  will  occupy  the 
same  time  in  falling  along  the  plane  DFas  along 
the  diameter  DC.  For  draw  FG  parallel  to  AB 
and  perpendicular  to  DC;  join  FC;  and  since 
the  time  of  fall  along  DC  is  to  that  along  DG  as 
the  mean  proportional  between  CD  and  GD  is 
to  GD  itself;  and  since  also  DF  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  DC  and  DGy  the  angle  DFC 
inscribed  in  a  semicircle  being  a  right-angle, 
and  FG  being  perpendicular  to  DC,  it  follows 
that  the  time  of  fall  along  DC  is  to  that  along 
DG  as  the  length  FD  is  to  GD.  But  it  has  al¬ 
ready  been  demonstrated  that  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  along  DF  is  to  that  along  DGas  the  length 
DF  is  to  DG;  hence  the  times  of  descent  along 
DF  and  DC  each  bear  to  the  time  of  fall  along 
DG  the  same  ratio;  consequently  they  are  equal. 

In  like  manner  it  may  be  shown  that  if  one 
draws  the  chord  CE  from  the  lower  end  of  the 
diameter,  also  the  line  EH  parallel  to  the  hori¬ 
zon,  and  joins  the  points  E  and  D,  the  time  of 
descent  along  EC,  will  be  the  same  as  that  along 
the  diameter,  DC. 

Corollary  I 

From  this  it  follows  that  the  times  of  descent 
along  all  chords  drawn  through  either  C  or  D 
are  equal  one  to  another. 

Corollary  II 

It  also  follows  that,  if  from  any  one  point 
there  be  drawn  a  vertical  line  and  an  inclined 
one  along  which  the  time  of  descent  is  the 
same,  the  inclined  line  will  be  a  chord  of  a  semi¬ 
circle  of  which  the  vertical  line  is  the  diameter. 

Corollary  III 

Moreover,  the  times  of  descent  along  inclined 
planes  will  be  equal  when  the  vertical  heights 
of  equal  lengths  of  these  planes  are  to  each 
other  as  the  lengths  of  the  planes  themselves; 
thus  it  is  clear  that  the  times  of  descent  along 
CA  and  DAy  in  the  figure  just  before  the  last, 
are  equal,  provided  the  vertical  height  of  AB 
(AB  being  equal  to  AD)y  namely,  BE,  is  to  the 
vertical  height  DF  as  CA  is  to  DA, 

Sagr.  Please  allow  me  to  interrupt  the  lec¬ 
ture  for  a  moment  in  order  that  I  may  clear  up 
an  idea  which  just  occurs  to  me;  one  which,  if 
it  involve  no  fallacy,  suggests  at  least  a  freakish 
and  interesting  circumstance,  such  as  often 
occurs  in  nature  and  in  the  realm  of  necessary 
consequences. 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


If,  from  any  point  fixed  in  a  horizontal  plane, 
straight  lines  be  drawn  extending  indefinitely 
in  all  directions,  and  if  we  imagine  a  point  to 
move  along  each  of  these  lines  with  constant 
speed,  all  starting  from  the  fixed  point  at  the 
same  instant  and  moving  with  equal  speeds, 
then  it  is  clear  that  all  of  these  moving  points 
will  lie  upon  the  circumference  of  a  circle  which 
grows  larger  and  larger,  always  having  the  afore¬ 
said  fixed  point  as  its  centre;  this  circle  spreads 
out  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  the  little 
waves  do  in  the  case  of  a  pebble  allowed  to  drop 
into  quiet  water,  where  the  impact  of  the  stone 
starts  the  motion  in  all  directions,  while  the 
point  of  impact  remains  the  centre  of  these 
ever-expanding  circular  waves.  But  imagine  a 
vertical  plane  from  the  highest  point  of  which 
are  drawn  lines  inclined  at  every  angle  and  ex¬ 
tending  indefinitely;  imagine  also  that  heavy 
particles  descend  along  these  lines  each  with  a 
naturally  accelerated  motion  and  each  with  a 
speed  appropriate  to  the  inclination  of  its  line. 
If  these  moving  particles  are  always  visible, 
what  will  be  the  locus  of  their  positions  at  any 
instant  ?  Now  the  answer  to  this  question  sur¬ 
prises  me,  for  I  am  led  by  the  preceding  theo¬ 
rems  to  believe  that  these  particles  will  always 
lie  upon  the  circumference  of  a  single  circle, 
ever  increasing  in  size  as  the  particles  recede 
farther  and  farther  from  the  point  at  which 
their  motion  began.  To  be  more  definite,  let  A 
be  the  fixed  point  from  which  are  drawn  the 
lines  ^'^Fand  AH  inclined  at  any  angle  whatso¬ 
ever.  On  the  perpendicular  AB  take  any  two 
points  C  and  D  about  which,  as  centres,  circles 
are  described  passing  through  the  point  Ay 
and  cutting  the  inclined  lines  at  the  points  F, 
Hy  By  Ey  Gy  /.  From  the  preceding  theorems  it 


is  clear  that,  if  particles  start,  at  the  same  in¬ 
stant,  from  A  and  descend  along  these  lines, 
when  one  is  at  E  another  will  be  at  G  and  an¬ 
other  at  /;  at  a  later  instant  they  will  be  found 


simultaneously  at  F,  H and  B;  these,  and  indeed 
an  infinite  number  of  other  particles  travelling 
along  an  infinite  number  of  different  slopes  will 
at  successive  instants  always  lie  upon  a  single 
ever-expanding  circle.  The  two  kinds  of  motion 
occurring  in  nature  give  rise  therefore  to  two 
infinite  series  of  circles,  at  once  resembling  and 
differing  from  each  other;  the  one  takes  its  rise 
in  the  centre  of  an  infinite  number  of  concen¬ 
tric  circles;  the  other  has  its  origin  in  the  con¬ 
tact,  at  their  highest  points,  of  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  eccentric  circles;  the  former  are  pro¬ 
duced  by  motions  which  are  equal  and  uniform; 
the  latter  by  motions  which  are  neither  uni¬ 
form  nor  equal  among  themselves,  but  which 
vary  from  one  to  another  according  to  the  slope. 

Further,  if  from  the  two  points  chosen  as 
origins  of  motion,  we  draw  lines  not  only  along 
horizontal  and  vertical  planes  but  in  all  direc¬ 
tions  then  just  as  in  the  former  cases,  beginning 
at  a  single  point  ever-expanding  circles  are  pro¬ 
duced,  so  in  the  latter  case  an  infinite  number 
of  spheres  are  produced  about  a  single  point,  or 
rather  a  single  sphere  which  expands  in  size 
without  limit:  and  this  in  two  ways,  one  with 
the  origin  at  the  centre,  the  other  on  the  sur¬ 
face  of  the  spheres. 

Salv.  The  idea  is  really  beautiful  and  worthy 
of  the  clever  mind  of  Sagredo. 

Simp.  As  for  me,  I  understand  in  a  general 
way  how  the  two  kinds  of  natural  motions  give 
rise  to  the  circles  and  spheres;  and  yet  as  to  the 
production  of  circles  by  accelerated  motion  and 
its  proof,  I  am  not  entirely  clear;  but  the  fact  that 
one  can  take  the  origin  of  motion  either  at  the  in¬ 
most  centre  or  at  the  very  top  of  the  sphere  leads 
one  to  think  that  there  may  be  some  great  mys- 
ter>^  hidden  in  these  true  and  wonderful  results, 
a  mystery'  related  to  the  creation  of  the  universe 
(which  is  said  to  be  spherical  in  shape),  and  re¬ 
lated  also  to  the  seat  of  the  first  cause. 

Salv.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  agreeing  with 
you.  But  profound  considerations  of  this  kind 
belong  to  a  higher  science  than  ours.  We  must 
be  satisfied  to  belong  to  that  class  of  less  worthy 
workmen  who  procure  from  the  quarry'  the 
marble  out  of  w  hich,  later,  the  gifted  sculptor 
produces  those  masterpieces  which  lay  hidden 
in  this  rough  and  shapeless  exterior.  Now',  if 
you  please,  let  us  proceed. 

Theorem  VII,  Proposition  VII 

If  the  heights  of  two  inclined  planes  are  to  each 
other  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  squares  of  their 
lengthsy  bodies  starting  from  rest  will  traverse  these 
planes  in  equal  times. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


Take  two  planes  of  different  lengths  and  dif¬ 
ferent  inclinations,  AE  and  AB,  whose  heights 
are  ^Fand  AD:  let  AF  be  to  AD  as  the  square 


A 


of  AE  is  to  the  square  of  AB:  then,  I  say,  that  a 
body,  starting  from  rest  at  A^  will  traverse  the 
planes  AE  and  AB  in  equal  times.  From  the 
vertical  line,  draw  the  horizontal  parallel  lines 
EF  and  DB,  the  latter  cutting  AE  at  G.  Since 
FA  :  DA=^A^  :  and  since  FA  :  DA= 

EA  :  GAy  it  follows  that  EA  :  GA=EA^ 

Hence  BA  is  a  mean  proportional  between  EA 
and  GA,  Now  since  the  time  of  descent  along 
AB  bears  to  the  time  along  AG  the  same  ratio 
which  AB  bears  to  AG  and  since  also  the  time 
of  descent  along  AG  is  to  the  time  along  AE  as 
/IG  is  to  a  mean  proportional  between  AG  and 
AEy  that  is,  to  ABy  it  follows,  ex  aequaliy  that 
the  time  along  AB  is  to  the  time  along  AE  as 
AB  is  to  itself.  Therefore  the  times  are  equal. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Theorem  VIII,  Proposition  VIII 

The  limes  of  descent  along  all  inclined  planes 
which  intersect  one  and  the  same  vertical  circlcy 
either  at  its  highest  or  lowest  pointy  are  equal  to  the 
time  of  fall  along  the  vertical  diameter;  for  those 
planes  which  fall  short  of  this  diameter  the  times 


A 


are  shorter;  for  planes  which  cut  this  diameter y  the 
times  are  longer. 

Let  AB  be  the  vertical  diameter  of  a  circle 
which  touches  the  horizontal  plane.  It  has  al¬ 
ready  been  proven  that  the  times  of  descent 
along  planes  drawn  from  either  end,  A  or  By  to 
the  circumference  are  equal.  In  order  to  show 
that  the  time  of  descent  along  the  plane  DF 
which  falls  short  of  the  diameter  is  shorter,  we 
may  draw  the  plane  DB  which  is  both  longer 
and  less  steeply  inclined  than  DF\  whence  it 
follows  that  the  time  along  DF  is  less  than  that 
along  DB  and  consequently  along  AB,  In  like 
manner,  it  is  shown  that  the  time  of  descent 
along  CO  which  cuts  the  diameter  is  greater: 
for  it  is  both  longer  and  less  steeply  inclined 
than  CB,  Hence  follows  the  theorem. 

Theorem  IX,  Proposition  IX 

If  from  any  point  on  a  horizontal  line  two  planeSy 
inclined  at  any  angle,  are  drawn,  and  if  they  are 
cut  by  a  line  which  ma^es  with  them  angles  alter¬ 
nately  equal  to  the  angles  between  these  planes  and 
the  horizontal,  then  the  times  required  to  traverse 
those  portions  of  the  plane  ctU  off  by  the  aforesaid 
line  are  equal. 

Through  the  point  C  on  the  horizontal  line 
Xy  draw  two  planes  CD  and  CE  inclined  at  any 
angle  whatever:  at  any  point  in  the  line  CD  lay 
off  the  angle  CDF  equal  to  the  angle  XCE\  let 
the  line  DF  cut  CE  at  F  so  that  the  angles  CDF 
and  CFD  are  alternately  equal  to  XCE  and 
LCD;  then,  I  say,  the  times  of  descent  over  CD 


Fig.  62 


and  CF  are  equal.  Now  since  the  angle  CDF 
is  equal  to  the  angle  XCE  by  construction,  it 
is  evident  that  the  angle  CFD  must  be  equal 
to  the  angle  DCL,  For  if  the  common  angle 
DCF  be  subtracted  from  the  three  angles  of 
the  triangle  CDF,  together  equal  to  two  right 
angles,  (to  which  are  also  equal  all  the  angles 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


which  can  be  described  about  the  point  C  on 
the  lower  side  of  the  line  LX)  there  remain  in 
the  triangle  two  angles,  CDF  and  CFDy  equal 
to  the  two  angles  XCE  and  LCD;  but,  by  hy¬ 
pothesis,  the  angles  CDF  and  XCE  are  equal; 
hence  the  remaining  angle  CFD  is  equal  to  the 
remainder  DCL,  Take  CE  equal  to  CD;  from 
the  points  Z)  and  E  draw  DA  and  EB  perpen¬ 
dicular  to  the  horizontal  line  XL;  and  from  the 
point  C  draw  CG  perpendicular  to  DF.  Now 
since  the  angle  CDG  is  equal  to  the  angle  ECB 
and  since  DGC  and  CBE  are  right  angles,  it 
follows  that  the  triangles  CDG  and  CBE  are 
equiangular;  consequently  DC  :  CG  =  CE  :  EB. 
But  DC  is  equal  to  CE,  and  therefore  CG  is 
equal  to  EB.  Since  also  the  angles  at  C  and  at 
Ay  in  the  triangle  DAC,  are  equal  to  the  angles 
at  F  and  G  in  the  triangle  CCE,  we  have 
CD  :  DA  =  FC  :  CG  and,  permiitandoy  DC  : 
CF=DA  :  CG=DA  :  BE.  Thus  the  ratio  of 
the  heights  of  the  equal  planes  CD  and  CE  is 
the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  lengths  DC  and 
CF.  Therefore,  by  Corollary  I  of  Prop.  VI, 
the  times  of  descent  along  these  planes  will  be 
equal.  Q.  e.  d. 

An  alternative  proof  is  the  following:  Draw 
FS  perpendicular  to  the  horizontal  line  AS. 
Then,  since  the  triangle  CSF  is  similar  to  the 
triangle  DGCy  we  have  SF  :  EC=  GC  :  CD; 
and  since  the  triangle  CFG  is  similar  to  the  tri¬ 
angle  DCAy  we  have  FC  :  CC=  CD  :  DA. 
Hence,  ex  aequaliy  SF  :  CC=  CG  :  DA.  There¬ 
fore  CG  is  a  mean  proportional  between  SF 


Fig.  63 


and  DAy  while  DA  :  SF=DA^  :  CG’^*  Again 
since  the  triangle  ACD  is  similar  to  the  tri¬ 
angle  CGFy  we  have  DA  :  DC=  GC  :  CF  and, 
pertmitandoy  DA  :  CG=DC  :  CF:  also  D/E  : 
CG^=D(^  :  CE^.  But  it  has  been  shown  that 
57^2  .  .  sp  Therefore  DC^  :  0^^= 

DA  :  FS.  Hence  from  the  above  Prop.  VII, 
since  the  heights  DA  and  FS  of  the  planes  CD 


and  CF  are  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the 
lengths  of  the  planes,  it  follows  that  the  times 
of  descent  along  these  planes  will  be  equal. 

Theorem  X,  Proposition  X 

The  times  of  descent  along  inclined  planes  of  the 
same  heighty  but  of  different  slopey  are  to  each 
other  as  the  lengths  of  these  planes;  and  this  is  true 
whether  the  motion  starts  from  rest  or  whether  it 
is  preceded  by  a  fall  from  a  constant  height. 

Let  the  paths  of  descent  be  along  ABC  and 
ABD  to  the  horizontal  plane  DC  so  that  the 
falls  along  BD  and  BC  are  preceded  by  the  fall 
along  AB;  then,  I  say,  that  the  time  of  descent 
along  BD  is  to  the  time  of  descent  along  BC  as 
the  length  BD  is  to  BC.  Draw  the  horizontal 
line  AF  and  extend  DB  until  it  cuts  this  line  at 
F;  let  EE  be  a  mean  proportional  between  DF 
and  FB;  draw  EG  parallel  to  DC;  then  AO 
will  be  a  mean  proportional  between  CA  and 
AB.  If  now  we  represent  the  time  of  fall  along 
AB  by  the  length  ABy  then  the  time  of  descent 
along  FB  will  be  represented  by  the  distance 
FB;  so  also  the  time  of  fall  through  the  entire 
distance  AC  will  be  represented  by  the  mean 
proportional  AO  :  and  for  the  entire  distance 
ED  by  EE.  Hence  the  time  of  fall  along  the  re¬ 
mainder,  BCy  will  be  represented  by  EO,  and 


that  along  the  remainder,  ED,  by  EE;  but 
since  BE  :  B0=  BD  :  BCy  it  follows,  if  we  al¬ 
low  the  bodies  to  fall  first  along  AB  and  EE,  or, 
what  is  the  same  thing,  along  the  common 
stretch  ABy  that  the  times  of  descent  along  ED 
and  BC  will  be  to  each  other  as  the  lengths  ED 
and  EC. 

But  we  have  previously  proven  that  the  time 
of  descent,  from  rest  at  E,  along  ED  is  to  the 
time  along  EC  in  the  ratio  which  the  length 
ED  bears  to  EC.  Hence  the  times  of  descent 
along  different  planes  of  constant  height  are  to 
each  other  as  the  lengths  of  these  planes,  wheth¬ 
er  the  motion  starts  from  rest  or  is  preceded  by 
a  fall  from  a  constant  height.  Q.  e,  d. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


Theorem  XI,  Proposition  XI 

If  a  plane  be  divided  into  any  two  parts  and  if  mo¬ 
tion  along  it  starts  froin  rest^  then  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  along  the  first  part  is  to  the  time  of  descent 
along  the  remainder  as  the  length  of  this  first  part 
is  to  the  excess  of  a  mean  proportional  between  this 
first  part  and  the  entire  length  over  this  first  part. 

Let  the  fall  take  place,  from  rest  at 
through  the  entire  distance  AB  which  is  divid- 
ed  at  any  point  C\  also  let  AF  be  a  mean 
proportional  between  the  entire  length  BA 
and  the  first  part  AC\  then  CF  will  denote 
the  excess  of  the  mean  proportional  FA 
over  the  first  part  AC.  Now,  I  say,  the  time 
of  descent  along  AC  will  be  to  the  time  of 
-  C  subsequent  fall  through  CB  as  the  length 
AC  is  to  CF.  This  is  evident,  because  the 
time  along  is  to  the  time  along  the  en- 
tire  distance  AB  as  AC  is  to  the  mean  pro¬ 
portional  AF.  Therefore,  dividendo,  the 
f  ®  time  along  AC  will  be  to  the  time  along  the 
Eig-  remainder  CB  as  AC  is  to  CF.  If  we  agree 
^5  to  represent  the  time  along  AC  by  the 
length  AC  then  the  time  along  CB  will  be  rep¬ 
resented  by  CF.  Q.  E.  D. 

In  case  the  motion  is  not  along  the  straight 
line  ACB  but  along  the  broken  line  ACD  to  the 


horizontal  line  BDy  and  if  from  F  we  draw  the 
horizontal  line  FE,  it  may  in  like  manner  be 
proved  that  the  time  along  AC  is  to  the  time 
along  the  inclined  line  CD  as  AC  is  to  CE.  For 
the  time  along  is  to  the  time  along  CB  as 
is  to  CF;  but  it  has  already  been  shown 
that  the  time  along  CF,  after  the  fall  through 
the  distance  ACy  is  to  the  time  along  CZ),  after 
descent  through  the  same  distance  ACy  as  CF 
is  to  CDy  or,  as  CF  is  to  CE\  therefore,  ex 
aeqtialiy  the  time  along  AC  will  be  to  the  time 
along  CD  as  the  length  AC  is  to  the  length  CE. 

Theorem  XII,  Proposition  XII 

If  a  vertical  plane  and  any  inclined  plane  are  lim¬ 
ited  by  two  horizontalsy  and  if  we  ta^e  mean  pro¬ 


portionals  between  the  lengths  of  these  planes  and 
those  portions  of  them  which  lie  between  their 
point  of  intersection  and  the  upper  horizontaly 
then  the  time  of  fall  along  the  perpendicular  bears 
to  the  tune  required  to  traverse  the  upper  part  of 
the  perpendicular  plus  the  time  required  to  traverse 
the  lotver  part  of  the  intersecting  plane  the  same 
ratio  which  the  entire  length  of  the  vertical  bears 
to  a  length  which  is  the  sum  of  the  mean  pro¬ 
portional  on  the  vertical  plus  the  excess  of  the  en¬ 
tire  length  of  the  inclined  plane  over  its  mean  pro¬ 
portional. 

Let  AF  and  CD  be  two  horizontal  planes 
limiting  the  vertical  plane  AC  and  the  inclined 
plane  DF;  let  the  two  last-mentioned  planes 
intersect  at  F.  Let  AR  be  a  mean  proportional 
between  the  entire  vertical  AC  and  its  upper 
part  AB;  and  let  FS  be  a  mean  proportional 
between  FD  and  its  upper  part  FF.  Then,  I  say, 
the  time  of  fall  along  the  entire  vertical  path 


AG  bears  to  the  time  of  fall  along  its  upper 
portion  AB  plus  the  time  of  fall  along  the  lower 
part  of  the  inclined  plane,  namely,  FD,  the 
same  ratio  which  the  length  AC  bears  to  the 
mean  proportional  on  the  vertical,  namely,  ARy 
plus  the  length  SD  which  is  the  excess  of  the 
entire  plane  DF  over  its  mean  proportional  FS. 

Join  the  points  R  and  S  giving  a  horizontal 
line  RS.  Now  since  the  time  of  fall  through  the 
entire  distance  AC  is  to  the  time  along  the  por¬ 
tion  AB  as  CA  is  to  the  mean  proportional  AR 
it  follows  that,  if  we  agree  to  represent  the  time 
of  fall  through  ^C  by  the  distance  ACy  the 
time  of  fall  through  the  distance  AB  will  be 
represented  by  AR;  and  the  time  of  descent 
through  the  remainder,  FC,  will  be  represented 
by  RC.  But,  if  the  time  along  AC  is  taken  to  be 
equal  to  the  length  ACy  then  the  time  along 
FD  will  be  equal  to  the  distance  FD;  and  we 
may  likewise  infer  that  the  time  of  descent 
along  FD,  when  preceded  by  a  fall  along  FF  or 
ABy  is  numerically  equal  to  the  distance  DS. 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


218 

Therefore  the  time  required  to  fall  along  the 
path  AC  is  equal  to  AR  plus  RC\  while  the  time 
of  descent  along  the  broken  line  ABD  will  be 
equal  to  AR  plus  SD.  Q.  e.  d. 

The  same  thing  is  true  if,  in  place  of  a  verti¬ 
cal  plane,  one  takes  any  other  plane,  as  for  in¬ 
stance  N0\  the  method  of  proof  is  also  the 
same. 

Problem  I,  Proposition  XIII 

Given  a  perpendicular  line  of  limited  lengthy  it  is 
required  to  find  a  plane  having  a  vertical  height 
equal  to  the  given  perpendicular  and  so  inclined 
that  a  body,  having  fallen  from  rest  along  the 
perpendicular,  will  make  its  descent  along  the 
inclined  plane  in  the  same  time  which  it  occupied 
in  falling  through  the  given  perpendicular. 

Let  AB  denote  the  given  perpendicular:  pro¬ 
long  this  line  to  C  making  BC  equal  to  AB,  and 
draw  the  horizontal  lines  CE  and  AG,  It  is  re¬ 
quired  to  draw  a  plane  from  B  to  the  horizontal 
line  CE  such  that  after  a  body  starting  from 
rest  at  A  has  fallen  through  the  distance  AB,  it 
will  complete  its  path  along  this  plane  in  an 
equal  time.  Lay  off  CD  equal  to  BCy  and  draw 
the  line  BD,  Construct  the  line  BE  equal  to  the 
sum  of  BD  and  DC;  then,  Lsay,  BE  is  the  re¬ 
quired  plane.  Prolong  EB  till  it  intersects  the 
horizontal  AG  at  G,  Let  GF  be  a  mean  propor¬ 


tional  between  GE  and  GB;  then  EF  :  FB= 
EG  :  GFy  :GP=EG: 

GB,  But  EG  is  twice  GB;  hence  the  square  of 
EF  is  twice  the  square  of  FB;  so  also  is  the 
square  of  DB  twice  the  square  of  BC,  Conse¬ 
quently  EF  :  FB=DB  :  BC,  and  componendo  et 
permutandoy  EB  :  DBA-BC=BF  :  BC,  But  EB 
^  DBA^BC;  hence  BF=BC=BA,  If  we  agree 
that  the  length  AB  shall  represent  the  time  of 
fall  along  the  line  AB,  then  GB  will  represent 
the  time  of  descent  along  GBy  and  GF  the  time 
along  the  entire  distance  GE;  therefore  BF  will 
represent  the  time  of  descent  along  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  these  paths,  namely,  BE,  after  fall  from 
G  or  from  A,  Q.  e.  f. 


Problem  II,  Proposition  XIV 

Given  an  inclined  plane  and  a  perpendicular  pass¬ 
ing  through  ity  to  find  a  length  on  the  tipper  part 
of  the  perpendicular  through  tvhich  a  body  will 
fall  from  rest  in  the  same  time  which  is  required 
to  traverse  the  inclined  plane  after  fall  through  the 
vertical  distance  just  determined. 

Let  AC  be  the  inclined  plane  and  DB  the 
perpendicular.  It  is  required  to  find  on  the  ver¬ 
tical  AD  a  length  which  will  be  traversed  by  a 
body,  falling  from  rest,  in  the  same  time  which 
is  needed  by  the  same  body  to  tra\erse  the 
plane  ACaher  the  aforesaid  fall.  Draw  the  hori¬ 
zontal  CB;  lay  off  AE  such  that  BA -^2 AC  : 
AC=AC  :  AEy  and  lay  off  AR  such  that  BA  : 
AC=EA  :  AR,  From  R  draw  RX  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  DB;  then,  I  say,  X  is  the  point  sought. 
For  since  BA-\r^AC  :  AC— AC  :  AEy  it  fol¬ 
lows,  dividendoy  that  BA-\-AC  :  AC=CE  : 
AE,  And  since  BA  :  AC=EA  :  AR,  we  have, 
componendoy  BA-\-AC  :  AC=ER  :  RA,  But 
BA+CA  :  AC=CE  :  AEy  hence  CE  :  EA= 
ER  :  RA=  sum  of  the  antecedents:  sum  of  the 
consequents=  CR  ;  RE,  Thus  RE  is  seen  to  be 


a  mean  proportional  between  CR  and  RA, 
Moreover,  since  it  has  been  assumed  that  BA  : 
AC=EA  :  ARy  and  since  by  similar  triangles 
we  have  BA  :  AC=XA  :  AR,  it  follows  that 
EA  :  AR=XA  :  AR,  Hence  EA  and  XA  are 
equal.  But  if  we  agree  that  the  time  of  fall 
through  RA  shall  be  represented  by  the  length 
RAy  then  the  time  of  fall  along  RC  will  be  rep¬ 
resented  by  the  length  RE  which  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  RA  and  RC;  likewise  AE 
will  represent  the  time  of  descent  along  AC 
after  descent  along  RA  or  along  AX,  But  the 
time  of  fall  through  XA  is  represented  by  the 
length  XAy  while  RA  represents  the  time 
through  RA,  But  it  has  been  shown  that  XA 
and  AE  are  equal.  Q.  e.  f. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


Problem  III,  Proposition  XV 

Given  a  vertical  line  and  a  plane  inclined  to  it,  it  is 
required  to  find  a  length  on  the  vertical  line  below 
its  point  of  intersection  which  will  be  traversed  in 
the  same  time  as  the  inclined  plane,  each  of  these 
motions  having  been  preceded  by  a  fall  through 
the  given  vertical  line. 

Let  AB  represent  the  vertical  line  and  BC 
the  inclined  plane;  it  is  required  to  find  a  length 
on  the  perpendicular  below  its  point  of  inter¬ 
section,  which  after  a  fall  from  A  will  be  trav¬ 
ersed  in  the  same  time  which  is  needed  for  BC 
after  an  identical  fall  from  A,  Draw  the  hori¬ 
zontal  AD,  intersecting  the  prolongation  of 
CB  at  D',  let  DE  be  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  CD  and  DB  ',  lay  ofFBF  equal  to  BE\  also 
let  AG  he  3i  third  proportional  to  BA  and  AF. 
Then,  I  say,  BG  is  the  distance  which  a  body, 
after  falling  through  AB,  will  traverse  in  the 


same  time  which  is  needed  for  the  plane  BC 
after  the  same  preliminary  fall.  For  if  we  as¬ 
sume  that  the  time  of  fall  along  AB  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  AB,  then  the  time  for  DB  will  be 
represented  by  DB,  And  since  DE  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  BD  and  DC,  this  same 
DE  will  represent  the  time  of  descent  along  the 
entire  distance  DC  while  BE  will  represent  the 
time  required  for  the  difference  of  these  paths, 
namely,  BC,  provided  in  each  case  the  fall  is 
from  rest  at  D  or  at  A,  In  like  manner,  we  may 
infer  that  BF  represents  the  time  of  descent 
through  the  distance  BG  after  the  same  pre¬ 
liminary  fall;  but  BF  is  equal  to  BE,  Hence  the 
problem  is  solved. 

Theorem  XIII,  Proposition  XVI 

If  a  limited  inclined  plane  and  a  limited  vertical 
line  are  drawn  from  the  same  point,  and  if  the 
time  required  for  a  body,  starting  from  rest,  to 


219 

traverse  each  of  these  is  the  same,  then  a  body  fall¬ 
ing  from  any  higher  altitude  will  traverse  the  in¬ 
clined  plane  in  less  time  than  is  required  for  the 
vertical  line. 

Let  EB  be  the  vertical  line  and  CE  the  in¬ 
clined  plane,  both  starting  from  the  common 
point  E,  and  both  traversed  in  equal  times  by  a 
body  starting  from  rest  at  E\  extend  the  vertical 
line  upwards  to  any  point  A,  from  which  falling 
bodies  are  allowed  to  start.  Then,  I  say,  that 
after  the  fall  through  AE,  the  inclined  plane  EC 
will  be  traversed  in  less  time  than  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  EB,  Join  CB,  draw  the  horizontal  AD, 
and  prolong  CE  backwards  until  it  meets  the 
latter  in  D\  let  DF  be  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  CD  and  DE  while  AG  is  made  a  mean 
proportional  between  BA  and  AE,  Draw  FG 
and  DG\  then  since  the  times  of  descent  along 
EC  and  EB,  starting  from  rest  at  E,  are  equal,  it 
follows,  according  to  Corollary  II  of  Proposi¬ 


tion  VI  that  the  angle  at  C  is  a  right  angle;  but 
the  angle  at  A  is  also  a  right  angle  and  the  angles 
at  the  vertex  E  are  equal;  hence  the  triangles 
AED  and  CEB  are  equiangular  and  the  sides 
about  the  equal  angles  are  proportional;  hence 
BE  :  EC=DE  :  EA.  Consequently  the  rectan¬ 
gle  BE, FA  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  CE.ED; 
and  since  the  rectangle  CZ) .  DE  exceeds  the  rec¬ 
tangle  CE,ED  by  the  square  of  ED,  and 
since  the  rectangle  BA .  AE  exceeds  the  rectan¬ 
gle  BE.  EA  by  the  square  of  EA,  it  follows  that 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


220 

the  excess  of  the  rectangle  CD.DE  over  the 
rectangle  BA,AE,  or  what  is  the  same  thing, 
the  excess  of  the  square  of  ED  over  the  square 
oi  AG,  will  be  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  square 
of  DE  over  the  square  of  AE,  which  excess  is 
equal  to  the  square  of  AD,  Therefore  FD'^= 
Hence  DF  is  equal  to  DG, 
and  the  angle  DGF  is  equal  to  the  angle  DFG 
while  the  angle  EGF  is  less  than  the  angle  EFG, 
and  the  opposite  side  EF  is  less  than  the  oppo¬ 
site  side  EG,  If  now  we  agree  to  represent  the 
time  of  fall  through  AE  by  the  length  AE,  then 
the  time  along  DE  will  be  represented  by  DE, 
And  since  AG  is  a  mean  proportional  between 
BA  and  AE,  if  follows  that  AG  will  represent 
the  time  of  fall  through  the  total  distance  AB, 
and  the  difference  EG  will  represent  the  time 
of  fall,  from  rest  at  A,  through  the  difference  of 
path  EB, 

In  like  manner  EF  represents  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  along  EC,  starting  from  rest  at  D  or  fall¬ 
ing  from  rest  at  A,  But  it  has  been  shown  that 
EF  is  less  than  EG;  hence  follows  the  theorem. 

Corollary 

From  this  and  the  preceding  proposition,  it 
is  clear  that  the  vertical  distance  covered  by  a 
freely  falling  body,  after  a  preliminary  fall,  and 
during  the  time-interval  required  to  traverse  an 
inclined  plane,  is  greater  than  the  length  of  the 
inclined  plane,  but  less  than  the  distance  trav¬ 
ersed  on  the  inclined  plane  during  an  equal 
time,  without  any  preliminary  fall.  For  since 
we  have  just  shown  that  bodies  falling  from  an 
elevated  point  A  will  traverse  the  plane  EC  in 
Fig.  71  in  a  shorter  time  than  the  vertical  EB,  it 
is  evident  that  the  distance  along  EB  which  will 
be  traversed  during  a  time  equal  to  that  of  de¬ 
scent  along  EC  will  be  less  than  the  whole  of 
EB,  But  now  in  order  to  show  that  this  vertical 


distance  is  greater  than  the  length  of  the  in¬ 
clined  plane  EC,  we  reproduce  Fig.  70  of  the 
preceding  theorem  in  which  the  vertical  length 
BG  is  traversed  in  the  same  time  as  BC  after  a 
preliminary  fall  through  AB.  That  BG  is  greater 
than  BC  is  shown  as  follows:  since  BE  and  FB 
are  equal  while  BA  is  less  than  BD,  it  follows 
that  FB  will  bear  to  BA  a  greater  ratio  than  EB 
bears  to  BD;  and,  cotnponendo,  FA  will  bear  to 
BA  a  greater  ratio  than  ED  to  DB',  but  FA  : 
AB=  GF  :  FB  (since  AF  \s  a  mean  proportional 
between  BA  and  AG)  and  in  like  manner  ED  : 
BD=  CE  :  EB,  Hence  GB  bears  to  BF  a  greater 
ratio  than  CB  bears  to  BE;  therefore  GB  is 
greater  than  BC, 

Problem  IV,  Proposition  XVII 

Gwen  a  vertical  line  and  an  inclined  plane,  it  is  re¬ 
quired  to  lay  off  a  distance  along  the  given  plane 
which  will  be  traversed  by  a  body,  after fall  along 
the  perpendicular,  in  the  same  time-interval  which 
is  needed  for  this  body  to  fall from  rest  through  the 
given  perpendicular. 

Let  AB  be  the  vertical  line  and  BE  the  in¬ 
clined  plane.  The  problem  is  to  determine  on 
BE  a  distance  such  that  a  body,  after  falling 


A  D 


through  AB,  will  traverse  it  in  a  time  equal  to 
that  required  to  traverse  the  perpendicular  AB 
itself,  starting  from  rest. 

Draw  the  horizontal  /fZ)and  extend  the  plane 
until  it  meets  this  line  in  D,  Lay  off  FB  equal  to 
5y^;and  choose  the  point  Esuch  that  FZ)  ;  FD= 
DF  :  DE.  Then,  I  say,  the  time  of  descent  along 
BE,  after  fall  through  AB,  is  equal  to  the  time 
of  fall,  from  rest  at  A,  through  AB,  For,  if  we 
assume  that  the  length  AB  represents  the  time 
of  fall  through  AB,  then  the  time  of  fall  through 
DB  will  be  represented  by  the  time  DB;  and 
since  BD  :  FD=DF  :  DE,  it  follows  that  DF 
will  represent  the  time  of  descent  along  the  en¬ 
tire  plane  DE  while  BF  represents  the  time 
through  the  portion  BE  starting  from  rest  at  D; 
but  the  time  of  descent  along  BE  after  the  pre¬ 
liminary  descent  along  DB  is  the  same  as  that 


221 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


after  a  preliminary  fall  through  AB.  Hence  the 
time  of  descent  along  BE  after  AB  will  be  BF 
which  of  course  is  equal  to  the  time  of  fall  through 
from  rest  at  q.  e.  f. 

Problem  V,  Proposition  XVIII 

Given  the  distance  through  which  a  body  will  fall 
vertically  from  rest  during  a  given  timedntervaly 
and  given  also  a  smaller  time- interval,  it  is  required 
to  locate  another  [equal]  vertical  distance  which  the 
body  will  traverse  during  this  given  smaller  tune- 
interval. 

Let  the  vertical  line  be  drawn  through  A,  and 
on  this  line  lay  off  the  distance  AB  which  is 
traversed  by  a  body  falling  from  rest  at  A,  dur¬ 
ing  a  time  which  may  also  be  represented  by 
AB.  Draw  the  horizontal  line  CBE,  and  on  it 
lay  off  BG  to  represent  the  given  interval  of 


A 


time  which  is  shorter  than  AB.  It  is  required  to 
locate,  in  the  perpendicular  above  mentioned, 
a  distance  which  is  equal  to  AB  and  which  will 
be  described  in  a  time  equal  to  BC.  Join  the 
points  A  and  C;  then,  since  BC<BA,  it  follows 
that  the  angle  BAG <ang\c  BCA.  Construct  the 
angle  CAE  equal  to  BCA  and  let  E  be  the  point 
where  AE  intersects  the  horizontal  line;  draw 
ED  at  right  angles  to  AE,  cutting  the  vertical 
at  D;  lay  off  DF  equal  to  BA.  Then,  I  say,  that 
FD  is  that  portion  of  the  vertical  which  a  body 
starting  from  rest  at  A  will  traverse  during  the 
assigned  time-interval  BC.  For,  if  in  the  right- 
angled  triangle  AED  a  perpendicular  be  drawn 
from  the  right-angle  at  E  to  the  opposite  side 
AD,  then  AE  will  be  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  DA  and  AB  while  BE  will  be  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  BD  and  BA,  or  between  FA 
and  AB  (seeing  that  FA  is  equal  to  DB);  and 
since  it  has  been  agreed  to  represent  the  time  of 
fall  through  AB  by  the  distance  AB,  it  follows 


that  AE,  or  EC,  will  represent  the  time  of  fall 
through  the  entire  distance  AD,  while  EB  will 
represent  the  time  through  AF.  Consequently 
the  remainder  BC  will  represent  the  time  of  fall 
through  the  remaining  distance  FD.  q.  e.  f. 

Problem  VI,  Proposition  XIX 

Given  the  distance  through  which  a  body  falls  in  a 
vertical  line from  rest  and  given  also  the  time  of  fall, 
it  is  required  to  find  the  time  in  which  the  same 
body  will,  later,  traverse  an  equal  distance  chosen 
anywhere  in  the  same  vertical  line. 

On  the  vertical  line  AB,  lay  off  equal  to 
the  distance  fallen  from  rest  at  A,  also  locate  at 
random  an  equal  distance  DB.  Let  the  time  of 


AC.  It  is  required  to  find  the  time  necessary  to 
traverse  DB  after  fall  from  rest  at  A.  About  the 
entire  length  AB  describe  the  semicircle  AEB; 
from  C  draw  CE  perpendicular  to  AB;  join  the 
points  A  and  E;  the  line  AE  will  be  longer  than 
EC;  lay  off  EF  equal  to  EC.  Then,  I  say,  the  dif¬ 
ference  FA  will  represent  the  time  required  for 
fall  through  DB.  For  since  AE  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  BA  and  AC  and  since  AC 
represents  the  time  of  fall  through  AC,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  AE  will  represent  the  time  through 
the  entire  distance  AB.  And  since  CE  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  DA  and  AC  (seeing  that 
DA=BC)  it  follows  that  CE,  that  is,  EF,  will 
represent  the  time  of  fall  through  AD.  Hence 
the  difference  AF  will  represent  the  time  of  fall 
through  the  difference  DB.  q.  e.  d. 

Corollary 

Hence  it  is  inferred,  that  if  the  time  of  fall 
from  rest  through  any  given  distance  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  that  distance  itself,  then  the  time  of 
fall,  after  the  given  distance  has  been  increased 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


222 

“S  by  a  certain  amount,  will  be  represented  by 
the  excess  of  the  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  the  increased  distance  and  the  origi¬ 
nal  distance  over  the  mean  proportional 
■  ^  between  the  original  distance  and  the  in¬ 
crement.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  we  agree 
that  AB  represents  the  time  of  fall,  from 
rest  at  through  the  distance  AB,  and  that 
AS  is  the  increment,  the  time  required  to 
traverse  ^45,  after  fall  through  SA,  will  be 
..B  the  excess  of  the  mean  proportional  be- 
Fig.  tween  SB  and  BA  over  the  mean  proper- 
7^  tional  between  BA  and  AS. 

Problem  VII,  Proposition  XX 

Gh’en  any  distance  tvhatever  and  a  portion  of  it 
laid  off  from  the  point  at  which  motion  begins,  it  is 
required  to  find  another  portion  which  lies  at  the 
othei'  end  of  the  distance  and  which  is  traversed  in 
the  same  time  as  the  first  given  portion. 

Let  the  given  distance  be  CB  and  let  CD  be 
that  part  of  it  which  is  laid  off  from  the  begin- 
ning  of  motion.  It  is  required  to  find  another 
part,  at  the  end  B,  which  is  traversed  in 
the  same  time  as  the  assigned  portion  CD. 
•D  Let  BA  be  a  mean  proportional  between 
BC  and  CD;  also  let  CE  be  a  third  pro¬ 
portional  to  BC  and  CA.  Then,  I  say,  EB 
will  be  the  distance  which,  after  fall  from 
^  C,  will  be  traversed  in  the  same  time  as  CD 
itself.  For  if  we  agree  that  CB  shall  repre¬ 
sent  the  time  through  the  entire  distance 
CB,  then  BA  (which,  of  course,  is  a  mean 
A  proportional  between  BC  and  CD)  will 
represent  the  time  along  CD;  and  since  CA 
is  a  mean  proportional  between  BC  and  CE, 
g  it  follows  that  CA  will  be  the  time  through 
CE;  but  the  total  length  CB  represents  the 
time  through  the  total  distance  CB.  There¬ 
fore  the  difference  BA  will  be  the  time  along 
the  difference  of  distances,  EE,  after  falling  from 
C;  but  this  same  BA  was  the  time  of  fall  through 
CD.  Consequently  the  distances  CD  and  EB  are 
traversed,  from  rest  at  in  equal  times.  Q.  e.  f. 

Theorem  XIV,  Proposition  XXI 

If,  on  the  path  of  a  body  falling  vertically  from 
rest,  one  lays  off  a  portion  which  is  traversed  in  any 
time  you  please  and  ivhose  upper  terminus  coin¬ 
cides  with  the  point  where  the  motion  begins,  and  if 
this fall  is followed  by  a  motion  defected  along  any 
inclined  plane,  then  the  space  traversed  along  the 
inclined  plane,  during  a  time-interval  equal  to  that 
occupied  in  the  previous  vertical  fall,  will  be  greater 
than  twice,  and  less  than  three  times,  the  length  of 
the  vertical  fall. 


Let  AB  be  a  vertical  line  drawn  downwards 
from  the  horizontal  line  AE,  and  let  it  repre¬ 
sent  the  path  of  a  body  falling  from  rest  at  A; 
choose  any  portion  AC  of  this  path.  Through  C 
draw  any  inclined  plane,  CG,  along  which  the 
motion  is  con  tinned  after  fall  through  AC.  Then, 
I  say,  that  the  distance  traversed  along  this  plane 
CG,  during  the  time-interv^al  equal  to  that  of 
the  fall  through  AC,  is  more  than  twice,  but  less 


than  three  times,  this  same  distance  AC.  Let  us 
lay  off  CF  equal  to  AC,  and  extend  the  plane 
GC  until  it  meets  the  horizontal  in  E;  choose  G 
such  that  CE  :  EF=  EF  :  EG.  If  now  we  assume 
that  the  time  of  fall  along  AC  is  represented  by 
the  length  AC,  then  CE  will  represent  the  time 
of  descent  along  CE,  while  CF,  or  CA,  will  rep¬ 
resent  the  time  of  descent  along  CG.  It  now  re¬ 
mains  to  be  shown  that  the  distance  CG  is  more 
than  twice,  and  less  than  three  times,  the  dis¬ 
tance  CA  itself.  Since  CE  :  EF=  EF  :  EG,  it 
follows  that  CE  :  EF=  CF  :  FG;  but  EC<EF; 
therefore  CF  will  be  less  than  FG  and  GC  will 
be  more  than  twice  FC,  or  AC.  Again  since 
FE<2EC  (for  EC  is  greater  than  CA,  or  CF), 
we  have  GF  less  than  twice  FC,  and  also  GC  less 
than  three  times  CF,  or  CA.  q.  e.  d. 

This  proposition  may  be  stated  in  a  more 
general  form;  since  what  has  been  proven  for 
the  case  of  a  vertical  and  inclined  plane  holds 
equally  well  in  the  case  of  motion  along  a 
plane  of  any  inclination  followed  by  motion 
along  any  plane  of  less  steepness,  as  can  be  seen 
from  the  adjoining  figure.  The  method  of  proof 
is  the  same. 

Problem  VIII,  Proposition  XXII 

Given  tivo  unequal  time- intervals,  also  the  distance 
through  which  a  body  will  fall  along  a  vertical  line, 
from  rest,  during  the  shorter  of  these  inten^als,  it  is 
required  to  pass  through  the  highest  point  of  this 
vertical  line  a  plane  so  inclined  that  the  time  of  de- 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


scent  along  it  will  be  equal  to  the  longer  of  the  given 
intervals. 

Let  A  represent  the  longer  and  B  the  shorter 
of  the  two  unequal  time-intervals,  also  let  CD 
represent  the  length  of  the  vertical  fall,  from 


223 

CE,  Extend  the  plane  at  O,  and  lay  off  CF,  FG 
and  GO  equal  to  RN,  NM,  and  M/ respectively. 
Then,  I  say,  the  time  along  the  inclined  plane 
CO,  after  fall  through  AC,  is  equal  to  the  time 
of  fall,  from  rest  at  A,  through  AC,  For  since 


Fig.  79 


rest,  during  the  time  B,  It  is  required  to  pass 
through  the  point  C  a  plane  of  such  a  slope  that 
it  will  be  traversed  in  the  time  A, 

Draw  from  the  point  C  to  the  horizontal  a 
line  CX  of  such  a  length  that  B  :  A=  CD  :  CX, 
It  is  clear  that  CX  is  the  plane  along  which  a 
body  will  descend  in  the  given  time  A,  For  it 
has  been  shown  that  the  time  of  descent  along  an 
inclined  plane  bears  to  the  time  of  fall  through 
its  vertical  height  the  same  ratio  which  the  length 
of  the  plane  bears  to  its  vertical  height.  There¬ 
fore,  the  time  along  CX  is  to  the  time  along  CD 
as  the  length  CX  is  to  the  length  CD,  that  is,  as 
the  time-interval  A  is  to  the  time-interval  B: 
but  B  is  the  time  required  to  traverse  the  verti¬ 
cal  distance,  CD,  starting  from  rest;  therefore  A 
is  the  time  required  for  descent  along  the  plane 
CX, 

Problem  IX,  Proposition  XXIII 

Given  the  time  employed  by  a  body  in  falling 
through  a  certain  distance  along  a  vertical  line,  it  is 
required  to  pass  through  the  lower  terminus  of  this 
vertical  fall,  a  plane  so  inclined  that  this  body  will, 
after  its  vertical  fall,  traverse  on  this  plane,  during 
a  time-interval  equal  to  that  of  the  vertical  fall,  a 
distance  equal  to  any  assigned  distance,  provided 
this  assigned  distance  is  more  than  twice  and  less 
than  three  times  the  vertical  fall. 

Let  AS  be  any  vertical  line,  and  let  AC  de¬ 
note  both  the  length  of  the  vertical  fall,  from 
rest  at  A,  and  also  the  time  required  for  this 
fall.  Let  IR  be  a  distance  more  than  twice  and 
less  than  three  times,  AC.  It  is  required  to  pass 
a  plane  through  the  point  C  so  inclined  that  a 
body,  after  fall  through  AC,  will,  during  the 
time  AC,  traverse  a  distance  equal  to  IR.  Lay 
off  RN and  NM  each  equal  to  AC.  Through  the 
point  C,  draw  a  plane  CE  meeting  the  horizon¬ 
tal,  AE,  at  such  a  point  that  IM  :  MN=AC  : 


OG  :  GF=  FC  :  CE,  it  follows,  componendo, 
that  OF  :  FG=OF  :  FC=^FE  :  EC,  and  since 
an  antecedent  is  to  its  consequent  as  the  sum  of 
the  antecedents  is  to  the  sum  of  the  consequents, 

1  M  N  R 


we  have  OE  :  EF=  EF  :  EC.  Thus  EF  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  OE  and  EC.  Having 
agreed  to  represent  the  time  of  fall  through  AC 
by  the  length  AC  it  follows  that  EC  will  repre¬ 
sent  the  time  along  EC,  and  EF  the  time  along 
the  entire  distance  EO,  while  the  difference  CF 
will  represent  the  time  along  the  difference  CO; 
but  CF=CA;  therefore  the  problem  is  solved. 
For  the  time  CA  is  the  time  of  fall,  from  rest  at 
A,  through  CA  while  CF  (which  is  equal  to  CA) 
is  the  time  required  to  traverse  CO  after  descent 
along  EC  or  after  fall  through  AC.  q.  e.  f. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  also,  that  the  same  solu¬ 
tion  holds  if  the  antecedent  motion  takes  place, 
not  along  a  vertical,  but  along  an  inclined  plane. 
This  case  is  illustrated  in  the  following  figure 
where  the  antecedent  motion  is  along  the  in¬ 
clined  plane  AS  underneath  the  horizontal  AE. 
The  proof  is  identical  with  the  preceding. 

Scholium 

On  careful  attention,  it  will  be  clear  that,  the 
nearer  the  given  line  IR  approaches  to  three 
times  the  length  AC,  the  nearer  the  inclined 


224 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


I  M  N  R 


Fig.  8 1 


plane,  CO,  along  which  the  second  motion  takes 
place,  approaches  the  perpendicular  along  which 
the  space  traversed,  during  the  time  AC,  will 
be  three  times  the  distance  AC.  For  if  IR  be 
taken  nearly  equal  to  three  times  AC,  then  IM 
will  be  almost  equal  to  MN;  and  since,  by  con¬ 
struction,  IM  :  MN=^AC  :  CE,  it  follows  that 
CE  is  but  little  greater  than  CA:  consequently 
the  point  E  will  lie  near  the  point  A,  and  the 
lines  CO  and  CS,  forming  a  very  acute  angle, 
will  almost  coincide.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if 
the  given  line,  IR,  be  only  the  least  bit  longer 
than  twice  AC,  the  line  IM  will  be  very  short; 
from  which  it  follows  that  AC  will  be  very  small 
in  comparison  with  CE  which  is  now  so  long 
that  it  almost  coincides  with  the  horizontal  line 
drawm  through  C.  Hence  we  can  infer  that,  if, 
after  descent  along  the  inclined  plane  AC  of  the 
adjoining  figure,  the  motion  is  continued  along 
a  horizontal  line,  such  as  CT,  the  distance  trav¬ 
ersed  by  a  body,  during  a  time  equal  to  the 
time  of  fall  through  AC,  will  be  exactly  twdce 
the  distance  AC.  The  argument  here  employed 
is  the  same  as  the  preceding.  For  it  is  clear,  since 
OE  :  EF=EF  :  EC,  that  FC  measures  the  time 
of  descent  along  CO.  But,  if  the  horizontal  line 
TC  which  is  twice  as  long  as  CA,  be  divided  in¬ 
to  tw'o  equal  parts  at  V  then  this  line  must  be 
extended  indefinitely  in  the  direction  of  X  be¬ 
fore  it  will  intersect  the  line  AE produced;  and 
accordingly,  the  ratio  of  the  infinite  length  TX 
to  the  infinite  length  VX  is  the  same  as  the  ratio 
of  the  infinite  distance  VX  to  the  infinite  dis¬ 
tance  CX. 

The  same  result  may  be  obtained  by  another 
method  of  approach,  namely,  by  returning  to 
the  same  line  of  argument  which  was  employed 
in  the  proof  of  the  first  proposition.  Let  us  con¬ 
sider  the  triangle  ABC,  which,  by  lines  drawn 
parallel  to  its  base,  represents  for  us  a  velocity 
increasing  in  proportion  to  the  time;  if  these 
lines  are  infinite  in  number,  just  as  the  points  in 
the  line  AC  are  infinite  or  as  the  number  of  in¬ 
stants  in  any  interval  of  time  is  infinite,  they 


will  form  the  area  of  the  triangle.  Let  us  now 
suppose  that  the  maximum  velocity  attained — 
that  represented  by  the  line  BC — to  be  con¬ 
tinued,  without  acceleration  and  at  constant 
value  through  another  interval  of  time  equal  to 
the  first.  From  these  velocities  will  be  built  up, 
in  a  similar  manner,  the  area  of  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  ADBC,  which  is  twice  that  of  the  triangle 
ABC;  accordingly,  the  distance  traversed  with 
these  velocities  during  any  given  interval  of 
time  wdll  be  twice  that  traversed  with  the  veloc¬ 
ities  represented  by  the  triangle  during  an  equal 
interval  of  time.  But  along  a 
horizontal  plane  the  motion  is 
uniform  since  here  it  experi¬ 
ences  neither  acceleration  nor 
retardation;  therefore  we  con¬ 
clude  that  thedistance  CDtrav- 
ersed  during  a  time-interval 
equal  to  AC  is  twice  the  dis¬ 
tance  AC;  for  the  latter  is  cov¬ 
ered  by  a  motion,  starting 
from  rest  and  increasing  in 
speed  in  proportion  to  the  par-  Fig.  82 
allel  lines  in  the  triangle,  while  the  former  is 
traversed  by  amotion  represented  by  the  paral¬ 
lel  lines  of  the  parallelogram  which,  being  also 
infinite  in  number,  yield  an  area  twice  that  of 
the  triangle. 

Furthermore,  we  may  remark  that  any  veloc¬ 
ity  once  imparted  to  a  moving  body  will  be  rig¬ 
idly  maintained  as  long  as  the  external  causes  of 
acceleration  or  retardation  are  removed,  a  con¬ 
dition  which  is  found  only  on  horizontal  planes; 
for  in  the  case  of  planes  which  slope  downwards 
there  is  already  present  a  cause  of  acceleration, 
while  on  planes  sloping  upward  there  is  retarda¬ 
tion;  from  this  it  follows  that  motion  along  a 
horizontal  plane  is  perpetual;  for,  if  the  velocity 
be  uniform,  it  cannot  be  diminished  or  slack¬ 
ened,  much  less  destroyed.  Further,  although 
any  velocity  which  a  body  may  have  acquired 
through  natural  fall  is  permanently  maintained 
so  far  as  its  own  nature  is  concerned,  yet  it  must 
be  remembered  that  if,  after  descent  along  a 
plane  inclined  downwards,  the  body  is  deflected 
to  a  plane  inclined  upward,  there  is  already  ex¬ 
isting  in  this  latter  plane  a  cause  of  retardation; 
for  in  any  such  plane  this  same  body  is  subject 
to  a  natural  acceleration  downwards.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  we  have  here  the  superposition  of  two 
different  states,  namely,  the  velocity  acquired 
during  the  preceding  fall  which  if  acting  alone 
would  carry  the  body  at  a  uniform  rate  to  in¬ 
finity,  and  the  velocity  which  results  from  a 
natural  acceleration  downwards  common  to  all 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


bodies.  It  seems  altogether  reasonable,  there¬ 
fore,  if  we  wish  to  trace  the  future  history  of  a 
body  which  has  descended  along  some  inclined 
plane  and  has  been  deflected  along  some  plane 
inclined  upwards,  for  us  to  assume  that  the  max¬ 
imum  speed  acquired  during  descent  is  perma¬ 
nently  maintained  during  the  ascent.  In  the 
ascent,  however,  there  supervenes  a  natural  in¬ 
clination  downwards,  namely,  a  motion  which, 
starting  from  rest,  is  accelerated  at  the  usual 
rate.  If  perhaps  this  discussion  is  a  little  obscure, 
the  following  figure  will  help  to  make  it  clearer. 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  descent  has  been 
made  along  the  downward  sloping  plane  ABy 
from  which  the  body  is  deflected  so  as  to  con¬ 
tinue  its  motion  along  the  upward  sloping  plane 
BC;  and  first  let  these  planes  be  of  equal  length 
and  placed  so  as  to  make  equal  angles  with  the 
horizontal  line  GH.  Now  it  is  well  known  that 
a  body,  starting  from  rest  at  Ay  and  descending 
along  ABy  acquires  a  speed  which  is  proportional 


to  the  time,  which  is  a  maximum  at  By  and 
which  is  maintained  by  the  body  so  long  as  all 
causes  of  fresh  acceleration  or  retardation  are 
removed;  the  acceleration  to  which  I  refer  is 
that  to  which  the  body  would  be  subject  if  its 
motion  were  continued  along  the  plane  AB 
extended,  while  the  retardation  is  that  which 
the  body  would  encounter  if  its  motion  were 
deflected  along  the  plane  BC  inclined  upwards; 
but,  upon  the  horizontal  plane  GHy  the  body 
would  maintain  a  uniform  velocity  equal  to  that 
which  it  had  acquired  at  B  after  fall  from  A; 
moreover,  this  velocity  is  such  that,  during  an 
interval  of  time  equal  to  the  time  of  descent 
through  ABy  the  body  will  traverse  a  horizontal 
distance  equal  to  twice  AB,  Now  let  us  imagine 
this  same  body  to  move  with  the  same  uniform 
speed  along  the  plane  BC  so  that  here  also  dur¬ 
ing  a  time-interval  equal  to  that  of  descent 
along  ABy  it  will  traverse  along  BC  extended  a 
distance  twice  AB;  but  let  us  suppose  that,  at 
the  very  instant  the  body  begins  its  ascent  it  is 
subjected,  by  its  very  nature,  to  the  same  in¬ 
fluences  which  surrounded  it  during  its  descent 
from  A  along  ABy  namely,  it  descends  from  rest 
under  the  same  acceleration  as  that  which  was 


225 

effective  in  ABy  and  it  traverses,  during  an  equal 
interval  of  time,  the  same  distance  along  this 
second  plane  as  it  did  along  AB;  it  is  clear  that, 
by  thus  superposing  upon  the  body  a  uniform 
motion  of  ascent  and  an  accelerated  motion  of 
descent,  it  will  be  carried  along  the  plane  BC 
as  far  as  the  point  C  where  these  two  velocities 
become  equal. 

If  now  we  assume  any  two  points  D  and  E, 
equally  distant  from  the  vertex  By  we  may  then 
infer  that  the  descent  along  BD  takes  place  in 
the  same  time  as  the  ascent  along  BE.  Draw  DF 
parallel  to  BC;  we  know  that,  after  descent 
along  ADy  the  body  will  ascend  along  DF;  or, 
if,  on  reaching  jD,  the  body  is  carried  along  the 
horizontal  DEy  it  will  reach  E  with  the  same 
momentum  with  which  it  left  D;  hence  from  E 
the  body  will  ascend  as  far  as  C,  proving  that 
the  velocity  at  E  is  the  same  as  that  at  D. 

From  this  we  may  logically  infer  that  a  body 
which  descends  along  any  inclined  plane  and 
continues  its  motion  along  a  plane  inclined  up¬ 
wards  will,  on  account  of  the  momentum  ac¬ 
quired,  ascend  to  an  equal  height  above  the 
horizontal;  so  that  if  the  descent  is  along  AB 
the  body  vdll  be  carried  up  the  plane  EC  as  far 
as  the  horizontal  line  ACD:  and  this  is  true 
whether  the  inclinations  of  the  planes  are  the 
same  or  different,  as  in  the  case  of  the  planes 
AB  and  BD.  But  by  a  previous  postulate  the 
speeds  acquired  by  fall  along  variously  inclined 


planes  having  the  same  vertical  height  are  the 
same.  If  therefore,  the  planes  EB  and  BD  have 
the  same  slope,  the  descent  along  EB  will  be 
able  to  drive  the  body  along  BD  as  far  as  D; 
and  since  this  propulsion  comes  from  the  speed 
acquired  on  reaching  the  point  E,  it  follows 
that  this  speed  at  E  is  the  same  whether  the 
body  has  made  its  descent  along  AB  or  EB. 
Evidently,  then  the  body  will  be  carried  up 
BD  whether  the  descent  has  been  made  along 
AB  or  along  EB.  The  time  of  ascent  along  BD 
is  however  greater  than  that  along  EC,  just  as 
the  descent  along  EB  occupies  more  time  than 
that  along  AB;  moreover  it  has  been  demon¬ 
strated  that  the  ratio  between  the  lengths  of 
these  times  is  the  same  as  that  between  the 
lengths  of  the  planes.  We  must  next  discover 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


226 

what  ratio  exists  between  the  distances  trav¬ 
ersed  in  equal  times  along  planes  of  different 
slope,  but  of  the  same  elevation,  that  is,  along 
planes  which  are  included  between  the  same 
parallel  horizontal  lines.  This  is  done  as  follows: 

Theorem  XV,  Proposition  XXIV 

Given  two  parallel  horizontal  planes  and  a  vertical 
line  connecting  them;  given  also  an  inclined  plane 
passing  through  the  lower  extremity  of  this  vertical 
line;  then^  if  a  body  fall  freely  along  the  vertical 
line  and  have  its  motion  reflected  along  the  in¬ 
clined  plane,  the  distance  which  it  ivill  traverse 
along  this  plane,  during  a  time  equal  to  that  of  the 
vertical  fall,  is  greater  than  once  hut  less  than  Uvice 
the  vertical  line. 

Let  BCand  HG  be  the  two  horizontal  planes, 
connected  by  the  perpendicular  AE;  also  let 
EB  represent  the  inclined  plane  along  which 


the  motion  takes  place  after  the  body  has  fallen 
along  ^Eand  has  been  reflected  from  E  towards 
B,  Then,  I  say,  that,  during  a  time  equal  to  that 
of  fall  along  AE,  the  body  will  ascend  the  in¬ 
clined  plane  through  a  distance  which  is  greater 
than  AE  but  less  than  twice  AE.  Lay  off  ED 
equal  to  AE  and  choose  F  so  that  EB  :  BD— 
BD  :  BF.  First  we  shall  show  that  Fis  the  point 
to  which  the  moving  body  will  be  carried  after 
reflection  from  E  towards  B  during  a  time  equal 
to  that  of  fall  along  AE;  and  next  we  shall  show 
that  the  distance  EF  is  greater  than  EA  but  less 
than  twice  that  quantity. 

Let  us  agree  to  represent  the  time  of  fall  along 
AE  by  the  length  AE,  then  the  time  of  descent 
along  BE,  or  what  is  the  same  thing,  ascent 
along  EF  will  be  represented  by  the  distance  EB. 

Now,  since  DB  is  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  EB  and  BF,  and  since  BE  is  the  time  of 
descent  for  the  entire  distance  BE,  it  follows 
that  BD  will  be  the  time  of  descent  through 
BF,  while  the  remainder  DE  will  be  the  time  of 
descent  along  the  remainder  FE,  But  the  time 
of  descent  along  the  fall  from  rest  at  B  is  the 
same  as  the  time  of  ascent  from  E  to  F  after  re¬ 
flection  from  E  with  the  speed  acquired  during 
fall  either  through  AE  or  BE.  Therefore,  DE 
represents  the  time  occupied  by  the  body  in 


passing  from  E  to  F,  after  fall  from  A  to  E  and 
after  reflection  along  EB.  But  by  construction 
ED  is  equal  to  AE.  This  concludes  the  first  part 
of  our  demonstration. 

Now  since  the  whole  of  EB  is  to  the  whole  of 
BD  as  the  portion  DB  is  to  the  portion  BF,  we 
have  the  whole  of  EB  is  to  the  whole  of  BD  as 
the  remainder  ED  is  to  the  remainder  DF;  but 
EB>BD  and  hence  ED>DF,  and  EF  is  less 
than  twice  DE  or  AE.  q.  e.  d. 

The  same  is  true  when  the  initial  motion  oc¬ 
curs,  not  along  a  perpendicular,  but  upon  an 
inclined  plane:  the  proof  is  also  the  same  pro¬ 
vided  the  upward  sloping  plane  is  less  steep, 
i.e.,  longer,  than  the  downward  sloping  plane. 

Theorem  XVI,  Proposition  XXV 

If  descent  along  any  inclined  plane  is  followed  by 
motion  along  a  horizontal  plane,  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  along  the  inclined  plane  bears  to  the  time 
required  to  traverse  any  assigned  length  of  the  hori¬ 
zontal  plane  the  same  ratio  which  twice  the  length 
of  the  inclined  plane  bears  to  the  given  horizontal 
length. 

Let  CB  be  any  horizontal  line  and  AB  an  in¬ 
clined  plane;  after  descent  along  AB  let  the  mo¬ 
tion  continue  through  the  assigned  horizontal 


distance  BD.  Then,  I  say,  the  time  of  descent 
along  AB  bears  to  the  time  spent  in  traversing 
BD  the  same  ratio  which  twice  AB  bears  to  BD. 
For,  lay  off  BC  equal  to  twice  AB  then  it  fol¬ 
lows,  from  a  previous  proposition,  that  the  time 
of  descent  along  AB  is  equal  to  the  time  re¬ 
quired  to  traverse  BC;  but  the  time  along  BC  is 
to  the  time  along  DB  as  the  length  CB  is  to  the 
length  BD.  Hence  the  time  of  descent  along 
AB  is  to  the  time  along  BD  as  twice  the  dis¬ 
tance  AB  is  to  the  distance  BD.  q.  e.  d. 

Problem  X,  Proposition  XXVT 

Given  a  vertical  height  joining  two  horizontal par¬ 
allel  lines;  given  also  a  distance  greater  than  once 
and  less  than  twice  this  vertical  height,  it  is  required 
to  pass  through  the  foot  of  the  given  perpendicular 
an  inclined  plane  such  that,  after  fall  through  the 
given  vertical  height,  a  body  whose  motion  is  de¬ 
flected  along  the  plane  tvill  traverse  the  assigned 
distance  in  a  time  equal  to  the  time  of  vertical fall. 

Let  AB  be  the  vertical  distance  separating 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


two  parallel  horizontal  lines  AO  and  BC;  also 
let  FE  be  greater  than  once  and  less  than  twice 
BA,  The  problem  is  to  pass  a  plane  through  5, 
extending  to  the  upper  horizontal  line,  and 
such  that  a  body,  after  having  fallen  from  A  to 
J5,  will,  if  its  motion  be  deflected  along  the  in¬ 
clined  plane,  traverse  a  distance  equal  to  EF  in 
a  time  equal  to  that  of  fall  along  AB.  Lay  off 
ED  equal  to  AB;  then  the  remainder  DF  will 
be  less  than  AB  since  the  entire  length  EF  is 
less  than  twice  this  quantity;  also  lay  off  DI 
equal  to  DFy  and  choose  the  point  X  such  that 
El :  ID=DF  :  FX;  from  5,  draw  the  plane  BO 
equal  in  length  to  EX,  Then,  I  say,  that  the 
plane  BO  is  the  one  along  which,  after  fall 
through  ABy  a  body  will  traverse  the  assigned 
distance  FE  in  a  time  equal  to  the  time  of  fall 
through  AB,  Lay  off  BR  and  RS  equal  to  ED 
and  DF  respectively;  then  since  El  :  ID=DF  : 
FXy  we  have,  componendoy  ED  :D1=DX: 
XF=  ED  :  DF=  EX :  XD=  BO :  OR=  RO :  OS, 


X  F  D  I  E 

Fig.  87 

If  we  represent  the  time  of  fall  along  AB  by  the 
length  ABy  then  OB  will  represent  the  time  of 
descent  along  05,  and  RO  will  stand  for  the 
time  along  OSy  while  the  remainder  BR  will 
represent  the  time  required  for  a  body  starting 
from  rest  at  O  to  traverse  the  remaining  dis¬ 
tance  SB,  But  the  time  of  descent  along  SB 
starting  from  rest  at  O  is  equal  to  the  time  of 
ascent  from  5  to  5  after  fall  through  AB,  Hence 
BO  is  that  plane,  passing  through  5,  along  which 
a  body,  after  fall  through  ABy  will  traverse  the 
distance  BSy  equal  to  the  assigned  distance  EFy 
in  the  time-interval  BR  or  BA,  q,  e.  f. 

Theorem  XVII,  Proposition  XXVII 

If  a  body  descends  along  two  inclined  planes  of 
different  lengths  but  of  the  same  vertical  heighty  the 
distance  which  it  will  traverse y  in  the  lower  part  of 
the  longer  planey  during  a  timeAnterval  equal  to 
that  of  descent  over  the  shorter  planey  is  equal  to 
the  length  of  the  shorter  plane  plus  a  portion  of  it 
to  which  the  shorter  plane  bears  the  same  ratio 
tvhich  the  longer  plane  bears  to  the  excess  of  the 
longer  over  the  shorter  plane. 

Let  AC  he  the  longer  plane,  ABy  the  shorter, 
and  AD  the  common  elevation;  on  the  lower 


part  of  AC  lay  off  CE  equal  to  AB,  Choose  F 
such  that  CA  :  AE=  CA  :  CA  -  AB=  CE  :  EF, 
Then,  I  say,  that  FC  is  that  distance  which  will, 
after  fall  from  A  be  traversed  during  a  time- 

A 


interval  equal  to  that  required  for  descent  along 
AB,  For  since  CA  :  AE=  CE  :  EFy  it  follows 
that  the  remainder  EA:  the  remainder  AF— 
CA  :  AE,  Therefore  AE  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  AC  and  AF,  Accordingly,  if  the  length 
AB  is  employed  to  measure  the  time  of  fall 
along  ABy  then  the  distance  AC  will  measure 
the  time  of  descent  through  AC;  but  the  time 
of  descent  through  AF  is  measured  by  the 
length  AEy  and  that  through  FC  by  EC,  Now 
EC=  AB;  and  hence  follows  the  proposition. 

Problem  XI,  Proposition  XXVIII 

Let  AG  be  any  horizontal  line  touching  a 
circle;  let  AB  be  the  diameter  passing  through 
the  point  of  contact;  and  let  AE  and  EB  repre¬ 
sent  any  two  chords.  The  problem  is  to  deter¬ 
mine  what  ratio  the  time  of  fall  through  AB 


Fig.  89 


bears  to  the  time  of  descent  over  both  AE  and 
EB.  Extend  BE  till  it  meets  the  tangent  at  G, 
and  draw  AF  so  as  to  bisect  the  angle  BAE, 
Then,  I  say,  the  time  through  AB  is  to  the  sum 
of  the  times  along  AE  and  EB  as  the  length  AE 
is  to  the  sum  of  the  lengths  AE  and  EF.  For 
since  the  angle  FAB  is  equal  to  the  angle  FAEy 
while  the  angle  EAG  is  equal  to  the  angle  ABF 
it  follows  that  the  entire  angle  GAF  is  equal  to 
the  sum  of  the  angles  FAB  and  ABF,  But  the 


228  GALILEO 

angle  GFA  is  also  equal  to  the  sum  of  these  two 
angles.  Hence  the  length  GF  is  equal  to  the 
length  GA;  and  since  the  rectangle  BG.GE  is 
equal  to  the  square  of  GA,  it  will  also  be  equal 
to  the  square  of  GF,  ox  BG  :  GF=  GF  :  GE,  If 
now  we  agree  to  represent  the  time  of  descent 
along  AE  by  the  length  AE,  then  the  length 
GE  will  represent  the  time  of  descent  along 
GE,  while  GF  will  stand  for  the  time  of  descent 
through  the  entire  distance  GB;  so  also  EF  will 
denote  the  time  through  EB  after  fall  from  G 
or  from  A  along  AE,  Consequently  the  time 
along  AE,  or  AB,  is  to  the  time  along  AE  and 
EB  as  the  length  AE  is  to  AE-^-EF,  q.  e.  d, 

A  shorter  method  is  to  lay  off  GF  equal  to 
GA,  thus  making  GF  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  BG  and  GE,  The  rest  of  the  proof  is  as 
above. 

Theorem  XVIII,  Proposition  XXIX 

Given  a  limited  horizontal  line,  at  one  end  of 
which  is  erected  a  limited  vertical  line  whose  length 
is  equal  to  one-half  the  given  horizontal  line;  then 
a  body,  falling  through  this  given  height  and  hav¬ 
ing  its  motion  deflected  into  a  horizontal  direction, 
will  traverse  the  given  horizontal  distance  and  ver¬ 
tical  line  in  less  time  than  it  will  any  other  vertical 
distance  plus  the  given  horizontal  distance, 

tE 

o 

•A 

•N 


DC  B 


CD  B 

Fig.  90 

Let  BC  be  the  given  distance  in  a  horizontal 
plane;  at  the  end  B  erect  a  perpendicular,  on 
which  lay  off  BA  equal  to  half  BC,  Then,  I  say, 
that  the  time  required  for  a  body,  starting  from 
rest  at  A,  to  traverse  the  two  distances,  AB  and 
BC,  is  the  least  of  all  possible  times  in  which 
this  same  distance  BC  together  with  a  vertical 
portion,  whether  greater  or  less  than  AB,  can 
be  traversed. 

Lay  off  EB  greater  than  AB,  as  in  the  first 
figure,  and  less  than  AB,  as  in  the  second.  It 
must  be  shown  that  the  time  required  to  trav¬ 
erse  the  distance  EB  plus  BC  is  greater  than 
that  required  for  AB  plus  BC,  Let  us  agree  that 


GALILEI 

the  length  AB  shall  represent  the  time  along 
AB,  then  the  time  occupied  in  traversing  the 
horizontal  portion  BC  will  also  be  AB,  seeing 
that  BC=  2AB;  consequently  the  time  required 
for  both  AB  and  BC  will  be  twice  AB.  Choose 
the  point  O  such  that  EB  :  BO=BO  :  BA, 
then  BO  will  represent  the  time  of  fall  through 
EB,  Again  lay  off  the  horizontal  distance  BD 
equal  to  twice  BE;  whence  it  is  clear  that  BO 
represents  the  time  along  BD  after  fall  through 
EB.  Select  a  point  N  such  that  DB  :  BC—  EB  : 
BA=OB  :  BN,  Now  since  the  horizontal  mo¬ 
tion  is  uniform  and  since  OB  is  the  time  occu¬ 
pied  in  traversing  BD,  after  fall  from  E,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  NB  will  be  the  time  along  BC  after 
fall  through  the  same  height  EB,  Hence  it  is 
clear  that  OB  plus  BN  represents  the  time  of 
traversing  EB  plus  BC;  and,  since  twice  BA  is 
the  time  along  AB  plus  BC,  it  remains  to  be 
shown  that  0B-^BN>2BA, 

But  since  EB  :  BO=BO  :  BA,  it  follows  that 
EB  :  BA—OB^  :  BA^,  Moreover  since  EB  : 
BA=OB  :  BN  it  follows  that  OB  :  BN=  OB^  : 
'BA\  But  OB  :  BN=  (OB  :  BA)  (BA  :  BN), 
and  therefore  AB  :  BN=  OB  :  BA,  that  is,  BA 
is  a  mean  proportional  between  BO  and  BN, 
Consequently  0B-\-BN>2BA,  q.  e.  d. 

Theorem  XIX,  Proposition  XXX 

A  perpendicular  is  let  fall  from  any  point  in  a 
horizontal  line;  it  is  required  to  pass  through 
any  other  point  in  this  same  horizontal  line  a 
plane  which  shall  cut  the  perpendicular  and 
N  along  which  a  body  will  descend  to  the  perpen- 
dicular  in  the  shortest  possible  time.  Such  a 
O  plane  will  cut  from  the  perpendicular  a  portion 
E  equal  to  the  distance  of  the  assumed  point  in 
the  horizontal  from  the  upper  end  of  the  per¬ 
pendicular. 

Let  be  any  horizontal  line  and  B  any 
point  in  it  from  which  is  dropped  the  verti¬ 
cal  line  BD,  Choose  any  point  C  in  the  hori¬ 
zontal  line  and  lay  off,  on  the  vertical,  the  dis¬ 
tance  BE  equal  to  BC;  join  C  and  E,  Then,  I  say, 
that  of  all  inclined  planes  that  can  be  passed 
through  C,  cutting  the  perpendicular,  CE'is  that 
one  along  which  the  descent  to  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  is  accomplished  in  the  shortest  time.  For, 
draw  the  plane  CjF  cutting  the  vertical  above  E, 
and  the  plane  CG  cutting  the  vertical  below  E; 
and  draw  IK,  a  parallel  vertical  line,  touching  at 
C  a  circle  described  with  BCas  radius.  Let  EK  be 
drawn  parallel  to  CF,  and  extended  to  meet  the 
tangent,  after  cutting  the  circle  at  L.  Now  it  is 
clear  that  the  time  of  fall  along  LE  is  equal  to 
the  time  along  CE;  but  the  time  along  KE  is 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


229 


greater  than  along  LE;  therefore  the  time  along 
KE  is  greater  than  along  CE,  But  the  time 
along  KE  is  equal  to  the  time  along  CF,  since 
they  have  the  same  length  and  the  same  slope; 
and,  in  like  manner,  it  follows  that  the  planes 
CG  and  /F,  having  the  same  length  and  the 
same  slope,  will  be  traversed  in  equal  times. 
Also,  since  HE<IE,  the  time  along  HE  will  be 
less  than  the  time  along  IE,  Therefore,  also  the 
time  along  CE  (equal  to  the  time  along  HE), 
will  be  shorter  than  the  time  along  IE, 

Q.  E.  D. 

Theorem  XX,  Proposition  XXXI 

If  a  straight  line  is  inclined  at  any  angle  to  the 
horizontal  and  if  from  any  assigned  point  in  the 
horizontal,  a  plane  of  quickest  descent  is  to  he 
drawn  to  the  inclined  line,  that  plane  will  be  the 
one  which  bisects  the  angle  contained  between  two 
lines  drawn  from  the  given  point,  one  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to  the  horizontal  line,  the  other  perpendicular 
to  the  inclined  line. 

Let  CD  be  a  line  inclined  at  any  angle  to  the 
horizontal  AB;  and  from  any  assigned  point  A 
in  the  horizontal  draw  AC  perpendicular  to 
AB,  and  AE  perpendicular  to  CD;  draw  EA  so 
as  to  bisect  the  angle  CAE,  Then,  I  say,  that  of 
all  the  planes  which  can  be  drawn  through  the 
point  A,  cutting  the  line  CD  at  any  points 
whatsoever  AE  is  the  one  of  quickest  descent. 
Draw  EG  parallel  to  AE;  the  alternate  angles 
GEA  and  EAE  will  be  equal;  also  the  angle 
EAE  is  equal  to  the  angle  EAG,  Therefore  the 
sides  GE  and  GA  of  the  triangle  EGA  are  equal. 
Accordingly,  if  we  describe  a  circle  about  G  as 


centre,  with  GA  as  radius,  this  circle  will  pass 
through  the  point  F,  and  will  touch  the  hori¬ 
zontal  at  the  point  A  and  the  inclined  line  at  F; 
for  GEC  is  a  right  angle,  since  GE  and  AE  are 
parallel.  It  is  clear  therefore  that  all  lines  drawn 
from  A  to  the  inclined  line,  with  the  single  ex¬ 
ception  of  EA,  will  extend  beyond  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  circle,  thus  requiring  more  time 
to  traverse  any  of  them  than  is  needed  for  EA, 

,  Q.  E.  D. 

Lemma 

If  two  circles  one  lying  within  the  other  are  in  con¬ 
tact,  and  if  any  straight  line  be  drawn  tangent  to 
the  inner  circle,  cutting  the  outer  circle,  and  if  three 
lines  be  drawn  from  the  point  at  which  the  circles 
are  in  contact  to  three  points  on  the  tangential 
straight  line,  namely,  the  point  of  tangency  on  the 
inner  circle  and  the  two  points  where  the  straight 
line  extended  cuts  the  outer  circle,  then  these  three 
lines  will  contain  equal  angles  at  the  point  of 
contact. 

Let  the  two  circles  touch  each  other  at  the 
point  A,  the  centre  of  the  smaller  being  at  B, 
the  centre  of  the  larger  at  C.  Draw  the  straight 
line  EG  touching  the  inner  circle  at  H,  and  cut¬ 
ting  the  outer  at  the  points  Fand  G;  also  draw 
the  three  lines  AE,  AH,  and  AG,  Then,  I  say, 
the  angles  contained  by  these  lines,  EAH  and 
GAH,  are  equal.  Prolong  AH  to  the  circum¬ 
ference  at  I;  from  the  centres  of  the  circles, 
draw  BH  and  Cl;  join  the  centres  B  and  C  and 
extend  the  line  until  it  reaches  the  point  of  con¬ 
tact  at  A  and  cuts  the  circles  at  the  points  O 
and  N,  But  now  the  lines  BH  and  Cl  are  paral¬ 
lel,  because  the  angles  ICN  and  HBO  are  equal, 
each  being  twice  the  angle  IAN,  And  since  BH, 
drawn  from  the  centre  to  the  point  of  contact 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


is  perpendicular  to  EG,  it  follows  that  Cl  will 
also  be  perpendicular  to  FG  and  that  the  arc 
FI  is  equal  to  the  arc  IG;  consequently  the 
angle  FAl  is  equal  to  the  angle  I  AG.  q.  e.  d. 

Theorem  XXI,  Proposition  XXXII 

If  in  a  horizontal  line  any  tivo  points  are  chosen^ 
and  if  through  one  of  these  points  a  line  be  drawn  in¬ 
clined  towards  the  other,  and  if from  this  other  point 
a  straight  line  is  drawn  to  the  inclined  line  in  such 
a  direction  that  it  cuts  off  from  the  inclined  line  a 
portion  equal  to  the  distance  betiveen  the  two 
chosen  points  on  the  horizontal  line,  then  the  time 
of  descent  along  the  line  so  drawn  is  less  than 
along  any  other  straight  line  drawn  from  the  same 
point  to  the  same  inclined  line.  Along  other  lines 
which  mahe  equal  angles  on  opposite  sides  of  this 
line,  the  times  of  descent  are  the  same. 

Let  A  and  B  be  any  two  points  on  a  horizon¬ 
tal  line:  through  B  draw  an  inclined  straight 
line  BC,  and  from  B  lay  off  a  distance  BD  equal 
to  BA;  join  the  points  A  and  D.  Then,  I  say, 
the  time  of  descent  along  AD  is  less  than  along 
any  other  line  drawn  from  A  to  the  inclined 
line  BC.  From  the  point  A  draw  AE  perpendic¬ 
ular  to  BA;  and  from  the  point  D  draw  DE 


perpendicular  to  BD,  intersecting  AE  at  E. 
Since  in  the  isosceles  triangle  ABD,  we  have 
the  angles  BAD  and  BDA  equal,  their  com¬ 
plements  DAE  and  EDA  are  equal.  Hence  if, 
with  E  as  centre  and  EA  as  radius,  we  describe 
a  circle  it  will  pass  through  D  and  will  touch 
the  lines  BA  and  BD  at  the  points  A  and  D. 
Now  since  A  is  the  end  of  the  vertical  line  AE, 
the  descent  along  AD  will  occupy  less  time 
than  along  any  other  line  drawn  from  the  ex¬ 
tremity  A  to  the  line  BC  and  extending  beyond 
the  circumference  of  the  circle;  which  con¬ 
cludes  the  first  part  of  the  proposition. 

If  however,  we  prolong  the  perpendicular  line 
AE,  and  choose  any  point  F  upon  it,  about 
which  as  centre,  we  describe  a  circle  of  radius 
FA,  this  circle  AGC,  will  cut  the  tangent  line 
in  the  points  G  and  C.  Draw  the  lines  AG  and 
AC  which  will  according  to  the  preceding  lem¬ 
ma,  deviate  by  equal  angles  from  the  median 
line  AD.  The  time  of  descent  along  either  of 
these  lines  is  the  same,  since  they  start  from  the 
highest  point  A,  and  terminate  on  the  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  circle  AGC. 

Problem  XII,  Proposition  XXXIII 

Given  a  limited  vertical  line  and  an  inclined  plane 
of  equal  height,  having  a  common  upper  ter¬ 
minal;  it  is  required  to  find  a  point  on  the  vertical 
line,  extended  upwards,  from  which  a  body  will 
fall  and,  when  defected  along  the  inclined  plane, 
will  traverse  it  in  the  same  time-interval  which  is 
required  for  fall,  from  rest,  through  the  given 
vertical  height. 


Let  AB  be  the  given  limited  vertical  line 
and  AC  2iX\  inclined  plane  having  the  same  al¬ 
titude.  It  is  required  to  find  on  the  vertical  BA, 


Fig.  94 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


extended  above  Ay  a  point  from  which  a  falling 
body  will  traverse  the  distance  AC  ln  the  same 
time  which  is  spent  in  falling,  from  rest  at  Ay 
through  the  given  vertical  line  AB,  Draw  the 
line  DCE  at  right  angles  to  ACy  and  lay  off  CD 
equal  to  AB;  also  join  the  points  A  and  D; 
then  the  angle  ADC  will  be  greater  than  the 
angle  CADy  since  the  side  CA  is  greater  than 
either  AB  or  CD,  Make  the  angle  DAE  equal 
to  the  angle  ADEy  and  draw  EE  perpendicular 
to  AE;  then  EF  will  cut  the  inclined  plane,  ex¬ 
tended  both  ways,  at  F,  Lay  off  AI  and  AG 
each  equal  to  CF;  through  G  draw  the  hori¬ 
zontal  line  GH,  Then,  I  say,  H  is  the  point 
sought. 

For,  if  we  agree  to  let  the  length  AB  rep¬ 
resent  the  time  of  fall  along  the  vertical  ABy 
then  AC  will  likewise  represent  the  time  of  de¬ 
scent  from  rest  at  Ay  along  AC;  and  since,  in 
the  right-angled  triangle  AEFy  the  line  EC  has 
been  drawn  from  the  right  angle  at  E perpendic¬ 
ular  to  the  base  AFy  it  follows  that  AE  will  be  a 
mean  proportional  between  FA  and  ACy  while 
CE  will  be  a  mean  proportional  between  AG 
and  CFy  that  is  between  CA  and  AI.  Now,  since 

represents  the  time  of  descent  from  A  along 
ACy  it  follows  that  AE  will  be  the  time  along, 
the  entire  distance  AFy  and  EC  the  time  along 
AI.  But  since  in  the  isosceles  triangle  AED  the 
side  EA  is  equal  to  the  side  ED  it  follows  that 
ED  will  represent  the  time  of  fall  along  AFy 
while  EC  is  the  time  of  fall  along  AI.  Therefore 
CDy  that  is  ABy  will  represent  the  time  of  fall, 
from  rest  at  Ay  along  IF;  which  is  the  same  as 
saying  that  AB  is  the  time  of  fall,  from  G  or 
from  Hy  along  AC.  Q.  e.  f. 

Problem  XIII,  Proposition  XXXIV 

Gwen  a  limited  inclined  plane  and  a  vertical  line 
having  their  highest  point  in  commony  it  is  re' 
qnired  to  find  a  point  in  the  vertical  line  extended 
such  that  a  body  will fall  from  it  and  then  traverse 
the  inclined  plane  in  the  same  time  which  is  re¬ 
quired  to  traverse  the  inclined  plane  alone y  starting 
from  rest  at  the  top  of  said  plane. 

Let  AC  and  AB  be  an  inclined  plane  and  a 
vertical  line  respectively,  having  a  common 
highest  point  at  A.  It  is  required  to  find  a  point 
in  the  vertical  line,  above  Ay  such  that  a  body, 
falling  from  it  and  afterwards  having  its  motion 
directed  along  ABy  will  traverse  both  the  as¬ 
signed  part  of  the  vertical  line  and  the  plane  AB 
in  the  same  time  which  is  required  for  the  plane 
AB  alone,  starting  from  rest  at  A.  Draw  BC  a 
horizontal  line  and  lay  off  AFl  equal  to  AC; 
choose  the  point  L  so  that  AB  :  BN^AL  :  LCy 


and  lay  off  AI  equal  to  AL;  choose  the  point  E 
such  that  CEy  laid  off  on  the  vertical  AC  pro¬ 
duced,  will  be  a  third  proportional  to  AC  and 
BI.  Then,  I  say,  CE  is  the  distance  sought;  so 
that,  if  the  vertical  line  is  extended  above  A 
and  if  a  portion  AX  is  laid  off  equal  to  CEy  then 
a  body  falling  from  X  will  traverse  both  the  dis¬ 
tances,  XA  and  ABy  in  the  same  time  as  that  re¬ 
quired,  when  starting  from  A,  to  traverse  AB 
alone. 

Draw  XR  parallel  to  BC  and  intersecting  BA 
produced  in  R;  next  draw  ED  parallel  to  BC 
and  meeting  BA  produced  in  D;  on  AD  as 
diameter  describe  a  semicircle;  from  B  draw  BF 
perpendicular  to  ADy  and  prolong  it  till  it 
meets  the  circumference  of  the  circle;  evidently 
FB  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AB  and  BDy 
while  FA  is  a  mean  proportional  between  DA 
and  AB.  Take  BS  equal  to  BI  and  FH  equal  to 
FB.  Now  since  AB  :  BD=AC :  CE  and  since 
BF  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AB  and  BDy 
while  BI  is  a  mean  proportional  between  AC 
and  CEy  it  follows  that  BA:AC=FB:BSy 
and  since  BA  :  AC=BA  :  BN=FB  :  BS  we 
shall  have,  convertendoy  BF :  FS=  AB :  BN=  AL: 
LC.  Consequently  the  rectangle  formed  by  FB 
and  CL  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  whose  sides  are 
^Land  SF;  moreover,  this  rectangle  AL.SFis 
the  excess  of  the  rectangle  AL.FBy  or  AI.BFy 
over  the  rectangle  AI.BSy  or  AI.IB.  But  the 
rectangle  FB.LC  is  the  excess  of  the  rectangle 
AC.BF  over  the  rectangle  AL.BF;  and  more¬ 
over  the  rectangle  AC.BF  is  equal  to  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AB.BI  since  BA  :  AC=FB  :  BI;  hence 
the  excess  of  the  rectangle  AB .  BI  over  the  rec¬ 
tangle  AI.BFy  or  AI.FHy  is  equal  to  the  ex¬ 
cess  of  the  rectangle  AI  .FH  over  the  rectangle 
AI.IB;  therefore  twice  the  rectangle  AI.FH  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  rectangles  AB.BI  and 
ALIBy  or  2AI.FH^2AI.IB+m\  Add  A~P  to 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


232  _  _  _ 

each  side,  tj^en  2AI.  -\-AP  =  AB>^  = 

2ALPH+  aI'^,  Again  add  to  each  side, 
then:;?S2+SF=  AP  =  2AI,FH+AP+BP=^ 
2AL  FH+Al^+FlF.  But  AP=  2AHJIF+ 
AH"+ HP;  and  hen^e  2AI.FH+  AP  + 
FIH—2AH.HF  -f-  AH^'i-  HP-  Subtracting 
JJP  from  each  side  we  have  2ALFH-{'AP= 
2AH  .HF AH^-  Since  now  FH  is  a  factor 
common  to  both  rectangles,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  AH  is  equal  to  AI;  for  if 
AH  were  either  greater  or  smaller 
than  Aly  then  the  two  rectangles 
AH  HF  plus  the  square  of  HA 
would  be  either  larger  or  smaller  than 
the  two  rectangles  ALFH  plus  the 
square  of  lAj  a  result  which  is  con¬ 
trary  to  what  we  have  just  demon¬ 
strated. 

If  now  we  agree  to  represent  the 
time  of  descent  along  AB  by  the 
length  ABy  then  the  time  through 
AC  will  likewise  be  measured  by  AC; 
and  IBy  which  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  AC  and  CE,  will  represent 
the  time  through  CE,  or  XAy  from 
rest  at  X.  Now,  since  AF  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  DA  and  AB 
or  between  RB  and  ABy  and  since 
BFy  which  is  equal  to  EET,  is  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  AB  and  ED,  that  is  between  AB 
and  ARy  it  follows,  from  a  preceding  proposition 
[XIX,  corollary],  that  the  difference  AH  repre¬ 
sents  the  time  of  descent  along  AB  either  from 
rest  at  E  or  after  fall  from  X,  while  the  time  of 
descent  along  ABy  from  rest  at  Ay  is  measured  by 
the  length  AB.  But  as  has  Just  been  shown,  the 
time  of  fall  through  XA  is  measured  by  /E, 
while  the  time  of  descent  along  ABy  after  fall, 
through  RA  or  through  XAy  is  lA.  Therefore 
the  time  of  descent  through  XA  plus  AB  is 
measured  by  the  length  ABy  which,  of  course, 
also  measures  the  time  of  descent,  from  rest  at 
Ay  along  AB  alone.  Q.  e.  f. 

Problem  XIV,  Proposition  XXXV 

Given  an  inclined  plane  and  a  limited  vertical 
linCy  it  is  required  to  find  a  distance  on  the  in¬ 
clined  plane  which  a  bodyy  starting  from  resty  will 
traverse  in  the  same  time  as  that  needed  to  traverse 
both  the  vertical  and  the  inclined  plane. 

Let  AB  be  the  vertical  line  and  EG  the  in¬ 
clined  plane.  It  is  required  to  lay  off  on  EG  a 
distance  which  a  body,  starting  from  rest,  will 
traverse  in  a  time  equal  to  that  which  is  oc¬ 
cupied  by  fall  through  the  vertical  AB  and  by 
descent  of  the  plane.  Draw  the  horizontal  line 


ADy  which  intersects  at  E  the  prolongation  of 
the  inclined  plane  GE;  lay  off  BF  equal  to  BAy 
and  about  E  as  centre,  with  EE  as  radius  de¬ 
scribe  the  circle  FIG.  Prolong  EE  until  it  inter¬ 
sects  the  circumference  at  G.  Choose  a  point  H 
such  that  GB  :  BF=  BH  :  HF.  Draw  the  line 
HI  tangent  to  the  circle  at  /.  At  E  draw  the 
line  BK  perpendicular  to  EG,  cutting  the  line 


Fig*  97 

EIL  at  L;  also  draw  LM  perpendicular  to  EL 
and  cutting  EG  at  M.  Then,  I  say,  BM  is  the 
distance  which  a  body,  starting  from  rest  at  By 
will  traverse  in  the  same  time  which  is  required 
to  descend  from  rest  at  A  through  both  dis¬ 
tances  AB  and  BM.  Lay  off  EN  equal  to  EL; 
then  since  GB  :  BF=  BH  :  HE,  we  shall  have, 
permntandoy  GB  :  BH=^  BF  :  HE,  and,  dividen- 
dOy  GH  :  BH=BH  :  HF.  Consequently  the 
rectangle  GH.HF  is  equal  to  the  square  on 
BH;  but  this  same  rectangle  is  also  equal  to  the 
square  on  HI;  therefore  EH  is  equal  to  HI. 
Since,  in  the  quadrilateral  ILBHy  the  sides  HE 
and  HI  are  equal  and  since  the  angles  at  E  and  I 
are  right  angles,  it  follows  that  the  sides  EL  and 
LI  are  also  equal:  but  EI=EF;  therefore  the 
total  length  LE,  or  HE,  is  equal  to  the  sum  of 
LB  and  EE.  If  we  subtract  the  common  part 
EE,  the  remainder  FN  will  be  equal  to  LB: 
but,  by  construction,  FB—BA  and,  therefore, 
LE=XE+EX.  If  again  we  agree  to  represent 
the  time  of  fall  through  AB  by  the  length  ABy 
then  the  time  of  descent  along  EE  will  be  meas¬ 
ured  by  EE;  moreover,  since  EN  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  ME  and  EE,  it  will  represent 
the  time  of  descent  along  the  whole  distance 
EM;  therefore  the  difference  of  these  distances, 
EM,  will  be  traversed,  after  fall  from  EE,  or 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


233 


AB/im  time  which  is  represented  by  BN.  But 
having  already  assumed  the  distance  AB  as  a 
measure  of  the  time  of  fall  through  AB,  the 
time  of  descent  along  AB  and  BM  is  measured 
by  AB-j-BN.  Since  EB  measures  the  time  of 
fall,  from  rest  at  E,  along  EB,  the  time  from 
rest  at  B  along  BM  will  be  the  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  BE  and  BM,  namely,  BL.  The 
time  therefore  for  the  path  AB-\-BM,  starting 
from  rest  at  A  is  AB-\-BN;  but  the  time  for  BM 
alone,  starting  from  rest  at  B,  is  BL;  and  since 
it  has  already  been  shown  that  EL=  AB-]-BN, 
the  proposition  follows. 

Another  and  shorter  proof  is  the  following: 
Let  BC  be  the  inclined  plane  and  BA  the  ver¬ 
tical;  at  B  draw  a  perpendicular  to  EC,  extend¬ 
ing  it  both  ways;  lay  off  BH  equal  to  the  excess 
of  BE  over  BA;  make  the  angle  HEL  equal  to 
the  angle  BHE;  prolong  EL  until  it  cuts  BK  in 
L;  at  L  draw  LM  perpendicular  to  EL  and  ex¬ 
tend  it  till  it  meets  BC  in  M;  then,  I  say,  BM  is 
the  portion  of  EC  sought.  For,  since  the  angle 
MLE  is  a  right  angle,  BL  will  be  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  MB  and  BE,  while  LE  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  ME  and  BE;  lay 
olf  EN  equal  to  LE;  then  NE=  EL=LH,  and 
HB=NE-BL.  But  also  HB=NE'(NB+BA); 
therefore  BN-\-BA=BL.  If  now  we  assume  the 
length  EB  as  a  measure  of  the  time  of  descent 
along  EB,  the  time  of  descent,  from  rest  at  B, 
along  EM  will  be  represented  by  EL;  but,  if  the 
descent  along  EM  is  from  rest  at  E  or  at  ^4, 
then  the  time  of  descent  will  be  measured  by 
BN;  and  AB  will  measure  the  time  along  AB. 
Therefore  the  time  required  to  traverse  AB 
and  EM,  namely,  the  sum  of  the  distances  AB 
and  BN,  is  equal  to  the  time  of  descent,  from 
rest  at  E,  along  EM  alone.  q.  e.  f. 

Lemma 

Let  DC  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  di¬ 
ameter  BA;  from  the  extremity  E  draw  the 


line  BED  at  random;  draw  the  line  EE.  Then, 
I  say,  EE  is  a  mean  proportional  between  DB 
and  BE.  Join  the  points  E  and  E.  Through 
E,  draw  the  tangent  BG  which  will  be  paral¬ 
lel  to  CD.  Now,  since  the  angle  DBG  is  equal 
to  the  angle  FDB,  and  since  the  alternate 
angle  of  GBD  is  equal  to  EEE,  it  follows  that 
the  triangles  FDB  and  EEE  are  similar  and 
hence  BD  :  BF=  FB  :  BE. 

Lemma 

Let  ^C  be  a  line  which  is  longer  than  DF, 
and  let  the  ratio  of  AB  to  BC  be  greater  than 
that  of  DE  to  EE.  Then,  I  say,  AB  is  greater 

A  '  B  C 


EG  F  . 


Fig.  100 

than  DE.  For,  if  AB  bears  to  BC  a  ratio  greater 
than  that  of  DE  to  EE,  then  DE  will  bear  to 
some  length  shorter  than  EE,  the  same  ratio 
which  AB  bears  to  EC.  Call  this  length  EG; 
then  since  AB  :  BC=  DE  :  EG,  it  follows,  com- 
ponendo  et  convertendo,  that  CA  :  AB=GD  : 
DE.  But  since  CA  is  greater  than  GD,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  BA  is  greater  than  DE. 

Lemma 

Let  ACIB  be  the  quadrant  of  a  circle;  from 
E  draw  BE  parallel  to  AC;  about  any  point  in 
the  line  BE  describe  a  circle  BOES,  touching 
AB  at  E  and  intersecting  the  circumference  of 
the  quadrant  at  /.  Join  the  points  C  and  E; 
draw  the  line  Cl,  prolonging  it  to  S.  Then,  I 
say,  the  line  Cl  is  always  less  than  CO.  Draw 
the  line  A1  touching  the  circle  EOE.  Then,  if 
the  line  DI  be  drawn,  it  will  be  equal  to  DB; 


234 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


but,  since  DB  touches  the  quadrant,  D1  will 
also  be  tangent  to  it  and  will  be  at  right  angles 
to  Al;  thus  AI  touches  the  circle  BOE  at  L 
And  since  the  angle  AlC  is  greater  than  the 
angle  ABC^  subtending  as  it  does  a  larger  arc, 
it  follows  that  the  angle  SIN  is  also  greater 
than  the  angle  ABC,  Wherefore  the  arc  lES  is 
greater  than  the  arc  BO,  and  the  line  CS,  being 
nearer  the  centre  is  longer  than  CB,  Conse¬ 
quently  CO  is  greater  than  Cl,  since  SC  :  CB— 
OC  :  CL 

This  result  would  be  all  the  more  marked  if, 
as  in  the  second  figure,  the  arc  BIC  were  less 
than  a  quadrant.  For  the  perpendicular  DB 
would  then  cut  the  circle  CIB;  and  so  also  would 
D1  which  is  equal  to  BD;  the  angle  DIA  would 
be  obtuse  and  therefore  the  line  AIN  would  cut 
the  circle  BIE,  Since  the  angle  ABC  is  less  than 
the  angle  AIC,  which  is  equal  to  SIN,  and  still 
less  than  the  angle  which  the  tangent  at  I 
would  make  with  the  line  SI,  it  follows  that  the 
arc  SEI  is  far  greater  than  the  arc  BO;  whence 
etc.  Q.  E.  D. 

Theorem  XXII,  Proposition  XXXVI 

If  from  the  lowest  point  of  a  vertical  circle,  a  chord 
is  drawn  subtending  an  arc  not  greater  than  a 
quadrant,  and  if  from  the  two  ends  of  this  chord 
two  other  chords  be  drawn  to  any  point  on  the  arc, 
the  time  of  descent  along  the  two  latter  chords  will 
be  shorter  than  along  the  first,  and  shorter  also,  by 
the  same  amount,  than  along  the  lower  of  these 
two  latter  chords. 

Let  CBD  be  an  arc,  not  exceeding  a  quad¬ 
rant,  taken  from  a  vertical  circle  whose  lowest 
point  is  C;  let  CD  be  the  chord  subtending  this 
arc,  and  let  there  be  two  other  chords  drawn 
from  C  and  D  to  any  point  B  on  the  arc.  Then, 


I  say,  the  time  of  descent  along  the  two  chords 
DB  and  BC  is  shorter  than  along  DC  alone,  or 
along  BCalone,  starting  from  rest  at  B.  Through 


M 


D 


// 

N 

r  G  S  R 

P 

Fig.  102 

the  point  D,  draw 

the  horizontal  line  MDA 

cutting  CB  extended  at  A:  draw  DN  and  MC 
at  right  angles  to  MD,  and  BN  at  right  angles 
to  BD;  about  the  right-angled  triangle  DBN 
describe  the  semicircle  DFBN,  cutting  DC  at 
F,  Choose  the  point  O  such  that  DO  will  be  a 
mean  proportional  between  CD  and  DF;  in 
like  manner  select  V  so  that  AV  is  2i  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  CA  and  AB.  Let  the  length 
PS  represent  the  time  of  descent  along  the 
whole  distance  DC  or  BC,  both  of  which  re¬ 
quire  the  same  time.  Lay  ofi'  PR  such  that  CD  : 
DO=timePS.  timePR.  Then  PR  will  represent 
the  time  in  which  a  body,  starting  from  D,  will 
traverse  the  distance  DF,  while  RS  will  meas¬ 
ure  the  time  in  which  the  remaining  distance, 
FC,  will  be  traversed.  But  since  PS  is  also  the 
time  of  descent,  from  rest  at  B,  along  BC,  and  if 
we  choose  T such  that  BC  :  CD— PS  :  PT  then 
PT  will  measure  the  time  of  descent  from  A  to  C, 


235 


THE  TWO  NEW 

for  we  have  already  shown  that  DC  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  AC  and  CB,  Finally 
choose  the  point  G  such  that  CA  :  AV—PT: 
PGy  then  PG  will  be  the  time  of  descent  from  A 
to  By  while  GT  will  be  the  residual  time  of  de¬ 
scent  along  BC  following  descent  from  A  to  B. 
But,  since  the  diameter,  DN,  of  the  circle 
DFN  is  a  vertical  line,  the  chords  DF  and  DB 
will  be  traversed  in  equal  times;  wherefore  if 
one  can  prove  that  a  body  will  traverse  BCy 
after  descent  along  D5,  in  a  shorter  time  than  it 
will  FC  after  descent  along  DF  he  will  have 
proved  the  theorem.  But  a  body  descending 
from  D  along  DB  will  traverse  BC  in  the  same 
time  as  if  it  had  come  from  A  along  ABj  seeing 
that  the  body  acquires  the  same  momentum  in 
descending  along  DB  as  along  AB.  Hence  it  re¬ 
mains  only  to  show"  that  descent  along  BC  after 
AB  is  quicker  than  along  FC  after  DF.  But  w"e 
have  already  shown  that  GT  represents  the 
time  along  BC  after  AB;  also  that  RS  measures 
the  time  along  FC  after  DF,  Accordingly  it 
must  be  shown  that  RS  is  greater  than  GT, 
w^hich  may  be  done  as  follows:  Since  SP  :  PR— 
CD  :  DOy  it  follows,  invertendo  et  convertendoy 
that  RS  :  SP=OC  :  CD;  also  we  have  SP : 
PT^DC  :  CA,  And  since  TP  :  PG=  CA  :  AVy 
it  follow"s,  invertendo y  that  PT  :  TG=AC  :  CVy 
therefore,  ex  sequaliy  RS  :  GT—OC  :  CV,  But, 
as  we  shall  presently  show,  OC  is  greater  than 
CV;  hence  the  time  RS  is  greater  than  the 
time  GTy  which  was  to  be  shown.  Now",  since 
CF  is  greater  than  CB  and  FD  smaller  than  BAy 
it  follows  that  CD  :  DF>CA  :  AB.  But  CD 
DF=CO  :  OFy  seeing  that  CD  :  DO=DO 
DF;  and  CA  :  AB=iCV'^  :  VB^^,  Therefore  CO 
OF>CV :  VBy  and,  according  to  the  preced¬ 
ing  lemma,  CO>CV.  Besides  this  it  is  clear 
that  the  time  of  descent  along  DC  is  to  the 
time  along  DBG  as  DOC  is  to  the  sum  of  DO 
and  CV, 

Scholium 


From  the  preceding  it  is  possible  to  infer 
that  the  path  of  quickest  descent  from  one 
point  to  another  is  not  the  shortest  path,  name¬ 
ly,  a  straight  line,  but  the  arc  of  a  circle.  In  the 
quadrant  BAECy  having  the  side  BC  vertical, 
divide  the  arc  AC  into  any  number  of  equal 
parts,  ADy  DEy  EFy  EG,  GG,  and  from  C  draw 
straight  lines  to  the  points  Ay  D,  E,  F,  G;  draw 
also  the  straight  lines  ADy  DEy  EFy  FG,  GG, 
Evidently  descent  along  the  path  ADC  is 
quicker  than  along  AC  alone  or  along  DC  from 
rest  at  D.  But  a  body,  starting  from  rest  at  Ay 
will  traverse  DC  more  quickly  than  the  path 
ADC;  while,  if  it  starts  from  rest  at  Ay  it  will 


SCIENCES 


traverse  the  path  DEC  in  a  shorter  time  than 
DGalone.  Hence  descent  along  the  three  chords 
ADECy  will  take  less  time  than  along  the  two 
chords  ADC.  Similarly,  following  descent  along 
ADEy  the  time  required  to  traverse  EFC  is  less 
than  that  needed  for  EC  alone.  Therefore  de¬ 
scent  is  more  rapid  along  the  four  chords 
ADEFC  than  along  the  three  ADEC.  And  fin¬ 
ally  a  body,  after  descent  along  ADEFy  will 
traverse  the  two  chords,  FGG,  more  quickly 
than  FG  alone.  Therefore,  along  the  five  chords, 
ADEFGCy  descent  will  be  more  rapid  than 
along  the  four,  ADEFC.  Consequently  the 
nearer  the  inscribed  polygon  approaches  a  cir¬ 
cle  the  shorter  is  the  time  required  for  descent 
from  A  to  G. 

What  has  been  proven  for  the  quadrant  holds 
true  also  for  smaller  arcs;  the  reasoning  is  the 
same. 

Problem  XV,  Proposition  XXXVII 

Given  a  limited  vertical  line  and  an  inclined  plane 
of  equal  altitude;  it  is  required  to  find  a  distance 
on  the  inclined  plane  which  is  equal  to  the  vertical 
line  and  which  is  traversed  in  an  interval  equal  to 
the  time  of  fall  along  the  vertical  line. 

Let  AlB  be  the  vertical  line  and  AC  the  in¬ 
clined  plane.  We  must  locate,  on  the  inclined 
plane,  a  distance  equal  to  the  vertical  line  AB 
and  which  will  be  traversed  by  a  body  starting 
from  rest  at  A  in  the  same  time  needed  for  fall 
along  the  vertical  line.  Lay  off  AD  equal  to  ABy 

A 


Fig.  104 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


236 

and  bisect  the  remainder  DC  at  /.  Choose  the 
point  E  such  that  AC :  Cl  =  Cl :  AE  and  lay  off 
DG  equal  to  AE,  Clearly  EG  is  equal  to  AD, 
and  also  to  AB,  And  further,  I  say  that  EG  is 
that  distance  which  will  be  traversed  by  a  body, 
starting  from  rest  at  A,  in  the  same  time  which 
is  required  for  that  body  to  fall  through  the  dis¬ 
tance  AB,  For  since  AC :  CI=  Cl :  AE=ID  : 
DG,  we  have,  convertendo,  CA  :  Al—Dl :  IG, 
And  since  the  whole  of  CA  is  to  the  whole  oiAI 
as  the  portion  Cl  is  to  the  portion  IG,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  remainder  lA  is  to  the  remainder 
AG  as  the  whole  of  CA  is  to  the  whole  of  AI, 
Thus  AI  is  seen  to  be  a  mean  proportional 
between  CA  and  AG,  while  Cl  is  a  mean 
proportional  between  CA  and  AE,  If  there¬ 
fore,  the  time  of  fall  along  A  Bis  represented 
by  the  length  AB,  the  time  along  AC  will  be 
represented  by  AC,  while  Cl,  or  ID,  will 
measure  the  time  along  AE,  Since  A I  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  CA  and  AG, 
and  since  CA  is  a  measure  of  the  time  along 
the  entire  distance  AC,  it  follows  that  A I 
is  the  time  along  AG,  and  the  difference  1C 
is  the  time  along  the  difference  GC;  but  DI 
was  the  time  along  AE,  Consequently  the 
lengths  DI  and  1C  measure  the  times  along 
AE  and  CG  respectively.  Therefore  the  re¬ 
mainder  DA  represents  the  time  along  EG, 
which  of  course  is  equal  to  the  time  along 
AB,  Q,  E, 

Corollary 

From  this  it  is  clear  that  the  distance  sought 
is  bounded  at  each  end  by  portions  of  the  in¬ 
clined  plane  which  are  traversed  in  equal  times. 

Problem  XVI,  Proposition  XXXVIII 

Gwen  two  horizontal  planes  cut  by  a  vertical  line, 
it  is  required  to  find  a  point  on  the  upper  part  of 
the  vertical  line  from  which  bodies  may  fall  to  the 
horizontal  planes  and  there,  having  their  motion 
defected  into  a  horizontal  direction,  will,  during 
an  interval  equal  to  the  time  of  fall,  traverse  dis¬ 
tances  which  bear  to  each  other  any  assigned  ratio 
of  a  smaller  quantity  to  a  larger. 

Let  CD  and  BE  be  the  horizontal  planes  cut 
by  the  vertical  ACB,  and  let  the  ratio  of  the 
smaller  quantity  to  the  larger  be  that  of  N  to 
EG.  It  is  required  to  find  in  the  upper  part  of 
the  vertical  line,  AB,  a  point  from  which  a 
body  falling  to  the  plane  CD  and  there  having 
its  motion  deflected  along  this  plane,  will  trav¬ 
erse,  during  an  interval  equal  to  its  time  of  fall 
a  distance  such  that  if  another  body,  falling 
from  this  same  point  to  the  plane  BE,  there 


have  its  motion  deflected  along  this  plane  and 
continued  during  an  interval  equal  to  its  time 
of  fall,  will  traverse  a  distance  which  bears  to  the 
former  distance  the  ratio  of  EG  to  N,  Lay  off 
GH  equal  to  iV,  and  select  the  point  L  so  that 
EH  :  HG=  BC  :  CL.  Then,  I  say,  L  is  the  point 
sought.  For,  if  we  lay  off  CM  equal  to  twice 
CL,  and  draw  the  line  LM  cutting  the  plane 
BE  at  O,  then  BO  will  be  equal  to  twice  BL, 
And  since  EH  :  HG~  BC  :  CL,  we  have,  com- 
ponendo  et  convertendo,  HG  :  GE=  N  :  GE== 
CL  :  LB—  CM  :  BO.  It  is  clear  that,  since  CM 
is  double  the  distance  LC,  the  space  CM  is  that 


F _ H _ G 

Fig.  105 

which  a  body  falling  from  L  through  LC  will 
traverse  in  the  plane  CD;  and,  for  the  same  rea¬ 
son,  since  BO  is  twice  the  distance  BL,  it  is 
clear  that  BO  is  the  distance  which  a  body, 
after  fall  through  LB,  will  traverse  during  an 
interval  equal  to  the  time  of  its  fall  through  LB, 

Q.  E.  F. 

Sagr.  Indeed,  I  think  we  may  concede  to  our 
Academician,  without  flattery,  his  claim  that  in 
the  principle  laid  down  in  this  treatise  he  has 
established  a  new  science  dealing  with  a  very 
old  subject.  Observing  with  what  ease  and 
clearness  he  deduces  from  a  single  principle  the 
proofs  of  so  many  theorems,  I  wonder  not  a 
little  how  such  a  question  escaped  the  attention 
of  Archimedes,  Apollonius,  Euclid  and  so  many 
other  mathematicians  and  illustrious  philoso¬ 
phers,  especially  since  so  many  ponderous  tomes 
have  been  devoted  to  the  subject  of  motion. 

Salv.  There  is  a  fragment  of  Euclid  which 
treats  of  motion,  but  in  it  there  is  no  indication 
that  he  ever  began  to  investigate  the  property 
of  acceleration  and  the  manner  in  which  it 
varies  with  slope.  So  that  we  may  say  the  door 
is  now  opened,  for  the  first  time,  to  a  new 
method  fraught  with  numerous  and  wonderful 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


results  which  in  future  years  will  command  the 
attention  of  other  minds. 

Sagr.  I  really  believe  that  just  as,  for  in¬ 
stance,  the  few  properties  of  the  circle  proven 
by  Euclid  in  the  Third  Book  of  his  Elements 
lead  to  many  others  more  recondite,  so  the 
principles  which  are  set  forth  in  this  little  trea¬ 
tise  will,  when  taken  up  by  speculative  minds, 
lead  to  many  another  more  remarkable  result; 
and  it  is  to  be  believed  that  it  will  be  so  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  nobility  of  the  subject,  which  is 
superior  to  any  other  in  nature. 


237 

During  this  long  and  laborious  day,  I  have 
enjoyed  these  simple  theorems  more  than  their 
proofs,  many  of  which,  for  their  complete  com¬ 
prehension,  would  require  more  than  an  hour 
each;  this  study,  if  you  will  be  good  enough  to 
leave  the  book  in  my  hands,  is  one  which  I 
mean  to  take  up  at  my  leisure  after  we  have 
read  the  remaining  portion  which  deals  with 
the  motion  of  projectiles;  and  this  if  agreeable 
to  you  we  shall  take  up  tomorrow. 

Salv.  I  shall  not  fail  to  be  with  you. 


FOURTH  DAY 


Salviati.  Once  more,  Simplicio  is  here  on  time; 
so  let  us  without  delay  take  up  the  question  of 
motion.  The  text  of  our  Author  is  as  follows: 

THE  MOTION  OF  PROJECTILES 

In  the  preceding  pages  we  have  discussed  the 
properties  of  uniform  motion  and  of  motion  nat¬ 
urally  accelerated  along  planes  of  all  inclina¬ 
tions.  I  now  propose  to  set  forth  those  properties 
which  belong  to  a  body  whose  motion  is  com¬ 
pounded  of  two  other  motions,  namely,  one  uni¬ 
form  and  one  naturally  accelerated;  these  prop¬ 
erties,  well  worth  knowing,  I  propose  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  in  a  rigid  manner.  This  is  the  kind  of 
motion  seen  in  a  moving  projectile;  its  origin  I 
conceive  to  be  as  follows: 

Imagine  any  particle  projected  along  a  hori¬ 
zontal  plane  without  friction;  then  we  know, 
from  what  has  been  more  fully  explained  in  the 
preceding  pages,  that  this  particle  will  move 
along  this  same  plane  with  a  motion  which  is 
uniform  and  perpetual,  provided  the  plane  has 
no  limits.  But  if  the  plane  is  limited  and  ele¬ 
vated,  then  the  moving  particle,  which  we  im¬ 
agine  to  be  a  heavy  one,  will  on  passing  over  the 
edge  of  the  plane  acquire,  in  addition  to  its  pre¬ 
vious  uniform  and  perpetual  motion,  a  down¬ 
ward  propensity  due  to  its  own  weight;  so  that 
the  resulting  motion  which  I  call  projection,  is 
compounded  of  one  which  is  uniform  and  hori¬ 
zontal  and  of  another  which  is  vertical  and  nat¬ 
urally  accelerated.  We  now  proceed  to  demon¬ 
strate  some  of  its  properties,  the  first  of  which  is 
as  follows : 

Theorem  I,  Proposition  I 

A  projectile  which  is  carried  by  a  uniform  horizon¬ 
tal  motion  compounded  with  a  naturally  acceler¬ 
ated  vertical  motion  describes  a  path  which  is  a 
semi-parabola. 

Sagr.  Here,  Salviati,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
stop  a  little  while  for  my  sake  and,  I  believe, 
also  for  the  benefit  of  Simplicio;  for  it  so  hap¬ 
pens  that  I  have  not  gone  very  far  in  my  study 
of  Apollonius  and  am  merely  aware  of  the  fact 
that  he  treats  of  the  parabola  and  other  conic 
sections,  without  an  understanding  of  which  I 


hardly  think  one  will  be  able  to  follow  the  proof 
of  other  propositions  depending  upon  them. 
Since  even  in  this  first  beautiful  theorem  the 
author  finds  it  necessary  to  prove  that  the  path 
of  a  projectile  is  a  parabola,  and  since,  as  I  im¬ 
agine,  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  only  this  kind 
of  curves,  it  will  be  absolutely  necessary  to  have 
a  thorough  acquaintance,  if  not  with  all  the 
properties  which  Apollonius  has  demonstrated 
for  these  figures,  at  least  w’ith  those  which  are 
needed  for  the  present  treatment. 

Salv.  You  are  quite  too  modest,  pretending 
ignorance  of  facts  which  not  long  ago  you  ac¬ 
knowledged  as  well  known — I  mean  at  the  time 
when  we  were  discussing  the  strength  of  mate¬ 
rials  and  needed  to  use  a  certain  theorem  of 
Apollonius  which  gave  you  no  trouble. 

Sagr.  I  may  have  chanced  to  know  it  or  may 
possibly  have  assumed  it,  so  long  as  needed,  for 
that  discussion;  but  now  when  we  have  to  fol¬ 
low  all  these  demonstrations  about  such  curves 
we  ought  not,  as  they  say,  to  swallow  it  whole, 
and  thus  waste  time  and  energy. 

Simp.  Now  even  though  Sagredo  is,  as  I  be¬ 
lieve,  well  equipped  for  all  his  needs,  I  do  not 
understand  even  the  elementary  terms;  for  al¬ 
though  our  philosophers  have  treated  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  projectiles,  I  do  not  recall  their  having 
described  the  path  of  a  projectile  except  to  state 
in  a  general  way  that  it  is  always  a  curved  line, 
unless  the  projection  be  vertically  upwards.  But 
if  the  little  Euclid  which  I  have  learned  since 
our  previous  discussion  does  not  enable  me  to 
understand  the  demonstrations  which  are  to  fol¬ 
low,  then  I  shall  be  obliged  to  accept  the  the¬ 
orems  on  faith  without  fully  comprehending 
them. 

Salv.  On  the  contrary,  I  desire  that  you 
should  understand  them  from  the  Author  him¬ 
self,  who,  when  he  allowed  me  to  see  this  work 
of  his,  was  good  enough  to  prove  for  me  two  of 
the  principal  properties  of  the  parabola  because 
I  did  not  happen  to  have  at  hand  the  books  of 
Apollonius.  These  properties,  which  are  the  only 
ones  we  shall  need  in  the  present  discussion, 
he  proved  in  such  a  way  that  no  prerequisite 
knowledge  was  required.  These  theorems  are. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


indeed,  given  by  Apollonius,  but  after  many 
preceding  ones,  to  follow  which  would  take  a 
long  while.  I  wish  to  shorten  our  task  by  deriv¬ 
ing  the  first  property  purely  and  simply  from 
the  mode  of  generation  of  the  parabola,  and 
proving  the  second  immediately  from  the  first. 

Beginning  now  with  the  first,  imagine  a  right 
cone,  erected  upon  the  circular  base  ib}^  with 
apex  at  /.  The  section  of  this  cone  made  by  a 


plane  drawn  parallel  to  the  side  l\  is  the  curve 
which  is  called  a  parabola.  The  base  of  this  para¬ 
bola  be  cuts  at  right  angles  the  diameter  i\  of 
the  circle  ib}^,  and  the  axis  ad  is  parallel  to  the 
side  l\;  now  having  taken  any  point  f  in  the 
curve  bfa  draw  the  straight  Ym^  fe  parallel  to 
bd;  then,  I  say,  the  square  of  bd  is  to  the  square 
of fe  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  axis  ad  is  to  the  por¬ 
tion  ae.  Through  the  point  e  pass  a  plane  parallel 
to  the  circle  ib)^,  producing  in  the  cone  a  circu¬ 
lar  section  whose  diameter  is  the  line  geh.  Since 
bd\s  ^x.  right  angles  to  in  the  circle  ibJ^,  the 
square  oibd  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  formed  by 
id  and  d\;so  also  in  the  upper  circle  which  passes 
through  the  points  gfh  the  square  of fe  is  equal 
to  the  rectangle  formed  by  geand  eh;  hence  the 
square  of  bd  is  to  the  square  oifeas  the  rectangle 
id-d\  is  to  the  rectangle  ge^eh.  And  since  the 
line  ed  is  parallel  to  the  line  eh^  being  parallel 
to  d\,  is  equal  to  it;  therefore  the  rectangle  id'd\ 
is  to  the  rectangle  ge^eh  as  id  is  to  ge^  that  is,  as 
da  is  to  ae\  whence  also  the  rectangle  id'd\\s  to 
the  rectangle  ge^ehy  that  is,  the  square  of  bd  is 
to  the  square  of fe^  as  the  axis  da  is  to  the  por¬ 
tion  ae.  Q.  E.  D. 

The  other  proposition  necessary  for  this  dis¬ 
cussion  we  demonstrate  as  follows.  Let  us  draw 
a  parabola  whose  axis  ca  is  prolonged  upwards  to 
a  point  d\  from  any  point  b  draw  the  line  be  par¬ 
allel  to  the  base  of  the  parabola;  if  now  the  point 
^is  chosen  so  that  then,  I  say,  the  straight 

line  drawn  through  the  points  b  and  d  will  be 


tangent  to  the  parabola  at  b.  For  imagine,  if 
possible,  that  this  line  cuts  the  parabola  above 
orthatitsprolongationcutsit  below,  and  through 
any  point  g  in  it  draw  the  straight  Ym^fge.  And 


since  the  square  oife  is  greater  than  the  square 
oYgey  the  square  ofj^  will  bear  a  greater  ratio  to 
the  square  of  be  than  the  square  of  ge  to  that  of 
be;  and  since,  by  the  preceding  proposition,  the 
square  of fe  is  to  that  of  be  as  the  line  ea  is  to  ea^ 
it  follows  that  the  line  ea  will  bear  to  the  line  ea 
a  greater  ratio  than  the  square  of  ge  to  that  of 
be,  or,  than  the  square  of  ed  to  that  of  ed  (the 
sides  of  the  triangles  deg  and  deb  being  propor¬ 
tional).  But  the  line  ea  is  to  ea,  or  da,  in  the 
same  ratio  as  four  times  the  rectangle  ea-ad  is  to 
four  times  the  square  of  ad,  or,  what  is  the  same, 
the  square  of  ed,  since  this  is  four  times  the 
^square  of  ad;  hence  four  times  the  rectangle  ea  • 
ad  bears  to  the  square  oied  a  greater  ratio  than 
the  square  of  ed Xo  the  square  of  ed;  but  that 
would  make  four  times  the  rectangle  ea^ad 
greater  than  the  square  of  ed;  which  is  false,  the 
fact  being  just  the  opposite,  because  the  two 
portions  ea  and  ad  of  the  line  ed  are  not  equal. 
Therefore  the  line  db  touches  the  parabola  with¬ 
out  cutting  it.  Q.  E.  D. 

Simp.  Your  demonstration  proceeds  too  rap¬ 
idly  and,  it  seems  to  me,  you  keep  on  assuming 
that  all  of  Euclid’s  theorems  are  as  familiar  and 
available  to  me  as  his  first  axioms,  which  is  far 
from  true.  And  now  this  fact  which  you  spring 
upon  us,  that  four  times  the  rectangle  ea-ad  is 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


240 

less  than  the  square  of  de  because  the  two  por¬ 
tions  ea  and  ad  of  the  line  are  not  equal  brings 
me  little  composure  of  mind,  but  rather  leaves 
me  in  suspense. 

Salv.  Indeed,  all  real  mathematicians  assume 
on  the  part  of  the  reader  perfect  familiarity  with 
at  least  the  elements  of  Euclid;  and  here  it  is 
necessary^  in  your  case  only  to  recall  a  proposi¬ 
tion  of  the  Second  Book  in  which  he  proves  that 
when  a  line  is  cut  into  equal  and  also  into  two 
unequal  parts,  the  rectangle  formed  on  the  un¬ 
equal  parts  is  less  than  that  formed  on  the  equal 
(/.  e.,  less  than  the  square  on  half  the  line),  by 
an  amount  which  is  the  square  of  the  dilference 
between  the  equal  and  unequal  segments.  From 
this  it  is  clear  that  the  square  of  the  whole  line 
which  is  equal  to  four  times  the  square  of  the 
half  is  greater  than  four  times  the  rectangle  of 
the  unequal  parts.  In  order  to  understand  the 
following  portions  of  this  treatise  it  will  be  nec¬ 
essary  to  keep  in  mind  the  two  elemental  the¬ 
orems  from  conic  sections  which  we  have  just 
demonstrated;  and  these  two  theorems  are  in¬ 
deed  the  only  ones  which  the  Author  uses.  We 
can  now  resume  the  text  and  see  how  he  dem¬ 
onstrates  his  first  proposition  in  which  he  shows 
that  a  body  falling  with  a  motion  compounded 
of  a  uniform  horizontal  and  a  naturally  acceler¬ 
ated  one  describes  a  semi-parabola. 

Let  us  imagine  an  elevated  horizontal  line  or 
plane  ab  along  which  a  body  moves  with  uni¬ 
form  speed  from  a  to  b.  Suppose  this  plane  to 


e  d 

: 

b  a 

h 

’  ^ 

0 

s 

i 

n 

Fig.  108 


end  abruptly  at  b;  then  at  this  point  the  body 
will,  on  account  of  its  weight,  acquire  also  a 
natural  motion  downwards  along  the  perpen¬ 
dicular  bn.  Draw  the  line  be  along  the  plane  ba 
to  represent  the  flow,  or  measure,  of  time;  di¬ 
vide  this  line  into  a  number  of  segments,  bc^  cdy 
de,  representing  equal  intervals  of  time;  from 
the  points  b,  c,  d,  e,  let  fall  lines  which  are  parallel 
to  the  perpendicular  bn.  On  the  first  of  these 
lay  off  any  distance  ci,  on  the  second  a  distance 


four  times  as  long,  df;  on  the  third,  one  nine 
times  as  long,  eh;  and  so  on,  in  proportion  to  the 
squares  of  cb,  db,  eb,  or,  we  may  say,  in  the 
squared  ratio  of  these  same  lines.  Accordingly, 
we  see  that  while  the  body  moves  from  b  x.o  c 
with  uniform  speed,  it  also  falls  perpendicularly 
through  the  distance  ci,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
time-interval  finds  itself  at  the  point  i.  In  like 
manner  at  the  end  of  the  time-interval  bd,  which 
is  the  double  of  be,  the  vertical  fall  will  be  four 
times  the  first  distance  ci;  for  it  has  been  shown 
in  a  previous  discussion  that  the  distance  trav¬ 
ersed  by  a  freely  falling  body  varies  as  the  square 
of  the  time;  in  like  manner  the  space  eh  trav¬ 
ersed  during  the  time  be  will  be  nine  times  ci; 
thus  it  is  evident  that  the  distances  eh,  df,  ci  will 
be  to  one  another  as  the  squares  of  the  lines  be, 
bd,  be.  Now  from  the  points  i,  f,  h  draw  the 
straight  lines  iQ,fg,  hi  parallel  to  be;  these  lines 
hl,fg,  io  are  equal  to  eb,  db  and  cb,  respectively; 
so  also  are  the  lines  bo,  bg,  bl  respectively  equal 
to  ci,  df,  and  eh.  The  square  of  hi  is  to  that  oifg 
as  the  line  lb  is  to  bg;  and  the  square  oifg  is  to 
that  of  io  as  gb  is  to  bo',  therefore  the  points  i,f, 

h,  lie  on  one  and  the  same  parabola.  In  like  man¬ 

ner  it  may  be  shown  that,  if  we  take  equal  time- 
intervals  of  any  size  whatever,  and  if  we  imagine 
the  particle  to  be  carried  by  a  similar  compound 
motion,  the  positions  of  this  particle,  at  the  ends 
of  these  time-intervals,  will  lie  on  one  and  the 
same  parabola.  q.  e.  d. 

Salv.  This  conclusion  follows  from  the  con¬ 
verse  of  the  first  of  the  two  propositions  given 
above.  For,  having  drawn  a  parabola  through 
the  points  b  and  h,  any  other  two  points, /and 

i,  not  falling  on  the  parabola  must  lie  either 
within  or  without;  consequently  the  line  is 
either  longer  or  shorter  than  the  line  which  ter¬ 
minates  on  the  parabola.  Therefore  the  square 
of  hi  will  not  bear  to  the  square  of^  the  same 
ratio  as  the  line  lb  to  bg,  but  a  greater  or  smaller; 
the  fact  is,  however,  that  the  square  of  hi  does 
bear  this  same  ratio  to  the  square  of^.  Hence 
the  point  f  does  lie  on  the  parabola,  and  so  do  all 
the  others. 

Sagr.  One  cannot  deny  that  the  argument  is 
new,  subtle  and  conclusive,  resting  as  it  does 
upon  this  hypothesis,  namely,  that  the  horizon¬ 
tal  motion  remains  uniform,  that  the  vertical 
motion  continues  to  be  accelerated  downwards 
in  proportion  to  the  square  of  the  time,  and  that 
such  motions  and  velocities  as  these  combine 
without  altering,  disturbing,  or  hindering  each 
other,  so  that  as  the  motion  proceeds  the  path 
of  the  projectile  does  not  change  into  a  different 
curve:  but  this,  in  my  opinion,  is  impossible. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


For  the  axis  of  the  parabola  along  which  we  im¬ 
agine  the  natural  motion  of  a  falling  body  to 
take  place  stands  perpendicular  to  a  horizontal 
surface  and  ends  at  the  centre  of  the  earth;  and 
since  the  parabola  deviates  more  and  more  from 
its  axis  no  projectile  can  ever  reach  the  centre  of 
the  earth  or,  if  it  does,  as  seems  necessary,  then 
the  path  of  the  projectile  must  transform  itself 
into  some  other  curve  very  different  from  the 
parabola. 

Simp.  To  these  difficulties,  I  may  add  others. 
One  of  these  is  that  we  suppose  the  horizontal 
plane,  which  slopes  neither  up  nor  down,  to  be 
represented  by  a  straight  line  as  if  each  point  on 
this  line  were  equally  distant  from  the  centre, 
which  is  not  the  case;  for  as  one  starts  from  the 
middle  and  goes  toward  either  end,  he  departs 
farther  and  farther  from  the  centre  [of  the  earth] 
and  is  therefore  constantly  going  uphill.  Whence 
if  follows  that  the  motion  cannot  remain  uni¬ 
form  through  any  distance  whatever,  but  must 
continually  diminish.  Besides,  I  do  not  see  how 
it  is  possible  to  avoid  the  resistance  of  the  medi¬ 
um  which  must  destroy  the  uniformity  of  the 
horizontal  motion  and  change  the  law  of  accel¬ 
eration  of  falling  bodies.  These  various  difficul¬ 
ties  render  it  highly  improbable  that  a  result 
derived  from  such  unreliable  hypotheses  should 
hold  true  in  practice. 

Salv.  All  these  difficulties  and  objections 
which  you  urge  are  so  well  founded  that  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  remove  them;  and,  as  for  me,  I  am 
ready  to  admit  them  all,  which  indeed  I  think 
our  Author  would  also  do.  I  grant  that  these 
conclusions  proved  in  the  abstract  will  be  differ¬ 
ent  when  applied  in  the  concrete  and  will  be 
fallacious  to  this  extent,  that  neither  will  the 
horizontal  motion  be  uniform  nor  the  natural 
acceleration  be  in  the  ratio  assumed,  nor  the 
path  of  the  projectile  a  parabola,  etc.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  I  ask  you  not  to  begrudge  our 
Author  that  which  other  eminent  men  have  as¬ 
sumed  even  if  not  strictly  true.  The  authority 
of  Archimedes  alone  will  satisfy  everybody.  In 
his  Mechanics  and  in  his  first  quadrature  of  the 
parabola  he  takes  for  granted  that  the  beam  of  a 
balance  or  steelyard  is  a  straight  line,  every  point 
of  which  is  equidistant  from  the  common  centre 
of  all  heavy  bodies,  and  that  the  cords  by  which 
heavy  bodies  are  suspended  are  parallel  to  each 
other. 

Some  consider  this  assumption  permissible 
because,  in  practice,  our  instruments  and  the 
distances  involved  are  so  small  in  comparison 
with  the  enormous  distance  from  the  centre  of 
the  earth  that  we  may  consider  a  minute  of  arc 


on  a  great  circle  as  a  straight  line,  and  may  re¬ 
gard  the  perpendiculars  let  fall  from  its  two  ex¬ 
tremities  as  parallel.  For  if  in  actual  practice  one 
had  to  consider  such  small  quantities,  it  would 
be  necessary  first  of  all  to  criticise  the  architects 
who  presume,  by  use  of  a  plumbline,  to  erect 
high  towers  with  parallel  sides.  I  may  add  that,  in 
all  their  discussions,  Archimedes  and  the  others 
considered  themselves  as  located  at  an  infinite 
distance  from  the  centre  of  the  earth,  in  which 
case  their  assumptions  were  not  false,  and  there¬ 
fore  their  conclusions  were  absolutely  correct. 
When  we  wish  to  apply  our  proven  conclusions 
to  distances  which,  though  finite,  are  very  large, 
it  is  necessary  for  us  to  infer,  on  the  basis  of  dem¬ 
onstrated  truth,  what  correction  is  to  be  made 
for  the  fact  that  our  distance  from  the  centre  of 
the  earth  is  not  really  infinite,  but  merely  very 
great  in  comparison  with  the  small  dimensions 
of  our  apparatus.  The  largest  of  these  will  be  the 
range  of  our  projectiles — and  even  here  we  need 
consider  only  the  artillery — which,  however 
great,  will  never  exceed  four  of  those  miles  of 
which  as  many  thousand  separate  us  from  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  earth;  and  since  these  paths  terminate 
upon  the  surface  of  the  earth  only  very  slight 
changes  can  take  place  in  their  parabolic  figure 
which,  it  is  conceded,  would  be  greatly  altered 
if  they  terminated  at  the  centre  of  the  earth. 

As  to  the  perturbation  arising  from  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  the  medium  this  is  more  considerable 
and  does  not,  on  account  of  its  manifold  forms, 
submit  to  fixed  laws  and  exact  description.  Thus 
if  we  consider  only  the  resistance  which  the  air 
offers  to  the  motions  studied  by  us,  we  shall  see 
that  it  disturbs  them  all  and  disturbs  them  in  an 
infinite  variety  of  ways  corresponding  to  the  in¬ 
finite  variety  in  the  form,  weight,  and  velocity 
of  the  projectiles.  For  as  to  velocity,  the  greater 
this  is,  the  greater  will  be  the  resistance  offered 
by  the  air;  a  resistance  which  will  be  greater  as 
the  moving  bodies  become  less  dense.  So  that  al¬ 
though  the  falling  body  ought  to  be  displaced 
in  proportion  to  the  square  of  the  duration  of  its 
motion,  yet  no  matter  how  heavy  the  body,  if 
it  falls  from  a  very  considerable  height,  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  the  air  will  be  such  as  to  prevent  any 
increase  in  speed  and  will  render  the  motion 
uniform;  and  in  proportion  as  the  moving  body 
is  less  dense  this  uniformity  will  be  so  much  the 
more  quickly  attained  and  after  a  shorter  fall. 
Even  horizontal  motion  which,  if  no  impedi¬ 
ment  were  offered,  would  be  uniform  and  con¬ 
stant  is  altered  by  the  resistance  of  the  air  and 
finally  ceases;  and  here  again  the  less  dense  the 
body  the  quicker  the  process.  Of  these  proper- 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


ties  of  weight,  of  velocity,  and  also  of  form,  in¬ 
finite  in  number,  it  is  not  possible  to  give  any 
exact  description;  hence,  in  order  to  handle  this 
matter  in  a  scientific  way,  it  is  necessary  to  cut 
loose  from  these  difficulties;  and  having  discov¬ 
ered  and  demonstrated  the  theorems,  in  the  case 
of  no  resistance,  to  use  them  and  apply  them 
with  such  limitations  as  experience  will  teach. 
And  the  advantage  of  this  method  will  not  be 
small;  for  the  material  and  shape  of  the  projec¬ 
tile  may  be  chosen,  as  dense  and  round  as  pos¬ 
sible,  so  that  it  will  encounter  the  least  resist¬ 
ance  in  the  medium.  Nor  will  the  spaces  and 
velocities  in  general  be  so  great  but  that  we  shall 
be  easily  able  to  correct  them  with  precision. 

In  the  case  of  those  projectiles  which  we  use, 
made  of  dense  material  and  round  in  shape,  or 
of  lighter  material  and  cylindrical  in  shape,  such 
as  arrows,  thrown  from  a  sling  or  crossbow,  the 
deviation  from  an  exact  parabolic  path  is  quite 
insensible.  Indeed,  if  you  will  allow  me  a  little 
greater  liberty,  I  can  show  you,  by  two  experi¬ 
ments,  that  the  dimensions  of  our  apparatus  are 
so  small  that  these  external  and  incidental  re¬ 
sistances,  among  which  that  of  the  medium  is 
the  most  considerable,  are  scarcely  observable. 

I  now  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  motions 
through  the  air,  since  it  is  with  these  that  we  are 
now  especially  concerned;  the  resistance  of  the 
air  exhibits  itself  in  two  ways:  first  by  offering 
greater  impedance  to  less  dense  than  to  very 
dense  bodies,  and  secondly  by  offering  greater 
resistance  to  a  body  in  rapid  motion  than  to  the 
same  body  in  slow  motion. 

Regarding  the  first  of  these,  consider  the  case 
of  two  balls  having  the  same  dimensions,  but 
one  weighing  ten  or  twelve  times  as  much  as  the 
other;  one,  say,  of  lead,  the  other  of  oak,  both 
allowed  to  fall  from  an  elevation  of  150  or  200 
cubits. 

Experiment  shows  that  they  will  reach  the 
earth  with  slight  difference  in  speed,  showing  us 
that  in  both  cases  the  retardation  caused  by  the 
air  is  small;  for  if  both  balls  start  at  the  same 
moment  and  at  the  same  elevation,  and  if  the 
leaden  one  be  slightly  retarded  and  the  wooden 
one  greatly  retarded,  then  the  former  ought  to 
reach  the  earth  a  considerable  distance  in  ad¬ 
vance  of  the  latter,  since  it  is  ten  times  as  heavy. 
But  this  does  not  happen;  indeed,  the  gain  in 
distance  of  one  over  the  other  does  not  amount 
to  the  hundredth  part  of  the  entire  fall.  And  in 
the  case  of  a  ball  of  stone  weighing  only  a  third 
or  half  as  much  as  one  of  lead,  the  difference  in 
their  times  of  reaching  the  earth  will  be  scarcely 
noticeable.  Now  since  the  speed  acquired  by  a 


leaden  ball  in  falling  from  a  height  of  200  cubits 
is  so  great  that  if  the  motion  remained  uniform 
the  ball  would,  in  an  interval  of  time  equal  to 
that  of  the  fall,  traverse  400  cubits,  and  since 
this  speed  is  so  considerable  in  comparison  with 
those  which,  by  use  of  bows  or  other  machines 
except  fire  arms,  we  are  able  to  give  to  our  pro¬ 
jectiles,  it  follows  that  we  may,  without  sensible 
error,  regard  as  absolutely  true  those  proposi¬ 
tions  which  we  are  about  to  prove  without  con¬ 
sidering  the  resistance  of  the  medium. 

Passing  now  to  the  second  case,  where  we  have 
to  show  that  the  resistance  of  the  air  for  a  rapid¬ 
ly  moving  body  is  not  very  much  greater  than 
for  one  moving  slowly,  ample  proof  is  given  by 
the  following  experiment.  Attach  to  two  threads 
of  equal  length — say  four  or  five  yards — two 
equal  leaden  balls  and  suspend  them  from  the 
ceiling;  now  pull  them  aside  from  the  perpen¬ 
dicular,  the  one  through  80  or  more  degrees, 
the  other  through  not  more  than  four  or  five 
degrees;  so  that,  when  set  free,  the  one  falls, 
passes  through  the  perpendicular,  and  describes 
large  but  slowly  decreasing  arcs  of  160,  150,  140 
degrees,  etc.;  the  other  swinging  through  small 
and  also  slowly  diminishing  arcs  of  10,  8,  6,  de¬ 
grees,  etc. 

In  the  first  place  it  must  be  remarked  that  one 
pendulum  passes  through  its  arcs  of  180°,  160®, 
etc.,  in  the  same  time  that  the  other  swings 
through  its  10°,  8°,  etc.,  from  which  it  follows 
that  the  speed  of  the  first  ball  is  16  and  18  times 
greater  than  that  of  the  second.  Accordingly,  if 
the  air  offers  more  resistance  to  the  high  speed 
than  to  the  low,  the  frequency  of  vibration  in 
the  large  arcs  of  180°  or  160°,  etc.,  ought  to  be 
less  than  in  the  small  arcs  of  10°,  8°,  4°,  etc.,  and 
even  less  than  in  arcs  of  2°,  or  1°;  but  this  pre¬ 
diction  is  not  verified  by  experiment;  because  if 
two  persons  start  to  count  the  vibrations,  the 
one  the  large,  the  other  the  small,  they  will  dis¬ 
cover  that  after  counting  tens  and  even  hun¬ 
dreds  they  will  not  differ  by  a  single  vibration, 
not  even  by  a  fraction  of  one. 

This  observation  justifies  the  two  following 
propositions,  namely,  that  vibrations  of  very 
large  and  very  small  amplitude  all  occupy  the 
same  time  and  that  the  resistance  of  the  air  does 
not  affect  motions  of  high  speed  more  than  those 
of  low  speed,  contrary  to  the  opinion  hitherto 
generally  entertained. 

Sagr.  On  the  contrary,  since  we  cannot  deny 
that  the  air  hinders  both  of  these  motions,  both 
becoming  slower  and  finally  vanishing,  we  have 
to  admit  that  the  retardation  occurs  in  the  same 
proportion  in  each  case.  But  how?  How,  indeed, 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


could  the  resistance  offered  to  the  one  body  be 
greater  than  that  offered  to  the  other  except  by 
the  impartation  of  more  momentum  and  speed 
to  the  fast  body  than  to  the  slow?  And  if  this  is 
so  the  speed  with  which  a  body  moves  is  at  once 
the  cause  and  measure  of  the  resistance  which  it 
meets.  Therefore,  all  motions,  fast  or  slow,  are 
hindered  and  diminished  in  the  same  propor¬ 
tion;  a  result,  it  seems  to  me,  of  no  small  im¬ 
portance. 

Salv.  We  are  able,  therefore,  in  this  second 
case  to  say  that  the  errors,  neglecting  those  which 
are  accidental,  in  the  results  which  we  are  about 
to  demonstrate  are  small  in  the  case  of  our  ma¬ 
chines  where  the  velocities  employed  are  mostly 
very  great  and  the  distances  negligible  in  com¬ 
parison  with  the  semidiameter  of  the  earth  or 
one  of  its  great  circles. 

Simp.  I  would  like  to  hear  your  reason  for 
putting  the  projectiles  of  fire  arms,  /.  (?.,  those 
using  powder,  in  a  different  class  from  the  pro¬ 
jectiles  employed  in  bows,  slings,  and  crossbows, 
on  the  ground  of  their  not  being  equally  subject 
to  change  and  resistance  from  the  air. 

Salv.  I  am  led  to  this  view  by  the  excessive 
and,  so  to  speak,  supernatural  violence  with 
which  such  projectiles  are  launched;  for,  indeed, 
it  appears  to  me  that  without  exaggeration  one 
might  say  that  the  speed  of  a  ball  fired  either 
from  a  musket  or  from  a  piece  of  ordnance  is 
supernatural.  For  if  such  a  ball  be  allowed  to  fall 
from  some  great  elevation  its  speed  will,  owing 
to  the  resistance  of  the  air,  not  go  on  increasing 
indefinitely;  that  which  happens  to  bodies  of 
small  density  in  falling  through  short  distances 
— I  mean  the  reduction  of  their  motion  to  uni¬ 
formity — will  also  happen  to  a  ball  of  iron  or 
lead  after  it  has  fallen  a  few  thousand  cubits; 
this  terminal  or  final  speed  is  the  maximum 
which  such  a  heavy  body  can  naturally  acquire 
in  falling  through  the  air.  This  speed  I  estimate 
to  be  much  smaller  than  that  impressed  upon 
the  ball  by  the  burning  powder. 

An  appropriate  experiment  will  serve  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  this  fact.  From  a  height  of  one  hundred 
or  more  cubits  fire  a  gun  loaded  with  a  lead  bul¬ 
let,  vertically  downwards  upon  a  stone  pave¬ 
ment;  with  the  same  gun  shoot  against  a  similar 
stone  from  a  distance  of  one  or  two  cubits,  and 
observ^e  which  of  the  two  balls  is  the  more  flat¬ 
tened.  Now  if  the  ball  which  has  come  from  the 
greater  elevation  is  found  to  be  the  less  flattened 
of  the  two,  this  will  show  that  the  air  has  hin¬ 
dered  and  diminished  the  speed  initially  impart¬ 
ed  to  the  bullet  by  the  powder,  and  that  the  air 
will  not  permit  a  bullet  to  acquire  so  great  a 


speed,  no  matter  from  what  height  it  falls;  for  if 
the  speed  impressed  upon  the  ball  by  the  fire 
does  not  exceed  that  acquired  by  it  in  falling 
freely  then  its  downward  blow  ought  to  be 
greater  rather  than  less. 

This  experiment  I  have  not  performed,  but  I 
am  of  the  opinion  that  a  musket-ball  or  cannon- 
shot,  falling  from  a  height  as  great  as  you  please, 
will  not  deliver  so  strong  a  blow  as  it  would  if 
fired  into  a  wall  only  a  few  cubits  distant,  /.  at 
such  a  short  range  that  the  splitting  or  rending 
of  the  air  will  not  be  sufiicient  to  rob  the  shot  of 
that  excess  of  supernatural  violence  given  it  by 
the  powder. 

The  enormous  momentum  of  these  violent 
shots  may  cause  some  deformation  of  the  tra¬ 
jectory,  making  the  beginning  of  the  parabola 
flatter  and  less  curved  than  the  end;  but,  so  far 
as  our  Author  is  concerned,  this  is  a  matter  of 
small  consequence  in  practical  operations,  the 
main  one  of  which  is  the  preparation  of  a  table 
of  ranges  for  shots  of  high  elevation,  giving  the 
distance  attained  by  the  ball  as  a  function  of  the 
angle  of  elevation;  and  since  shots  of  this  kind 
are  fired  from  mortars  using  small  charges  and 
imparting  no  supernatural  momentum  they  fol¬ 
low  their  prescribed  paths  very  exactly. 

But  now  let  us  proceed  with  the  discussion  in 
which  the  Author  invites  us  to  the  study  and 
investigation  of  the  motion  of  a  body  when  that 
motion  is  compounded  of  two  others;  and  first 
the  case  in  which  the  two  are  uniform,  the  one 
horizontal,  the  other  vertical. 

Theorem  II,  Proposition  II 

When  the  motion  of  a  body  is  the  resultant  of  two 
uniform  motions^  one  horizontal,  the  other  perpen¬ 
dicular,  the  square  of  the  resultant  momentum  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  two  com¬ 
ponent  momenta. 

Let  us  imagine  any  body  urged  by  two  uni¬ 
form  motions  and  let  ab  represent  the  vertical 
displacement,  while  be  represents  the  displace- 


a 


Fig.  109 

ment  which,  in  the  same  interv^al  of  time,  takes 
place  in  a  horizontal  direction.  If  then  the  dis¬ 
tances  ab  and  ^^rare  traversed,  during  the  same 
time-interval,  with  uniform  motions  the  corre¬ 
sponding  momenta  will  be  to  each  other  as  the 
distances  ab  and  be  are  to  each  other;  but  the 
body  which  is  urged  by  these  two  motions  de- 


244 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


scribes  the  diagonal  ac;  its  momentum  is  propor¬ 
tional  to  ac.  Also  the  square  of  ac  is  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  squares  oiab  and  be.  Hence  the  square 
of  the  resultant  momentum  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  squares  of  the  two  momenta  ab  and  be. 

Q.  E.  D. 

Simp.  At  this  point  there  is  just  one  slight 
difficulty  which  needs  to  be  cleared  up;  for  it 
seems  to  me  that  the  conclusion  just  reached 
contradicts  a  previous  proposition  in  which  it  is 
claimed  that  the  speed  of  a  body  coming  from  a 
to  b  is  equal  to  that  in  coming  from  a  to  c;  while 
now  you  conclude  that  the  speed  at  c  is  greater 
than  that  at  b. 

Salv.  Both  propositions,  Simplicio,  are  true, 
yet  there  is  a  great  difference  between  them. 
Here  we  are  speaking  of  a  body  urged  by  a  single 
motion  which  is  the  resultant  of  two  uniform 
motions,  while  there  we  were  speaking  of  two 
bodies  each  urged  with  naturally  accelerated 
motions,  onealong  the  vertical  ab  the  other  along 
the  inclined  plane  ac.  Besides  the  time-intervals 
were  there  not  supposed  to  be  equal,  that  along 
the  incline  ac  being  greater  than  that  along  the 
vertical  ab;  but  the  motions  of  which  we  now 
speak,  those  along  ab^  be,,  ac,,  are  uniform  and 
simultaneous. 

Simp.  Pardon  me;  I  am  satisfied;  pray  go  on. 

Salv.  Our  Author  next  undertakes  to  explain 
what  happens  when  a  body  is  urged  by  a  motion 
compounded  of  one  which  is  horizontal  and  uni¬ 
form  and  of  another  which  is  vertical  but  natu¬ 
rally  accelerated;  from  these  two  components 
results  the  path  of  a  projectile,  which  is  a  para¬ 
bola.  The  problem  is  to  determine  the  speed  of 
the  projectile  at  each  point.  With  this  purpose 
in  view  our  Author  sets  forth  as  follows  the  man¬ 
ner,  or  rather  the  method,  of  measuring  such 
speed  along  the  path  which  is  taken  by  a  heavy 
body  starting  from  rest  and  falling  with  a  natu¬ 
rally  accelerated  motion. 

Theorem  III,  Proposition  III 

Let  the  motion  take  place  along  the  line  ab^ 
starting  from  rest  at  a,  and  in  this  line  choose 
any  point  c.  Let  ac  represent  the  time,  or  the 
measure  of  the  time,  required  for  the  body  to 
fall  through  the  space  ac;  let  ac  also  represent 
the  velocity  at  c  acquired  by  a  fall  through  the 
distance  ac.  In  the  line  ab  select  any  other  point 
b.  The  problem  now  is  to  determine  the  velocity 
at  b  acquired  by  a  body  in  falling  through  the 
distance  ab  and  to  express  this  in  terms  of  the 
velocity  at  r,  the  measure  of  which  is  the  length 
ac.  Take  a  mean  proportional  between  ^rand 
ab.  We  shall  prove  that  the  velocity  at  b  is  to 


that  at  as  the  length  as  is  to  the  length  ac.  Draw 
the  horizontal  line  cd,,  having  twice  the  length 
of  ac,  and  be,  having  twice  the  length  of  ba.  It 
then  follows,  from  the  preceding  theorems,  that 


e 


I _ 

Fig.  no 


S 

b 


a  body  falling  through  the  distance  ac,  and  turned 
so  as  to  move  along  the  horizontal  cd  with  a  uni¬ 
form  speed  equal  to  that  acquired  on  reaching  c 
will  traverse  the  distance  cd  in  the  same  interval 
of  time  as  that  required  to  fall  with  accelerated 
motion  from  a  to  c.  Likewise  will  be  traversed 
in  the  same  time  as  ba.  But  the  time  of  descent 
through  ab  is  as;  hence  the  horizontal  distance 
be  is  also  traversed  in  the  time  as.  Take  a  point 
I  such  that  the  time  as  is  to  the  time  aczsbe  is  to 
bl;  since  the  motion  along  be  is  uniform,  the  dis¬ 
tance  bl,  if  traversed  with  the  speed  acquired  at 

will  occupy  the  time  ac;  but  in  this  same  time- 
interval,  ac,  the  distance  cd  is  traversed  with 
the  speed  acquired  in  c.  Now  two  speeds  are  to 
each  other  as  the  distances  traversed  in  equal 
intervals  of  time.  Hence  the  speed  at  cis  to  the 
speed  at  b  as  cd  is  to  bl.  But  since  dc  is  to  be  as 
their  halves,  namely,  as  ca  is  to  ba,  and  since  be 
is  to  bl  as  ba  is  to  sa;  it  follows  that  dc  is  to  bl  as 
ca  is  to  sa.  In  other  words,  the  speed  at  d:  is  to 
that  at  b  as  ca  is  to  sa,  that  is,  as  the  time  of  fall 
through  ab. 

The  method  of  measuring  the  speed  of  a  body 
along  the  direction  of  its  fall  is  thus  clear;  the 
speed  is  assumed  to  increase  directly  as  the  time. 

But  before  we  proceed  further,  since  this  dis¬ 
cussion  is  to  deal  with  the  motion  compounded 
of  a  uniform  horizontal  one  and  one  accelerated 
vertically  downwards — the  path  of  a  projectile, 
namely,  a  parabola — it  is  necessary  that  we  de¬ 
fine  some  common  standard  by  which  we  may 
estimate  the  velocity,  or  momentum  of  both 
motions;  and  since  from  the  innumerable  uni¬ 
form  velocities  one  only,  and  that  not  selected 
at  random,  is  to  be  compounded  with  a  velocity 
acquired  by  naturally  accelerated  motion,  I  can 
think  of  no  simpler  way  of  selecting  and  meas¬ 
uring  this  than  to  assume  another  of  the  same 
kind.*  For  the  sake  of  clearness,  draw  the  verti- 


^  Galileo  here  proposes  to  employ  as  a  standard  of  vel¬ 
ocity  the  terminal  speed  of  a  body  falling  freely  from  a 
given  height.  Trans. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


cal  line  ac  to  meet  the  horizontal  line  be.  Ac  is 
the  height  and  be  the  amplitude  of  the  semi- 
parabola  aby  which  is  the  resultant  of  the  two 
motions,  one  that  of  a  body  falling  from  rest  at 
Uy  through  the  distance  aCy  with  naturally  ac¬ 


celerated  motion,  the  other  a  uniform  motion 
along  the  horizontal  ad.  The  speed  acquired  at 
r  by  a  fall  through  the  distance  ae  is  determined 
by  the  height  ae;  for  the  speed  of  a  body  falling 
from  the  same  elevation  is  always  one  and  the 
same;  but  along  the  horizontal  one  may  give  a 
body  an  infinite  number  of  uniform  speeds. 
However,  in  order  that  I  may  select  one  out  of 
this  multitude  and  separate  it  from  the  rest  in  a 
perfectly  definite  manner,  I  will  extend  the 
height  ca  upwards  to  e  just  as  far  as  is  necessary 
and  will  call  this  distance  ae  the  “sublimity.’' 
Imagine  a  body  to  fall  from  rest  at  e;  it  is  clear 
that  we  may  make  its  terminal  speed  at  a  the 
same  as  that  with  which  the  same  body  travels 
along  the  horizontal  line  ad;  this  speed  will  be 
such  that,  in  the  time  of  descent  along  ea,  it  will 
describe  a  horizontal  distance  twice  the  length 
of  ea.  This  preliminary  remark  seems  necessary. 

The  reader  is  reminded  that  above  I  have 
called  the  horizontal  line  cb  the  “amplitude”  of 
the  semi-parabola  ab;  the  axis  ae  of  this  parab¬ 
ola,  I  have  called  its  “altitude”;  but  the  line  ea 
the  fall  along  which  determines  the  horizontal 
speed  I  have  called  the  “sublimity.”  These  mat¬ 
ters  having  been  explained,  I  proceed  with  the 
demonstration. 

Sagr.  Allow  me,  please,  to  interrupt  in  order 
that  I  may  point  out  the  beautiful  agreement 
between  this  thought  of  the  Author  and  the 
views  of  Plato  concerning  the  origin  of  the 
various  uniform  speeds  with  which  the  heaven¬ 
ly  bodies  revolve.  The  latter  chanced  upon  the 


245 

idea  that  a  body  could  not  pass  from  rest  to  any 
given  speed  and  maintain  it  uniformly  except 
by  passing  through  all  the  degrees  of  speed  in¬ 
termediate  between  the  given  speed  and  rest. 
Plato  thought  that  God,  after  having  created 
the  heavenly  bodies,  assigned  them  the  proper 
and  uniform  speeds  with  which  they  were  for¬ 
ever  to  revolve;  and  that  He  made  them  start 
from  rest  and  move  over  definite  distances  un¬ 
der  a  natural  and  rectilinear  acceleration  such 
as  governs  the  motion  of  terrestrial  bodies.  He 
added  that  once  these  bodies  had  gained  their 
proper  and  permanent  speed,  their  rectilinear 
motion  was  converted  into  a  circular  one,  the 
only  motion  capable  of  maintaining  uniform¬ 
ity,  a  motion  in  which  the  body  revolves  with¬ 
out  either  receding  from  or  approaching  its  de¬ 
sired  goal.  This  conception  is  truly  worthy  of 
Plato;  and  it  is  to  be  all  the  more  highly  prized 
since  its  underlying  principles  remained  hidden 
until  discovered  by  our  Author  who  removed 
from  them  the  mask  and  poetical  dress  and  set 
forth  the  idea  in  correct  historical  perspective. 
In  view  of  the  fact  that  astronomical  science 
furnishes  us  such  complete  information  con¬ 
cerning  the  size  of  the  planetary  orbits,  the  dis¬ 
tances  of  these  bodies  from  their  centres  of 
revolution,  and  their  velocities,  I  cannot  help 
thinking  that  our  Author  (to  whom  this  idea  of 
Plato  was  not  unknown)  had  some  curiosity  to 
discover  whether  or  not  a  definite  “sublimity” 
might  be  assigned  to  each  planet,  such  that,  if 
it  were  to  start  from  rest  at  this  particular  height 
and  to  fall  with  naturally  accelerated  motion 
along  a  straight  line,  and  were  later  to  change 
the  speed  thus  acquired  into  uniform  motion, 
the  size  of  its  orbit  and  its  period  of  revolution 
would  be  those  actually  observed. 

Salv.  I  think  I  remember  his  having  told  me 
that  he  once  made  the  computation  and  found 
a  satisfactory  correspondence  with  observa¬ 
tion.  But  he  did  not  wish  to  speak  of  it,  lest  in 
view  of  the  odium  which  his  many  new  discov¬ 
eries  had  already  brought  upon  him,  this 
might  be  adding  fuel  to  the  fire.  But  if  any  one 
desires  such  information  he  can  obtain  it  for 
himself  from  the  theory  set  forth  in  the  present 
treatment. 

We  now  proceed  with  the  matter  in  hand, 
which  is  to  prove : 

Problem  I,  Proposition  IV 

To  determine  the  momentum  of  a  projectile  at 
each  particular  point  in  its  given  parabolic  path. 

Let  bee  be  the  semi-parabola  whose  ampli¬ 
tude  is  cd  and  whose  height  is  dby  which  latter 


246  GALILEO  GALILEI 


extended  upwards  cuts  the  tangent  of  the  para¬ 
bola  ca  in  a.  Through  the  vertex  draw  the  hori¬ 
zontal  line  bi  parallel  to  cd.  Now  if  the  ampli¬ 
tude  cd  is  equal  to  the  entire  height  day  then  bi 
will  be  equal  to  ba  and  also  to  bd;  and  if  we 
take  ab  as  the  measure  of  the  time  required  for 
fall  through  the  distance  ab  and  also  of  the  mo¬ 
mentum  acquired  at  b  in  consequence  of  its  fall 
from  rest  at  tty  then  if  we  turn  into  a  horizontal 
direction  the  momentum  acquired  by  fall 
through  aby  the  space  traversed  in  the  same  in¬ 
terval  of  time  will  be  represented  by  dc  which 
is  twice  bi.  But  a  body  which  falls  from  rest  at  b 
along  the  line  bd  will  during  the  same  time-in¬ 
terval  fall  through  the  height  of  the  parabola 
bd.  Hence  a  body  falling  from  rest  at  turned 
into  a  horizontal  direction  with  the  speed  aby 
will  traverse  a  space  equal  to  dc.  Now  if  one  su¬ 
perposes  upon  this  motion  a  fall  along  bdy  trav¬ 
ersing  the  height  bd  while  the  parabola  be  is 
described,  then  the  momentum  of  the  body  at 


the  terminal  point  c  is  the  resultant  of  a  uni¬ 
form  horizontal  momentum,  whose  value  is 
represented  by  aby  and  of  another  momentum 
acquired  by  fall  from  b  to  the  terminal  point 
d  or  c;  these  two  momenta  are  equal.  If,  there¬ 
fore,  we  take  ab  to  be  the  measure  of  one  of 
these  momenta,  say,  the  uniform  horizontal 
one,  then  biy  which  is  equal  to  bdy  will  rep¬ 
resent  the  momentum  acquired  at  d  or  c;  and 
ia  will  represent  the  resultant  of  these  two 
momenta,  that  is,  the  total  momentum  with 
which  the  projectile,  travelling  along  the  para¬ 
bola,  strikes  at  c. 

With  this  in  mind  let  us  take  any  point  on 
the  parabola,  say  e,  and  determine  the  momen¬ 
tum  with  which  the  projectile  passes  that  point. 
Draw  the  horizontal  ^and  take  ^ga  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  bd  and  bf.  Now  since  ab,  or 
bdy  is  assumed  to  be  the  measure  of  the  time  and 
of  the  momentum  acquired  by  falling  from  rest 
at  b  through  the  distance  bdy  it  follows  that  bg 


will  measure  the  time  and  also  the  momentum 
acquired  at y^by  fall  from  b.  If  therefore  we  lay 
off  bOy  equal  to  bgy  the  diagonal  line  joining  a 
and  o  will  represent  the  momentum  at  the  point 
e;  because  the  length  ab  has  been  assumed  to 
represent  the  momentum  at  b  which,  after  di¬ 
version  into  a  horizontal  direction,  remains  con¬ 
stant;  and  because  bo  measures  the  momentum 
at f  or  €y  acquired  by  fall,  from  rest  at  by  through 
the  height  bf.  But  the  square  of  ao  equals  the 
sum  of  the  squares  of  ab  and  ho.  Hence  the  the¬ 
orem  sought. 

Sagr.  The  manner  in  which  you  compound 
these  different  momenta  to  obtain  their  result¬ 
ant  strikes  me  as  so  novel  that  my  mind  is  left 
in  no  small  confusion.  I  do  not  refer  to  the  com¬ 
position  of  two  uniform  motions,  even  when  un¬ 
equal,  and  when  one  takes  place  along  a  hori¬ 
zontal,  the  other  along  a  vertical  direction;  be¬ 
cause  in  this  case  I  am  thoroughly  convinced 
that  the  resultant  is  a  motion  whose  square  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  two  com¬ 
ponents.  The  confusion  arises  when  one  under¬ 
takes  to  compound  a  uniform  horizontal  mo¬ 
tion  with  a  vertical  one  which  is  naturally  ac¬ 
celerated.  I  trust,  therefore,  we  may  pursue  this 
discussion  more  at  length. 

Simp.  And  I  need  this  even  more  than  you 
since  I  am  not  yet  as  clear  in  my  mind  as  I  ought 
to  be  concerning  those  fundamental  propositions 
upon  which  the  others  rest.  Even  in  the  case  of 
the  two  uniform  motions,  one  horizontal,  the 
other  perpendicular,  I  wish  to  understand  bet¬ 
ter  the  manner  in  which  you  obtain  the  result¬ 
ant  from  the  components.  Now,  Salviati,  you 
understand  what  we  need  and  what  we  desire. 

Sal\'.  Your  request  is  altogether  reasonable 
and  I  will  see  whether  my  long  consideration  of 
these  matters  will  enable  me  to  make  them  clear 
to  you.  But  you  must  excuse  me  if  in  the  ex¬ 
planation  I  repeat  many  things  already  said  by 
the  Author. 

Concerning  motions  and  their  velocities  or 
momenta  whether  uniform  or  naturally  acceler¬ 
ated,  one  cannot  speak  definitely  until  he  has 
established  a  measure  for  such  velocities  and  also 
for  time.  As  for  time  we  have  the  already  widely 
adopted  hours,  first  minutes  and  second  min¬ 
utes.  So  for  velocities,  just  as  for  intervals  of 
time,  there  is  need  of  a  common  standard  which 
shall  be  understood  and  accepted  by  every  one, 
and  which  shall  be  the  same  for  all.  As  has  al¬ 
ready  been  stated,  the  Author  considers  the  ve¬ 
locity  of  a  freely  falling  body  adapted  to  this 
purpose,  since  this  velocity  increases  according 
to  the  same  law  in  all  parts  of  the  world;  thus 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


for  instance  the  speed  acquired  by  a  leaden  ball 
of  a  pound  weight  starting  from  rest  and  falling 
vertically  through  the  height  of,  say,  a  spear’s 
length  is  the  same  in  all  places;  it  is  therefore  ex¬ 
cellently  adapted  for  representing  the  momen¬ 
tum  acquired  in  the  case  of  natural  fall. 

It  still  remains  for  us  to  discover  a  method  of 
measuring  momentum  in  the  case  of  uniform 
motion  in  such  a  way  that  all  who  discuss  the 
subject  will  form  the  same  conception  of  its  size 
and  velocity.  This  will  prevent  one  person  from 
imagining  it  larger,  another  smaller,  than  it 
really  is;  so  that  in  the  composition  of  a  given 
uniform  motion  with  one  which  is  accelerated 
different  men  may  not  obtain  different  values 
for  the  resultant.  In  order  to  determine  and  rep¬ 
resent  such  a  momentum  and  particular  speed 
our  Author  has  found  no  better  method  than  to 
use  the  momentum  acquired  by  a  body  in  nat¬ 
urally  accelerated  motion.  The  speed  of  a  body 
which  has  in  this  manner  acquired  any  momen¬ 
tum  whatever  will,  when  converted  into  uni¬ 
form  motion,  retain  precisely  such  a  speed  as, 
during  a  time-interval  equal  to  that  of  the  fall, 
will  carry  the  body  through  a  distance  equal  to 
twice  that  of  the  fall.  But  since  this  matter  is 
one  which  is  fundamental  in  our  discussion  it  is 
well  that  we  make  it  perfectly  clear  by  means  of 
some  particular  example. 

Let  us  consider  the  speed  and  momentum  ac¬ 
quired  by  a  body  falling  through  the  height,  say, 
of  a  spear  as  a  standard  which  we  may  use  in  the 
measurement  of  other  speeds  and  momenta  as 
occasion  demands;  assume  for  instance  that  the 
time  of  such  a  fall  is  four  seconds;  now  in  order 
to  measure  the  speed  acquired  from  a  fall  through 
any  other  height,  whether  greater  or  less,  one 
must  not  conclude  that  these  speeds  bear  to  one 
another  the  same  ratio  as  the  heights  of  fall;  for 
instance,  it  is  not  true  that  a  fall  through  four 
times  a  given  height  confers  a  speed  four  times 
as  great  as  that  acquired  by  descent  through  the 
given  height;  because  the  speed  of  a  naturally 
accelerated  motion  does  not  vary  in  proportion 
to  the  time.  As  has  been  shown  above,  the  ratio 
of  the  spaces  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the  ratio  of 
the  times. 

If,  then,  as  is  often  done  for  the  sake  of  brev¬ 
ity,  we  take  the  same  limited  straight  line  as  the 
measure  of  the  speed,  and  of  the  time,  and  also 
of  the  space  traversed  during  that  time,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  duration  of  fall  and  the  speed  ac¬ 
quired  by  the  same  body  in  passing  over  any 
other  distance,  is  not  represented  by  this  second 
distance,  but  by  a  mean  proportional  between 
the  two  distances.  This  I  can  better  illustrate  by 


an  example.  In  the  vertical  line  aCy  lay  off  the 
portion  al?  to  represent  the  distance  traversed 
by  a  body  falling  freely  with  accelerated 
motion :  the  time  of  fall  may  be  represent-  T  ^ 
ed  by  any  limited  straight  line,  but  for 
the  sake  of  brevity,  we  shall  represent  it  ^ 
by  the  same  length  al?;  this  length  may 
also  be  employed  as  a  measure  of  the  mo¬ 
mentum  and  speed  acquired  during  the  ^ 
motion;  in  short,  let  ah  be  a  measure  of 
the  various  physical  quantities  which 
enter  this  discussion. 

Having  agreed  arbitrarily  upon  ah  as  a 
measure  of  these  three  different  quanti-  ^ 
ties,  namely,  space,  time,  and  momen- 
turn,  our  next  task  is  to  find  the  time  re-  ^ 
quired  for  fall  through  a  given  vertical 
distance  aCy  also  the  momentum  acquired  at 
the  terminal  point  c,  both  of  which  are  to  be 
expressed  in  terms  of  the  time  and  momentum 
represented  by  ah.  These  two  required  quan¬ 
tities  are  obtained  by  laying  off  ady  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  ah  and  ac;  in  other  words,  the 
time  of  fall  from  to  c  is  represented  by  ad  on 
the  same  scale  on  which  we  agreed  that  the  time 
of  fall  from  a  to  h  should  be  represented  by  ah. 
In  like  manner,  we  may  say  that  the  momen¬ 
tum  acquired  at  cis  related  to  that  acquired  at 
hy  in  the  same  manner  that  the  line  ad  is  related 
to  ahy  since  the  velocity  varies  directly  as  the 
time,  a  conclusion,  which  although  employed  as 
a  postulate  in  Proposition  III,  is  here  amplified 
by  the  Author. 

This  point  being  clear  and  well-established 
we  pass  to  the  consideration  of  the  momentum 
in  the  case  of  two  compound  motions,  one  of 
which  is  compounded  of  a  uniform  horizontal 
and  a  uniform  vertical  motion,  while  the  other 
is  compounded  of  a  uniform  horizontal  and  a 
naturally  accelerated  vertical  motion.  If  both 
components  are  uniform,  and  one  at  right  angles 
to  the  other,  we  have  already  seen  that  the  square 
of  the  resultant  is  obtained  by  adding  the  squares 
of  the  components  [p.  244],  as  will  be  clear  from 
the  following  illustration. 


a 


Let  us  imagine  a  body  to  move  along  the  ver¬ 
tical  ah  with  a  uniform  momentum  of  3,  and  on 


2aS  GALILEO  GALILEI 


reaching  b  to  move  toward  c  with  a  momentum 
of  4,  so  that  during  the  same  time-interval  it  will 
traverse  3  cubits  along  the  vertical  and  4  along 
the  horizontal.  But  a  particle  which  moves  with 
the  resultant  velocity  will,  in  the  same  time, 
traverse  the  diagonal  aCy  whose  length  is  not  7 
cubits— the  sum  of  ab  (3)  and  (4)— but  5, 
which  is  in  potenza  equal  to  the  sum  of  3  and  4, 
that  is,  the  squares  of  3  and  4  when  added  make 
25,  which  is  the  square  of  aCy  and  is  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  squares  of  ab  and  be.  Hence  ac  is  rep¬ 
resented  by  the  side— or  we  may  say  the  root— 
of  a  square  whose  area  is  25,  namely  5. 

As  a  fixed  and  certain  rule  for  obtaining  the 
momentum  which  results  from  two  uniform 
momenta,  one  vertical,  the  other  horizontal,  we 
have  therefore  the  following:  take  the  square  of 
each,  add  these  together,  and  extract  the  square 
root  of  the  sum,  which  will  be  the  momentum 
resulting  from  the  two.  Thus,  in  the  above  ex¬ 
ample,  the  body  which  in  virtue  of  its  vertical 
motion  would  strike  the  horizontal  plane  with  a 
momentum  of  3,  would,  owing  to  its  horizontal 
motion  alone,  strike  at  r  with  a  momentum  of  4; 
but  if  the  body  strikes  with  a  momentum  which 
is  the  resultant  of  these  two,  its  blow  will  be 
that  of  a  body  moving  with  a  momentum  of  5; 
and  such  a  blow  will  be  the  same  at  all  points  of 
the  diagonal  aCy  since  its  components  are  always 
the  same  and  never  increase  or  diminish. 

Let  us  now  pass  to  the  consideration  of  a  uni¬ 
form  horizontal  motion  compounded  with  the 
vertical  motion  of  a  freely  falling  body  starting 
from  rest.  It  is  at  once  clear  that  the  diagonal 
which  represents  the  motion  compounded  of 
these  two  is  not  a  straight  line,  but,  as  has  been 
demonstrated,  a  semi-parabola,  in  which  the 
momentum  is  always  increasing  because  the 
speed  of  the  vertical  component  isalways  increas¬ 
ing.  Wherefore,  to  determine  the  momentum  at 
any  given  point  in  the  parabolic  diagonal,  it  is 
necessary  first  to  fix  upon  the  uniform  horizon¬ 
tal  momentum  and  then,  treating  the  body  as 
one  falling  freely,  to  find  the  vertical  momen¬ 
tum  at  the  given  point;  this  latter  can  be  deter¬ 
mined  only  by  taking  into  account  the  duration 
of  fall,  a  consideration  which  does  not  enter  into 
the  composition  of  two  uniform  motions  where 
the  velocities  and  momenta  are  always  the  same; 
but  here  where  one  of  the  component  motions 
has  an  initial  value  of  zero  and  increases  its  speed 
in  direct  proportion  to  the  time,  it  follows  that 
the  time  must  determine  the  speed  at  the  as¬ 
signed  point.  It  only  remains  to  obtain  the  mo¬ 
mentum  resulting  from  these  two  components 
(as  in  the  case  of  uniform  motions)  by  placing 


the  square  of  the  resultant  equal  to  the  sum  of 
the  squares  of  the  two  components.  But  here 
again  it  is  better  to  illustrate  by  means  of  an 
example. 

On  the  vertical  ^rlay  off  any  portion  ab  which 
we  shall  employ  as  a  measure  of  the  space  trav¬ 
ersed  by  a  body  falling  freely  along  the  perpen¬ 
dicular,  likewise  as  a  measure  of  the  time  and 
also  of  the  speed  or,  we  may  say,  of  the  momenta. 
It  is  at  once  clear  that  if  the  momentum  of  a 
body  at  by  after  having  fallen  from  rest  at  be 


diverted  along  the  horizontal  direction  bdy  with 
uniform  motion,  its  speed  will  be  such  that,  dur¬ 
ing  the  time-interval  aby  it  will  traverse  a  dis¬ 
tance  which  is  represented  by  the  line  bd  and 
which  is  twice  as  great  as  ab.  Now  choose  a  point 
Cy  such  that^iTshall  be  equal  to  ^7^,  and  through 
draw  the  line  equal  and  parallel  to  bd;  through 
the  points  b  and  e  draw  the  parabola  bei.  And 
since,  during  the  time-interval  aby  the  horizon¬ 
tal  distance  bd  or  ccy  double  the  length  aby  is 
traversed  with  the  momentum  aby  and  since 
during  an  equal  time-interval  the  vertical  dis¬ 
tance  be  is  traversed,  the  body  acquiring  at  r  a 
momentum  represented  by  the  same  horizontal, 
bdy  it  follows  that  during  the  time  ab  the  body 
will  pass  from  b  to  e  along  the  parabola  bCy  and 
will  reach  e  with  a  momentum  compounded  of 
two  momenta  each  equal  to  ab.  And  since  one 
of  these  is  horizontal  and  the  other  vertical,  the 
square  of  the  resultant  momentum  is  equal  to 
the  sum  of  the  squares  of  these  two  components, 
z.  e.y  equal  to  twice  either  one  of  them. 

Therefore,  if  we  lay  off  the  distance  bfy  equal 
to  bay  and  draw  the  diagonal  afy  it  follows  that 
the  momentum  at  e  will  exceed  that  of  a  body 
at  b  after  having  fallen  from  ay  or  what  is  the 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


same  thing,  will  exceed  the  horizontal  momen¬ 
tum  along  bd,  in  the  ratio  of  af  to  ab. 

Suppose  now  we  choose  for  the  height  of  fall 
a  distance  bo  which  is  not  equal  to  but  greater 
than  ab,  and  suppose  that  bg  represents  a  mean 
proportional  between  ba  and  bo;  then,  still  re¬ 
taining  ba  as  a  measure  of  the  distance  fallen 
through,  from  rest  at  to  b,  also  as  a  measure  of 
the  time  and  of  the  momentum  which  the  fall¬ 
ing  body  acquires  at  b,  it  follows  that  bg  will  be 
the  measure  of  the  time  and  also  of  the  momen¬ 
tum  which  the  body  acquires  in  falling  from  b 
to  o.  Likewise  just  as  the  momentum  ab  during 
the  time  ab  carried  the  body  a  distance  along 
the  horizontal  equal  to  twice  ab,  so  now,  during 
the  time-interval  bg,  the  body  will  be  carried 
in  a  horizontal  direction  through  a  distance 
which  is  greater  in  the  ratio  of  bg  to  ba.  Lay 
off  lb  equal  to  bg  and  draw  the  diagonal  al, 
from  which  we  have  a  quantity  compounded 
of  two  velocities,  one  horizontal,  the  other  ver¬ 
tical;  these  determine  the  parabola.  The  hori¬ 
zontal  and  uniform  velocity  is  that  acquired  at 
b  in  falling  from  a;  the  other  is  that  acquired  at 
o,  or,  we  may  say,  at  i,  by  a  body  falling  through 
the  distance  bo,  during  a  time  measured  by  the 
line  bg,  which  line  bg  also  represents  the  mo¬ 
mentum  of  the  body.  And  in  like  manner  we 
may,  by  taking  a  mean  proportional  between 
the  two  heights,  determine  the  momentum  at 
the  extreme  end  of  the  parabola  where  the 
height  is  less  than  the  sublimity  ab;  this  mean 
proportional  is  to  be  drawn  along  the  horizontal 
in  place  of  bf,  and  also  another  diagonal  in  place 
of  af,  which  diagonal  will  represent  the  mo¬ 
mentum  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  parabola. 

To  what  has  hitherto  been  said  concerning 
the  momenta,  blows  or  shocks  of  projectiles,  we 
must  add  another  very  important  considera¬ 
tion;  to  determine  the  force  and  energy  of  the 
shock  it  is  not  sufficient  to  consider  only  the 
speed  of  the  projectiles,  but  we  must  also  take 
into  account  the  nature  and  condition  of  the 
target  which,  in  no  small  degree,  determines  the 
efficiency  of  the  blow.  First  of  all,  it  is  well 
known  that  the  target  suffers  violence  from  the 
speed  of  the  projectile  in  proportion  as  it  partly 
or  entirely  stops  the  motion;  because  if  the 
blow  falls  upon  an  object  which  yields  to  the 
impulse  without  resistance  such  a  blow  will  be 
of  no  effect;  likewise,  when  one  attacks  his  en¬ 
emy  with  a  spear  and  overtakes  him  at  an  in¬ 
stant  when  he  is  fleeing  with  equal  speed,  there 
will  be  no  blow  but  merely  a  harmless  touch. 
But  if  the  shock  falls  upon  an  object  which 
yields  only  in  part  then  the  blow  will  not  have 


its  full  effect,  but  the  damage  will  be  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  excess  of  the  speed  of  the  projectile 
over  that  of  the  receding  body;  thus,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  if  the  shot  reaches  the  target  with  a  speed 
of  10  while  the  latter  recedes  with  a  speed  of  4, 
the  momentum  and  shock  will  be  represented 
by  6.  Finally  the  blow  will  be  a  maximum,  in  so 
far  as  the  projectile  is  concerned,  when  the  tar¬ 
get  does  not  recede  at  all  but  if  possible  com¬ 
pletely  resists  and  stops  the  motion  of  the  pro¬ 
jectile.  I  have  said  in  so  far  as  the  projectile  is 
concerned  because  if  the  target  should  approach 
the  projectile  the  shock  of  collision  would  be 
greater  in  proportion  as  the  sum  of  the  two 
speeds  is  greater  than  that  of  the  projectile 
alone. 

Moreover  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  amount 
of  yielding  in  the  target  depends  not  only  upon 
the  quality  of  the  material,  as  regards  hard¬ 
ness,  whether  it  be  of  iron,  lead,  wool,  etc.,  but 
also  upon  its  position.  If  the  position  is  such 
that  the  shot  strikes  it  at  right  angles,  the  mo¬ 
mentum  imparted  by  the  blow  will  be  a  maxi¬ 
mum;  but  if  the  motion  be  oblique,  that  is  to 
say  slanting,  the  blow  will  be  weaker;  and  more 
and  more  so  in  proportion  to  the  obliquity;  for, 
no  matter  how  hard  the  material  of  the  target 
thus  situated,  the  entire  momentum  of  the  shot 
will  not  be  spent  and  stopped;  the  projectile 
will  slide  by  and  will,  to  some  extent,  continue 
its  motion  along  the  surface  of  the  opposing 
body. 

All  that  has  been  said  above  concerning  the 
amount  of  momentum  in  the  projectile  at  the 
extremity  of  the  parabola  must  be  understood 
to  refer  to  a  blow  received  on  a  line  at  right 
angles  to  this  parabola  or  along  the  tangent  to 
the  parabola  at  the  given  point;  for,  even  though 
the  motion  has  two  components,  one  horizon¬ 
tal,  the  other  vertical,  neither  will  the  mo¬ 
mentum  along  the  horizontal  ncr  that  upon 
a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  horizontal  be  a 
maximum,  since  each  of  these  will  be  received 
obliquely. 

Sagr.  Your  having  mentioned  these  blows 
and  shocks  recalls  to  my  mind  a  problem,  or 
rather  a  question,  in  mechanics  of  which  no 
author  has  given  a  solution  or  said  anything 
which  diminishes  my  astonishment  or  even 
partly  relieves  my  mind. 

My  difficulty  and  surprise  consist  in  not 
being  able  to  see  whence  and  upon  what  prin¬ 
ciple  is  derived  the  energy  and  immense  force 
which  makes  its  appearance  in  a  blow;  for  in¬ 
stance,  we  see  the  simple  blow  of  a  hammer, 
weighing  not  more  than  8  or  10  lbs.,  overcom- 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


ing  resistances  which,  without  a  blow,  would 
not  yield  to  the  weight  of  a  body  producing  im¬ 
petus  by  pressure  alone,  even  though  that  body 
weighed  many  hundreds  of  pounds.  I  would  like 
to  discover  a  method  of  measuring  the  force  of 
sucii  a  percussion.  I  can  hardly  think  it  infinite, 
but  incline  rather  to  the  view  that  it  has  its 
limit  and  can  be  counterbalanced  and  measured 
by  other  forces,  such  as  weights,  or  by  levers  or 
screws  or  other  mechanical  instruments  which 
are  used  to  multiply  forces  in  a  manner  which 
I  satisfactorily  understand. 

Salv.  You  are  not  alone  in  your  surprise  at 
this  effect  or  in  obscurity  as  to  the  cause  of  this 
remarkable  property.  I  studied  this  matter  my¬ 
self  for  a  while  in  vain;  but  my  confusion  mere¬ 
ly  increased  until  finally  meeting  our  Academi¬ 
cian  I  received  from  him  great  consolation. 
First  he  told  me  that  he  also  had  for  a  long  time 
been  groping  in  the  dark;  but  later  he  said  that, 
after  having  spent  some  thousands  of  hours  in 
speculating  and  contemplating  thereon,  he  had 
arrived  at  some  notions  which  are  far  removed 
from  our  earlier  ideas  and  which  are  remarkable 
for  their  novelty.  And  since  now  I  know  that 
you  would  gladly  hear  what  these  novel  ideas 
are  I  shall  not  wait  for  you  to  ask  but  promise 
that,  as  soon  as  our  discussion  of  projectiles  is 
completed,  I  will  explain  all  these  fantasies,  or 
if  you  please,  vagaries,  as  far  as  I  can  recall  them 
from  the  words  of  our  Academician.  In  the 
meantime  we  proceed  with  the  propositions  of 
the  author. 

Proposition  V,  Problem 

Having  given  a  parabola,  find  the  point,  in  its 
axis  extended  upwards,  from  which  a  particle 
must  fall  in  order  to  describe  this  same  parabola. 


Let  ab  be  the  given  parabola,  hb  its  ampli¬ 
tude,  and  he  its  axis  extended.  The  problem  is 
to  find  the  point  e  from  which  a  body  must  fall 


in  order  that,  after  the  momentum  which  it  ac¬ 
quires  at  a  has  been  diverted  into  a  horizontal 
direction,  it  will  describe  the  parabola  ab.  Draw 
the  horizontal  ag,  parallel  to  bh,  and  having 
laid  off  af  equal  to  ah,  draw  the  straight  line  bj 
which  will  be  a  tangent  to  the  parabola  at  b, 
and  will  intersect  the  horizontal  ag  at  g:  choose 
e  such  that  ag  will  be  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  af  and  ae.  Now  I  say  that  e  is  the  point 
above  sought.  That  is,  if  a  body  falls  from  rest 
at  this  point  e,  and  if  the  momentum  acquired 
at  the  point  a  be  diverted  into  a  horizontal 
direction,  and  compounded  with  the  momen¬ 
tum  acquired  at  h  in  falling  from  rest  at  a,  then 
the  body  will  describe  the  parabola  ab.  For  if 
we  understand  ea  to  be  the  measure  of  the  time 
of  fall  from  e  to  a,  and  also  of  the  momentum 
acquired  at  a,  then  ag  (which  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  ea  and  af)  will  represent  the 
time  and  momentum  of  fall  from  f  to  a  or,  what 
is  the  same  thing,  from  a  to  h;  and  since  a  body 
falling  from  e,  during  the  time  ea,  will,  owing 
to  the  momentum  acquired  at  a,  traverse  at 
uniform  speed  a  horizontal  distance  which  is 
twice  ea,  it  follows  that,  the  body  will  if  im¬ 
pelled  by  the  same  momentum,  during  the 
time-interval  ag  traverse  a  distance  equal  to 
twice  ag  which  is  the  half  of  bh.  This  is  true  be¬ 
cause,  in  the  case  of  uniform  motion,  the  spaces 
traversed  vary  directly  as  the  times.  And  like¬ 
wise  if  the  motion  be  vertical  and  start  from 
rest,  the  body  will  describe  the  distance  ah  in 
the  time  ag.  Hence  the  amplitude  bh  and  the 
altitude  ah  are  traversed  by  a  body  in  the  same 
time.  Therefore  the  parabola  ab  will  be  de¬ 
scribed  by  a  body  falling  from  the  sublimity  of  e. 

Q.  E.  F. 

COROLLARY 

Hence  it  follows  that  half  the  base,  or  ampli¬ 
tude,  of  the  semi-parabola  (which  is  one-quar¬ 
ter  of  the  entire  amplitude)  is  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  its  altitude  and  the  sublimity 
from  which  a  falling  body  will  describe  this 
same  parabola. 

Proposition  VI,  Problem 

Given  the  sublimity  and  the  altitude  of  a  parabola, 
to  find  its  ajnplitude. 

Let  the  line  ac,  in  which  lie  the  given  alti¬ 
tude  cb  and  sublimity  ab,  be  perpendicular  to 
the  horizontal  line  cd.  The  problem  is  to  find 
the  amplitude,  along  the  horizontal  cd,  of  the 
semi-parabola  which  is  described  with  the  sub¬ 
limity  ba  and  altitude  be.  Lay  off  cd  equal  to 
twice  the  mean  proportional  between  cb  and 


THE  TWO  NEW 


ba.  Then  cd  will  be  the  amplitude  sought,  as  is 
evident  from  the  preceding  proposition. 

Theorem.  Proposition  VII 

If  projectiles  describe  semi-parabolas  of  the  same 
amplittide^  the  momentum  required  to  describe 
that  one  tvhose  amplitude  is  double  its  altitude  is 
less  than  that  required  for  any  other. 

Let  bd  be  a  semi-parabola  whose  amplitude 
cd  is  double  its  altitude  cb;  on  its  axis  extended 
upwards  lay  off  ba  equal  to  its  altitude  be.  Draw 
the  line  ad  which  will  be  a  tangent  to  the  para¬ 
bola  at  d  and  will  cut  the  horizontal  line  be  at 
the  point  e^  making  be  equal  to  be  and  also  to 
ba.  It  is  evident  that  this  parabola  will  be  de¬ 
scribed  by  a  projectile  whose  uniform  horizon¬ 
tal  momentum  is  that  which  it  would  acquire 
at  b  in  falling  from  rest  at  a  and  whose  naturally 
accelerated  vertical  momentum  is  that  of  the 
body  falling  to  r,  from  rest  at  b.  From  this  it 
follows  that  the  momentum  at  the  terminal 


SCIENCES  251 

point  dy  compounded  of  these  two,  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  diagonal  ae,  whose  square  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  two  compo¬ 
nents.  Now  let  gd  be  any  other  parabola  what¬ 
ever  having  the  same  amplitude  cd.,  but  whose 
altitude  eg  is  either  greater  or  less  than  the  al¬ 
titude  be.  Let  hd  be  the  tangent  cutting  the 
horizontal  through  g  at  Select  a  point  I  such 
that  hg  :g\=gl{:gl.  Then  from  a  preceding 
proposition  [V],  it  follows  that  gl  will  be  the 
height  from  which  a  body  must  fall  in  order  to 
describe  the  parabola  gd. 

Let  gm  be  a  mean  proportional  between  ab 
and  gl;  then  gm  will  [Prop.  IV]  represent  the 
time  and  momentum  acquired  at  g  by  a  fall 
from  /;  for  ab  has  been  assumed  as  a  measure  of 
both  time  and  momentum.  Again  let  gn  be  a 
mean  proportional  between  be  and  eg;  it  will 
then  represent  the  time  and  momentum  which 
the  body  acquires  at  c  in  falling  from  g.  If  now 
we  join  m  and  n,  this  line  mn  will  represent  the 
momentum  at  d  of  the  projectile  traversing  the 
parabola  dg;  which  momentum  is,  I  say,  greater 
that  that  of  the  projectile  travelling  along  the 
parabola  bd  whose  measure  was  given  by  ae. 
For  since  gn  has  been  taken  as  a  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  be  and  gc;  and  since  be  is  equal 
to  be  and  also  to  \g  (each  of  them  being  the  half 
oide)  it  follows  t^t  eg:_^  =  gn  :gl{j  and  as  eg  or 
(hg)  is  to  gy^so  is  ng^  to_g^:  but  by  construction 
=  Hence  nf:'^  =  gI{:gL  But  g{: 
gl  =  gl^:gm^,  since  gm  is  a  mean  proportional 
between  l{g  and  gl.  Therefore  the  three  squares 
ng,  ks,  mg  form  a  continued  proportion,  gn‘^: 
^2  ^  ^2 . ^2  j  sunn  of  the  two  extremes 
which  is  equal  to  the  square  of  mn  is  greater 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


than  twice  the  square  of^^;  but  the  square  of 
ae  is  double  the  square  of  Hence  the  square 
of  mn  is  greater  than  the  square  of  ae  and  the 
length  mn  is  greater  than  the  length  ae. 

Corollary 

Conversely,  it  is  evident  that  less  momentum 
will  be  required  to  send  a  projectile  from  the 
terminal  point  d  along  the  parabola  bd  than 
along  any  other  parabola  having  an  elevation 
greater  or  less  than  that  of  the  parabola  bd,  for 
which  the  tangent  at  d  makes  an  angle  of  45® 
with  the  horizontal.  From  which  it  follows  that 
if  projectiles  are  fired  from  the  terminal  point 
d,  all  having  the  same  speed,  but  each  having  a 
different  elevation,  the  maximum  range,  i,e,, 
amplitude  of  the  semi-parabola  or  of  the  entire 
parabola,  will  be  obtained  when  the  elevation  is 
45°:  the  other  shots,  fired  at  angles  greater  or 
less  will  have  a  shorter  range. 

Sagr.  The  force  of  rigid  demonstrations  such 
as  occur  only  in  mathematics  fills  me  with  won¬ 
der  and  delight.  From  accounts  given  by  gun¬ 
ners,  I  was  already  aware  of  the  fact  that  in  the 
use  of  cannon  and  mortars,  the  maximum  range, 
that  is  the  one  in  which  the  shot  goes  farthest, 
is  obtained  when  the  elevation  is  45°  or,  as  they 
say,  at  the  sixth  point  of  the  quadrant;  but  to 
understand  why  this  happens  far  outweighs  the 
mere  information  obtained  by  the  testimony  of 
others  or  even  by  repeated  experiment. 

Salv.  What  you  say  is  very  true.  The  knowl¬ 
edge  of  a  single  fact  acquired  through  a  dis¬ 
covery  of  its  causes  prepares  the  mind  to  under¬ 
stand  and  ascertain  other  facts  without  need  of 
recourse  to  experiment,  precisely  as  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  case,  where  by  argumentation  alone  the 
Author  proves  with  certainty  that  the  maxi¬ 
mum  range  occurs  when  the  elevation  is  45°. 
He  thus  demonstrates  what  has  perhaps  never 
been  observed  in  experience,  namely,  that  of 
other  shots  those  which  exceed  or  fall  short  of 
45°  by  equal  amounts  have  equal  ranges;  so  that 
if  the  balls  have  been  fired  one  at  an  elevation 
of  7  points,  the  other  at  5,  they  will  strike  the 
level  at  the  same  distance:  the  same  is  true  if 
the  shots  are  fired  at  8  and  at  4  points,  at  9  and 
at  3,  etc.  Now  let  us  hear  the  demonstration  of 

Theorem.  Proposition  VIII 

The  amplitudes  of  two  parabolas  described  by 
projectiles  fired  with  the  same  speed,  but  at  angles 
of  elevation  which  exceed  and  fall  short  of  by 
equal  amounts,  are  equal  to  each  other. 

In  the  triangle  mcb  let  the  horizontal  side  be 
and  the  vertical  cm,  which  form  a  right  angle  at 


c,  be  equal  to  each  other;  then  the  angle  mbc 
will  be  a  semi-right  angle;  let  the  line  cm  be 
prolonged  to  d,  such  a  point  that  the  two  angles 
at  namely  mbe  and  mbd,  one  above  and  the 


other  below  the  diagonal  mb,  shall  be  equal.  It 
is  now  to  be  proved  that  in  the  case  of  two  para¬ 
bolas  described  by  two  projectiles  fired  from  b 
with  the  same  speed,  one  at  the  angle  of  ebc,  the 
other  at  the  angle  of  dbc,  their  amplitudes  will 
be  equal.  Now  since  the  external  angle  bmc  is 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  internal  angles  mdb  and 
dbm  we  may  also  equate  to  them  the  angle 
mbc;  but  if  we  replace  the  angle  dbm  by  mbe, 
then  this  same  angle  mbc  is  equal  to  the  two 
mbe  and  bde:  and  if  we  subtract  from  each  side 
of  this  equation  the  angle  mbe,  we  have  the  re¬ 
mainder  bde  equal  to  the  remainder  ebc.  Hence 
the  two  triangles  deb  and  bcezrt  similar.  Bisect 
the  straight  lines  ^/rand  eciw  the  points  ^and  f : 
and  draw  the  lines  hi and^  parallel  to  the  hori¬ 
zontal  cb,  and  choose  /such  that  dh:hi=ih:hl. 
Then  the  triangle  ihl  will  be  similar  to  ihd,  and 
also  to  the  triangle  egf;  and  since  ih  and  gf  are 
equal,  each  being  half  of  be,  it  follows  that  hi 
is  equal  X.o  fe  and  also  toyir/and  if  we  add  to 
each  of  these  the  common  part//^,  it  will  be 
seen  that  ch  is  equal  toy*/. 

Let  us  now  imagine  a  parabola  described 
through  the  points  h  and  b  whose  altitude  is  he 
and  sublimity  hi.  Its  amplitude  will  be  cb  which 
is  double  the  length  hi  since  hi  is  a  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  dh  (or  ch)  and  hi.  The  line 
db  is  tangent  to  the  parabola  at  b,  since  ch  is 
equal  to  hd.  If  again  we  imagine  a  parabola  de¬ 
scribed  through  the  points  f  and  b,  with  a  sub¬ 
limity  fl  and  altitude  fc,  of  which  the  mean 
proportional  isfg,  or  one-half  of  cb,  then,  as  be¬ 
fore,  will  cb  be  the  amplitude  and  the  line  eb  a 
tangent  at  b;  for  ef  and  fc  are  equal.  But  the 
two  angles  dbc  and  ebc,  the  angles  of  elevation, 
differ  by  equal  amounts  from  a  45°  angle. 
Hence  follows  the  proposition. 


THE  TWO  NEW 

Theorem.  Proposition  IX 

'The  amplitudes  of  two  parabolas  are  equal  when 
their  altitudes  and  sublimities  are  inversely  pro¬ 
portional. 

Let  the  altitude  gf  of  the  parabola  fh  bear  to 
the  altitude  cb  of  the  parabola  bd  the  same 
ratio  which  the  sublimity  ba  bears  to  the  sub¬ 
limity  then,  I  say,  the  amplitude  is  equal 
to  the  amplitude  dc.  For  since  the  first  of  these 
quantities,  gf  bears  to  the  second,  cb,  the  same 
ratio  which  the  third,  ba,  bears  to  the  fourth,ytf, 
it  follows  that  the  area  of  the  rectangle  gffc  is 
equal  to  that  of  the  rectangle  cb-ba;  therefore 


squares  which  are  equal  to  these  rectangles  are 
equal  to  each  other.  But  [by  Proposition  VI] 
the  square  of  half  of  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
gffe;  and  the  square  of  half  of  cd  is  equal  to  the 
rectangle  cb-ba.  Therefore  these  squares  and 
their  sides  and  the  doubles  of  their  sides  are 
equal.  But  these  last  are  the  amplitudes  gh  and 
cd.  Hence  follows  the  proposition. 

Lemma  for  the  following  Proposition 

If  a  straight  line  be  cut  at  any  point  whatever  and 
mean  proportionals  between  this  line  and  each  of 
its  parts  be  ta\en,  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  these 
mean  proportionals  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the 
entire  line. 

Let  the  line  ab  be  cut  at  c.  Then,  I  say,  that 
the  square  of  the  mean  proportional  between 


ab  and  ac  plus  the  square  of  the  mean  propor¬ 
tional  between  ab  and  cb  is  equal  to  the  square 
of  the  whole  line  ab.  This  is  evident  as  soon  as 


SCIENCES  253 

we  describe  a  semicircle  upon  the  entire  line 
ab,  erect  a  perpendicular  cd  at  c,  and  draw  da 
and  db.  For  da  is  a  mean  proportional  between 
ab  and  ac  while  db  is  a  mean  proportional  be¬ 
tween  ab  and  be:  and  since  the  angle  adb,  in¬ 
scribed  in  a  semicircle,  is  a  right  angle  the  sum 
of  the  squares  of  the  lines  da  and  db  is  equal  to 
the  square  of  the  entire  line  ab.  Hence  follows 
the  proposition. 

Theorem.  Proposition  X 

The  momentum  acquired  by  a  particle  at  the  ter¬ 
minal  point  of  any  semi-parabola  is  equal  to  that 
which  it  would  acquire  in  falling  through  a  verti- 
cal  distance  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  sub¬ 
limity  and  the  altiuide  of  the  semi¬ 
parabola. 

Let  ab  be  a  semi-parabola  having  a 
sublimity  da  and  an  altitude  ac,  the 
sum  of  which  is  the  perpendicular 
Now,  I  say,  the  momentum  of  the  par- 

- - ^  tide  at  b  is  the  same  as  that  which  it 

would  acquire  in  falling  freely  from  d 
to  c.  Let  us  take  the  length  of  dc  itself 

_ \c  as  a  measure  of  time  and  momentum, 

and  lay  off  cf  equal  to  the  mean  pro¬ 
portional  between  cd  and  da;  also  lay 
off  ce  a  mean  proportional 
between  cd  and  ca.  Now  cf 
is  the  measure  of  the  time 
and  of  the  momentum  ac¬ 
quired  by  fall,  from  rest  at 
d,  through  the  distance  da; 
while  ce  is  the  time  and 
momentum  of  fall,  from 
rest  at  through  the  dis¬ 
tance  ca;  also  the  diagonal 
ef  will  represent  a  momen¬ 
tum  which  is  the  resultant 
of  these  two,  and  is  there¬ 
fore  the  momentum  at  the 
terminal  point  of  the  pa¬ 
rabola,  b. 

And  since  dc  has  been  cut  at  some  point  a 
and  since  cf  and  ce  are  mean  proportionals  be¬ 
tween  the  whole  of  cd  and  its  parts,  da  and  ac, 
it  follows,  from  the  preceding  lemma,  that  the 
sum  of  the  squares  of  these  mean  proportionals 
is  equal  to  the  square  of  the  whole:  but  the 
square  of  ef  is  also  equal  to  the  sum  of  these 
same  squares;  whence  it  follows  that  the  line  ef 
is  equal  to  dc. 

Accordingly,  the  momentum  acquired  at  c 
by  a  particle  in  falling  from  d  is  the  same  as  that 
acquired  at  ^  by  a  particle  traversing  the  para¬ 
bola  ab,  Q* 


254 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


Corollary 

Hence  it  follows  that,  in  the  case  of  all  para¬ 
bolas  where  the  sum  of  the  sublimity  and  alti¬ 
tude  is  a  constant,  the  momentum  at  the  ter¬ 
minal  point  is  a  constant. 

Problem.  Proposition  XI 

Given  the  amplitude  and  the  speed  at  the  terminal 
point  of  a  semi'parabola,  to  find  its  altitude. 

Let  the  given  speed  be  represented  by  the 
vertical  line  ab,  and  the  amplitude  by  the  hori¬ 
zontal  line  be;  it  is  required  to  find  the  sublim¬ 
ity  of  the  semi-parabola  whose  terminal  speed 
is  ab  and  amplitude  be.  From  what  precedes 
[Cor.  Prop.  V]  it  is  clear  that  half  the  amplitude 
be  is  a  mean  proportional  between  the  altitude 


a 


and  sublimity  of  the  parabola  of  which  the  ter¬ 
minal  speed  is  equal,  in  accordance  with  the 
preceding  proposition,  to  the  speed  acquired 
by  a  body  in  falling  from  rest  at  a  through  the 
distance  ab.  Therefore  the  line  ba  must  be  cut 
at  a  point  such  that  the  rectangle  formed  by  its 
two  parts  will  be  equal  to  the  square  of  half  be^ 
namely  bd.  Necessarily,  therefore,  bd  must  not 
exceed  the  half  of  ba;  for  of  all  the  rectangles 
formed  by  parts  of  a  straight  line  the  one  of 
greatest  area  is  obtained  when  the  line  is  divid¬ 
ed  into  two  equal  parts.  Let  e  he  the  middle 
point  of  the  line  ab;  Tind  now  if  bd  be  equal  to 
be  the  problem  is  solved;  for  be  will  be  the  alti¬ 
tude  and  ea  the  sublimity  of  the  parabola.  (In¬ 
cidentally,  we  may  observe  a  consequence  al¬ 
ready  demonstrated,  namely:  of  all  parabolas 
described  with  any  given  terminal  speed  that 


for  which  the  elevation  is  45®  will  have  the 
maximum  amplitude.) 

But  suppose  that  bd  is  less  than  half  of  ba^ 
which  is  to  be  divided  in  such  a  way  that  the 
rectangle  upon  its  parts  may  be  equal  to  the 
square  of  bd.  Upon  ea  as  diameter  describe  a 
semicircle  in  which  draw  the  chord  af^ 
equal  to  bd:  join  fe  and  lay  off  the  distance  eg 
equal  to  fe.  Then  the  rectangle  bg^ga  plus  the 
square  of  eg  will  be  equal  to  the  square  of  ea., 
and  hence  also  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  af 
and  fe.  If  now  we  subtract  the  equal  squares  of 
fe  and  ge  there  remains  the  rectangle  bg'ga 
equal  to  the  square  of  af,  that  is,  of  bd,  a  line 
which  is  a  mean  proportional  between  bg  and 
ga;  from  which  it  is  evident  that  the  semi-para¬ 
bola  whose  amplitude  is  be  and  whose  terminal 
speed  is  represented  by  ba  has  an  altitude  bg 
and  a  sublimity  ga. 

If  however  we  lay  off  bi  equal  to  ga,  then  bi 
will  be  the  altitude  of  the  semi-parabola  ie,  and 
ia  will  be  its  sublimity.  From  the  preceding 
demonstration  we  are  able  to  solve  the  follow¬ 
ing  problem. 

Problem.  Proposition  XII 

To  eompnte  and  tabulate  the  amplitudes  of  all 
semi-parabolas  whieh  are  deseribed  by  projeetiles 
fired  with  the  same  initial  speed* 

From  the  foregoing  it  follows  that,  whenever 
the  sum  of  the  altitude  and  sublimity  is  a  con¬ 


stant  vertical  height  for  any  set  of  parabolas, 
these  parabolas  are  described  by  projectiles 
having  the  same  initial  speed;  all  vertical 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES  255 


heights  thus  obtained  are  therefore  included 
between  two  parallel  horizontal  lines.  Let  cb 
represent  a  horizontal  line  and  ab  a  vertical  line 
of  equal  length;  draw  the  diagonal  ac;  the  angle 
acb  will  be  one  of  45°;  let  d  be  the  middle  point 
of  the  vertical  line  ab.  Then  the  semi-parabola 
dc  is  the  one  which  is  determined  by  the  sub¬ 
limity  ad  and  the  altitude  dby  while  its  terminal 
speed  at  c  is  that  which  would  be  acquired  at  b 
by  a  particle  falling  from  rest  at  a.  If  now  ag  be 
drawn  parallel  to  bCy  the  sum  of  the  altitude 
and  sublimity  for  any  other  semi-parabola  hav¬ 
ing  the  same  terminal  speed  will,  in  the  manner 
explained,  be  equal  to  the  distance  between  the 
parallel  lines  ag  and  be.  Moreover,  since  it  has 
already  been  shown  that  the  amplitudes  of  two 
semi-parabolas  are  the  same  when  their  angles 
of  elevation  differ  from  45°  by  like  amounts,  it 
follows  that  the  same  computation  which  is  em¬ 
ployed  for  the  larger  elevation  will  serve  also 
for  the  smaller.  Let  us  also  assume  10000  as  the 
greatest  amplitude  for  a  parabola  whose  angle  of 
elevation  is  45°;  this  then  will  be  the  length  of 
the  line  ba  and  the  amplitude  of  the  semi-para¬ 
bola  be.  This  number,  10000,  is  selected  be¬ 
cause  in  these  calculations  we  employ  a  table  of 
tangents  in  which  this  is  the  value  of  the  tan¬ 
gent  of  45°.  And  now,  coming  down  to  busi¬ 
ness,  draw  the  straight  line  ce  making  an  acute 
angle  ecb  greater  than  acb:  the  problem  now  is 
to  draw  the  semi-parabola  to  which  the  line  ec 
is  a  tangent  and  for  which  the  sum  of  the  sub¬ 
limity  and  the  altitude  is  the  distance  ba.  Take 
the  length  of  the  tangent  be  from  the  table  of 
tangents,  using  the  angle  bee  as  an  argument: 
let/be  the  middle  point  of  be;  next  find  a  third 
proportional  to  bf  and  bi  (the  half  of  bc^  which 
is  of  necessity  greater  than  fa.  Call  this  fo.  We 
have  now  discovered  that,  for  the  parabola  in¬ 
scribed  in  the  triangle  ecb  having  the  tangent 
ce  and  the  amplitude  the  altitude  is  bf  and 
the  sublimity/o.  But  the  total  length  of  bo  ex¬ 
ceeds  the  distance  between  the  parallels  ag  and 
cby  while  our  problem  was  to  keep  it  equal  to 
this  distance:  for  both  the  parabola  sought  and 
the  parabola  dc  are  described  by  projectiles 
fired  from  r  with  the  same  speed.  Now  since  an 
infinite  number  of  greater  and  smaller  parabo¬ 
las,  similar  to  each  other,  may  be  described 
within  the  angle  bee  we  must  find  another 
parabola  which  like  cd  has  for  the  sum  of  its 
altitude  and  sublimity  the  height  ba^  equal 
to  be. 

Therefore  lay  off  cr  so  that,  ob:ba  =  bc:cr; 
then  cr  will  be  the  amplitude  of  a  semi-parabola 


for  which  bee  is  the  angle  of  elevation  and  for 
which  the  sum  of  the  altitude  and  sublimity  is 
the  distance  between  the  parallels  ga  and  cb,  as 
desired.  The  process  is  therefore  as  follows:  One 
draws  the  tangent  of  the  given  angle  bee;  takes 
half  of  this  tangent,  and  adds  to  it  the  quantity, 
fo,  which  is  a  third  proportional  to  the  half  of 
this  tangent  and  the  half  of  be;  the  desired  am¬ 
plitude  cr  is  then  found  from  the  following 
proportion  ob:ba  =  bc:cr.  For  example,  let  the 
angle  ecb  be  one  of  50°;  its  tangent  is  11918,  half 
of  which,  namely  bf,  is  5959;  half  of  be  is  5000; 
the  third  proportional  of  these  halves  is  4195, 
which  added  to  bf  gives  the  value  10 154  for  bo. 
Further,  as  ob  is  to  ab,  that  is,  as  T0154  is  to 
10000,  so  is  be,  or  10000  (each  being  the  tan¬ 
gent  of  45°)  to  cr,  which  is  the  amplitude  sought 
and  which  has  the  value  9848,  the  maximum 
amplitude  being  be,  or  10000.  The  amplitudes 
of  the  entire  parabolas  are  double  these,  name¬ 
ly,  19696  and  20000.  This  is  also  the  amplitude 
of  a  parabola  whose  angle  of  elevation  is  40®, 
since  it  deviates  by  an  equal  amount  from  one 
of  45°. 

Sagr.  In  order  to  thoroughly  understand 
this  demonstration  I  need  to  be  shown  how  the 
third  proportional  of  bf  and  bi  is,  as  the  Author 
indicates,  necessarily  greater  than  fa. 

Salv.  This  result  can,  I  think,  be  obtained  as 
follows.  The  square  of  the  mean  proportional 
between  two  lines  is  equal  to  the  rectangle 
formed  by  these  two  lines.  Therefore  the  square 
of  bi  (or  of  bd  which  is  equal  to  b'i)  must  be 
equal  to  the  rectangle  formed  by/^  and  the 
desired  third  proportional.  This  third  propor¬ 
tional  is  necessarily  greater  than  fa  because  the 
rectangle  formed  by  bf  and  fa  is  less  than  the 
square  of  bd  by  an  amount  equal  to  the  square 
of  df,  as  shown  in  Euclid,  ii.  i.  Besides  it  is  to 
be  observed  that  the  point/,  which  is  the  mid¬ 
dle  point  of  the  tangent  eb,  falls  in  general 
above  a  and  only  once  at  a;  in  which  cases  it  is 
self-evident  that  the  third  proportional  to  the 
half  of  the  tangent  and  to  the  sublimity  bi  lies 
wholly  above  a.  But  the  Author  has  taken  a 
case  where  it  is  not  evident  that  the  third  pro¬ 
portional  is  always  greater  than  fa,  so  that  when 
laid  off  above  the  point/it  extends  beyond  the 
parallel  ag. 

Now  let  us  proceed.  It  will  be  worth  while, 
by  the  use  of  this  table,  to  compute  another 
giving  the  altitudes  of  these  semi-parabolas  de¬ 
scribed  by  projectiles  having  the  same  initial 
speed.  The  construction  is  as  follows: 


256 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


Amplitudes  of  semi-  Altitudes  of  semi-parabolas 
parabolas  described  described  with  the  same  in- 
with  the  same  ini-  itial  speed, 
tial  speed. 


Angle  of 

Angle  of 

Angle  of 

Angle  of 

Elevation 

Elevation 

Elevation 

Elevation 

45^^  ^ 

[0000 

1° 

3 

46° 

5173 

46 

9994 

44° 

2 

13 

47 

5346 

47 

9976 

43 

3 

28 

48 

5523 

48 

9945 

42 

4 

50 

49 

5698 

49 

9902 

41 

5 

76 

50 

5868 

50 

9848 

40 

6 

108 

51 

6038 

51 

9782 

39 

7 

150 

52 

6207 

52 

9704 

38 

8 

194 

53 

6379 

53 

9612 

37 

9 

245 

54 

6546 

54 

9511 

36 

10 

302 

55 

6710 

55 

9396 

35 

II 

365 

56 

6873 

56 

9272 

34 

12 

432 

57 

7033 

57 

9136 

33 

13 

506 

58 

7190 

58 

8989 

32 

14 

585 

59 

7348 

59 

8829 

31 

15 

670 

60 

7502 

60 

8659 

30 

16 

760 

61 

7649 

61 

8481 

29 

17 

855 

62 

7796 

62 

8290 

28 

18 

955 

63 

7939 

63 

8090 

27 

19 

1060 

64 

8078 

64 

7880 

26 

20 

1170 

65 

8214 

65 

7660 

25 

21 

1285 

66 

8346 

66 

7431 

24 

22 

1402 

67 

8474 

67 

7191 

23 

23 

1527 

68 

8597 

68 

6944 

22 

24 

1685 

69 

8715 

69 

6692 

21 

25 

1786 

70 

8830 

70 

6428 

20 

26 

1922 

71 

8940 

71 

6157 

19 

27 

2061 

72 

9045 

72 

5878 

18 

28 

2204 

73 

9144 

73 

5592 

17 

29 

2351 

74 

9240 

74 

5300 

16 

30 

2499 

75 

9330 

75 

5000 

15 

31 

2653 

76 

94‘5 

76 

4694 

M 

32 

2810 

77 

9493 

77 

4383 

13 

33 

2967 

78 

9567 

78 

4067 

12 

34 

3128 

79 

9636 

79 

3746 

II 

35 

3289 

80 

9698 

80 

3420 

10 

36 

3456 

81 

9755 

81 

3090 

9 

37 

3621 

82 

9806 

82 

2756 

8 

38 

3793 

83 

9851 

83 

2419 

7 

39 

3962 

84 

9890 

84 

2079 

6 

40 

4132 

85 

9924 

85 

1736 

5 

4* 

4302 

86 

9951 

86 

1391 

4 

42 

4477 

87 

9972 

87 

1044 

3 

43 

4654 

88 

9987 

88 

698 

2 

44 

4827 

89 

9998 

89 

349 

I 

45 

5000 

90 

10000 

Problem.  Proposition  XIII 


From  the  amplitudes  of  semi-parabolas  given  in 
the  preceding  table  to  find  the  altitudes  of  each  of 
the  parabolas  described  tvith  the  same  initial 
speed. 

Let  denote  the  given  amplitude;  and  let 
oby  the  sum  of  the  altitude  and  sublimity,  be 
the  measure  of  the  initial  speed  which  is  under¬ 


stood  to  remain  constant.  Next  we  must  find 
and  determine  the  altitude,  which  we  shall  ac¬ 
complish  by  so  dividing  ob  that  the  rectangle 
contained  by  its  parts  shall  be  equal  to  the 
square  of  half  the  amplitude,  be.  Let  f  denote 
this  point  of  division  and  d  and  i  be  the  middle 
points  of  ob  and  be  respectively.  The  square  of 
ib  is  equal  to  the  rectangle  bf  • fo;  but  the  square 
of  do  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  rectangle  bf'fo 
and  the  square  of  fd.  If,  therefore,  from  the 
square  of  do  we  subtract  the  square  of  bi  which 
is  equal  to  the  rectangle  bf-fo,,  there  will  remain 
the  square  of fd.  The  altitude  in  question,  bf  is 
now  obtained  by  adding  to  this  length,^,  the 
line  bd.  The  process  is  then  as  follows;  From  the 
square  of  half  of  bo  which  is 
known,  subtract  the  square 
of  bi  which  is  also  known; 
take  the  square  root  of  the 
remainder  and  add  to  it  the 
known  length  db;  then  you 
have  the  required  altitude, 
bf. 

Example,  To  find  the  alti¬ 
tude  of  a  semi-parabola  de¬ 
scribed  with  an  angle  of  ele¬ 
vation  of  55°.  From  the  pre¬ 
ceding  table  the  amplitude 


0 

\f 


d 


Fig.  125 


is  seen  to  be  9396,  of  which  the  half  is  4698,  and 
the  square  22071204.  When  this  is  subtracted 
from  the  square  of  the  half  of  bo,  which  is  al¬ 
ways  25,000,000,  the  remainder  is  2928796,  of 
which  the  square  root  is  approximately  1710. 
Adding  this  to  the  half  of  bo,  namely  5000,  we 
have  6710  for  the  altitude  of  bf. 

It  will  be  worth  while  to  add  a  third  table 
giving  the  altitudes  and  sublimities  for  para¬ 
bolas  in  which  the  amplitude  is  a  constant. 

Sagr.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  see  this;  for  from 
it  I  shall  learn  the  difference  of  speed  and  force 
required  to  fire  projectiles  over  the  same  range 
with  what  we  call  mortar  shots.  This  difference 
will,  I  believe,  vary  greatly  with  the  elevation 
so  that  if,  for  example,  one  wished  to  employ  an 
elevation  of  3°  or  4°,  or  87°  or  88°  and  yet  give 
the  ball  the  same  range  which  it  had  with  an 
elevation  of  45°  (where  we  have  shown  the  ini¬ 
tial  speed  to  be  a  minimum)  the  excess  of  force 
required  will,  I  think,  be  very  great. 

Salv,  You  are  quite  right,  sir;  and  you  will 
find  that  in  order  to  perform  this  operation 
completely,  at  all  angles  of  elevation,  you  will 
have  to  make  great  strides  toward  an  infinite 
speed.  We  pass  now  to  the  consideration  of  the 
table. 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


Table  giving  the  altitudes  and  sublimities  of 
parabolas  of  constant  amplitude,  namely 
1 0000,  computed  for  each  degree  of  eleva¬ 
tion. 


Angle  of 

Alti¬ 

Angle  of  Alti- 

Elevation 

tude 

Sublimity 

Elevation  ttide  Sublimity 

87 

286533 

46° 

5177 

4828 

2 

175 

142450 

47 

5363 

4662 

3 

262 

95802 

48 

5553 

4502 

4 

349 

71531 

49 

5752 

4345 

5 

437 

57142 

5^> 

5959 

4196 

6 

525 

47573 

51 

6174 

4048 

7 

614 

40716 

52 

6399 

3906 

8 

702 

35587 

53 

6635 

3765 

9 

792 

31565 

54 

6882 

3632 

10 

881 

28367 

55 

7141 

3500 

1 1 

972 

25720 

56 

7413 

3372 

12 

1063 

23518 

57 

7699 

3247 

13 

1154 

21701 

58 

8002 

3123 

M 

1246 

20056 

59 

8332 

3004 

15 

1339 

18663 

60 

8600 

2887 

16 

M34 

17405 

61 

9020 

2771 

17 

1529 

16355 

62 

9403 

2658 

18 

1624 

•5389 

63 

9813 

2547 

19 

1722 

14522 

64 

1 025 1 

2438 

20 

1820 

13736 

65 

10722 

2331 

21 

1919 

13024 

66 

1 1230 

2226 

22 

2020 

12376 

67 

1 1779 

2122 

23 

2123 

11778 

68 

12375 

2020 

24 

2226 

1 1230 

69 

13025 

1919 

25 

2332 

10722 

70 

13237 

1819 

26 

2439 

10253 

71 

14521 

1721 

27 

2547 

9814 

72 

15388 

1624 

28 

2658 

9404 

73 

16354 

1528 

29 

2772 

9020 

74 

17437 

1433 

30 

2887 

8659 

75 

18660 

1339 

3* 

3008 

8336 

76 

20054 

1246 

32 

3124 

8001 

77 

21657 

1154 

33 

3247 

7699 

78 

23523 

1062 

34 

3373 

7413 

79 

25723 

972 

35 

3501 

7141 

80 

28356 

881 

36 

3633 

6882 

81 

31569 

792 

37 

3768 

6635 

82 

35577 

702 

38 

3906 

6395 

83 

40222 

613 

39 

4049 

6174 

84 

47572 

525 

40 

4196 

5959 

85 

57150 

437 

41 

4346 

5752 

86 

71503 

349 

42 

4502 

5553 

87 

95405 

262 

43 

4662 

5362 

88 

143181 

174 

44 

4828 

5177 

89 

286499 

87 

45 

5000 

5000 

90 

infinita 

Proposition  XIV 

To  find  for  each  degree  of  elevation  the  altitudes 
and  sublimities  of  parabolas  of  constant  ampli¬ 
tude. 

The  problem  is  easily  solved.  For  if  vve  as¬ 
sume  a  constant  amplitude  of  loooo,  then  half 
the  tangent  at  any  angle  of  elevation  will  be  the 


altitude.  Thus,  to  illustrate,  a  parabola  having 
an  angle  of  elevation  of  30°  and  an  amplitude 
of  10000,  will  have  an  altitude  of  2887,  which 
is  approximately  one-half  the  tangent.  And 
now  the  altitude  having  been  found,  the  sub¬ 
limity  is  derived  as  follows.  Since  it  has  been 
proved  that  half  the  amplitude  of  a  semi-para¬ 
bola  is  the  mean  proportional  between  the  al¬ 
titude  and  sublimity,  and  since  the  altitude  has 
already  been  found,  and  since  the  semi-ampli¬ 
tude  is  a  constant,  namely  5000,  it  follows  that 
if  we  divide  the  square  of  the  semi-amplitude 
by  the  altitude  we  shall  obtain  the  sublimity 
sought.  Thus  in  our  example  the  altitude  was 
found  to  be  2887:  the  square  of  5000  is  25,000,- 
000  which  divided  by  2887  gives  the  approxi¬ 
mate  value  of  the  sublimity,  namely  8659. 

Salv.  Here  we  see,  first  of  all,  how  very  true 
is  the  statement  made  above,  that,  for  different 
angles  of  elevation,  the  greater  the  deviation 
from  the  mean,  whether  above  or  below,  the 
greater  the  initial  speed  required  to  carry  the 
projectile  over  the  same  range.  For  since  the 
speed  is  the  resultant  of  two  motions,  namely, 
one  horizontal  and  uniform,  the  other  vertical 
and  naturally  accelerated;  and  since  the  sum 
of  the  altitude  and  sublimity  represents  this 
speed,  it  is  seen  from  the  preceding  table  that 
this  sum  is  a  minimum  for  an  elevation  of  45° 
where  the  altitude  and  sublimity  are  equal, 
namely,  each  5000;  and  their  sum  10000.  But  if 
we  choose  a  greater  elevation,  say  50°,  we  shall 
find  the  altitude  5959,  and  the  sublimity  4196, 
giving  a  sum  of  10155;  in  like  manner  we  shall 
find  that  this  is  precisely  the  value  of  the  speed 
at  40°  elevation,  both  angles  deviating  equally 
from  the  mean. 

Secondly,  it  is  to  be  noted  that,  while  equal 
speeds  are  required  for  each  of  two  elevations 
that  are  equidistant  from  the  mean,  there  is 
this  curious  alternation,  namely,  that  the  alti¬ 
tude  and  sublimity  at  the  greater  elevation  cor¬ 
respond  inversely  to  the  sublimity  and  altitude 
at  the  lower  elevation.  Thus  in  the  preceding 
example,  an  elevation  of  50°  gives  an  altitude 
of  5959  and  a  sublimity  of  4196;  while  an  ele¬ 
vation  of  40°  corresponds  to  an  altitude  of  4196 
and  a  sublimity  of  5959.  And  this  holds  true  in 
general;  but  it  is  to  be  remembered  that,  in 
order  to  escape  tedious  calculations,  no  account 
has  been  taken  of  fractions  which  are  of  little 
moment  in  comparison  with  such  large  num¬ 
bers. 

Sagr.  I  note  also  in  regard  to  the  two  compo¬ 
nents  of  the  initial  speed  that  the  higher  the 


258  GALILEO  GALILEI 


shot  the  less  is  the  horizontal  and  the  greater 
the  vertical  component;  on  the  other  hand,  at 
lower  elevations  where  the  shot  reaches  only  a 
small  height  the  horizontal  component  of  the 
initial  speed  must  be  great.  In  the  case  of  a  pro¬ 
jectile  fired  at  an  elevation  of  90^,  I  quite  un¬ 
derstand  that  all  the  force  in  the  world  would 
not  be  sufficient  to  make  it  deviate  a  single  fin¬ 
ger’s  breadth  from  the  perpendicular  and  that 
it  would  necessarily  fall  back  into  its  initial  pos¬ 
ition;  but,  in  the  case  of  zero  elevation,  when 
the  shot  is  fired  horizontally,  I  am  not  so  cer¬ 
tain  that  some  force,  less  than  infinite,  would 
not  carry  the  projectile  some  distance;  thus 
not  even  a  cannon  can  fire  a  shot  in  a  perfectly 
horizontal  direction,  or  as  we  say,  point  blank, 
that  is,  with  no  elevation  at  all.  Here,  I  admit, 
there  is  some  room  for  doubt.  The  fact  I  do  not 
deny  outright,  because  of  another  phenomenon 
apparently  no  less  remarkable,  but  yet  one  for 
which  I  have  conclusive  evidence.  This  phen¬ 
omenon  is  the  impossibility  of  stretching  a  rope 
in  such  a  way  that  it  shall  be  at  once  straight 
and  parallel  to  the  horizon;  the  fact  is  that  the 
cord  always  sags  and  bends  and  that  no  force  is 
sufficient  to  stretch  it  perfectly  straight. 

Salv.  In  this  case  of  the  rope  then,  Sagredo, 
you  cease  to  wonder  at  the  phenomenon  be¬ 
cause  you  have  its  demonstration;  but  if  we 
consider  it  with  more  care  we  may  possibly  dis¬ 
cover  some  correspondence  between  the  case  of 
the  gun  and  that  of  the  string.  The  curvature 
of  the  path  of  the  shot  fired  horizontally  ap¬ 
pears  to  result  from  two  forces,  one  (that  of  the 
weapon)  drives  it  horizontally  and  the  other 
(its  own  weight)  draws  it  vertically  downward. 
So  in  stretching  the  rope  you  have  the  force 
which  pulls  it  horizontally  and  its  own  weight 
which  acts  downwards.  The  circumstances  in 
these  two  cases  are,  therefore,  very  similar.  If 
then  you  attribute  to  the  weight  of  the  rope  a 
power  and  energy  sufficient  to  oppose  and  over¬ 
come  any  stretching  force,  no  matter  how  great, 
why  deny  this  power  to  the  bullet  ? 

Besides  I  must  tell  you  something  which  will 
both  surprise  and  please  you,  namely,  that  a 
cord  stretched  more  or  less  tightly  assumes  a 
curve  which  closely  approximates  the  para¬ 
bola.  This  similarity  is  clearly  seen  if  you  draw  a 
parabolic  curve  on  a  vertical  plane  and  then  in¬ 
vert  it  so  that  the  apex  will  lie  at  the  bottom 
and  the  base  remain  horizontal;  for,  on  hang¬ 
ing  a  chain  below  the  base,  one  end  attached  to 
each  extremity  of  the  base,  you  will  observe 
that,  on  slackening  the  chain  more  or  less,  it 
bends  and  fits  itself  to  the  parabola;  and  the 


coincidence  is  more  exact  in  proportion  as  the 
parabola  is  drawn  with  less  curvature  or,  so  to 
speak,  more  stretched;  so  that  using  parabolas 
described  with  elevations  less  than  45°  the  chain 
fits  its  parabola  almost  perfectly. 

Sagr.  Then  with  a  fine  chain  one  would  be 
able  to  quickly  draw  many  parabolic  lines  upon 
a  plane  surface. 

Salv.  Certainly,  and  with  no  small  advan¬ 
tage  as  I  shall  show  you  later. 

Simp.  But  before  going  further,  I  am  anxious 
to  be  convinced  at  least  of  that  proposition  of 
which  you  say  that  there  is  a  rigid  demonstra¬ 
tion;  I  refer  to  the  statement  that  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  by  any  force  whatever  to  stretch  a  cord  so 
that  it  will  lie  perfectly  straight  and  horizontal. 

Sagr.  I  will  see  if  I  can  recall  the  demonstra¬ 
tion;  but  in  order  to  understand  it,  Simplicio, 
it  will  be  necessary  for  you  to  take  for  granted 
concerning  machines  what  is  evident  not  alone 
from  experiment  but  also  from  theoretical  con¬ 
siderations,  namely,  that  the  velocity  of  a  mov¬ 
ing  body,  even  when  its  force  is  small,  can  over¬ 
come  a  very  great  resistance  exerted  by  a  slow¬ 
ly  moving  body,  whenever  the  velocity  of  the 
moving  body  bears  to  that  of  the  resisting  body 
a  greater  ratio  than  the  resistance  of  the  resist¬ 
ing  body  to  the  force  of  the  moving  body. 

Simp.  This  I  know  very  well  for  it  has  been 
demonstrated  by  Aristotle  in  his  Questions  in 
Mechanics;  it  is  also  clearly  seen  in  the  lever  and 
the  steelyard  where  a  counterpoise  weighing 
not  more  than  4  pounds  will  lift  a  weight  of 
400,  provided  that  the  distance  of  the  counter¬ 
poise  from  the  axis  about  which  the  steelyard 
rotates  be  more  than  one  hundred  times  as 
great  as  the  distance  between  this  axis  and  the 
point  of  support  for  the  large  weight.  This  is 
true  because  the  counterpoise  in  its  descent 
traverses  a  space  more  than  one  hundred  times 
as  great  as  that  moved  over  by  the  large  weight 
in  the  same  time;  in  other  words,  the  small 
counterpoise  moves  with  a  velocity  which  is 
more  than  one  hundred  times  as  great  as  that 
of  the  large  weight. 

Sagr.  You  are  quite  right;  you  do  not  hesi¬ 
tate  to  admit  that  however  small  the  force  of 
the  moving  body  it  will  overcome  any  resist¬ 
ance,  however  great,  provided  it  gains  more  in 
velocity  than  it  loses  in  force  and  Vv*eight.  Now 
let  us  return  to  the  case  of  the  cord.  In  the  ac¬ 
companying  figure  ab  represents  a  line  passing 
through  two  fixed  points  a  and  b;  at  the  ex¬ 
tremities  of  this  line  hang,  as  you  see,  two  large 
weights  c  and  d,  which  stretch  it  with  great 
force  and  keep  it  truly  straight,  seeing  that  it 


THE  TWO  NEW  SCIENCES 


is  merely  a  line  without  weight.  Now  I  wish  to 
remark,  that  if  from  the  middle  point  of  this 
line,  which  we  may  call  you  suspend  any 
small  weight,  say  h,  the  line  ab  will  yield  to¬ 
ward  the  point /  and  on  account  of  its  elonga¬ 
tion  will  compel  the  two  heavy  weights  c  and  d 
to  rise.  This  I  shall  demonstrate  as  follows:  with 
the  points  a  and  b  as  centres  describe  the  tv/o 
quadrants,  <?/^and  elm;  now  since  the  two  semi¬ 
diameters  ai  and  bl  are  equal  to  ae  and  eby  the 
remainders//  and  fl  are  the  excesses  of  the  lines 
af  and  fb  over  ae  and  eb;  they  therefore  deter¬ 


mine  the  rise  of  the  weights  c  and  d,  assuming 
of  course  that  the  weight  h  has  taken  the  posi¬ 
tion  /But  the  weight  h  will  take  the  position  / 
whenever  the  line  ^  which  represents  the  de¬ 
scent  of  h  bears  to  the  line  ft — that  is,  to  the 
rise  of  the  weights  c  and  d — a  ratio  which  is 
greater  than  the  ratio  of  the  weight  of  the  two 
large  bodies  to  that  of  the  body  h.  Even  when 
the  weights  of  c  and  d are  very  great  and  that  of 
h  very  small  this  will  happen;  for  the  excess  of 
the  weights  c  and  d  over  the  weight  of  h  can 
never  be  so  great  but  that  the  excess  of  the  tan¬ 
gent  ef  over  the  segment//may  be  proportional¬ 
ly  greater.  This  may  be  proved  as  follows:  Draw 
a  circle  of  diameter  ^^7/;  draw  the  line  bo  such  that 
the  ratio  of  its  length  to  another  length  c,c>d,  is 
the  same  as  the  ratio  of  the  weights  c  and  d  to 
the  weight  h.  Since  c>d,  the  ratio  of  bo  to  d  is 
greater  than  that  of  bo  to  c.  Take  be  a  third 
proportional  to  ob  and  d:  prolong  the  diameter 


259 

gi  to  a  point  /such  xS\2Xgi:if=oe:eb;  and  from 
the  point/ draw  the  tangent  fn;  then  since  we 
already  have  oe:eb  =  gi:if  we  shall  obtain,  by 
compounding  ratios,  ob:eb  —  gf:if  But  is  a 
mean  proportional  between  ob  and  be;  while  nf 
is  a  mean  proportional  between  gf  and  //. 
Hence  //bears  to //  the  same  ratio  as  that  of  cb 
to  d,  which  is  greater  than  that  of  the  weights 
c  and  d  to  the  weight  K  Since  then  the  descent, 
or  velocity,  of  the  weight  h  bears  to  the  rise,  or 
velocity,  of  the  weights  c  and  d  a  greater  ratio 
than  the  weight  of  the  bodies  c  and  d  bears  to 
the  weight  of  h,  it  is  clear  that  the  weight  h 
will  descend  and  the  line  ab  will  cease  to  be 
straight  and  horizontal. 

And  now  this  which  happens  in  the  case  of  a 
weightless  cord  ab  when  any  small  weight  h  is 
attached  at  the  point  happens  also  when  the 
cord  is  made  of  ponderable  matter  but  without 
any  attached  weight;  because  in  this  case  the 
material  of  which  the  cord  is  composed  func¬ 
tions  as  a  suspended  weight. 

Simp.  I  am  fully  satisfied.  So  now’  Salviati  can 
explain,  as  he  promised,  the  advantage  of  such 
a  chain  and,  afterwards,  present  the  specula¬ 
tions  of  our  Academician  on  the  subject  of  im¬ 
pulsive  forces. 

Salv.  Let  the  preceding  discussions  suffice 
for  to-day;  the  hour  is  already  late  and  the  time 
remaining  will  not  permit  us  to  clear  up  the 
subjects  proposed;  we  may  therefore  postpone 
our  meeting  until  another  and  more  opportune 
occasion. 

Sagr.  1  concur  in  your  opinion,  because  after 
various  conversations  with  intimate  friends  of 
our  Academician  I  have  concluded  that  this 
question  of  impulsive  forces  is  very  obscure, 
and  I  think  that,  up  to  the  present,  none  of 
those  who  have  treated  this  subject  have  been 
able  to  clear  up  its  dark  corners  which  lie  al¬ 
most  beyond  the  reach  of  human  imagina¬ 
tion;  among  the  various  views  wLich  I  have 
heard  expressed  one,  strangely  fantastic,  re¬ 
mains  in  my  memory,  namely,  that  impulsive 
forces  are  indeterminate,  if  not  infinite.  Let  us, 
therefore,  await  the  convenience  of  Salviati. 
Meanwhile,  tell  me  what  is  this  which  follows 
the  discussion  of  projectiles. 

Salv.  These  are  some  theorems  pertaining  to 
the  centres  of  gravity  of  solids,  discovered  by 
our  Academician  in  his  youth,  and  undertaken 
by  him  because  he  considered  the  treatment  of 
Federigo  Comandino  to  be  somewhat  incom¬ 
plete.  The  propositions  which  you  have  before 
you  would,  he  thought,  meet  the  deficiencies 
of  Comandino’s  book.  The  investigation  was 


GALILEO  GALILEI 


260 

undertaken  at  the  instance  of  the  Illustrious 
Marquis  Guidobaldo  dal  Monte,  a  very  distin¬ 
guished  mathematician  of  his  day,  as  is  eviden¬ 
ced  by  his  various  publications.  To  this  gentle¬ 
man  our  Academician  gave  a  copy  of  this  work, 
hoping  to  extend  the  investigation  to  other 
solids  not  treated  by  Comandino.  But  a  little 
later  there  chanced  to  fall  into  his  hands  the 
book  of  the  great  geometrician,  Luca  Valerio, 
where  he  found  the  subject  treated  so  com¬ 


pletely  that  he  left  off  his  own  investigations, 
although  the  methods  which  he  employed  were 
quite  different  from  those  of  Valerio. 

Sagr.  Please  be  good  enough  to  leave  this 
volume  with  me  until  our  next  meeting  so  that 
I  may  be  able  to  read  and  study  these  proposi¬ 
tions  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  written. 

Salv.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  comply  with  your 
request  and  I  only  hope  that  the  propositions 
will  be  of  deep  interest  to  you. 


*<•  *  tIRPPI 

tf^rtokm  «r  <Jtr  IttManc^  of  d)^VU}a»tTiBtri  |Mci/Hii»r  ^  Mm  iateMtffHlieiHw  ' 

Ma^ik  OnjcikjMJa  (tel  M6t)K4  a  vccy  wLc^h  ttetmaboiii  wbidkii6|||f|af^f<i^Mae  , 

tniC^iOpniddA  <|)att  wrcieftt  fcom  ttawe  af  -Va^rr^  «  .'.  ^ 

ctii  l«y  b»«ikirM|tip<ibfica(t(ifiik!l^  Tb^  S'ie«>vl’I<si|r  W  vx<cl  taio^  i^-  ican^llite,  j 

WM  ouf  j^cadeitifeiw  fj/s*t  i  t»ii«  «>jrk,  iwjwM  vUk-ate  iwii  iwst  ?««  meiHf^io  tiii*  ;l 
hGfa%  ftf  titttud  tW'inuTicWuun  40  ctW  l^v  :<9;«!8rfiftd‘stiKiy'di^  inepait;  ^ 

mWs  npctKstcd  tey  Cook^wo®.  ku*  »•  n^^Kii  tbty vmt«®.  ri  j 

ftwt  ttr<e  tftemcTil  M  £41  iotc  tew'tew*  vt®  ft  it  ^  (^e#«MC  to  jxmf- ' 

hkJt  ti  ttefr  JjnM  cMn^iAbimk'X^tot  I'bi^iiOi  o^^lfuen  itotf  I  (wy  i.:|ie/th4rt)«  uiopMiteofii^' 1 
wjfcric  be  me  .«a  ■dSJbebfitetoujita**  ityaik,  - ,  j.'*i  * 

"  i.  '•.  '  '  '  •  ^  ^  •  .'.  i 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

William  Harvey,  1578-1657 


Harvey  was  born  at  Folkestone  on  April  i, 
1578,  the  eldest  of  the  seven  sons  of  Thomas 
Harvey,  a  prosperous  Kentish  yeoman.  At  the 
age  of  ten  he  was  sent  to  the  King’s  School 
at  Canterbury  and  five  years  later  to  Caius- 
Gonvil  College,  Cambridge,  where  he  took  his 
A.B.  degree  in  1597.  To  prepare  himself  for  a 
medical  career  he  went  to  the  University  of 
Padua,  then  the  most  celebrated  school  of 
medicine.  Harvey  was  there  while  Galileo  was 
achieving  his  first  fame  at  Padua.  He  fol¬ 
lowed  the  anatomy  lectures  of  the  great  Fa- 
bricius  of  Aquapendente  and  in  the  spring  of 
1602  took  his  degree  at  Padua;  later  that 
same  year  he  was  made  a  Doctor  of  Medicine 
at  Cambridge. 

Shortly  afterwards,  Harvey  settled  in  Lon¬ 
don,  married  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Lancelot 
Browne,  Queen  Elizabeth’s  physician,  and  be¬ 
gan  to  practise  medicine.  In  1604  he  became 
a  candidate  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians 
and  was  duly  admitted  a  fellow  three  years 
later.  Upon  the  recommendation  of  the  king 
and  the  president  of  the  college,  he  was  ap¬ 
pointed  in  1609  assistant  physician  of  St. 
Bartholomew’s  Hospital  and  in  the  following 
year  succeeded  to  the  post  of  physician.  His 
practice  prospered,  and,  although  Aubrey, 
who  knew  Harvey,  says  that  his  anatomy  was 
better  than  his  therapy,  it  is  known  that  he 
performed  difficult  surgical  operations  and  had 
many  illustrious  patients,  among  them  Francis 
Bacon  and  King  James  I,  to  whom  he  became 
physician  extraordinary. 

Upon  his  appointment  as  the  Lumleian  lec¬ 
turer  at  the  College  of  Physicians  in  1615,  Har¬ 
vey  began  his  lectures  on  anatomy  in  which  he 
made  known  his  work  on  the  motions  of  the 
heart  and  blood.  In  his  lectures  he  professed 
“to  learn  and  teach  anatomy,  not  from  books, 
but  from  dissections,  not  from  the  positions  of 
the  philosophers  but  from  the  fabric  of  nature”; 
and  during  his  lifetime  he  dissected  more  than 
eighty  kinds  of  animals.  His  teaching  also 
showed  his  wide  knowledge  of  books.  He  knew 
all  the  anatomists  from  Vesalius  to  his  own 
time;  he  had  studied  Aristotle,  whom  he  quotes 


more  often  than  any  other  author,  and  Galen; 
he  was  especially  fond  of  Virgil,  had  read  Plau¬ 
tus,  Horace,  Caesar,  Cicero,  Vitruvius,  and  St. 
Augustine,  and  was  thoroughly  familiar  with 
the  Bible. 

In  1628,  after  “nine  years  and  more”  of 
teaching,  Harvey  published  his  work  on  the 
circulation  of  the  blood,  Exercitatio  Anatomica 
de  Motu  Cordis  et  Sanguinis  in  Animalibus.  The 
book  was  dedicated  to  Charles  I,  whom  Harvey 
served  as  physician.  It  immediately  attracted 
wide  attention,  although  at  first,  and  particu¬ 
larly  on  the  continent,  it  was  mostly  of  an  ad¬ 
verse  character.  Harvey  for  the  most  part  left 
the  defense  of  his  work  to  his  supporters,  and 
he  lived  to  see  his  teaching  generally  accepted. 
His  friend,  Hobbes,  declared  that  Harvey  was 
“the  only  one  I  know  who  has  overcome  public 
odium  and  established  a  new  doctrine  during 
his  own  lifetime.” 

After  the  publication  of  his  work  Harvey 
became  more  closely  associated  with  Charles  I, 
and  until  1646  his  fortunes  were  involved  with 
those  of  the  king.  By  the  king’s  command  he  re¬ 
linquished  his  functions  at  the  College  of  Phy¬ 
sicians  in  1629  to  accompany  James  Stuart,  the 
young  duke  of  Lennox,  on  his  travels  to  the 
continent.  Four  years  later  he  went  to  Nurem¬ 
berg  and  Rome  with  the  Earl  of  Arundel,  who 
had  been  sent  as  an  ambassador  to  the  German 
emperor.  As  royal  physician,  he  several  times 
attended  the  king  on  his  journeys.  Despite  his 
close  connection  with  king  and  court,  Harvey 
himself  seems  to  have  taken  little  interest  in 
politics.  In  1641  he  still  attended  the  king  not 
only  with  the  consent  but  also  at  the  desire  of 
parliament.  But  with  the  outbreak  of  war  be¬ 
tween  the  king  and  parliament,  Harvey  be¬ 
came  identified  with  the  royal  cause.  At  the 
battle  of  Edgehill,  Aubrey  reports  that  he  was 
given  charge  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  the 
Duke  of  York  but  was  so  little  concerned  with 
the  battle  that  “he  withdrew  with  them  under 
a  hedge  and  took  out  of  his  pocket  a  book  and 
read.”  Harvey  went  to  Oxford  with  the  re¬ 
treating  royal  forces  in  1642  and  remained 
there  until  the  surrender  of  that  city  in  1646. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


264 

He  then  returned  to  London  and  for  the  rest 
of  his  life  lived  there  with  his  brothers,  who 
were  eminent  merchants. 

During  the  fifteen  years  that  Harvey  was  in 
close  attendance  upon  the  king,  he  continued 
to  pursue  his  medical  investigations.  In  study¬ 
ing  the  process  of  generation  he  enjoyed  the  in¬ 
terest  and  support  of  Charles  I,  who  not  only 
placed  the  royal  deer  parks  at  his  disposal,  but 
also  watched  his  demonstration  of  the  growth 
of  the  chick  with  the  same  interest  that  he  had 
shown  for  the  movements  of  the  heart.  Even  the 
Civil  War  did  not  completely  interrupt  his  re¬ 
search.  He  notes  that  his  “enemies  abstracted 
from  my  museum  the  fruits  of  many  years  of 
toil”  with  the  result  that  “many  observations, 
particularly  on  the  generation  of  insects,  have 
perished,  with  detriment,  I  venture  to  say,  to 
the  republic  of  letters.”  Despite  this  loss,  he 
had  collected  a  large  number  of  observations 
and  had  embodied  the  results  of  his  investiga¬ 
tions  in  a  treatise.  Finally,  in  1651  his  friend 
and  disciple,  George  Ent,  obtained  the  manu¬ 
scripts  and  with  the  author’s  permission  made 
public  the  work  on  generation,  Exercitationes  de 
Generatione  Animalium, 

This  was  the  last  of  Harvey’s  labors.  He  had 
now  reached  his  seventy-third  year  and  was 


honored  at  home  and  abroad.  His  college  at 
Cambridge  voted  a  statue  in  his  honor,  and  the 
College  of  Physicians  in  1654  elected  him  presi¬ 
dent,  an  office  he  declined  because  of  age.  He 
had  already  served  three  terms  as  censor  (1613, 
1625,  1629),  and  in  that  capacity,  together 
with  three  of  his  colleagues,  had  supervised 
practitioners,  taken  necessary  proceedings 
against  quacks,  and  inspected  apothecaries. 
The  same  year  that  he  was  offered  the  presi¬ 
dency  he  built  and  equipped  a  library  for  the 
College,  to  which  in  1656  he  also  made  over 
his  property  in  Essex  with  provision  for  a 
salary  to  the  college  librarian  and  the  endow¬ 
ment  of  an  annual  oration.  This  address,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Harvey’s  orders,  is  to  exhort  the 
fellows  “to  search  out  and  study  the  secrets  of 
nature  by  way  of  experiment,  and  also  for  the 
honor  of  the  profession  to  continue  mutual 
love  and  affection  among  themselves.” 

Although  afflicted  by  the  gout,  Harvey  en¬ 
joyed  the  active  use  of  all  his  faculties  until  his 
eightieth  year.  On  June  3,  1657,  he  was  at¬ 
tacked  by  paralysis  and  though  deprived  of 
speech  was  able  to  send  for  his  nephews  and 
distribute  his  personal  things  among  them.  He 
died  the  same  evening  and  was  buried  with 
great  honor  in  Hempstead  Church,  Essex. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note 


AN  ANATOMICAL  DISQUISITION  ON 
THE  MOTION  OF  THE  HEART  AND 
BLOOD  IN  ANIMALS 


263  A  SECOND  DISQUISITION  TO  JOHN  RIO¬ 
LAN;  IN  WHICH  MANY  OBJECTIONS  TO 
THE  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 
ARE  REFUTED  313 


Dedications 

Introduction 


267 

268 


CHAP. 

L  The  author's  motives  for  writing  273 

2.  Of  the  motions  of  the  heart,  as  seen  in  the  dis¬ 
section  of  living  animals  274 

3.  Of  the  motions  of  arteries,  as  seen  in  the  dissec¬ 
tion  of  living  animals  275 

4.  Of  the  motion  of  the  heart  and  its  auricles,  as 

seen  in  the  bodies  of  living  animals  276 

5.  Of  the  motion,  action,  and  office  of  the  heart  278 

6.  Of  the  course  by  which  the  blood  is  carried 
from  the  vena  cava  into  the  arteries,  or  from 
the  right  into  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  280 

7.  The  blood  percolates  the  substance  of  the  lungs 

from  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  into  the 
pulmonary  veins  and  left  ventricle  283 

8.  Of  the  quantity  of  blood  passing  through  the 

heart  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries;  and  of  the 
circular  motion  of  the  blood  285 

9.  That  there  is  a  circulation  of  the  blood  is  con¬ 
firmed  from  the  first  proposition  286 

10.  The  first  position:  of  the  quantity  of  blood 
passing  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries.  And  that 
there  is  a  circuit  of  the  blood,  freed  from  objec¬ 
tions,  and  farther  confirmed  by  experiment  288 

11.  The  second  position  is  demonstrated  289 

12.  That  there  is  a  circulation  of  the  blood  is  shown 
from  the  second  position  demonstrated  292 

13.  The  third  position  is  confirmed:  and  the  circu¬ 
lation  of  the  blood  is  demonstrated  from  it  293 

14.  Conclusion  of  the  demonstration  of  the  circu¬ 
lation  295 

15.  The  circulation  of  the  blood  is  further  con¬ 
firmed  by  probable  reasons  296 

16.  The  circulation  of  the  blood  is  further  proved 

from  certain  consequences  297 

17.  The  motion  and  circulation  of  the  blood  are 

confirmed  from  the  particulars  apparent  in  the 
structure  of  the  heart,  and  from  those  things 
which  dissection  unfolds  299 

THE  FIRST  ANATOxMICAL  DISQUISITION 
ON  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD, 
ADDRESSED  TO  JOHN  RIOLAN  305 


ANATOMICAL  EXERCISES  ON 
THE  GENERATION  OF  ANIMALS 

Dedication  329 

Introduction  331 

Of  the  manner  and  order  of  acquiring  knowledge  332 

Of  the  same  matters,  according  to  Aristotle  333 

Of  the  method  to  be  pursued  in  studying  gen¬ 
eration  335 

ON  ANIMAL  GENERATION 

EXERCISE 

1.  Wherefore  we  begin  with  the  history  of  the 

hen’s  egg  338 

2.  Of  the  seat  of  generation  338 

3.  Of  the  upper  part  of  the  hen’s  uterus,  or  the 

ovary  339 

4.  Of  the  infundibulum  342 

5.  Of  the  external  portion  of  the  uterus  of  the 

common  fowl  343 

6.  Of  the  uterus  of  the  fowl  347 

7.  Of  the  abdomen  of  the  common  fowl  and  of 

other  birds  350 

8.  Of  the  situation  and  structure  of  the  remaining 

parts  of  the  fowl’s  uterus  351 

9.  Of  the  extrusion  of  the  egg,  or  parturition  of 

the  fowl,  in  general  353 

10.  Of  the  increase  and  nutrition  of  the  egg  353 

11.  Of  the  covering  or  shell  of  the  egg  354 

12.  Of  the  remaining  parts  of  the  egg  357 

13.  Of  the  diversities  of  eggs  359 

14.  Of  the  production  of  the  chick  from  the  egg  of 

the  hen  363 

15.  The  first  examination  of  the  egg;  or  of  the  effect 

of  the  first  day’s  incubation  upon  the  egg  365 

16.  Second  inspection  of  the  egg  366 

17.  The  third  inspection  of  the  egg  368 

18.  The  fourth  inspection  of  the  egg  371 

19.  The  fifth  inspection  of  the  egg  375 

20.  The  sixth  inspection  377 

21.  The  inspection  after  the  tenth  day  378 

22.  The  inspection  after  the  fourteenth  day  379 

23.  Of  the  exclusion  of  the  chick,  or  the  birth  from 

the  egg  381 

24.  Of  twin-bearing  eggs  382 


265 


CONTENTS 


266 

25.  Certain  deductions  from  the  preceding  history 

of  the  egg  383 

26.  Of  (he  nature  of  the  egg  383 

27.  The  egg  is  not  the  product  of  the  uterus,  but  of 

the  vital  principle  388 

28.  The  egg  is  not  produced  without  the  hen  390 

29.  Of  the  manner,  according  to  Aristotle,  in  which 

a  perfect  and  fruitful  egg  is  produced  by  the 
male  and  female  fowl  391 

30.  Of  the  uses  of  this  disquisition  on  fecundity  393 

31.  The  egg  is  not  produced  by  the  cock  and  hen  in 

the  way  Aristotle  would  have  it  394 

32.  Nor  in  the  manner  imagined  by  physicians  394 

33.  The  male  and  the  female  are  alike  efficient  in 

the  business  of  generation  395 

k  Of  the  matter  of  the  egg,  in  opposition  to  the 
.\ristotelians  and  the  medical  writers  396 

35.  In  how  far  is  the  fowl  efficient  in  the  generation 
of  the  egg,  according  to  Aristotle.?  And  where¬ 
fore  is  the  concurrence  of  the  male  required .?  397 

36.  The  perfect  hen’s  egg  is  of  two  colours  398 

37.  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  egg  is  increased  by 

the  albumen  399 

38.  Of  what  the  cock  and  hen  severally  contribute 

to  the  production  of  the  egg  400 

39.  Of  the  cock  and  the  particulars  most  remark¬ 
able  in  his  constitution  401 

40.  Of  the  hen  402 

41.  Of  the  sense  in  which  the  hen  may  be  called  the 
“prime  efficient”:  and  of  her  parturition  405 

42.  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  generation  of  the 

chick  takes  place  from  the  egg.  407 

43.  In  how  many  ways  the  chick  may  be  said  to  be 

formed  from  the  egg  408 

44.  Fabricius  is  mistaken  with  regard  to  the  matter 
of  the  generation  of  the  chick  in  ovo  409 

45.  What  is  the  material  of  the  chick,  and  how  it  is 

formed  in  the  egg  412 

46.  Of  the  efficient  cause  of  the  generation  of  the 

chick  and  feetus  415 

47.  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  efficient  cause  of 


the  chick  acts,  according  to  Aristotle  417 

48.  The  opinion  of  Fabricius  on  the  efficient  cause 

of  the  chick  is  refuted  419 

49.  The  inquiry  into  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick 

is  one  of  great  difficulty  421 

50.  Of  the  efficient  cause  of  animals,  and  its  con¬ 
ditions  424 

51.  Of  the  order  of  generation;  and,  first,  of  the 

primary  genital  particle  429 

52.  Of  the  blood  as  prime  element  in  the  body  432 

53.  Of  the  inferences  deducible  from  the  course  of 

the  umbilical  vessels  in  the  egg  438 

54.  Of  the  order  of  the  parts  in  generation  from  an 

egg,  according  to  Fabricius  441 

55.  Of  the  order  of  the  parts  according  to  Aris¬ 
totle  445 

56.  Of  the  order  of  the  parts  in  generation  as  it 

appears  from  observation  449 

57.  Of  certain  paradoxes  and  problems  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  in  connexion  with  this  subject  454 

58.  Of  the  nutrition  of  the  chick  in  ovo  458 

59.  Of  the  uses  of  the  entire  egg  461 

60.  Of  the  uses  of  the  yelk  and  albumen  462 

61.  Of  the  uses  of  the  other  parts  of  the  egg  467 

62.  An  egg  is  the  common  origin  of  all  animals  468 

63.  Of  the  generation  of  viviparous  animals  470 

64.  The  generation  of  viviparous  animals  in  gen¬ 
eral  is  illustrated  from  the  history  of  that  of  the 
hind  and  doe,  and  the  reason  of  this  selection  472 

65.  Of  the  uterus  of  the  hind  and  doe  473 

66.  Of.  the  intercourse  of  the  hind  and  doe  476 

67.  Of  the  constitution  or  change  that  takes  place 

in  the  uterus  of  the  deer  in  the  course  of  the 
month  of  September  477 

68.  Of  what  takes  place  in  the  month  of  October  478 

69.  Of  what  takes  place  in  the  uterus  of  the  doe 

during  the  month  of  November  479 

70.  Of  the  conception  of  the  deer  in  the  course  of 

the  month  of  December  484 

71.  Of  the  innate  heat  488 

72.  Of  the  primigenial  moisture  494 


An  Anatomical  Disquisition  on  the 
Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood  in  Animals 


To  the  Most  Illustrious  and  Indomitable  Prince, 
CHARLES, 

KING  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN,  FRANCE,  AND  IRELAND, 
DEFENDER  OF  THE  FAITH 

Most  illustrious  Prince! 

The  heart  of  animals  is  the  foundation  of  their  life,  the  sovereign  of  every¬ 
thing  within  them,  the  sun  of  their  microcosm,  that  upon  which  all  growth  de¬ 
pends,  from  which  all  power  proceeds.  The  King,  in  like  manner,  is  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  his  kingdom,  the  sun  of  the  world  around  him,  the  heart  of  the  repub¬ 
lic,  the  fountain  whence  all  power,  all  grace  doth  flow.  What  I  have  here  written 
of  the  motions  of  the  heart  I  am  the  more  emboldened  to  present  to  your  Ma¬ 
jesty,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  present  age,  because  almost  all  things 
human  are  done  after  human  examples,  and  many  things  in  a  King  are  after  the 
pattern  of  the  heart.  The  knowledge  of  his  heart,  therefore,  will  not  be  useless 
to  a  Prince,  as  embracing  a  kind  of  Divine  example  of  his  functions — and  it 
has  still  been  usual  with  men  to  compare  small  things  with  great.  Here,  at  all 
events,  best  of  Princes,  placed  as  you  are  on  the  pinnacle  of  human  affairs,  you 
may  at  once  contemplate  the  prime  mover  in  the  body  of  man,  and  the  emblem 
of  your  own  sovereign  power.  Accept  therefore,  with  your  wonted  clemency,  I 
most  humbly  beseech  you,  illustrious  Prince,  this,  my  new  Treatise  on  the 
Heart;  you,  who  are  yourself  the  new  light  of  this  age,  and  indeed  its  very 
heart;  a  Prince  abounding  in  virtue  and  in  grace,  and  to  whom  we  gladly  refer 
all  the  blessings  which  England  enjoys,  all  the  pleasure  we  have  in  our  lives. 

Your  Majesty's  most  devoted  servant, 

William  Harvey 

[London  ....  1628.] 


TO  HIS  very  dear  FRIEND,  DOCTOR  ARGENT,  THE  EXCELLENT  AND 
ACCOMPLISHED  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  ROYAL  COLLEGE  OF  PHYSICIANS, 
AND  TO  OTHER  LEARNED  PHYSICIANS,  HIS  MOST  ESTEEMED  COLLEAGUES 


I  have  already  and  repeatedly  presented  you, 
my  learned  friends,  with  my  new  views  of  the 
motion  and  function  of  the  heart,  in  my  ana¬ 
tomical  lectures;  but  having  now  for  nine  years 
and  more  confirmed  these  views  by  multiplied 
demonstrations  in  your  presence,  illustrated 
them  by  arguments,  and  freed  them  from  the 
objections  of  the  most  learned  and  skilful  anato¬ 
mists,  I  at  length  yield  to  the  requests,  I  might 


say  entreaties,  of  many,  and  here  present  them 
for  general  consideration  in  this  treatise. 

Were  not  the  work  indeed  presented  through 
you,  my  learned  friends,  I  should  scarce  hope 
that  it  could  come  out  scatheless  and  com¬ 
plete;  for  you  have  in  general  been  the  faithful 
witnesses  of  almost  all  the  instances  from  which 
I  have  either  collected  the  truth  or  confuted 
error;  you  have  seen  my  dissections,  and  at  my 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


268 

demonstrations  of  all  that  I  maintain  to  be 
objects  of  sense,  you  have  been  accustomed  to 
stand  by  and  bear  me  out  with  your  testimony. 
And  as  this  book  alone  declares  the  blood  to 
course  and  revolve  by  a  new  route,  very  differ¬ 
ent  from  the  ancient  and  beaten  pathway  trod¬ 
den  for  so  many  ages,  and  illustrated  by  such  a 
host  of  learned  and  distinguished  men,  I  was 
greatly  afraid  lest  I  might  be  charged  with  pre¬ 
sumption  did  I  lay  my  work  before  the  public 
at  home,  or  send  it  beyond  seas  for  impression, 
unless  I  had  first  proposed  its  subject  to  you, 
had  confirmed  its  conclusions  by'ocular  demon¬ 
strations  in  your  presence,  had  replied  to  your 
doubts  and  objections,  and  secured  the  assent 
and  support  of  our  distinguished  President.  For 
I  was  most  intimately  persuaded,  that  if  I  could 
make  good  my  proposition  before  you  and  our 
College,  illustrious  by  its  numerous  body  of 
learned  individuals,  I  had  less  to  fear  from  oth¬ 
ers;  I  even  ventured  to  hope  that  I  should  have 
the  comfort  of  finding  all  that  you  had  granted 
me  in  your  sheer  love  of  truth,  conceded  by 
others  who  were  philosophers  like  yourselves. 
For  true  philosophers,  who  are  only  eager  for 
truth  and  knowledge,  never  regard  themselves 
as  already  so  thoroughly  informed,  but  that 
they  welcome  further  information  from  whom¬ 
soever  and  from  whencesoever  it  may  come; 
nor  are  they  so  narrow-minded  as  to  imagine 
any  of  the  arts  or  sciences  transmitted  to  us  by 
the  ancients,  in  such  a  state  of  forwardness  or 
completeness,  that  nothing  is  left  for  the  in¬ 
genuity  and  industry  of  others;  very  many,  on 
the  contrary,  maintain  that  all  we  know  is  still 
infinitely  less  than  all  that  still  remains  un¬ 
known;  nor  do  philosophers  pin  their  faith  to 
others’  precepts  in  such  wise  that  they  lose  their 
liberty,  and  cease  to  give  credence  to  the  con¬ 
clusions  of  their  proper  senses.  Neither  do  they 
swear  such  fealty  to  their  mistress  Antiquity, 
that  they  openly,  and  in  sight  of  all,  deny  and 
desert  their  friend  Truth.  But  even  as  they  see 
that  the  credulous  and  vain  are  disposed  at  the 
first  blush  to  accept  and  to  believe  everything 
that  is  proposed  to  them,  so  do  they  observe 
that  the  dull  and  unintellectual  are  indisposed 
to  see  what  lies  before  their  eyes,  and  even  to 
deny  the  light  of  the  noonday  sun.  They  teach 
us  in  our  course  of  philosophy  as  sedulously  to 
avoid  the  fables  of  the  poets  and  the  fancies  of 
the  vulgar,  as  the  false  conclusions  of  the  scep¬ 
tics.  And  then  the  studious,  and  good,  and  true, 
never  suffer  their  minds  to  be  warped  by  the 
passions  of  hatred  and  envy,  which  unfit  men 
duly  to  weigh  the  arguments  that  are  advanced 


in  behalf  of  truth,  or  to  appreciate  the  proposi¬ 
tion  that  is  even  fairly  demonstrated;  neither 
do  they  think  it  unworthy  of  them  to  change 
their  opinion  if  truth  and  undoubted  demon¬ 
stration  require  them  so  to  do;  nor  do  they 
esteem  it  discreditable  to  desert  error,  though 
sanctioned  by  the  highest  antiquity;  for  they 
know  full  well  that  to  err,  to  be  deceived,  is  hu¬ 
man;  that  many  things  are  discovered  by  acci¬ 
dent,  and  that  many  may  be  learned  indiffer¬ 
ently  from  any  quarter,  by  an  old  man  from  a 
youth,  by  a  person  of  understanding  from  one 
of  inferior  capacity. 

My  dear  colleagues,  I  had  no  purpose  to  swell 
this  treatise  into  a  large  volume  by  quoting  the 
names  and  writings  of  anatomists,  or  to  make  a 
parade  of  the  strength  of  my  memory,  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  my  reading,  and  the  amount  of  my 
pains;  because  I  profess  both  to  learn  and  to 
teach  anatomy,  not  from  books  but  from  dis¬ 
sections;  not  from  the  positions  of  philosophers 
but  from  the  fabric  of  nature;  and  then  because 
I  do  not  think  it  right  or  proper  to  strive  to 
take  from  the  ancients  any  honour  that  is  their 
due,  nor  yet  to  dispute  with  the  moderns,  and 
enter  into  controversy  with  those  who  have  ex¬ 
celled  in  anatomy  and  been  my  teachers.  I 
would  not  charge  with  wilful  falsehood  anyone 
who  was  sincerely  anxious  for  truth,  nor  lay  it 
to  anyone’s  door  as  a  crime  that  he  had  fallen 
into  error.  I  avow  myself  the  partisan  of  truth 
alone;  and  I  can  indeed  say  that  I  have  used  all 
my  endeavours,  bestowed  all  my  pains  on  an 
attempt  to  produce  something  that  should  be 
agreeable  to  the  good,  profitable  to  the  learned, 
and  useful  to  letters. 

Farewell,  most  worthy  Doctors, 

And  think  kindly  of  your  Anatomist, 

William  Harvey 

INTRODUCTION 

As  we  are  about  to  discuss  the  motion,  action, 
and  use  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  it  is  impera¬ 
tive  on  us  first  to  state  what  has  been  thought 
of  these  things  by  others  in  their  writings,  and 
what  has  been  held  by  the  vulgar  and  by  tradi¬ 
tion,  in  order  that  what  is  true  may  be  con¬ 
firmed,  and  what  is  false  set  right  by  dissection, 
multiplied  experience,  andaccurateobserv'ation. 

Almost  all  anatomists,  physicians,  and  phi¬ 
losophers,  up  to  the  present  time,  have  sup¬ 
posed,  with  Galen,  that  the  object  of  the  pulse 
was  the  same  as  that  of  respiration,  and  only 
differed  in  one  particular,  this  being  conceived 
to  depend  on  the  animal,  the  respiration  on  the 
vital  faculty;  the  two,  in  all  other  respects, 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


whether  with  reference  to  purpose  or  to  mo¬ 
tion,  comporting  themselves  alike.  Whence  it 
is  affirmed,  as  by  Hieronymus  Fabricius  of 
Aquapendente,  in  his  book  on  Respiration^ 
which  has  lately  appeared,  that  as  the  pulsation 
of  the  heart  and  arteries  does  not  suffice  for  the 
ventilation  and  refrigeration  of  the  blood,  there¬ 
fore  were  the  lungs  fashioned  to  surround  the 
heart.  From  this  it  appears  that  whatever  has 
hitherto  been  said  upon  the  systole  and  dias¬ 
tole,  on  the  motion  of  the  heart  and  arteries, 
has  been  said  with  especial  reference  to  the 
lungs. 

But  as  the  structure  and  movements  of  the 
heart  differ  from  those  of  the  lungs,  and  the 
motions  of  the  arteries  from  those  of  the  chest, 
so  seems  it  likely  that  other  ends  and  offices  will 
thence  arise,  and  that  the  pulsations  and  uses  of 
the  heart,  likewise  of  the  arteries,  will  differ  in 
many  respects  from  the  heavings  and  uses  of 
the  chest  and  lungs.  For  did  the  arterial  pulse 
and  the  respiration  serve  the  same  ends;  did  the 
arteries  in  their  diastole  take  air  into  their  cavi¬ 
ties,  as  commonly  stated,  and  in  their  systole 
emit  fuliginous  vapours  by  the  same  pores  of 
the  flesh  and  skin;  and  further,  did  they,  in  the 
time  intermediate  between  the  diastole  and  the 
systole,  contain  air,  and  at  all  times  either  air, 
or  spirits,  or  fuliginous  vapours,  what  should 
then  be  said  to  Galen,  who  wrote  a  book  on 
purpose  to  show  that  by  nature  the  arteries 
contained  blood,  and  nothing  but  blood;  neither 
spirits  nor  air,  consequently,  as  may  be  readily 
gathered  from  the  experiments  and  reasonings 
contained  in  the  same  book  ?  Now  if  the  arteries 
are  filled  in  the  diastole  with  air  then  taken  into 
them  (a  larger  quantity  of  air  penetrating  when 
the  pulse  is  large  and  full) ,  it  must  come  to  pass 
that  if  you  plunge  into  a  bath  of  water  or  of  oil 
when  the  pulse  is  strong  and  full,  it  ought  forth¬ 
with  to  become  either  smaller  or  much  slower, 
since  the  circumambient  bath  will  render  it 
either  difficult  or  impossible  for  the  air  to  pen¬ 
etrate.  In  like  manner,  as  all  the  arteries,  those 
that  are  deep-seated  as  well  as  those  that  are 
superficial,  are  dilated  at  the  same  instant,  and 
with  the  same  rapidity,  how  were  it  possible 
that  air  should  penetrate  to  the  deeper  parts  as 
freely  and  quickly  through  the  skin,  flesh,  and 
other  structures,  as  through  the  mere  cuticle  ? 
And  how  should  the  arteries  of  the  foetus  draw 
air  into  their  cavities  through  the  abdomen  of 
the  mother  and  the  body  of  the  womb.?^  And 
how  should  seals,  whales,  dolphins,  and  other 
cetaceans,  and  fishes  of  every  description,  liv¬ 
ing  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  take  in  and  emit 


269 

air  by  the  diastole  and  systole  of  their  arteries 
through  the  infinite  mass  of  waters  For  to  say 
that  they  absorb  the  air  that  is  infixed  in  the 
water,  and  emit  their  fumes  into  this  medium, 
were  to  utter  something  very  like  a  mere  fig¬ 
ment.  And  if  the  arteries  in  their  systole  expel 
fuliginous  vapours  from  their  cavities  through 
the  pores  of  the  flesh  and  skin,  why  not  the 
spirits,  which  are  said  to  be  contained  in  these 
vessels,  at  the  same  time,  since  spirits  are  much 
more  subtile  than  fuliginous  vapours  or  smoke  ? 
And  further,  if  the  arteries  take  in  and  cast  out 
air  in  the  systole  and  diastole,  like  the  lungs  in 
the  process  of  respiration,  wherefore  do  they 
not  do  the  same  thing  when  a  wound  is  made 
in  one  of  them,  as  is  done  in  the  operation  of 
arteriotomy When  the  windpipe  is  divided,  it 
is  sufficiently  obvious  that  the  air  enters  and 
returns  through  the  wound  by  two  opposite 
movements;  but  when  an  artery  is  divided,  it 
is  equally  manifest  that  blood  escapes  in  one 
continuous  stream,  and  that  no  air  either  enters 
or  issues.  If  the  pulsations  of  the  arteries  fan 
and  refrigerate  the  several  parts  of  the  body  as 
the  lungs  do  the  heart,  how  comes  it,  as  is  com¬ 
monly  said,  that  the  arteries  carry  the  vital 
blood  into  the  different  parts,  abundantly 
charged  with  vital  spirits,  which  cherish  the 
heat  of  these  parts,  sustain  them  when  asleep, 
and  recruit  them  when  exhausted  And  how 
should  it  happen  that,  if  you  tie  the  arteries, 
immediately  the  parts  not  only  become  torpid, 
and  frigid,  and  look  pale,  but  at  length  cease 
even  to  be  nourished  ?  This,  according  to  Galen, 
is  because  they  are  deprived  of  the  heat  which 
flowed  through  all  parts  from  the  heart,  as  its 
source;  whence  it  would  appear  that  the  arteries 
rather  carry  warmth  to  the  parts  than  serve  for 
any  fanning  or  refrigeration.  Besides,  how  can 
the  diastole  draw  spirits  from  the  heart  to  warm 
the  body  and  its  parts,  and,  from  without, 
means  of  cooling  or  tempering  them  ?  Still  fur¬ 
ther,  although  some  affirm  that  the  lungs,  ar¬ 
teries,  and  heart  have  all  the  same  offices,  they 
yet  maintain  that  the  heart  is  the  workshop  of 
the  spirits,  and  that  the  arteries  contain  and 
transmit  them;  denying,  however,  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  the  opinion  of  Columbus,  that  the  lungs 
can  either  make  or  contain  spirits;  and  then 
they  assert,  with  Galen,  against  Erasistratus, 
that  it  is  blood,  not  spirits,  which  is  contained 
in  the  arteries. 

These  various  opinions  are  seen  to  be  so  in¬ 
congruous  and  mutually  subversive,  that  every 
one  of  them  is  not  unjustly  brought  under  sus¬ 
picion.  That  it  is  blood  and  blood  alone  which 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


270 

is  contained  in  the  arteries  is  made  manifest  by 
the  experiment  of  Galen,  by  arteriotomy,  and 
by  wounds;  for  from  a  single  artery  divided,  as 
Galen  himself  affirms  in  more  than  one  place, 
the  whole  of  the  blood  may  be  withdrawn  in 
the  course  of  half  an  hour,  or  less.  The  experi¬ 
ment  of  Galen  alluded  to  is  this:  “If  you  include 
a  portion  of  an  artery  between  two  ligatures, 
and  slit  it  open  lengthways,  you  will  find  noth¬ 
ing  but  blood”;  and  thus  he  proves  that  the  ar¬ 
teries  contain  blood  only.  And  we  too  may  be 
permitted  to  proceed  by  a  like  train  of  reason¬ 
ing:  if  we  find  the  same  blood  in  the  arteries 
that  we  find  in  the  veins,  which  we  have  tied  in 
the  same  way,  as  I  have  myself  repeatedly  as¬ 
certained,  both  in  the  dead  body  and  in  living 
animals,  we  may  fairly  conclude  that  the  ar¬ 
teries  contain  the  same  blood  as  the  veins,  and 
nothing  but  the  same  blood.  Some,  whilst  they 
attempt  to  lessen  the  difficulty  here,  affirming 
that  the  blood  is  spirituous  and  arterious,  vir¬ 
tually  concede  that  the  office  of  the  arteries 
is  to  carry  blood  from  the  heart  into  the  whole 
of  the  body,  and  that  they  are  therefore  filled 
with  blood;  for  spirituous  blood  is  not  the  less 
blood  on  that  account.  And  then  no  one  denies 
that  the  blood  as  such,  even  the  portion  of  it 
which  flows  in  the  veins,  is  imbued  with  spirits. 
But  if  that  portion  which  is  contained  in  the  ar¬ 
teries  be  richer  in  spirits,  it  is  still  to  be  be¬ 
lieved  that  these  spirits  are  inseparable  from 
the  blood,  like  those  in  the  veins;  that  the  blood 
and  spirits  constitute  one  body  (like  whey  and 
butter  in  milk,  or  heat  [and  water]  in  hot  wa¬ 
ter),  with  which  the  arteries  are  charged,  and 
for  the  distribution  of  which  from  the  heart 
they  are  provided,  and  that  this  body  is  noth¬ 
ing  else  than  blood.  But  if  this  blood  be  said  to 
be  drawn  from  the  heart  into  the  arteries  by 
the  diastole  of  these  vessels,  it  is  then  assumed 
that  the  arteries  by  their  distension  are  filled 
with  blood,  and  not  with  the  ambient  air,  as 
heretofore;  for  if  they  be  said  also  to  become 
filled  with  air  from  the  ambient  atmosphere, 
how  and  when,  I  ask,  can  they  receive  blood 
from  the  heart  If  it  be  answered:  during  the 
systole;  I  say,  that  seems  impossible;  the  ar¬ 
teries  would  then  have  to  fill  whilst  they  con¬ 
tracted;  in  other  words,  to  fill,  and  yet  not  be¬ 
come  distended.  But  if  it  be  said:  during  the 
diastole,  they  would  then,  and  for  two  opposite 
purposes,  be  receiving  both  blood  and  air,  and 
heat  and  cold;  which  is  improbable.  Further, 
when  it  is  affirmed  that  the  diastole  of  the  heart 
and  arteries  is  simultaneous,  and  the  systole  of 
the  two  is  also  concurrent,  there  is  another  in¬ 


congruity.  For  how  can  two  bodies  mutually 
connected,  which  are  simultaneously  distended, 
attract  or  draw  anything  from  one  another;  or, 
being  simultaneously  contracted,  receive  any¬ 
thing  from  each  other.?  And  then,  it  seems  im¬ 
possible  that  one  body  can  thus  attract  another 
body  into  itself,  so  as  to  become  distended,  see¬ 
ing  that  to  be  distended  is  to  be  passive,  un¬ 
less,  in  the  manner  of  a  sponge,  previously  com¬ 
pressed  by  an  external  force,  whilst  it  is  return¬ 
ing  to  its  natural  state.  But  it  is  difficult  to  con¬ 
ceive  that  there  can  be  anything  of  this  kind  in 
the  arteries.  The  arteries  dilate,  because  they 
are  filled  like  bladders  or  leathern  bottles;  they 
are  not  filled  because  they  expand  like  bellows. 
This  I  think  easy  of  demonstration;  and  indeed 
conceive  that  I  have  already  proved  it.  Never¬ 
theless,  in  that  book  of  Galen  headed  Quod 
sanguis  continetur  in  arteriis,  he  quotes  an  ex¬ 
periment  to  prove  the  contrary:  An  artery, 
having  been  exposed,  is  opened  longitudinally, 
and  a  reed  or  other  pervious  tube,  by  which  the 
blood  is  prevented  from  being  lost,  and  the 
wound  is  closed,  is  inserted  into  the  vessel 
through  the  opening.  “So  long,”  he  says,  “as 
things  are  thus  arranged,  the  whole  artery  will 
pulsate;  but  if  you  now  throw  a  ligature  about 
the  vessel  and  tightly  compress  its  tunics  over 
the  tube,  you  will  no  longer  see  the  artery  beat¬ 
ing  beyond  the  ligature.”  I  have  never  per¬ 
formed  this  experiment  of  Gakn’s,  nor  do  I 
think  that  it  could  very  well  be  performed  in 
the  living  body,  on  account  of  the  profuse  flow 
of  blood  that  would  take  place  from  the  vessel 
which  was  operated  on;  neither  would  the  tube 
effectually  close  the  wound  in  the  vessel  with¬ 
out  a  ligature;  and  I  cannot  doubt  but  that  the 
blood  would  be  found  to  flow  out  between  the 
tube  and  the  vessel.  Still  Galen  appears  by  this 
experiment  to  prove  both  that  the  pulsative 
faculty  extends  from  the  heart  by  the  walls  of 
the  arteries,  and  that  the  arteries,  whilst  they 
dilate,  are  filled  by  that  pulsific  force,  because 
they  expand  like  bellows,  and  do  not  dilate  be¬ 
cause  they  are  filled  like  skins.  But  the  con¬ 
trary  is  obvious  in  arteriotomy  and  in  wounds; 
for  the  blood  spurting  from  the  arteries  escapes 
with  force,  now  farther,  now  not  so  far,  alter¬ 
nately,  or  in  jets;  and  the  jet  always  takes  place 
with  the  diastole  of  the  artery,  never  with  the 
systole.  By  which  it  clearly  appears  that  the  ar¬ 
tery  is  dilated  by  the  impulse  of  the  blood;  for 
of  itself  it  would  not  throw  the  blood  to  such  a 
distance,  and  whilst  it  was  dilating;  it  ought 
rather  to  draw  air  into  its  cavity  through  the 
wound,  were  those  things  true  that  are  com- 


!  MOTION  OF 

1  monly  stated  concerning  the  uses  of  the  arter- 
j  ies.  Nor  let  the  thickness  of  the  arterial  tunics 
I  impose  upon  us,  and  lead  us  to  conclude  that 
’  the  pulsative  property  proceeds  along  them 
from  the  heart.  For  in  several  animals  the  arter- 
I  ies  do  not  apparently  differ  from  the  veins; 
and  in  extreme  parts  of  the  body,  where  the  ar¬ 
teries  are  minutely  subdivided,  as  in  the  brain, 
the  hand,  &c.,  no  one  could  distinguish  the  ar¬ 
teries  from  the  veins  by  the  dissimilar  charac¬ 
ters  of  their  coats;  the  tunics  of  both  are  iden¬ 
tical.  And  then,  in  an  aneurism  proceeding 
from  a  wounded  or  eroded  artery,  the  pulsa¬ 
tion  is  precisely  the  same  as  in  the  other  ar¬ 
teries,  and  yet  it  has  no  proper  arterial  tunic. 
This  the  learned  Riolanus  testifies  to,  along 
with  me,  in  his  Seventh  Book. 

Nor  let  any  one  imagine  that  the  uses  of  the 
pulse  and  the  respiration  are  the  same,  because 
under  the  influence  of  the  same  causes,  such  as 
running,  anger,  the  warm  bath,  or  any  other 
heating  thing,  as  Galen  says,  they  become  more 
frequent  and  forcible  together.  For,  not  only  is 
experience  in  opposition  to  this  idea,  though 
Galen  endeavours  to  explain  it  away,  when  we 
see  that  with  excessive  repletion  the  pulse  beats 
more  forcibly,  whilst  the  respiration  is  dimin¬ 
ished  in  amount;  but  in  young  persons  the  pulse 
is  quick,  whilst  respiration  is  slow.  So  is  it  also 
in  alarm,  and  amidst  care,  and  under  anxiety  of 
mind;  sometimes,  too,  in  fevers,  the  pulse  is 
rapid,  but  the  respiration  is  slower  than  usual. 

These  and  other  objections  of  the  same  kind 
may  be  urged  against  the  opinions  mentioned. 
Nor  are  the  views  that  are  entertained  of  the 
offices  and  pulse  of  the  heart,  perhaps,  less 
bound  up  with  great  and  most  inextricable  dif¬ 
ficulties.  The  heart,  it  is  vulgarly  said,  is  the 
fountain  and  workshop  of  the  vital  spirits,  the 
centre  from  whence  life  is  dispensed  to  the 
several  parts  of  the  body;  and  yet  it  is  denied 
that  the  right  ventricle  makes  spirits;  it  is 
rather  held  to  supply  nourishment  to  the  lungs; 
whence  it  is  maintained  that  fishes  are  without 
any  right  ventricle  (and  indeed  every  animal 
wants  a  right  ventricle  which  is  unfurnished 
with  lungs),  and  that  the  right  ventricle  is  pres¬ 
ent  solely  for  the  sake  of  the  lungs. 

I.  Why,  I  ask,  when  we  see  that  the  structure 
of  both  ventricles  is  almost  identical,  there 
being  the  same  apparatus  of  fibres,  and  braces, 
and  valves,  and  vessels,  and  auricles,  and  in 
both  the  same  infarction  of  blood,  in  the  sub¬ 
jects  of  our  dissections,  of  the  like  black  col¬ 
our,  and  coagulated — why,  I  say,  should  their 
uses  be  imagined  to  be  different,  when  the  ac- 


THE  HEART  271 

tion,  motion,  and  pulse  of  both  are  the  same  ? 
If  the  three  tricuspid  valves  placed  at  the  en¬ 
trance  into  the  right  ventricle  prove  obstacles 
to  the  reflux  of  the  blood  into  the  vena  cava, 
and  if  the  three  semilunar  valves  which  are 
situated  at  the  commencement  of  the  pulmon¬ 
ary  artery  be  there,  that  they  may  prevent  the 
return  of  the  blood  into  the  ventricle;  where¬ 
fore,  when  we  find  similar  structures  in  con¬ 
nexion  with  the  left  ventricle,  should  we  deny 
that  they  are  there  for  the  same  end,  of  pre¬ 
venting  here  the  egress,  there  the  regurgita¬ 
tion  of  the  blood  ? 

2.  And  again,  when  we  see  that  these  struc¬ 
tures,  in  point  of  size,  form,  and  situation,  are 
almost  in  every  respect  the  same  in  the  left  as 
in  the  right  ventricle,  wherefore  should  it  be 
maintained  that  things  are  here  arranged  in 
connexion  with  the  egress  and  regress  of  spirits, 
there,  i.e.,  in  the  right,  of  blood.  The  same  ar¬ 
rangement  cannot  be  held  fitted  to  favour  or 
impede  the  motion  of  blood  and  of  spirits  in¬ 
differently. 

3.  And  when  we  observe  that  the  passages 
and  vessels  are  severally  in  relation  to  one  an¬ 
other  in  point  of  size,  viz.,  the  pulmonary  ar¬ 
tery  to  the  pulmonary  veins;  wherefore  should 
the  one  be  imagined  destined  to  a  private  or 
particular  purpose,  that,  to  wit,  of  nourishing 
the  lungs,  the  other  to  a  public  and  general 
function.? 

4.  And,  as  Realdus  Columbus  says,  how  can 
it  be  conceived  that  such  a  quantity  of  blood 
should  be  required  for  the  nutrition  of  the 
lungs;  the  vessel  that  leads  to  them,  the  vena 
arteriosa  or  pulmonary  artery  being  of  greater 
capacity  than  both  the  iliac  veins.? 

5.  And  I  ask  further;  as  the  lungs  are  so  close 
at  hand,  and  in  continual  motion,  and  the  vessel 
that  supplies  them  is  of  such  dimensions,  what 
is  the  use  or  meaning  of  the  pulse  of  the  right 
ventricle .?  and  why  was  nature  reduced  to  the 
necessity  of  adding  another  ventricle  for  the 
sole  purpose  of  nourishing  the  lungs? 

When  it  is  said  that  the  left  ventricle  obtains 
materials  for  the  formation  of  spirits,  air  to 
wit,  and  blood,  from  the  lungs  and  right  sinuses 
of  the  heart,  and  in  like  manner  sends  spiritu¬ 
ous  blood  into  the  aorta,  drawing  fuliginous 
vapours  from  thence,  and  sending  them  by  the 
arteria  venosa  into  the  lungs,  whence  spirits 
are  at  the  same  time  obtained  for  transmission 
into  the  aorta,  I  ask  how,  and  by  what  means, 
is  the  separation  effected.?  and  how  comes  it 
that  spirits  and  fuliginous  vapours  can  pass 
hither  and  thither  without  admixture  or  con- 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


fusion?  If  the  mitral  cuspidate  valves  do  not 
prevent  the  egress  of  fuliginous  vapours  to  the 
lungs,  how  should  they  oppose  the  escape  of 
air?  And  how  should  the  semilunars  hinder  the 
regress  of  spirits  from  the  aorta  upon  each  su¬ 
pervening  diastole  of  the  heart?  And,  above 
all,  how  can  they  say  that  the  spirituous  blood 
is  sent  from  the  arteria  venalis  (pulmonary 
veins)  by  the  left  ventricle  into  the  lungs  with¬ 
out  any  obstacle  to  its  passage  from  the  mitral 
valves,  when  they  have  previously  asserted 
that  the  air  entered  by  the  same  vessel  from 
the  lungs  into  the  left  ventricle,  and  have 
brought  forward  these  same  mitral  valves  as 
obstacles  to  its  retrogression?  Good  God!  how 
should  the  mitral  valves  prevent  regurgitation 
of  air  and  not  of  blood  ? 

Further,  when  they  dedicate  the  vena  ar- 
teriosa  (or  pulmonary  artery),  a  vessel  of  great 
size,  and  having  the  tunics  of  an  artery,  to  none 
but  a  kind  of  private  and  single  purpose,  that, 
namely,  of  nourishing  the  lungs,  why  should  the 
arteria  venalis  (or  pulmonary  vein),  which  is 
scarcely  of  similar  size,  which  has  the  coats  of  a 
vein,  and  is  soft  and  lax,  be  presumed  to  be 
made  for  many — three  or  four,  different  uses? 
For  they  will  have  it  that  air  passes  through  this 
vessel  from  the  lungs  into  the  left  ventricle; 
that  fuliginous  vapours  escape  by  it  from  the 
heart  into  the  lungs;  and  that  a  portion  of  the 
spirituous  or  spiritualized  blood  is  distributed 
by  it  to  the  lungs  for  their  refreshment. 

If  they  will  have  it  that  fumes  and  air — 
fumes  flowing  from,  air  proceeding  towards  the 
heart— are  transmitted  by  the  same  conduit,  I 
reply  that  nature  is  not  wont  to  institute  but 
one  vessel,  to  contrive  but  one  way  for  such 
contrary  motions  and  purposes,  nor  is  anything 
of  the  kind  seen  elsewhere. 

If  fumes  or  fuliginous  vapours  and  air  per¬ 
meate  this  vessel,  as  they  do  the  pulmonary 
bronchia,  wherefore  do  we  find  neither  air  nor 
fuliginous  vapours  when  we  divide  the  arteria 
venosa  ?  Why  do  we  always  find  this  vessel  full 
of  sluggish  blood,  never  of  air? — whilst  in  the 
lungs  we  find  abundance  of  air  remaining. 

If  anyone  will  perform  Galen’s  experiment 
of  dividing  the  trachea  of  a  living  dog,  forcibly 
distending  the  lungs  with  a  pair  of  bellows,  and 
then  tying  the  trachea  securely,  he  will  find, 
when  he  has  laid  open  the  thorax,  abundance  of 
air  in  the  lungs,  even  to  their  extreme  invest¬ 
ing  tunic,  but  none  in  either  the  pulmonary 
veins,  or  left  ventricle  of  the  heart.  But  did  the 
heart  either  attract  air  from  the  lungs,  or  did  the 
lungs  transmit  any  air  to  the  heart,  in  the  living 


dog,  by  so  much  the  more  ought  this  to  be  the 
case  in  the  experiment  just  referred  to.  Who, 
indeed,  doubts  that,  did  he  inflate  the  lungs  of  a 
subject  in  the  dissecting-room,  he  would  in¬ 
stantly  see  the  air  making  its  way  by  this  route, 
were  there  actually  any  such  passage  for  it? 
But  this  office  of  the  pulmonary  veins,  namely, 
the  transference  of  air  from  the  lungs  to  the 
heart,  is  held  of  such  importance,  that  Hieron¬ 
ymus  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente,  maintains 
the  lungs  were  made  for  the  sake  of  this  vessel, 
and  that  it  constitutes  the  principal  element  in 
their  structure. 

But  I  should  like  to  be  informed  wherefore, 
if  the  pulmonary  vein  were  destined  for  the 
conveyance  of  air,  it  has  the  structure  of  a 
blood-vessel  here.  Nature  had  rather  need  of 
annular  tubes,  such  as  those  of  the  bronchia,  in 
order  that  they  might  always  remain  open,  not 
have  been  liable  to  collapse;  and  that  they  might 
continue  entirely  free  from  blood,  lest  the  liquid 
should  interfere  with  the  passage  of  the  air,  as 
it  so  obviously  does  when  the  lungs  labour  from 
being  either  greatly  oppressed  or  loaded  in  a 
less  degree  with  phlegm,  as  they  are  when  the 
breathing  is  performed  with  a  sibilous  or  rat¬ 
tling  noise. 

Still  less  is  that  opinion  to  be  tolerated  which 
(as  a  two-fold  matter,  one  aereal,  one  sanguine¬ 
ous,  is  required  for  the  composition  of  vital 
spirits)  supposes  the  blood  to  ooze  through  the 
septum  of  the  heart  from  the  right  to  the  left 
ventricle  by  certain  secret  pores,  and  the  air  to 
be  attracted  from  the  lungs  through  the  great 
vessel,  the  pulmonary  vein;  and  which  will 
have  it,  consequently,  that  there  are  numerous 
pores  in  the  septum  cordis  adapted  for  the 
transmission  of  the  blood.  But,  in  faith,  no  such 
pores  can  be  demonstrated,  neither,  in  fact,  do 
any  such  exist.  For  the  septum  of  the  heart  is  of 
a  denser  and  more  compact  structure  than  any 
portion  of  the  body,  except  the  bones  and  sin¬ 
ews.  But  even  supposing  that  there  were  fora¬ 
mina  or  pores  in  this  situation,  how  could  one 
of  the  ventricles  extract  anything  from  the 
other — the  left,  e.g.^  obtain  blood  from  the 
right,  when  we  see  that  both  ventricles  contract 
and  dilate  simultaneously?  Wherefore  should 
we  not  rather  believe  that  the  right  took  spirits 
from  the  left,  than  that  the  left  obtained  blood 
from  the  right  ventricle,  through  these  fora¬ 
mina?  But  it  is  certainly  mysterious  and  incon¬ 
gruous  that  blood  should  be  supposed  to  be 
most  commodiously  drawn  through  a  set  of  ob¬ 
scure  or  invisible  pores,  and  air  through  per¬ 
fectly  open  passages,  at  one  and  the  same  mo- 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


ment.  And  why,  I  ask,  is  recourse  had  to  secret 
and  invisible  porosities,  to  uncertain  and  ob¬ 
scure  channels,  to  explain  the  passage  of  the 
blood  into  the  left  ventricle,  when  there  is  so 
open  a  way  through  the  pulmonary  veins  ?  I  own 
it  has  always  appeared  extraordinary  to  me 
that  they  should  have  chosen  to  make,  or 
rather  to  imagine,  a  way  through  the  thick, 
hard,  and  extremely  compact  substance  of  the 
septum  cordis,  rather  than  to  take  that  by  the 
open  vas  venosum  or  pulmonary  vein,  or  even 
through  the  lax,  soft  and  spongy  substance  of 
the  lungs  at  large.  Besides,  if  the  blood  could 
permeate  the  substance  of  the  septum,  or  could 
be  imbibed  from  the  ventricles,  what  use  were 
there  for  the  coronary  artery  and  vein,  branches 
of  which  proceed  to  the  septum  itself,  to  sup¬ 
ply  it  with  nourishment?  And  what  is  espe¬ 
cially  worthy  of  notice  is  this:  if  in  the  foetus, 
where  everything  is  more  lax  and  soft.  Nature 
saw  herself  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  bringing 
the  blood  from  the  right  into  the  left  side  of  the 
heart  by  the  foramen  ovale,  from  the  vena 
cava  through  the  arteria  venosa,  how  should  it 
be  likely  that  in  the  adult  she  should  pass  it  so 
commodiously,  and  without  an  effort,  through 
the  septum  ventriculorum,  which  has  now  be¬ 
come  denser  by  age  ? 

Andreas  Laurentius,^  resting  on  the  author¬ 
ity  of  Galen^  and  the  experience  of  Hollerius, 
asserts  and  proves  that  the  serum  and  pus  in 
empyema,  absorbed  from  the  cavities  of  the 
chest  into  the  pulmonary  vein,  may  be  ex¬ 
pelled  and  got  rid  of  with  the  urine  and  faeces 
through  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  and  ar¬ 
teries.  He  quotes  the  case  of  a  certain  person  af¬ 
fected  with  melancholia,  and  who  suffered 
from  repeated  fainting  fits,  who  was  relieved 
from  the  paroxysms  on  passing  a  quantity  of 
turbid,  fetid,  and  acrid  urine;  but  he  died  at 
last,  worn  out  by  the  disease ;  and  when  the  body 
came  to  be  opened  after  death,  no  fluid  like 
that  he  had  micturated  was  discovered  either 
in  the  bladder  or  in  the  kidneys;  but  in  the  left 
ventricle  of  the  heart  and  cavity  of  the  thorax 
plenty  of  it  was  met  with;  and  then  Laurentius 
boasts  that  he  had  predicted  the  cause  of  the 
symptoms.  For  my  own  part,  however,  I  can¬ 
not  but  wonder,  since  he  had  divined  and  pre¬ 
dicted  that  heterogeneous  matter  could  be  dis¬ 
charged  by  the  course  he  indicates,  why  he 
could  not  or  would  not  perceive,  and  inform  us 
that,  in  the  natural  state  of  things,  the  blood 
might  be  commodiously  transferred  from  the 

*  Book  IX,  Chap,  ii,  q.  12. 

*  De  locis  affectisj  vi,  7. 


273 

lungs  to  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  by  the 
very  same  route. 

Since,  therefore,  from  the  foregoing  consider¬ 
ations  and  many  others  to  the  same  effect,  it  is 
plain  that  what  has  heretofore  been  said  con¬ 
cerning  the  motion  and  function  of  the  heart 
and  arteries  must  appear  obscure,  or  inconsis¬ 
tent  or  even  impossible  to  him  who  carefully 
considers  the  entire  subject;  it  will  be  proper  to 
look  more  narrowly  into  the  matter;  to  con¬ 
template  the  motion  of  the  heart  and  arteries, 
not  only  in  man,  but  in  all  animals  that  have 
hearts;  and  further,  by  frequent  appeals  to 
vivisection,  and  constant  ocular  inspection,  to 
investiga,te  and  endeavour  to  find  the  truth. 

CHAPTER  1.  The  author's  motives  for  writing 

When  I  first  gave  my  mind  to  vivisections,  as  a 
means  of  discovering  the  motions  and  uses  of 
the  heart,  and  sought  to  discover  these  from  ac¬ 
tual  inspection,  and  not  from  the  writings  of 
others,  I  found  the  task  so  truly  arduous,  so  full 
of  difficulties,  that  I  was  almost  tempted  to 
think,  with  Fracastorius,  that  the  motion  of  the 
heart  was  only  to  be  comprehended  by  God. 
For  I  could  neither  rightly  perceive  at  first 
when  the  systole  and  when  the  diastole  took 
place,  nor  when  and  where  dilatation  and  con¬ 
traction  occurred,  by  reason  of  the  rapidity  of 
the  motion,  which  in  many  animals  is  accom¬ 
plished  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  coming  and 
going  like  a  flash  of  lightning;  so  that  the  sys¬ 
tole  presented  itself  to  me  now  from  this  point, 
now  from  that;  the  diastole  the  same;  and  then 
everything  was  reversed,  the  motions  occur¬ 
ring,  as  it  seemed,  variously  and  confusedly  to¬ 
gether.  My  mind  was  therefore  greatly  unset¬ 
tled,  nor  did  I  know  what  I  should  myself  con¬ 
clude,  nor  what  believe  from  others;  I  was  not 
surprised  that  Andreas  Laurentius  should  have 
said  that  the  motion  of  the  heart  was  as  per¬ 
plexing  as  the  flux  and  reflux  of  Euripus  had 
appeared  to  Aristotle. 

At  length,  and  by  using  greater  and  daily 
diligence,  having  frequent  recourse  to  vivisec¬ 
tions,  employing  a  variety  of  animals  for  the 
purpose,  and  collating  numerous  observations, 
I  thought  that  I  had  attained  to  the  truth,  that 
I  should  extricate  myself  and  escape  from  this 
labyrinth,  and  that  I  had  discovered  what  I  so 
much  desired,  both  the  motion  and  the  use  of 
the  heart  and  arteries;  since  which  time  I  have 
not  hesitated  to  expose  my  views  upon  these 
subjects,  not  only  in  private  to  my  friends,  but 
also  in  public,  in  my  anatomical  lectures,  after 
the  manner  of  the  Academy  of  old. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


274 

These  views,  as  usual,  pleased  some  more, 
others  less;  some  chid  and  calumniated  me,  and 
laid  it  to  me  as  a  crime  that  I  had  dared  to  de¬ 
part  from  the  precepts  and  opinion  of  all  anato¬ 
mists;  others  desired  further  explanations  of  the 
novelties,  which  they  said  were  both  worthy  of 
consideration,  and  might  perchance  be  found 
of  signal  use.  At  length,  yielding  to  the  requests 
of  my  friends,  that  all  might  be  made  partici¬ 
pators  in  my  labours,  and  partly  moved  by  the 
envy  of  others,  who,  receiving  my  views  with 
uncandid  minds  and  understanding  them  indif¬ 
ferently,  have  essayed  to  traduce  me  publicly, 
I  have  been  moved  to  commit  these  things  to 
the  press,  in  order  that  all  may  be  enabled  to 
form  an  opinion  both  of  me  and  my  labours. 
This  step  I  take  all  the  more  willingly,  seeing 
that  Hieronymus  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente, 
although  he  has  accurately  and  learnedly  de¬ 
lineated  almost  every  one  of  the  several  parts  of 
animals  in  a  special  work,  has  left  the  heart 
alone  untouched.  Finally,  if  any  use  or  benefit 
to  this  department  of  the  republic  of  letters 
should  accrue  from  my  labours,  it  will,  perhaps, 
be  allowed  that  I  have  not  lived  idly,  and,  as 
the  old  man  in  the  comedy  says: 

For  never  yet  hath  any  one  attained 
To  such  perfection^  hut  that  timCy  and  place y 
And  usCy  have  brought  addition  to  his  hpowh 
edge; 

Or  made  correctiony  or  admonished  himy 
That  he  was  ignorant  of  much  which  he 
Had  thought  he  hnew;  or  led  him  to  reject 
What  he  had  once  esteemed  of  highest  price. 

So  will  it,  perchance,  be  found  with  reference 
to  the  heart  at  this  time;  or  others,  at  least, 
starting  from  hence,  the  way  pointed  out  to 
them,  advancing  under  the  guidance  of  a  hap¬ 
pier  genius,  may  make  occasion  to  proceed 
more  fortunately,  and  to  inquire  more  accu¬ 
rately. 

CHAPTER  2.  Of  the  motions  of  the  hearty  as  seen  in 
the  dissection  of  living  animals 

In  the  first  place,  then,  when  the  chest  of  a  liv¬ 
ing  animal  is  laid  open  and  the  capsule  that 
immediately  surrounds  the  heart  is  slit  up  or 
removed,  the  organ  is  seen  now  to  move,  now 
to  be  at  rest;  there  is  a  time  when  it  moves,  and 
a  time  when  it  is  motionless. 

These  things  are  more  obvious  in  the  colder 
animals,  such  as  toads,  frogs,  serpents,  small 
fishes,  crabs,  shrimps,  snails  and  shell-fish.  They 
also  become  more  distinct  in  warm-blooded 
animals,  such  as  the  dog  and  hog,  if  they  be  at¬ 


tentively  noted  when  the  heart  begins  to  flag, 
to  move  more  slowly,  and,  as  it  were,  to  die: 
the  movements  then  become  slower  and  rarer, 
the  pauses  longer,  by  which  it  is  made  much 
more  easy  to  perceive  and  unravel  what  the 
motions  really  are,  and  how  they  are  performed. 
In  the  pause,  as  in  death,  the  heart  is  soft,  flac¬ 
cid,  exhausted,  lying,  as  it  were,  at  rest. 

In  the  motion,  and  interval  in  which  this  is 
accomplished,  three  principal  circumstances 
are  to  be  noted: 

1.  That  the  heart  is  erected,  and  rises  up¬ 
wards  to  a  point,  so  that  at  this  time  it  strikes 
against  the  breast  and  the  pulse  is  felt  exter¬ 
nally. 

2.  That  it  is  everywhere  contracted,  but 
more  especially  towards  the  sides,  so  that  it 
looks  narrower,  relatively  longer,  more  drawn 
together.  The  heart  of  an  eel  taken  out  of  the 
body  of  the  animal  and  placed  upon  the  table 
or  the  hand,  shows  these  particulars;  but  the 
same  things  are  manifest  in  the  heart  of  small 
fishes  and  of  those  colder  animals  where  the 
organ  is  more  conical  or  elongated. 

3.  The  heart  being  grasped  in  the  hand,  it  is 
felt  to  become  harder  during  its  action.  Now 
this  hardness  proceeds  from  tension,  precisely 
as  when  the  forearm  is  grasped,  its  tendons  are 
perceived  to  become  tense  and  resilient  when 
the  fingers  are  moved. 

4.  It  may  further  be  observed  in  fishes,  and 
the  colder  blooded  animals,  such  as  frogs,  ser¬ 
pents,  &c.,  that  the  heart,  when  it  moves,  be¬ 
comes  of  a  paler  colour,  when  quiescent  of  a 
deeper  blood-red  colour. 

From  these  particulars  it  appeared  evident  to 
me  that  the  motion  of  the  heart  consists  in  a 
certain  universal  tension — both  contraction  in 
the  line  of  its  fibres,  and  constriction  in  every 
sense.  It  becomes  erect,  hard,  and  of  diminished 
size  during  its  action;  the  motion  is  plainly  of 
the  same  nature  as  that  of  the  muscles  when 
they  contract  in  the  line  of  their  sinews  and 
fibres;  for  the  muscles,  when  in  action,  acquire 
vigour  and  tenseness,  and  from  soft  become 
hard,  prominent  and  thickened:  in  the  same 
manner  the  heart. 

We  are  therefore  authorized  to  conclude  that 
the  heart,  at  the  moment  of  its  action,  is  at  once 
constricted  on  all  sides,  rendered  thicker  in  its 
parietes  and  smaller  in  its  ventricles,  and  so 
made  apt  to  project  or  expel  its  charge  of  blood. 
This,  indeed,  is  made  sufficiently  manifest  by 
the  fourth  observation  preceding,  in  which  we 
have  seen  that  the  heart,  by  squeezing  out  the 
blood  it  contains  becomes  paler,  and  then  when 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


it  sinks  into  repose  and  the  ventricle  is  filled 
anew  with  blood,  that  the  deeper  crimson  col¬ 
our  returns.  But  no  one  need  remain  in  doubt 
of  the  fact,  for  if  the  ventricle  be  pierced  the 
blood  will  be  seen  to  be  forcibly  projected  out¬ 
wards  upon  each  motion  or  pulsation  when  the 
heart  is  tense. 

These  things,  therefore,  happen  together  or 
at  the  same  instant:  the  tension  of  the  heart, 
the  pulse  of  its  apex,  which  is  felt  externally  by 
its  striking  against  the  chest,  the  thickening  of 
its  parietes,  and  the  forcible  expulsion  of  the 
blood  it  contains  by  the  constriction  of  its 
ventricles. 

Hence  the  very  opposite  of  the  opinions  com¬ 
monly  received  appears  to  be  true;  inasmuch  as 
it  is  generally  believed  that  when  the  heart 
strikes  the  breast  and  the  pulse  is  felt  without, 
the  heart  is  dilated  in  its  ventricles  and  is  filled 
with  blood;  but  the  contrary  of  this  is  the  fact, 
and  the  heart,  when  it  contracts,  is  emptied. 
Whence  the  motion  which  is  generally  regarded 
as  the  diastole  of  the  heart,  is  in  truth  its  sys¬ 
tole.  And  in  like  manner  the  intrinsic  motion  of 
the  heart  is  not  the  diastole  but  the  systole; 
neither  is  it  in  the  diastole  that  the  heart  grows 
firm  and  tense,  but  in  the  systole,  for  then  only, 
when  tense,  is  it  moved  and  made  vigorous. 

Neither  is  it  by  any  means  to  be  allowed  that 
the  heart  only  moves  in  the  line  of  its  straight 
fibres,  although  the  great  Vesalius,  giving  this 
notion  countenance,  quotes  a  bundle  of  osiers 
bound  into  a  pyramidal  heap  in  illustration; 
meaning,  that  as  the  apex  is  approached  to  the 
base,  so  are  the  sides  made  to  bulge  out  in  the 
fashion  of  arches,  the  cavities  to  dilate,  the 
ventricles  to  acquire  the  form  of  a  cupping- 
glass  and  so  to  suck  in  the  blood.  But  the  true 
effect  of  every  one  of  its  fibres  is  to  constringe 
the  heart  at  the  same  time  that  they  render  it 
tense;  and  this  rather  with  the  effect  of  thicken¬ 
ing  and  amplifying  the  walls  and  substance  of 
the  organ  than  enlarging  its  ventricles.  And, 
again,  as  the  fibres  run  from  the  apex  to  the 
base,  and  draw  the  apex  towards  the  base,  they 
do  not  tend  to  make  the  walls  of  the  heart  bulge 
out  in  circles,  but  rather  the  contrary;  inas¬ 
much  as  every  fibre  that  is  circularly  disposed, 
tends  to  become  straight  when  it  contracts; 
and  is  distended  laterally  and  thickened,  as  in 
the  case  of  muscular  fibres  in  general,  when 
they  contract,  that  is,  when  they  are  shortened 
longitudinally,  as  we  see  them  in  the  bellies  of 
the  muscles  of  the  body  at  large.  To  all  this  let 
it  be  added  that  not  only  are  the  ventricles  con¬ 
tracted  in  virtue  of  the  direction  and  condensa¬ 


275 

tion  of  their  walls,  but  further,  that  those  fibres, 
or  bands,  styled  nerves  by  Aristotle,  which  are 
so  conspicuous  in  the  ventricles  of  the  larger 
animals,  and  contain  all  the  straight  fibres  (the 
parietes  of  the  heart  containing  only  circular 
ones),  when  they  contract  simultaneously,  by 
an  admirable  adjustment  all  the  internal  sur¬ 
faces  are  drawn  together,  as  if  with  cords,  and 
so  is  the  charge  of  blood  expelled  with  force. 

Neither  is  it  true,  as  vulgarly  believed,  that 
the  heart  by  any  dilatation  or  motion  of  its 
own,  has  the  power  of  drawing  the  blood  into 
the  ventricles;  for  when  it  acts  and  becomes 
tense,  the  blood  is  expelled;  when  it  relaxes  and 
sinks  together  it  receives  the  blood  in  the  man¬ 
ner  and  wise  which  will  by  and  by  be  explained. 

CHAPTER  3.  Of  the  motions  of  arteries^  as  seen  in 
the  dissection  of  living  animals 

In  connexion  with  the  motions  of  the  heart 
these  things  are  further  to  be  observed  having 
reference  to  the  motions  and  pulses  of  the 
arteries: 

1.  At  the  moment  the  heart  contracts,  and 
when  the  breast  is  struck,  when,  in  short,  the 
organ  is  in  its  state  of  systole,  the  arteries  are 
dilated,  yield  a  pulse,  and  are  in  the  state  of 
diastole.  In  like  manner,  when  the  right  ven¬ 
tricle  contracts  and  propels  its  charge  of  blood, 
the  arterial  vein  is  distended  at  the  same  time 
with  the  other  arteries  of  the  body. 

2.  When  the  left  ventricle  ceases  to  act,  to 
contract,  to  pulsate,  the  pulse  in  the  arteries 
also  ceases;  further,  when  this  ventricle  con¬ 
tracts  languidly,  the  pulse  in  the  arteries  is 
scarcely  perceptible.  In  like  manner,  the  pulse 
in  the  right  ventricle  failing,  the  pulse  in  the 
vena  arteriosa  ceases  also. 

3.  Further,  when  an  arteiy'  is  divided  or  punc¬ 
tured,  the  blood  is  seen  to  be  forcibly  propelled 
from  the  wound  at  the  moment  the  left  ven¬ 
tricle  contracts;  and,  again,  when  the  pulmo¬ 
nary  artery  is  wounded,  the  blood  will  be  seen 
spouting  forth  with  violence  at  the  instant 
when  the  right  ventricle  contracts. 

So  also  in  fishes,  if  the  vessel  which  leads  from 
the  heart  to  the  gills  be  divided,  at  the  moment 
when  the  heart  becomes  tense  and  contracted, 
at  the  same  moment  does  the  blood  flow  with 
force  from  the  divided  vessel. 

In  the  same  way,  finally,  when  we  see  the 
blood  in  arteriotomy  projected  now  to  a  greater, 
now  to  a  less  distance,  and  that  the  greater  jet 
corresponds  to  the  diastole  of  the  artery  and 
to  the  time  when  the  heart  contracts  and  strikes 
the  ribs,  and  is  in  its  state  of  systole,  we  under- 


276  WILLIAM 

stand  that  the  blood  is  expelled  by  the  same 
movement. 

From  these  facts  it  is  manifest,  in  opposition 
to  commonly  received  opinions,  that  the  dias¬ 
tole  of  the  arteries  corresponds  with  the  time  of 
the  heart's  systole;  and  that  the  arteries  are 
filled  and  distended  by  the  blood  forced  into 
them  by  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles;  the 
arteries,  therefore,  are  distended,  because  they 
are  filled  like  sacs  or  bladders,  and  are  not  filled 
because  they  expand  like  bellows.  It  is  in  virtue 
of  one  and  the  same  cause,  therefore,  that  all 
the  arteries  of  the  body  pulsate,  viz.,  the  con¬ 
traction  of  the  left  ventricle;  in  the  same  way 
as  the  pulmonary  artery  pulsates  by  the  con¬ 
traction  of  the  right  ventricle. 

Finally,  that  the  pulses  of  the  arteries  are  due 
to  the  impulses  of  the  blood  from  the  left  ven¬ 
tricle  may  be  illustrated  by  blowing  into  a 
glove,  when  the  whole  of  the  fingers  will  be 
found  to  become  distended  at  one  and  the  same 
time,  and  in  their  tension  to  bear  some  resem¬ 
blance  to  the  pulse.  For  in  the  ratio  of  the  ten¬ 
sion  is  the  pulse  of  the  heart,  fuller,  stronger, 
more  frequent  as  that  acts  more  vigorously, 
still  preserving  the  rhythm  and  volume,  and 
order  of  the  heart's  contractions.  Nor  is  it  to  be 
expected  that  because  of  the  motion  of  the 
blood,  the  time  at  which  the  contraction  of  the 
heart  takes  place,  and  that  at  which  the  pulse 
in  an  artery  (especially  a  distant  one)  is  felt, 
shall  be  otherwise  than  simultaneous:  it  is  here 
the  same  as  in  blowing  up  a  glove  or  bladder; 
for  in  a  plenum  (as  in  a  drum,  a  long  piece  of 
timber,  &c.)  the  stroke  and  the  motion  occur 
at  both  extremities  at  the  same  time.  Aristotle, 
too,  has  said,  “the  blood  of  all  animals  palpi¬ 
tates  within  their  veins,  (meaning  the  arteries) 
and  by  the  pulse  is  sent  everywhere  simultane¬ 
ously.”^  And  further,  “thus  do  all  the  veins 
pulsate  together  and  by  successive  strokes,  be¬ 
cause  they  all  depend  upon  the  heart;  and,  as  it 
is  always  in  motion,  so  are  they  likewise  always 
moving  together,  but  by  successive  move¬ 
ments.''^  It  is  well  to  observe  with  Galen,  in 
this  place,  that  the  old  philosophers  called  the 
arteries  veins, 

1  happened  upon  one  occasion  to  have  a  par¬ 
ticular  case  under  my  care,  which  plainly  satis¬ 
fied  me  of  this  truth:  a  certain  person  was  af¬ 
fected  with  a  large  pulsating  tumour  on  the 
right  side  of  the  neck,  called  an  aneurism,  just 
at  that  part  where  the  artery  descends  into  the 
axilla,  produced  by  an  erosion  of  the  artery  it- 

*  History  of  Animals,  iii,  19. 

2  On  Breathings  20. 


HARVEY 

self,  and  daily  increasing  in  size;  this  tumour 
was  visibly  distended  as  it  received  the  charge 
of  blood  brought  to  it  by  the  artery,  with  each 
stroke  of  the  heart:  the  connexion  of  parts  was 
obvious  when  the  body  of  the  patient  came  to 
be  opened  after  his  death.  The  pulse  in  the  cor¬ 
responding  arm  was  small,  in  consequence  of 
the  greater  portion  of  the  blood  being  diverted 
into  the  tumour  and  so  intercepted. 

Whence  it  appears  that  wherever  the  motion 
of  the  blood  through  the  arteries  is  impeded, 
whether  it  be  by  compression  or  infarction,  or 
interception,  there  do  the  remote  divisions  of 
the  arteries  beat  less  forcibly,  seeing  that  the 
pulse  of  the  arteries  is  nothing  more  than  the 
impulse  or  shock  of  the  blood  in  these  vessels. 

CHAPTER  4.  Of  the  motion  of  the  heart  and  its 
anricleSs  as  seen  in  the  bodies  of  living  animals 

Besides  the  motions  already  spoken  of,  we 
have  still  to  consider  those  that  appertain  to 
the  auricles. 

Caspar  Bauhinand  John  Riolan,^  most  learned 
men  and  skilful  anatomists,  inform  us  from 
their  observations  that  if  we  carefully  watch 
the  movements  of  the  heart  in  the  vivisection 
of  an  animal,  we  shall  perceive  four  motions  dis¬ 
tinct  in  time  and  in  place,  two  of  which  are 
proper  to  the  auricles,  two  to  the  ventricles. 
With  all  deference  to  such  authority,  I  say  that 
there  are  four  motions  distinct  in  point  of  place, 
but  not  of  time;  for  the  two  auricles  move  to¬ 
gether,  and  so  also  do  the  two  ventricles,  in 
such  wise  that  though  the  places  be  four,  the 
times  are  only  two.  And  this  occurs  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  manner: 

There  are,  as  it  were,  two  motions  going  on 
together;  one  of  the  auricles,  another  of  the 
ventricles;  these  by  no  means  taking  place  si¬ 
multaneously,  but  the  motion  of  the  auricles 
preceding,  that  of  the  heart  itself  following; 
the  motion  appearing  to  begin  from  the  auri¬ 
cles  and  to  extend  to  the  ventricles.  When  all 
things  are  becoming  languid,  and  the  heart  is 
dying,  as  also  in  fishes  and  the  colder  blooded 
animals,  there  is  a  short  pause  between  these 
two  motions,  so  that  the  heart  aroused,  as  it 
were,  appears  to  respond  to  the  motion,  now 
more  quickly,  now  more  tardily;  and  at  length, 
and  when  near  to  death,  it  ceases  to  respond  by 
its. proper  motion,  but  seems,  as  it  were,  to  nod 
the  head,  and  is  so  obscurely  moved  that  it  ap¬ 
pears  rather  to  give  signs  of  motion  to  the  pul¬ 
sating  auricle,  than  actually  to  move.  The 
heart,  therefore,  ceases  to  pulsate  sooner  than 

3  Bauhin,  11, 21 ;  Riolan,  viii,  i. 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


the  auricles,  so  that  the  auricles  have  been  said 
to  outlive  it,  the  left  ventricle  ceasing  to  pul¬ 
sate  first  of  all;  then  its  auricle,  next  the  right 
ventricle;  and,  finally,  all  the  other  parts  being 
at  rest  and  dead,  as  Galen  long  since  observed, 
the  right  auricle  still  continues  to  beat;  life, 
therefore,  appears  to  linger  longest  in  the  right 
auricle.  Whilst  the  heart  is  gradually  dying,  it 
is  sometimes  seen  to  reply,  after  two  or  three 
contractions  of  the  auricles,  roused  as  it  were  to 
action,  and  making  a  single  pulsation,  slowly, 
unwillingly,  and  with  an  effort. 

But  this  especially  is  to  be  noted,  that  after 
the  heart  has  ceased  to  beat,  the  auricles,  how¬ 
ever,  still  contracting,  a  finger  placed  upon  the 
ventricles  perceives  the  several  pulsations  of 
the  auricles,  precisely  in  the  same  way  and  for 
the  same  reason,  as  we  have  said,  that  the  pulses 
of  the  ventricles  are  felt  in  the  arteries,  to  wit, 
the  distension  produced  by  the  jet  of  blood. 
And  if  at  this  time,  the  auricles  alone  pulsating, 
the  point  of  the  heart  be  cut  off  with  a  pair  of 
scissors,  you  will  perceive  the  blood  flowing  out 
upon  each  contraction  of  the  auricles.  Whence 
it  is  manifest  how  the  blood  enters  the  ventri¬ 
cles,  not  by  any  attraction  or  dilatation  of  the 
heart,  but  thrown  into  them  by  the  pulses  of 
the  auricles. 

And  here  I  would  observe,  that  w'henever  I 
speak  of  pulsations  as  occurring  in  the  auricles 
or  ventricles,  I  mean  contractions:  first  the  au¬ 
ricles  contract^  and  then  and  subsequently  the 
heart  contracts.  When  the  auricles  contract 
they  are  seen  to  become  whiter,  especially 
where  they  contain  but  little  blood;  but  they 
are  filled  as  magazines  or  reservoirs  of  the  blood, 
which  is  tending  spontaneously  and,  by  the 
motion  of  the  veins,  under  pressure  towards 
the  centre;  the  whiteness  indicated  is  most  con¬ 
spicuous  towards  the  extremities  or  edges  of  the 
auricles  at  the  time  of  their  contractions. 

In  fishes  and  frogs,  and  other  animals  which 
have  hearts  with  but  a  single  ventricle,  and  for 
an  auricle  have  a  kind  of  bladder  much  dis¬ 
tended  with  blood,  at  the  base  of  the  organ,  you 
may  very  plainly  perceive  this  bladder  con¬ 
tracting  first,  and  the  contraction  of  the  heart 
or  ventricle  following  afterwards. 

But  I  think  it  right  to  describe  what  I  have 
observed  of  an  opposite  character:  the  heart  of 
an  eel,  of  several  fishes,  and  even  of  some  ani¬ 
mals  taken  out  of  the  body,  beats  without  auri¬ 
cles;  nay,  if  it  be  cut  in  pieces  the  several  parts 
may  still  be  seen  contracting  and  relaxing;  so 
that  in  these  creatures  the  body  of  the  heart 
may  be  seen  pulsating,  palpitating,  after  the 


277 

cessation  of  all  motion  in  the  auricle.  But  is  not 
this  perchance  peculiar  to  animals  more  tena¬ 
cious  of  life,  whose  radical  moisture  is  more  glu¬ 
tinous,  or  fat  and  sluggish,  and  less  readily  sol¬ 
uble?  The  same  faculty  indeed  appears  in  the 
flesh  of  eels,  generally,  which  even  when  skin¬ 
ned  and  embowelled,  and  cut  into  pieces,  are 
still  seen  to  move. 

Experimenting  with  a  pigeon  upon  one  oc¬ 
casion,  after  the  heart  had  wholly  ceased  to  pul¬ 
sate,  and  the  auricles  too  had  become  motion¬ 
less,  I  kept  my  finger  wetted  with  saliva  and 
warm  for  a  short  time  upon  the  heart,  and  ob¬ 
served  that  under  the  influence  of  this  fomen¬ 
tation  it  recovered  new  strength  and  life,  so 
that  both  ventricles  and  auricles  pulsated,  con¬ 
tracting  and  relaxing  alternately,  recalled  as  it 
were  from  death  to  life. 

Besides  this,  however,  I  have  occasionally  ob¬ 
served,  after  the  heart  and  even  its  right  auri¬ 
cle  had  ceased  pulsating,  when  it  was  in  articiilo 
mortis  in  short,  that  an  obscure  motion,  an  un¬ 
dulation  or  palpitation,  remained  in  the  blood 
itself,  which  was  contained  in  the  right  auricle, 
this  being  apparent  so  long  as  it  was  inbued 
with  heat  and  spirit.  And  indeed  a  circum¬ 
stance  of  the  same  kind  is  extremely  manifest 
in  the  course  of  the  generation  of  animals,  as 
may  be  seen  in  the  course  of  the  first  seven  days 
of  the  incubation  of  the  chick:  a  drop  of  blood 
makes  its  appearance  which  palpitates,  as  Aris¬ 
totle  had  already  observed;  from  this,  when  the 
growth  is  further  advanced  and  the  chick  is 
fashioned,  the  auricles  of  the  heart  are  formed, 
which  pulsating  henceforth  give  constant  signs 
of  life.  When  at  length,  and  after  the  lapse  of  a 
few  days,  the  outline  of  the  body  begins  to  be 
distinguished,  then  is  the  ventricular  part  of 
the  heart  also  produced;  but  it  continues  for  a 
time  white  and  apparently  bloodless,  like  the 
rest  of  the  animal;  neither  does  it  pulsate  or 
give  signs  of  motion.  I  have  seen  a  similar  con¬ 
dition  of  the  heart  in  the  human  foetus  about 
the  beginning  of  the  third  month,  the  heart 
being  then  whitish  and  bloodless,  although  its 
auricles  contained  a  considerable  quantity  of 
purple  blood.  In  the  same  way  in  the  egg, 
when  the  chick  was  formed  and  had  increased 
in  size,  the  heart  too  increased  and  acquired 
ventricles,  which  then  began  to  receive  and  to 
transmit  blood. 

And  this  leads  me  to  remark  that  he  who  in¬ 
quires  very  particularly  into  this  matter  will 
not  conclude  that  the  heart,  as  a  whole,  is  the 
primtim  vivens^  ultimiim  moriens — the  first  part 
to  live,  the  last  to  die,  but  rather  its  auricles,  or 


278  WILLIAM 

the  part  which  corresponds  to  the  auricles  in 
serpents,  fishes,  &c.,  which  both  lives  before  the 
heart  and  dies  after  it. 

Nay,  has  not  the  blood  itself  or  spirit  an  ob¬ 
scure  palpitation  inherent  in  it,  which  it  has 
even  appeared  to  me  to  retain  after  death  ?  And 
it  seems  very  questionable  whether  or  not  we 
are  to  say  that  life  begins  with  the  palpitation 
or  beating  of  the  heart.  The  seminal  fluid  of  all 
animals — the  prolific  spirit,  as  Aristotle  ob¬ 
served,  leaves  their  body  w  ith  a  bound  and  like 
a  living  thing;  and  nature  in  death,  as  Aristotle^ 
further  remarks,  retracing  her  steps,  reverts  to 
whence  she  had  set  out,  returns  at  the  end  of 
her  course  to  the  goal  whence  she  had  started; 
and  as  animal  generation  proceeds  from  that 
which  is  not  animal,  entity  from  non-entity,  so, 
by  a  retrograde  course,  entity,  by  corruption, 
is  resolved  into  non-entity;  whence  that  in  ani¬ 
mals,  which  was  last  created,  fails  first;  and  that 
which  was  first,  fails  last. 

I  have  also  observed  that  almost  all  animals 
have  truly  a  heart,  not  the  larger  creatures 
only,  and  those  that  have  red  blood,  but  the 
smaller,  and  bloodless  ones  also,  such  as  slugs, 
snails,  scallops,  shrimps,  crabs,  crayfish,  and 
many  others;  nay,  even  in  wasps,  hornets  and 
flies,  I  have,  with  the  aid  of  a  magnifying  glass, 
and  at  the  upper  part  of  what  is  called  the  tail, 
both  seen  the  heart  pulsating  myself,  and 
shown  it  to  many  others. 

But  in  the  exsanguine  tribes  the  heart  pul¬ 
sates  sluggishly  and  deliberately,  contracting 
slowly  as  in  animals  that  are  moribund,  a  fact 
that  may  readily  be  seen  in  the  snail,  whose 
heart  will  be  found  at  the  bottom  of  that  orifice 
in  the  right  side  of  the  body  which  is  seen  to  be 
opened  and  shut  in  the  course  of  respiration, 
and  whence  saliva  is  discharged,  the  incision 
being  made  in  the  upper  aspect  of  the  body, 
near  the  part  which  corresponds  to  the  liver. 

This,  however,  is  to  be  observ^ed:  that  in  win¬ 
ter  and  the  colder  season,  exsanguine  animals, 
such  as  the  snail,  show  no  pulsations;  they  seem 
rather  to  live  after  the  manner  of  vegetables,  or 
of  those  other  productions  which  are  therefore 
designated  plant -animals. 

It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  all  animals  which 
have  a  heart,  have  also  auricles,  or  something 
analogous  to  auricles;  and  further,  that  wher¬ 
ever  the  heart  has  a  double  ventricle  there  are 
always  two  auricles  present,  but  not  otherwise. 
If  you  turn  to  the  production  of  the  chick  in 
ovo,  however,  you  will  find  at  first  no  more 
than  a  vesicle  or  auricle,  or  pulsating  drop  of 

^  On  the  Motion  of  Animals^  8. 


HARVEY 

blood;  it  is  only  by  and  by,  when  the  develop¬ 
ment  has  made  some  progress,  that  the  heart  is 
fashioned:  even  so  in  certain  animals  not  des¬ 
tined  to  attain  to  the  highest  perfection  in  their 
organization,  such  as  bees,  wasps,  snails,  shrimps, 
crayfish,  &c.,  we  only  find  a  certain  pulsating 
vesicle,  like  a  sort  of  red  or  white  palpitating 
point,  as  the  beginning  or  principle  of  their  life. 

We  have  a  small  shrimp  in  these  countries, 
which  is  taken  in  the  Thames  and  in  the  sea, 
the  whole  of  whose  body  is  transparent;  this 
creature,  placed  in  a  little  water,  has  frequently 
afforded  myself  and  particular  friends  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  observing  the  motions  of  the 
heart  with  the  greatest  distinctness,  the  exter¬ 
nal  parts  of  the  body  presenting  no  obstacle  to 
our  view,  but  the  heart  being  perceived  as 
though  it  had  been  seen  through  a  window. 

I  have  also  observed  the  first  rudiments  of 
the  chick  in  the  course  of  the  fourth  or  fifth  day 
of  the  incubation,  in  the  guise  of  a  little  cloud, 
the  shell  having  been  removed  and  the  egg  im¬ 
mersed  in  clear  tepid  water.  In  the  midst  of  the 
cloudlet  in  question  there  was  a  bloody  point  so 
small  that  it  disappeared  during  the  contrac¬ 
tion  and  escaped  the  sight,  but  in  the  relaxation 
it  reappeared  again,  red  and  like  the  point  of  a 
pin;  so  that  betwixt  the  visible  and  invisible, 
betwixt  being  and  not  being,  as  it  were,  it  gave 
by  its  pulses  a  kind  of  representation  of  the 
commencement  of  life. 

CHAPTER  5.  Of  the  motion,  action,,  and  office  of  the 
heart 

From  these  and  other  observations  of  the  like 
kind,  I  am  persuaded  it  will  be  found  that  the 
motion  of  the  heart  is  as  follows: 

First  of  all,  the  auricle  contracts,  and  in  the 
course  of  its  contraction  throws  the  blood 
(which  it  contains  in  ample  quantity  as  the 
head  of  the  veins,  the  storehouse  and  cistern  of 
the  blood)  into  the  ventricle,  which  being 
filled,  the  heart  raises  itself  straightway,  makes 
all  its  fibres  tense,  contracts  the  ventricles,  and 
performs  a  beat,  by  which  beat  it  immediately 
sends  the  blood  supplied  to  it  by  the  auricle  in¬ 
to  the  arteries;  the  right  ventricle  sending  its 
charge  into  the  lungs  by  the  vessel  which  is 
called  vena  arteriosa,  but  which,  in  structure 
and  function,  and  all  things  else,  is  an  artery; 
the  left  ventricle  sending  its  charge  into  the 
aorta,  and  through  this  by  the  arteries  to  the 
body  at  large. 

These  two  motions,  one  of  the  ventricles, 
another  of  the  auricles,  take  place  consecutive¬ 
ly,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  there  is  a  kind  of 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


harmony  or  rhythm  preserved  between  them, 
the  two  concurring  in  such  wise  that  but  one 
motion  is  apparent,  especially  in  the  warmer 
blooded  animals,  in  which  the  movements  in 
question  are  rapid.  Nor  is  this  for  any  other 
reason  than  it  is  in  a  piece  of  machinery,  in 
which,  though  one  wheel  gives  motion  to  an¬ 
other,  yet  all  the  wheels  seem  to  move  simul¬ 
taneously;  or  in  that  mechanical  contrivance 
which  is  adapted  to  firearms,  where  the  trigger 
being  touched,  down  comes  the  flint,  strikes 
against  the  steel,  elicits  a  spark,  which  falling 
among  the  powder,  it  is  ignited,  upon  which 
the  flame  extends,  enters  the  barrel,  causes  the 
explosion,  propels  the  ball,  and  the  mark  is  at¬ 
tained — all  of  which  incidents,  by  reason  of  the 
celerity  with  which  they  happen,  seem  to  take 
place  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  So  also  in  de¬ 
glutition:  by  the  elevation  of  the  root  of  the 
tongue,  and  the  compression  of  the  mouth,  the 
food  or  drink  is  pushed  into  the  fauces,  the  lar¬ 
ynx  is  closed  by  its  own  muscles,  and  the  epi¬ 
glottis,  whilst  the  pharynx,  raised  and  opened 
by  its  muscles  no  otherwise  than  is  a  sac  that  is 
to  be  filled,  is  lifted  up,  and  its  mouth  dilated; 
upon  which,  the  mouthful  being  received,  it  is 
forced  downwards  by  the  transverse  muscles, 
and  then  carried  farther  by  the  longitudinal 
ones.  Yet  are  all  these  motions,  though  executed 
by  different  and  distinct  organs,  performed 
harmoniously,  and  in  such  order,  that  they 
seem  to  constitute  but  a  single  motion  and  act, 
which  we  call  deglutition. 

Even  so  does  it  come  to  pass  with  the  motions 
and  action  of  the  heart,  which  constitute  a  kind 
of  deglutition,  a  transfusion  of  the  blood  from 
the  veins  to  the  arteries.  And  if  anyone,  bear¬ 
ing  these  things  in  mind,  will  carefully  watch 
the  motions  of  the  heart  in  the  body  of  a  living 
animal,  he  will  perceive  not  only  all  the  partic¬ 
ulars  I  have  mentioned,  viz.,  the  heart  becom¬ 
ing  erect,  and  making  one  continuous  motion 
with  its  auricles;  but  further,  a  certain  obscure 
undulation  and  lateral  inclination  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  axis  of  the  right  ventricle,  twisting 
itself  slightly  in  performing  its  work.  And  in¬ 
deed  everyone  may  see  when  a  horse  drinks 
that  the  water  is  drawn  in  and  transmitted 
to  the  stomach  at  each  movement  of  the 
throat,  the  motion  being  accompanied  with 
a  sound,  and  yielding  a  pulse  both  to  the 
ear  and  the  touch;  in  the  same  way  it  is  with 
each  motion  of  the  heart,  when  there  is  the  de¬ 
livery  of  a  quantity  of  blood  from  the  veins  to 
the  arteries,  that  a  pulse  takes  place,  and  can  be 
heard  within  the  chest. 


279 

The  motion  of  the  heart,  then,  is  entirely  of 
this  description,  and  the  one  action  of  the  heart 
is  the  transmission  of  the  blood  and  its  distri¬ 
bution,  by  means  of  the  arteries,  to  the  very 
extremities  of  the  body;  so  that  the  pulse 
which  we  feel  in  the  arteries  is  nothing  more 
than  the  impulse  of  the  blood  derived  from  the 
heart. 

Whether  or  not  the  heart,  besides  propelling 
the  blood,  giving  it  motion  locally,  and  distrib¬ 
uting  it  to  the  body,  adds  anything  else  to  it — 
heat,  spirit,  perfection — must  be  inquired  into 
by  and  by,  and  decided  upon  other  grounds.  So 
much  may  suffice  at  this  time,  when  it  is  shown 
that  by  the  action  of  the  heart  the  blood  is 
transfused  through  the  ventricles  from  the 
veins  to  the  arteries,  and  distributed  by  them 
to  all  parts  of  the  body. 

So  much,  indeed,  is  admitted  by  all,  both 
from  the  structure  of  the  heart  and  the  arrange¬ 
ment  and  action  of  its  valves.  But  still  they  are 
like  persons  purblind  or  groping  about  in  the 
dark;  and  then  they  give  utterance  to  diverse, 
contradictory,  and  incoherent  sentiments,  de¬ 
livering  many  things  upon  conjecture,  as  we 
have  already  had  occasion  to  remark. 

The  grand  cause  of  hesitation  and  error  in 
this  subject  appears  to  me  to  have  been  the  in¬ 
timate  connexion  between  the  heart  and  the 
lungs.  When  men  saw  both  the  vena  arteriosa 
and  the  arterise  venosae  losing  themselves  in  the 
lungs,  of  course,  it  became  a  puzzle  to  them  to 
know  how  or  by  what  means  the  right  ventricle 
should  distribute  the  blood  to  the  body,  or  the 
left  draw  it  from  the  venae  cavae.  This  fact  is 
borne  witness  to  by  Galen,  whose  words,  when 
writing  against  Erasistratus  in  regard  to  the  ori¬ 
gin  and  use  of  the  veins  and  the  coction  of  the 
blood,  are  the  following:  “You  will  reply,”  he 
says,  ‘‘that  the  effect  is  so;  that  the  blood  is  pre¬ 
pared  in  the  liver,  and  is  thence  transferred  to 
the  heart  to  receive  its  proper  form  and  last 
perfection;  a  statement  which  does  not  appear 
devoid  of  reason;  for  no  great  and  perfect  work 
is  ever  accomplished  at  a  single  effort,  or  re¬ 
ceives  its  final  polish  from  one  instrument.  But 
if  this  be  actually  so,  then  show^  us  another  ves¬ 
sel  which  draws  the  absolutely  perfect  blood 
from  the  heart,  and  distributes  it  as  the  arteries 
do  the  spirits  over  the  whole  body.”^  Here  then 
is  a  reasonable  opinion  not  allowed,  because, 
forsooth,  besides  not  seeing  the  true  means  of 
transit,  he  could  not  discover  the  vessel  which 
should  transmit  the  blood  from  the  heart  to 
the  body  at  large! 

^  Dc  placitis  Hippocratis  ct  Platonist  vi. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


280 

But  had  anyone  been  there  in  behalf  of  Era- 
sistratus,  and  of  that  opinion  which  we  now  es¬ 
pouse,  and  which  Galen  himself  acknowledges 
in  other  respects  consonant  with  reason,  to  have 
pointed  to  the  aorta  as  the  vessel  which  distrib¬ 
utes  the  blood  from  the  heart  to  the  rest  of  the 
body,  I  wonder  what  would  have  been  the  an¬ 
swer  of  that  most  ingenious  and  learned  man? 
Had  he  said  that  the  artery  transmits  spirits 
and  not  blood,  he  would  indeed  sufficiently 
have  answered  Erasistratus,  who  imagined  that 
the  arteries  contained  nothing  but  spirits;  but 
then  he  would  have  contradicted  himself,  and 
given  a  foul  denial  to  that  for  which  he  had 
keenly  contended  in  his  writings  against  this 
very  Erasistratus,  to  wit,  that  blood  in  sub¬ 
stance  is  contained  in  the  arteries,  and  not 
spirits;  a  fact  which  he  demonstrated  not  only 
by  many  powerful  arguments,  but  by  experi¬ 
ments. 

But  if  the  divine  Galen  will  here  allow,  as  in 
other  places  he  does,  “that  all  the  arteries  of 
the  body  arise  from  the  great  artery,  and  that 
this  takes  its  origin  from  the  heart;  that  all 
these  vessels  naturally  contain  and  carry  blood; 
that  the  three  semilunar  valves  situated  at  the 
orifice  of  the  aorta  prevent  the  return  of  the 
blood  into  the  heart,  and  that  nature  never 
connected  them  with  this,  the  most  noble  vis- 
cus  of  the  body,  unless  for  some  most  impor¬ 
tant  end*’;  if,  I  say,  this  father  of  physic  admits 
all  these  things — and  I  quote  his  own  words — I 
do  not  see  how  he  can  deny  that  the  great  ar¬ 
tery  is  the  very  vessel  to  carry  the  blood,  when 
it  has  attained  its  highest  term  of  perfection, 
from  the  heart  for  distribution  to  all  parts  of 
the  body.  Or  would  he  perchance  still  hesitate, 
like  all  who  have  come  after  him,  even  to  the 
present  hour,  because  he  did  not  perceive  the 
route  by  which  the  blood  was  transferred  from 
the  veins  to  the  arteries,  in  consequence,  as  I 
have  already  said,  of  the  intimate  connexion 
between  the  heart  and  the  lungs?  And  that  this 
difficulty  puzzled  anatomists  not  a  little,  when 
in  their  dissections  they  found  the  pulmonary 
artery  and  left  ventricle  full  of  thick,  black,  and 
clotted  blood,  plainly  appears,  when  they  felt 
themselves  compelled  to  affirm  that  the  blood 
made  its  way  from  the  right  to  the  left  ventricle 
by  sweating  through  the  septum  of  the  heart. 
But  this  fancy  I  have  already  refuted.  A  new 
pathway  for  the  blood  must  therefore  be  pre¬ 
pared  and  thrown  open,  and  being  once  ex¬ 
posed,  no  further  difficulty  will,  I  believe,  be 
experienced  by  anyone  in  admitting  what  I 
have  already  proposed  in  regard  to  the  pulse  of 


the  heart  and  arteries,  viz.^  the  passage  of  the 
blood  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries,  and  its 
distribution  to  the  whole  of  the  body  by  means 
of  these  vessels. 

CHAPTER  6.  Of  the  course  by  which  the  blood  is 

carried  from  the  vena  cava  into  the  arteries,  or  from 

the  right  into  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart 

Since  the  intimate  connexion  of  the  heart  with 
the  lungs,  which  is  apparent  in  the  human  sub¬ 
ject,  has  been  the  probable  cause  of  the  errors 
that  have  been  committed  on  this  point,  they 
plainly  do  amiss  who,  pretending  to  speak  of 
the  parts  of  animals  generally,  as  anatomists  for 
the  most  part  do,  confine  their  researches  to 
the  human  body  alone,  and  that  when  it  is 
dead.  They  obviously  act  no  otherwise  than  he 
who,  having  studied  the  forms  of  a  single  com¬ 
monwealth,  should  set  about  the  composition 
of  a  general  system  of  polity;  or  who,  having 
taken  cognizance  of  the  nature  of  a  single  field, 
should  imagine  that  he  had  mastered  the 
science  of  agriculture;  or  who,  upon  the  ground 
of  one  particular  proposition,  should  proceed  to 
draw  general  conclusions. 

Had  anatomists  only  been  as  conversant  with 
the  dissection  of  the  lower  animals  as  they  are 
with  that  of  the  human  body,  the  matters  that 
have  hitherto  kept  them  in  a  perplexity  of 
doubt  would,  in  my  opinion,  have  met  them 
freed  from  every  kind  of  difficulty. 

And,  first,  in  fishes,  in  which  the  heart  con¬ 
sists  of  but  a  single  ventricle,  they  having  no 
lungs,  the  thing  is  sufficiently  manifest.  Here 
the  sac,  which  is  situated  at  the  base  of  the 
heart,  and  is  the  part  analogous  to  the  auricle  in 
man,  plainly  throws  the  blood  into  the  heart, 
and  the  heart,  in  its  turn,  conspicuously  trans¬ 
mits  it  by  a  pipe  or  artery,  or  vessel  analogous 
to  an  artery;  these  are  facts  which  are  con¬ 
firmed  by  simple  ocular  inspection,  as  well  as 
by  a  division  of  the  vessel,  when  the  blood  is 
seen  to  be  projected  by  each  pulsation  of  the 
heart. 

The  same  thing  is  also  not  difficult  of  demon¬ 
stration  in  those  animals  that  have  either  no 
more,  or,  as  it  were,  no  more  than  a  single  ven¬ 
tricle  to  the  heart,  such  as  toads,  frogs,  serpents, 
and  lizards,  which,  although  they  have  lungs  in 
a  certain  sense,  as  they  have  a  voice  (and  I  have 
many  observations  by  me  on  the  admirable 
structure  of  the  lungs  of  these  animals,  and 
matters  appertaining,  which,  however,  I  can¬ 
not  introduce  in  this  place),  still  their  anatomy 
plainly  shows  that  the  blood  is  transferred  in 
them  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries  in  the  same 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


manner  as  in  higher  animals,  viz.,  by  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  the  heart;  the  way,  in  fact,  is  patent, 
open,  manifest;  there  is  no  difficulty,  no  room 
for  hesitating  about  it;  for  in  them  the  matter 
stands  precisely  as  it  would  in  man,  were  the 
septum  of  his  heart  perforated  or  removed,  or 
one  ventricle  made  out  of  two;  and  this  being 
the  case,  I  imagine  that  no  one  will  doubt  as 
to  the  way  by  which  the  blood  may  pass  from 
the  veins  into  the  arteries. 

But  as  there  are  actually  more  animals  which 
have  no  lungs  than  there  are  which  be  furnished 
with  them,  and  in  like  manner  a  greater  num¬ 
ber  which  have  only  one  ventricle  than  there 
are  which  have  two,  it  is  open  to  us  to  conclude, 
judging  from  the  mass  or  multitude  of  living 
creatures,  that  for  the  major  part,  and  gener¬ 
ally,  there  is  an  open  way  by  which  the  blood  is 
transmitted  from  the  veins  through  the  sinuses 
or  cavities  of  the  heart  into  the  arteries. 

I  have,  however,  cogitating  with  myself,  seen 
further,  that  the  same  thing  obtained  most  ob¬ 
viously  in  the  embryos  of  those  animals  that 
have  lungs;  for  in  the  foetus  the  four  vessels  be¬ 
longing  to  the  heart,  viz,,  the  vena  cava,  the 
vena  arteriosa  or  pulmonary  artery,  the  arteria 
venalis  or  pulmonary  vein,  and  the  arteria  mag- 
na  or  aorta,  are  all  connected  otherwise  than  in 
the  adult;  a  fact  sufficiently  known  to  every 
anatomist.  The  first  contact  and  union  of  the 
vena  cava  with  the  arteria  venosa  or  pulmo¬ 
nary  veins,  which  occurs  before  the  cava  opens 
properly  into  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart, 
or  gives  off  the  coronary  vein,  a  little  above  its 
escape  from  the  liver,  is  by  a  lateral  anastomo¬ 
sis;  this  is  an  ample  foramen,  of  an  oval  form, 
communicating  between  the  cava  and  the  ar¬ 
teria  venosa,  or  pulmonary  vein,  so  that  the 
blood  is  free  to  flow  in  the  greatest  abundance 
by  that  foramen  from  the  vena  cava  into  the 
arteria  venosa  or  pulmonary  vein,  and  left  auri¬ 
cle,  and  from  thence  into  the  left  ventricle;  and 
further,  in  this  foramen  ovale,  from  that  part 
which  regards  the  arteria  venosa,  or  pulmonary 
vein,  there  is  a  thin  tough  membrane,  larger 
than  the  opening,  extended  like  an  operculum 
or  cover;  this  membrane  in  the  adult  blocking 
up  the  foramen,  and  adhering  on  all  sides,  fi¬ 
nally  closes  it  up,  and  almost  obliterates  every 
trace  of  it.  This  membrane,  however,  is  so  con¬ 
trived  in  the  foetus,  that  falling  loosely  upon  it¬ 
self,  it  permits  a  ready  access  to  the  lungs  and 
heart,  yielding  a  passage  to  the  blood  which  is 
streaming  from  the  cava,  and  hindering  the 
tide  at  the  same  time  from  flowing  back  into 
that  vein.  All  things,  in  short,  permit  us  to  be¬ 


281 

lieve  that  in  the  embryo  the  blood  must  con¬ 
stantly  pass  by  this  foramen  from  the  vena  cava 
into  the  arteria  venosa,  or  pulmonary  vein,  and 
from  thence  into  the  left  auricle  of  the  heart; 
and  having  once  entered  there,  it  can  never  re¬ 
gurgitate. 

Another  union  is  that  by  the  vena  arteriosa, 
or  pulmonary  artery,  and  is  effected  when  that 
vessel  divides  into  two  branches  after  its  escape 
from  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart.  It  is  as  if 
to  the  two  trunks  already  mentioned  a  third 
were  superadded,  a  kind  of  arterial  canal,  car¬ 
ried  obliquely  from  the  vena  arteriosa,  or  pul¬ 
monary  artery,  to  perforate  and  terminate  in 
the  arteria  magna  or  aorta.  In  the  embryo,  con¬ 
sequently,  there  are,  as  it  were,  two  aortas,  or 
two  roots  of  the  arteria  magna,  springing  from 
the  heart.  This  canalis  arteriosus  shrinks  grad¬ 
ually  after  birth,  and  is  at  length  and  finally 
almost  entirely  withered,  and  removed,  like 
the  umbilical  vessels. 

The  canalis  arteriosus  contains  no  membrane 
or  valve  to  direct  or  impede  the  flow  of  the 
blood  in  this  or  in  that  direction:  for  at  the  root 
of  the  vena  arteriosa,  or  pulmonary  artery,  of 
which  the  canalis  arteriosus  is  the  continuation 
in  the  foetus,  there  are  three  sigmoid  or  semi¬ 
lunar  valves,  which  open  from  within  outwards, 
and  oppose  no  obstacle  to  the  blood  flowing  in 
this  direction  or  from  the  right  ventricle  into 
the  pulmonary  artery  and  aorta;  but  they  pre¬ 
vent  all  regurgitation  from  the  aorta  or  pul¬ 
monic  vessels  back  upon  the  right  ventricle; 
closing  with  perfect  accuracy,  they  oppose  an 
effectual  obstacle  to  everything  of  the  kind  in 
the  embryo.  So  that  there  is  also  reason  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  when  the  heart  contracts,  the  blood 
is  regularly  propelled  by  the  canal  or  passage 
indicated  from  the  right  ventricle  into  the 
aorta. 

What  is  commonly  said  in  regard  to  these 
two  great  communications,  to  wit,  that  they 
exist  for  the  nutrition  of  the  lungs,  is  both  im¬ 
probable  and  inconsistent;  seeing  that  in  the 
adult  they  are  closed  up,  abolished,  and  con¬ 
solidated,  although  the  lungs,  by  reason  of  their 
heat  and  motion,  must  then  be  presumed  to  re¬ 
quire  a  larger  supply  of  nourishment.  The  same 
may  be  said  in  regard  to  the  assertion  that  the 
heart  in  the  embryo  does  not  pulsate,  that  it 
neither  acts  nor  moves,  so  that  nature  was  forced 
to  make  these  communications  for  the  nutri¬ 
tion  of  the  lungs.  This  is  plainly  false ;  for  simple 
inspection  of  the  incubated  egg,  and  of  embryos 
just  taken  out  of  the  uterus,  shows  that  the 
heart  moves  precisely  in  them  as  in  adults,  and 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


282 

that  nature  feels  no  such  necessity.  I  have  my¬ 
self  repeatedly  seen  these  motions,  and  Aristotle 
is  likewise  witness  of  their  reality.  “The  pulse, 
he  observ'es,  “inheres  in  the  very  constitution 
of  the  heart,  and  appears  from  the  beginning, 
as  is  learned  both  from  the  dissection  of  living 
animals,  and  the  formation  of  the  chick  in  the 
egg.”^  But  we  further  observe  that  the  passages 
in  question  are  not  only  pervious  up  to  the  pe¬ 
riod  of  birth  in  man,  as  well  as  in  other  animals, 
as  anatomists  in  general  have  described  them, 
but  for  several  months  subsequently,  in  some 
indeed  for  several  years,  not  to  say  for  the  whole 
course  of  life;  as,  for  example,  in  the  goose, 
snipe,  and  various  birds,  and  many  of  the  smaller 
animals.  And  this  circumstance  it  was,  perhaps, 
that  imposed  upon  Botallus,  who  thought  he 
had  discovered  a  new  passage  for  the  blood 
from  the  vena  cava  into  the  left  ventricle  of  the 
heart;  and  I  own  that  when  I  met  with  the  same 
arrangement  in  one  of  the  larger  members  of 
the  mouse  family,  in  the  adult  state,  I  was  my¬ 
self  at  first  led  to  something  of  a  like  conclusion. 

From  this  it  will  be  understood  that  in  the 
human  embr^^o,  and  in  the  embr)^os  of  animals 
in  which  the  communications  are  not  closed, 
the  same  thing  happens,  namely,  that  the  heart 
by  its  motion  propels  the  blood  by  obvious  and 
open  passages  from  the  vena  cava  into  the  aorta 
through  the  cavities  of  both  the  ventricles;  the 
right  one  receiving  the  blood  from  the  auricle, 
and  propelling  it  by  the  vena  arteriosa,  or  pul¬ 
monary  arter)%  and  its  continuation,  named  the 
ductus  arteriosus,  into  the  aorta;  the  left,  in 
like  manner,  charged  by  the  contraction  of  its 
auricle,  which  has  received  its  supply  through 
the  foramen  ovale  from  the  vena  cava,  con¬ 
tracting,  and  projecting  the  blood  through  the 
root  of  the  aorta  into  the  trunk  of  that  vessel. 

In  embr)^os,  consequently,  whilst  the  lungs 
are  yet  in  a  state  of  inaction,  performing  no 
function,  subject  to  no  motion  any  more  than 
if  they  had  not  been  present,  nature  uses  the 
two  ventricles  of  the  heart  as  if  they  formed  but 
one,  for  the  transmission  of  the  blood.  The  con¬ 
dition  of  the  embryos  of  those  animals  which 
have  lungs,  whilst  these  organs  are  yet  in  abey¬ 
ance  and  not  employed,  is  the  same  as  that  of 
those  animals  which  have  no  lungs. 

So  clearly,  therefore,  does  it  appear  in  the 
case  of  the  foetus,  viz.,  that  the  heart  by  its  ac¬ 
tion  transfers  the  blood  from  the  vena  cava  into 
the  aorta,  and  that  by  a  route  as  obvious  and 
open,  as  il  in  the  adult  the  two  ventricles  were 
made  to  communicate  by  the  removal  of  their 

^  De  spiriitt,  5  [a  pseudo-Aristotelian  work]. 


septum.  Since,  then,  we  find  that  in  the  greater 
number  of  animals,  in  all,  indeed,  at  a  certain 
period  of  their  existence,  the  channels  for  the 
transmission  of  the  blood  through  the  heart  are 
so  conspicuous,  we  have  still  to  inquire  where¬ 
fore  in  some  creatures — those,  namely,  that 
have  warm  blood,  and  that  have  attained  to  the 
adult  age,  man  among  the  number — we  should 
not  conclude  that  the  same  thing  is  accom¬ 
plished  through  the  substance  of  the  lungs, 
which  in  the  embryo,  and  at  a  time  when  the 
function  of  these  organs  is  in  abeyance,  nature 
effects  by  the  direct  passages  described,  and 
which,  indeed,  she  seems  compelled  to  adopt 
through  want  of  a  passage  by  the  lungs;  or 
wherefore  it  should  be  better  (for  nature  always 
does  that  which  is  best)  that  she  should  close  up 
the  various  open  routes  which  she  had  formerly 
made  use  of  in  the  embryo  and  foetus,  and  still 
uses  in  all  other  animals;  not  only  opening  up 
no  new  apparent  channels  for  the  passage  of  the 
blood,  therefore,  but  even  entirely  shutting  up 
those  which  formerly  existed. 

And  now  the  discussion  is  brought  to  this 
point,  that  they  who  inquire  into  the  ways  by 
which  the  blood  reaches  the  left  ventricle  of  the 
heart  and  pulmonary  veins  from  the  vena  cava, 
will  pursue  the  wisest  course  if  they  seek  by  dis¬ 
section  to  discover  the  causes  why  in  the  larger 
and  more  perfect  animals  of  mature  age,  nature 
has  rather  chosen  to  make  the  blood  percolate 
the  parenchyma  of  the  lungs,  than  as  in  other 
instances  chosen  a  direct  and  obvious  course — 
for  I  assume  that  no  other  path  or  mode  of 
transit  can  be  entertained.  It  must  be  either  be¬ 
cause  the  larger  and  more  perfect  animals  are 
warmer,  and  when  adult  their  heat  greater — 
ignited,  as  I  might  say,  and  requiring  to  be 
damped  or  mitigated;  therefore  it  may  be  that 
the  blood  is  sent  through  the  lungs,  that  it  may 
be  tempered  by  the  air  that  is  inspired,  and 
prevented  from  boiling  up,  and  so  becoming 
extinguished,  or  something  else  of  the  sort.  But 
to  determine  these  matters,  and  explain  them 
satisfactorily,  were  to  enter  on  a  speculation  in 
regard  to  the  office  of  the  lungs  and  the  ends 
for  which  they  exist;  and  upon  such  a  subject, 
as  well  as  upon  what  pertains  to  eventilation,  to 
the  necessity  and  use  of  the  air,  &c.,  as  also  to 
the  variety  and  diversity  of  organs  that  exist  in 
the  bodies  of  animals  in  connexion  with  these 
matters,  although  I  have  made  a  vast  number 
of  observ^ations,  still,  lest  I  should  be  held  as 
wandering  too  wide  of  my  present  purpose, 
which  is  the  use  and  motion  of  the  heart,  and 
be  charged  with  speaking  of  things  beside  the 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


question,  and  rather  complicating  and  quitting 
than  illustrating  it,  I  shall  leave  such  topics  till 
I  can  more  conveniently  set  them  forth  in  a 
treatise  apart.  And  now,  returning  to  my  im¬ 
mediate  subject,  I  go  on  with  what  yet  remains 
for  demonstration,  viz.,  that  in  the  more  per¬ 
fect  and  warmer  adult  animals,  and  man,  the 
blood  passes  from  the  right  ventricle  of  the 
heart  by  the  vena  arteriosa,  or  pulmonary  ar¬ 
tery,  into  the  lungs,  and  thence  by  the  arteriae 
venosae,  or  pulmonary  veins,  into  the  left  auri¬ 
cle,  and  thence  into  the  left  ventricle  of  the 
heart.  And,  first,  I  shall  show  that  this  may  be 
so,  and  then  I  shall  prove  that  it  is  so  in  fact. 

CHAPTER  7.  The  blood  percolates  the  substance  of 

the  lungs  from  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  into 

the  pulmonary  veins  and  left  ventricle 

That  this  is  possible,  and  that  there  is  nothing 
to  prevent  it  from  being  so,  appears  when  we 
reflect  on  the  way  in  which  water  percolating 
the  earth  produces  springs  and  rivulets,  or  when 
we  speculate  on  the  means  by  which  the  sweat 
passes  through  the  skin,  or  the  urine  through 
the  parenchyma  of  the  kidneys.  It  is  well 
known  that  persons  who  use  the  Spa  waters,  or 
those  of  La  Madonna,  in  the  territories  of  Padua, 
or  others  of  an  acidulous  or  vitriolated  nature, 
or  who  simply  swallow  drinks  by  the  gallon, 
pass  all  off  again  within  an  hour  or  two  by  urine. 
Such  a  quantity  of  liquid  must  take  some  short 
time  in  the  concoction:  it  must  pass  through 
the  liver  (it  is  allowed  by  all  that  the  juices  of 
the  food  we  consume  pass  twice  through  this 
organ  in  the  course  of  the  day);  it  must  flow 
through  the  veins,  through  the  parenchyma  of 
the  kidneys,  and  through  the  ureters  into  the 
bladder. 

To  those,  therefore,  whom  I  hear  denying 
that  the  blood,  aye  the  whole  mass  of  the  blood 
may  pass  through  the  substance  of  the  lungs, 
even  as  the  nutritive  juices  percolate  the  liver, 
asserting  such  a  proposition  to  be  impossible, 
and  by  no  means  to  be  entertained  as  credible, 

I  reply,  with  the  poet,  that  they  are  of  that  race 
of  men  who,  when  they  will,  assent  full  readily, 
and  when  they  will  not,  by  no  manner  of  means; 
who,  when  their  assent  is  wanted,  fear,  and 
when  it  is  not,  fear  not  to  give  it. 

The  parenchyma  of  the  liver  is  extremely 
dense,  so  is  that  of  the  kidney;  the  lungs,  again, 
are  of  a  much  looser  texture,  and  if  compared 
with  the  kidneys  are  absolutely  spongy.  In  the 
liver  there  is  no  forcing,  no  impelling  power;  in 
the  lungs  the  blood  is  forced  on  by  the  pulse  of 
the  right  ventricle,  the  necessary  effect  of  whose 


283 

impulse  is  the  distension  of  the  vessels  and  pores 
of  the  lungs.  And  then  the  lungs,  in  respiration, 
are  perpetually  rising  and  falling;  motions,  the 
effect  of  which  must  needs  be  to  open  and  shut 
the  pores  and  vessels,  precisely  as  in  the  case  of 
a  sponge,  and  of  parts  having  a  spongy  structure, 
when  they  are  alternately  compressed  and  again 
are  suffered  to  expand.  The  liver,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  remains  at  rest,  and  is  never  seen  to  be 
dilated  and  constricted.  Lastly,  if  no  one  denies 
the  possibility  of  the  whole  of  the  ingested  juices 
passing  through  the  liver,  in  man,  oxen,  and  the 
larger  animals  generally,  in  order  to  reach  the 
vena  cava,  and  for  this  reason,  that  if  nourish¬ 
ment  is  to  go  on,  these  juices  must  needs  get 
into  the  veins,  and  there  is  no  other  way  but 
the  one  indicated,  why  should  not  the  same 
arguments  be  held  of  avail  for  the  passage  of 
the  blood  in  adults  through  the  lungs?  Why 
not,  with  Columbus,  that  skilful  and  learned 
anatomist,  maintain  and  believe  the  like,  from 
the  capacity  and  structure  of  the  pulmonary 
vessels;  from  the  fact  of  the  pulmonary  veins 
and  ventricle  corresponding  with  them,  being 
always  found  to  contain  blood,  which  must 
needs  have  come  from  the  veins,  and  by  no 
other  passage  save  through  the  lungs?  Colum¬ 
bus,  and  we  also,  from  what  precedes,  from  dis¬ 
sections,  and  other  arguments,  conceive  the 
thing  to  be  clear.  But  as  there  are  some  who 
admit  nothing  unless  upon  authority,  let  them 
learn  that  the  truth  I  am  contending  for  can  be 
confirmed  from  Galen’s  own  words,  namely, 
that  not  only  may  the  blood  be  transmitted 
from  the  pulmonary  artery  into  the  pulmonary 
veins,  then  into  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart, 
and  from  thence  into  the  arteries  of  the  body, 
but  that  this  is  effected  by  the  ceaseless  pulsa¬ 
tion  of  the  heart  and  the  motion  of  the  lungs 
in  breathing. 

There  are,  as  everyone  knows,  three  sigmoid 
or  semilunar  valves  situated  at  the  orifice  of  the 
pulmonary  artery,  which  effectually  prevent 
the  blood  sent  into  the  vessel  from  returning  in¬ 
to  the  cavity  of  the  heart.  Now  Galen,  explain¬ 
ing  the  uses  of  these  valves,  and  the  necessity 
for  them,  employs  the  following  language: 
“There  is  everywhere  a  mutual  anastomosis  and 
inosculation  of  the  arteries  with  the  veins,  and 
they  severally  transmit  both  blood  and  spirit, 
by  certain  invisible  and  undoubtedly  very  nar¬ 
row  passages.  Now  if  the  mouth  of  the  vena 
arteriosa,  or  pulmonary  artery,  had  stood  in 
like  manner  continually  open,  and  nature  had 
found  no  contrivance  for  closing  it  when  requi¬ 
site,  and  opening  it  again,  it  would  have  been 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


284 

impossible  that  the  blood  could  ever  have  passed 
by  the  invisible  and  delicate  mouths,  during 
the  contractions  of  the  thorax,  into  the  arteries; 
for  all  things  are  not  alike  readily  attracted  or 
repelled;  but  that  which  is  light  is  more  readily 
drawn  in,  the  instrument  being  dilated,  and 
forced  out  again  when  it  is  contracted,  than 
that  which  is  heavy;  and  in  like  manner  is  any¬ 
thing  drawn  more  rapidly  along  an  ample  con¬ 
duit,  and  again  driven  forth,  than  it  is  through 
a  narrow  tube.  But  when  the  thorax  is  con¬ 
tracted,  the  pulmonary  veins,  which  are  in  the 
lungs,  being  driven  inwardly,  and  powerfully 
compressed  on  every  side,  immediately  force 
out  some  of  the  spirit  they  contain,  and  at  the 
same  time  assume  a  certain  portion  of  blood  by 
those  subtile  mouths;  a  thing  that  could  never 
come  to  pass  were  the  blood  at  liberty  to  flow 
back  into  the  heart  through  the  great  orifice  of 
the  pulmonary  artery.  But  its  return  through 
this  great  opening  being  prevented,  when  it  is 
compressed  on  every  side,  a  certain  portion  of 
it  distils  into  the  pulmonary  veins  by  the  mi¬ 
nute  orifices  mentioned.”^  And  shortly  after¬ 
wards,  in  the  very  next  chapter,  he  says:  “The 
more  the  thorax  contracts,  the  more  it  strives 
to  force  out  the  blood,  the  more  exactly  do 
these  membranes  (viz.,  the  sigmoid  valves) 
close  up  the  mouth  of  the  vessel,  and  suffer 
nothing  to  regurgitate.”  The  same  fact  he  has 
also  alluded  to  in  a  preceding  part  of  the  tenth 
chapter:  “Were  there  no  valves,  a  three-fold 
inconvenience  would  result,  so  that  the  blood 
would  then  perform  this  lengthened  course  in 
vain;  it  would  flow  inwards  during  the  diastoles 
of  the  lungs,  and  fill  all  their  arteries;  but  in  the 
systoles,  in  the  manner  of  the  tide,  it  would 
ever  and  anon,  like  the  Euripus,  flow  back¬ 
wards  and  forwards  by  the  same  way,  with  a 
reciprocating  motion,  which  would  nowise  suit 
the  blood.  This,  however,  may  seem  a  matter 
of  little  moment;  but  if  it  meantime  appear 
that  the  function  of  respiration  suffer,  then  I 
think  it  would  be  looked  upon  as  no  trifle/’  &c. 
And  again,  and  shortly  afterwards:  “And  then  a 
third  inconvenience,  by  no  means  to  be  thought 
lightly  of,  would  follow,  were  the  blood  moved 
backwards  during  the  expirations,  had  not  our 
Maker  instituted  those  supplementary  mem¬ 
branes.”  Whence,  in  the  eleventh  chapter,  he 
concludes:  “That  they  have  all  a  common  use 
(to  wit,  the  valves),  and  that  it  is  to  prevent 
regurgitation  or  backward  motion;  each,  how¬ 
ever,  having  a  proper  function,  the  one  set 
drawing  matters  from  the  heart,  and  prevent- 
*  De  tisu  partium^  vi.  10. 


ing  their  return,  the  other  drawing  matters  in¬ 
to  the  heart,  and  preventing  their  escape  from 
it.  For  nature  never  intended  to  distress  the 
heart  with  needless  labour,  neither  to  bring 
aught  into  the  organ  which  it  had  been  better 
to  have  kept  away,  nor  to  take  from  it  again 
aught  which  it  was  requisite  should  be  brought. 
Since,  then,  there  are  four  orifices  in  all,  two 
in  either  ventricle,  one  of  these  induces,  the 
other  educes.”  And  again  he  says:  “Further, 
since  there  is  one  vessel,  consisting  of  a  simple 
tunic,  implanted  in  the  heart,  and  another, 
having  a  double  tunic,  extending  from  it  (Galen 
is  here  speaking  of  the  right  side  of  the  heart, 
but  I  extend  his  observations  to  the  left  side 
also),  a  kind  of  reservoir  had  to  be  provided,  to 
which  both  belonging,  the  blood  should  be 
drawn  in  by  the  one,  and  sent  out  by  the  other.” 

This  argument  Galen  adduces  for  the  transit 
of  the  blood  by  the  right  ventricle  from  the 
vena  cava  into  the  lungs;  but  we  can  use  it  with 
still  greater  propriety,  merely  changing  the 
terms,  for  the  passage  of  the  blood  from  the 
veins  through  the  heart  into  the  arteries.  From 
Galen,  however,  that  great  man,  that  father  of 
physicians,  it  clearly  appears  that  the  blood 
passes  through  the  lungs  from  the  pulmonary 
artery  into  the  minute  branches  of  the  pulmo¬ 
nary  veins,  urged  to  this  both  by  the  pulses  of 
the  heart  and  by  the  motions  of  the  lungs  and 
thorax;  that  the  heart,  moreover,  is  incessantly 
receiving  and  expelling  the  blood  by  and  from 
its  ventricles,  as  from  a  magazine  or  cistern,  and 
for  this  end  is  furnished  with  four  sets  of  valves, 
two  serving  for  the  induction  and  two  for  the 
eduction  of  the  blood,  lest,  like  the  Euripus, 
it  should  be  incommodiously  sent  hither  and 
thither,  or  flow  back  into  the  cavity  which  it 
should  have  quitted,  or  quit  the  part  where  its 
presence  was  required,  and  so  the  heart  be 
oppressed  with  labour  in  vain,  and  the  office 
of  the  lungs  be  interfered  with.^  Finally,  our 
position  that  the  blood  is  continually  passing 
from  the  right  to  the  left  ventricle,  from  the 
vena  cava  into  the  aorta,  through  the  porous 
structure  of  the  lungs,  plainly  appears  from 
this,  that  since  the  blood  is  incessantly  sent 
from  the  right  ventricle  into  the  lungs  by  the 
pulmonary  artery,  and  in  like  manner  is  inces¬ 
santly  drawn  from  the  lungs  into  the  left  ven¬ 
tricle,  as  appears  from  what  precedes  and  the 
position  of  the  valves,  it  cannot  do  other\vise 
than  pass  through  continuously.  And  then,  as 

^  See  the  commentary  of  the  learned  Hofmann  upon 
the  Sixth  Book  of  Galen,  De  usii  partium^  a  work  which 
I  first  saw  after  I  had  written  what  precedes. 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


the  blood  is  incessantly  flowing  into  the  right 
ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  is  continually  passed 
out  from  the  left,  as  appears  in  like  manner, 
and  as  is  obvious  both  to  sense  and  reason,  it  is 
impossible  that  the  blood  can  do  otherwise 
than  pass  continually  from  the  vena  cava  into 
the  aorta. 

Dissection  consequently  shows  distinctly 
what  takes  place  in  the  greater  number  of  ani¬ 
mals,  and  indeed  in  all,  up  to  the  period  of  their 
[foetal]  maturity;  and  that  the  same  thing  occurs 
in  adults  is  equally  certain,  both  from  Galen’s 
words,  and  what  has  already  been  said  on  the 
subject,  only  that  in  the  former  the  transit  is 
effected  by  open  and  obvious  passages,  in  the 
latter  by  the  obscure  porosities  of  the  lungs  and 
the  minute  inosculations  of  vessels.  Whence  it 
appears  that,  although  one  ventricle  of  the 
heart,  the  left  to  wit,  would  suffice  for  the  dis¬ 
tribution  of  the  blood  over  the  body,  and  its 
eduction  from  the  vena  cava,  as  indeed  is  done 
in  those  creatures  that  have  no  lungs,  nature, 
nevertheless,  when  she  ordained  that  the  same 
blood  should  also  percolate  the  lungs,  saw  her¬ 
self  obliged  to  add  another  ventricle,  the  right, 
the  pulse  of  which  should  force  the  blood  from 
the  vena  cava  through  the  lungs  into  the  cavity 
of  the  left  ventricle.  In  this  way,  therefore,  it 
may  be  said  that  the  right  ventricle  is  made  for 
the  sake  of  the  lungs,  and  for  the  transmission 
of  the  blood  through  them,  not  for  their  nutri¬ 
tion;  seeing  it  were  unreasonable  to  suppose 
that  the  lungs  required  any  so  much  more  copi¬ 
ous  a  supply  of  nutriment,  and  that  of  so  much 
purer  and  more  spirituous  a  kind,  as  coming 
immediately  from  the  ventricle  of  the  heart, 
than  either  the  brain  with  its  peculiarly  pure 
substance,  or  the  eyes  with  their  lustrous  and 
truly  admirable  structure,  or  the  flesh  of  the 
heart  itself,  which  is  more  commodiously  nour¬ 
ished  by  the  coronary  artery. 

CHAPTER  8.  Of  the  quantity  of  blood  passing 
through  the  heart  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries;  and 
of  the  circular  motion  of  the  blood 

Thus  far  I  have  spoken  of  the  passage  of  the 
blood  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries,  and  of  the 
manner  in  which  it  is  transmitted  and  distribut¬ 
ed  by  the  action  of  the  heart;  points  to  which 
some,  moved  either  by  the  authority  of  Galen 
or  Columbus,  or  the  reasonings  of  others,  will 
give  in  their  adhesion.  But  what  remains  to  be 
said  upon  the  quantity  and  source  of  the  blood 
which  thus  passes  is  of  so  novel  and  unheard-of 
character,  that  I  not  only  fear  injury  to  myself 
from  the  envy  of  a  few,  but  I  tremble  lest  I  have 


285 

mankind  at  large  for  my  enemies,  so  much  doth 
wont  and  custom,  that  become  as  another  na¬ 
ture,  and  doctrine  once  sown  and  that  hath 
struck  deep  root,  and  respect  for  antiquity  in¬ 
fluence  all  men :  still  the  die  is  cast,  and  my  trust 
is  in  my  love  of  truth,  and  the  candour  that  in¬ 
heres  in  cultivated  minds.  And  sooth  to  say, 
when  I  surveyed  my  mass  of  evidence,  whether 
derived  from  vivisections,  and  my  various  re¬ 
flections  on  them,  or  from  the  ventricles  of  the 
heart  and  the  vessels  that  enter  into  and  issue 
from  them,  the  symmetry  and  size  of  these  con¬ 
duits — for  nature  doing  nothing  in  vain,  would 
never  have  given  them  so  large  a  relative  size 
without  a  purpose — or  from  the  arrangement 
and  intimate  structure  of  the  valves  in  particu¬ 
lar,  and  of  the  other  parts  of  the  heart  in  gen¬ 
eral,  with  many  things  besides,  I  frequently 
and  seriously  bethought  me,  and  long  revolved 
in  my  mind,  what  might  be  the  quantity  of 
blood  which  was  transmitted,  in  how  short  a 
time  its  passage  might  be  effected,  and  the  like; 
and  not  finding  it  possible  that  this  could  be 
supplied  by  the  juices  of  the  ingested  aliment 
without  the  veins  on  the  one  hand  becoming 
drained,  and  the  arteries  on  the  other  getting 
ruptured  through  the  excessive  charge  of  blood, 
unless  the  blood  should  somehow  find  its  way 
from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  and  so  return 
to  the  right  side  of  the  heart;  I  began  to  think 
whether  there  might  not  be  a  motion,  as  it 
WERE,  IN  A  CIRCLE.  Now  this  I  afterwards 
found  to  be  true;  and  I  finally  saw  that  the 
blood,  forced  by  the  action  of  the  left  ventricle 
into  the  arteries,  was  distributed  to  the  body  at 
large,  and  its  several  parts,  in  the  same  manner 
as  it  is  sent  through  the  lungs,  impelled  by  the 
right  ventricle  into  the  pulmonary  artery,  and 
that  it  then  passed  through  the  veins  and  along 
the  vena  cava,  and  so  round  to  the  left  ventricle 
in  the  manner  already  indicated.  Which  motion 
we  may  be  allowed  to  call  circular,  in  the  same 
way  as  Aristotle  says  that  the  air  and  the  rain 
emulate  the  circular  motion  of  the  superior 
bodies;  for  the  moist  earth,  warmed  by  the  sun, 
evaporates;  the  vapours  drawn  upwards  are 
condensed,  and  descending  in  the  form  of  rain, 
moisten  the  earth  again;  and  by  this  arrange¬ 
ment  are  generations  of  living  things  produced; 
and  in  like  manner  too  are  tempests  and  meteors 
engendered  by  the  circular  motion,  and  by  the 
approach  and  recession  of  the  sun. 

And  so,  in  all  likelihood,  does  it  come  to  pass 
in  the  body,  through  the  motion  of  the  blood; 
the  various  parts  are  nourished,  cherished, 
quickened  by  the  warmer,  more  perfect,  va- 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


286 

porous,  spirituous,  and,  as  I  may  say,  alimen- 
tive  blood;  which,  on  the  contrary,  in  contact 
with  these  parts  becomes  cooled,  coagulated, 
and,  so  to  speak,  effete;  whence  it  returns  to 
its  sovereign  the  heart,  as  if  to  its  source,  or  to 
the  inmost  home  of  the  body,  there  to  recover 
its  state  of  excellence  or  perfection.  Here  it  re¬ 
sumes  its  due  fluidity  and  receives  an  infusion 
of  natural  heat — powerful,  fervid,  a  kind  of 
treasury  of  life,  and  is  impregnated  with  spirits, 
and  it  might  be  said  with  balsam;  and  thence  it 
is  again  dispersed;  and  all  this  depends  on  the 
motion  and  action  of  the  heart. 

The  heart,  consequently,  is  the  beginning  of 
life;  the  sun  of  the  microcosm,  even  as  the  sun 
in  his  turn  might  well  be  designated  the  heart 
of  the  world;  for  it  is  the  heart  by  whose  virtue 
and  pulse  the  blood-  is  moved,  perfected,  made 
apt  to  nourish,  and  is  preserved  from  corrup¬ 
tion  and  coagulation;  it  is  the  household  divin¬ 
ity  \\  hich,  discharging  its  function,  nourishes, 
cherishes,  quickens  the  whole  body,  and  is  in¬ 
deed  the  foundation  of  life,  the  source  of  all  ac¬ 
tion.  But  of  these  things  we  shall  speak  more 
opportunely  when  we  come  to  speculate  upon 
the  final  cause  of  this  motion  of  the  heart. 

Hence,  since  the  veins  are  the  conduits  and 
vessels  that  transport  the  blood,  they  are  of  two 
kinds,  the  cava  and  the  aorta;  and  this  not  by 
reason  of  there  being  two  sides  of  the  body,  as 
Aristotle  has  it,  but  because  of  the  difference 
of  office;  nor  yet,  as  is  commonly  said,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  any  diversity  of  structure,  for  in 
many  animals,  as  I  have  said,  the  vein  does  not 
differ  from  the  artery  in  the  thickness  of  its 
tunics,  but  solely  in  virtue  of  their  severaD  des¬ 
tinies  and  uses.  A  vein  and  an  artery,  both 
styled  vein  by  the  ancients,  and  that  not  unde¬ 
servedly,  as  Galen  has  remarked,  because  the 
one,  the  artery,  to  wit,  is  the  vessel  which  car¬ 
ries  the  blood  from  the  heart  to  the  body  at 
large,  the  other  or  vein  of  the  present  day 
bringing  it  back  from  the  general  system  to  the 
heart:  the  former  is  the  conduit  from,  the  lat¬ 
ter  the  channel  to,  the  heart;  the  latter  con¬ 
tains  the  cruder,  effete  blood,  rendered  unfit 
for  nutrition;  the  former  transmits  the  digested, 
perfect,  peculiarly  nutritive  fluid. 

CHAPTER  9.  That  there  is  a  circulation  of  the  blood 
is  confirmed  from  the  first  proposition 

But  lest  any  one  should  say  that  we  give  them 
words  only,  and  make  mere  specious  assertions 
without  any  foundation,  and  desire  to  innovate 
without  sufficient  cause,  three  points  present 
themselves  for  confirmation,  which  being  stated. 


I  conceive  that  the  truth  I  contend  for  will  fol¬ 
low  necessarily,  and  appear  as  a  thing  obvious 
to  all.  First,  the  blood  is  incessantly  transmit¬ 
ted  by  the  action  of  the  heart  from  the  vena 
cava  to  the  arteries  in  such  quantity  that  it  can¬ 
not  be  supplied  from  the  ingesta,  and  in  such 
wise  that  the  whole  mass  must  very  quickly 
pass  through  the  organ;  second,  the  blood  un¬ 
der  the  influence  of  the  arterial  pulse  enters 
and  is  impelled  in  a  continuous,  equable,  and 
incessant  stream  through  every  part  and  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  body,  in  much  larger  quantity  than 
were  sufficient  for  nutrition,  or  than  the  whole 
mass  of  fluids  could  supply;  third,  the  veins  in 
like  manner  return  this  blood  incessantly  to  the 
heart  from  all  parts  and  members  of  the  body. 
These  points  proved,  I  conceive  it  will  be  mani¬ 
fest  that  the  blood  circulates,  revolves,  pro¬ 
pelled  and  then  returning,  from  the  heart  to 
the  extremities,  from  the  extremities  to  the 
heart,  and  thus  that  it  performs  a  kind  of  circu¬ 
lar  motion. 

Let  us  assume,  either  arbitrarily  or  from  ex¬ 
periment,  the  quantity  of  blood  which  the  left 
ventricle  of  the  heart  will  contain  when  dis¬ 
tended  to  be,  say  two  ounces,  three  ounces,  one 
ounce  and  a  half — in  the  dead  body  I  have 
found  It  to  hold  upwards  of  two  ounces.  Let  us 
assume  further,  how  much  less  the  heart  will 
hold  in  the  contracted  than  in  the  dilated  state; 
and  how  much  blood  it  will  project  into  the 
aorta  upon  each  contraction — and  all  the  world 
allows  that  with  the  systole  something  is  al¬ 
ways  projected,  a  necessary  consequence  dem¬ 
onstrated  in  the  third  chapter,  and  obvious 
from  the  structure  of  the  valves;  and  let  us  sup¬ 
pose  as  approaching  the  truth  that  the  fourth, 
or  fifth,  or  sixth,  or  even  but  the  eighth  part  of 
its  charge  is  thrown  into  the  artery  at  each  con¬ 
traction;  this  would  give  either  half  an  ounce, 
or  three  drachms,  or  one  drachm  of  blood  as 
propelled  by  the  heart  at  each  pulse  into  the 
aorta;  which  quantity,  by  reason  of  the  valves 
at  the  root  of  the  vessel,  can  by  no  means  return 
into  the  ventricle.  Now  in  the  course  of  half  an 
hour,  the  heart  will  have  made  more  than  one 
thousand  beats,  in  some  as  many  as  two,  three, 
and  even  four  thousand.  Multiplying  the  num¬ 
ber  of  drachms  propelled  by  the  number  of 
pulses,  we  shall  have  either  one  thousand  half 
ounces,  or  one  thousand  times  three  drachms, 
or  a  like  proportional  quantity  of  blood,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  amount  which  we  assume  as  pro¬ 
pelled  with  each  stroke  of  the  heart,  sent  from 
this  organ  into  the  artery;  a  larger  quantity  in 
every  case  than  is  contained  in  the  whole  body! 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


In  the  same  way,  in  the  sheep  or  dog,  say  that 
but  a  single  scruple  of  blood  passes  with  each 
stroke  of  the  heart,  in  one  half  hour  we  should 
have  one  thousand  scruples,  or  about  three 
pounds  and  a  half  of  blood  injected  into  the 
aorta;  but  the  body  of  neither  animal  contains 
above  four  pounds  of  blood,  a  fact  which  I  have 
myself  ascertained  in  the  case  of  the  sheep. 

Upon  this  supposition,  therefore,  assumed 
merely  as  a  ground  for  reasoning,  we  see  the 
whole  mass  of  blood  passing  through  the  heart, 
from  the  veins  to  the  arteries,  and  in  like  man¬ 
ner  through  the  lungs. 

But  let  it  be  said  that  this  does  not  take  place 
in  half  an  hour,  but  in  an  hour,  or  even  in  a 
day;  any  way  it  is  still  manifest  that  more  blood 
passes  through  the  heart  in  consequence  of  its 
action,  than  can  either  be  supplied  by  the 
whole  of  the  ingesta,  or  than  can  be  contained 
in  the  veins  at  the  same  moment. 

Nor  can  it  be  allowed  that  the  heart  in  con¬ 
tracting  sometimes  propels  and  sometimes  does 
not  propel,  or  at  most  propels  but  very  little,  a 
mere  nothing,  or  an  imaginar^^  something:  all 
this,  indeed,  has  already  been  refuted;  and  is, 
besides,  contrary  both  to  sense  and  reason.  For 
if  it  be  a  necessary  effect  of  the  dilatation  of  the 
heart  that  its  ventricles  become  filled  with 
blood,  it  is  equally  so  that,  contracting,  these 
cavities  should  expel  their  contents;  and  this 
not  in  any  trifling  measure,  seeing  that  neither 
are  the  conduits  small,  nor  the  contractions 
few  in  number,  but  frequent,  and  always  in 
some  certain  proportion,  whether  it  be  a  third 
or  a  sixth,  or  an  eighth,  to  the  total  capacity  of 
the  ventricles,  so  that  a  like  proportion  of  blood 
must  be  expelled,  and  a  like  proportion  re¬ 
ceived  with  each  stroke  of  the  heart,  the  capa¬ 
city  of  the  ventricle  contracted  always  bearing 
a  certain  relation  to  the  capacity  of  the  ventri¬ 
cle  when  dilated.  And  since  in  dilating,  the 
ventricles  cannot  be  supposed  to  get  filled  with 
nothing,  or  with  an  imaginary  something;  so  in 
contracting  they  never  expel  nothing  or  aught 
imaginary,  but  always  a  certain  something,  viz., 
blood,  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  the  con¬ 
traction.  Whence  it  is  to  be  inferred,  that  if  at 
one  stroke  the  heart  in  man,  the  ox  or  the  sheep, 
ejects  but  a  single  drachm  of  blood,  and  there 
are  one  thousand  strokes  in  half  an  hour,  in  this 
interval  there  will  have  been  ten  pounds,  five 
ounces  expelled:  were  there  with  each  stroke 
two  drachms  expelled,  the  quantity  would  of 
course  amount  to  twenty  pounds  and  ten 
ounces;  were  there  half  an  ounce,  the  quantity 
would  come  to  forty-one  pounds  and  eight 


287 

ounces;  and  were  there  one  ounce  it  would  be 
as  much  as  eighty-three  pounds  and  four 
ounces;  the  whole  of  which,  in  the  course  of  one 
half  hour,  would  have  been  transfused  from  the 
veins  to  the  arteries.  The  actual  quantity  of 
blood  expelled  at  each  stroke  of  the  heart,  and 
the  circumstances  under  which  it  is  either 
greater  or  less  than  ordinary,  I  leave  for  par¬ 
ticular  determination  afterwards,  from  numer¬ 
ous  observations  which  I  have  made  on  the  sub¬ 
ject. 

Meantime  this  much  I  know,  and  would  here 
proclaim  to  all  that  the  blood  is  transfused  at 
one  time  in  larger,  at  another  in  smaller  quan¬ 
tity;  and  that  the  circuit  of  the  blood  is  ac¬ 
complished  now  more  rapidly,  now  more  slow¬ 
ly,  according  to  the  temperament,  age,  &c.  of 
the  individual,  to  external  and  internal  circum¬ 
stances,  to  naturals  and  non-naturals — sleep, 
rest,  food,  exercise,  affections  of  the  mind,  and 
the  like.  But  indeed,  supposing  even  the  small¬ 
est  quantity  of  blood  to  be  passed  through  the 
heart  and  the  lungs  with  each  pulsation,  a 
vastly  greater  amount  would  still  be  thrown 
into  the  arteries  and  whole  body  than  could  by 
any  possibility  be  supplied  by  the  food  con¬ 
sumed;  in  short  it  could  be  furnished  in  no 
other  way  than  by  making  a  circuit  and  re¬ 
turning. 

This  truth,  indeed,  presents  itself  obviously 
before  us  when  we  consider  what  happens  in 
the  dissection  of  living  animals;  the  great  ar¬ 
tery  need  not  be  divided,  but  a  very  small 
branch  only  (as  Galen  even  proves  in  regard  to 
man),  to  have  the  whole  of  the  blood  in  the 
body,  as  well  that  of  the  veins  as  of  the  arteries, 
drained  away  in  the  course  of  no  long  time — 
some  half  hour  or  less.  Butchers  are  well  aware 
of  the  fact  and  can  bear  witness  to  it;  for,  cut¬ 
ting  the  throat  of  an  ox  and  so  dividing  the  ves¬ 
sels  of  the  neck,  in  less  than  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  they  have  all  the  vessels  bloodless — the 
whole  mass  of  blood  has  escaped.  The  same 
thing  also  occasionally  occurs  with  great  rapid¬ 
ity  in  performing  amputations  and  removing 
tumours  in  the  human  subject. 

Nor  would  this  argument  lose  any  of  its 
force,  did  anyone  say  that  in  killing  animals  in 
the  shambles,  and  performing  amputations,  the 
blood  escaped  in  equal,  if  not  perchance  in 
larger  quantity  by  the  veins  than  by  the  ar¬ 
teries.  The  contrary  of  this  statement,  indeed, 
is  certainly  the  truth;  the  veins,  in  fact,  collap¬ 
sing,  and  being  without  any  propelling  power, 
and  further,  because  of  the  impediment  of  the 
valves,  as  I  shall  show  immediately,  pour  out 


WILLIAM  HAR\^Y 


288 

but  very  little  blood;  whilst  the  arteries  spout 
it  forth  with  force  abundantly,  impetuously, 
and  as  if  it  were  propelled  by  a  syringe.  And 
then  the  experiment  is  easily  tried  of  leaving 
the  vein  untouched,  and  only  dividing  the  ar¬ 
tery  in  the  neck  of  a  sheep  or  dog,  when  it  will 
be  seen  with  what  force,  in  what  abundance, 
and  how  quickly,  the  whole  blood  in  the  body, 
of  the  veins  as  well  as  of  the  arteries,  is  emptied. 
But  the  arteries  receive  blood  from  the  veins  in 
no  other  way  than  by  transmission  through  the 
heart,  as  we  have  already  seen;  so  that  if  the 
aorta  be  tied  at  the  base  of  the  heart,  and  the 
carotid  or  any  other  artery  be  opened,  no  one 
will  now  be  surprised  to  find  it  empty,  and  the 
veins  only  replete  with  blood. 

And  now  the  cause  is  manifest,  wherefore  in 
our  dissections  we  usually  find  so  large  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  blood  in  the  veins,  so  little  in  the  arter¬ 
ies;  wherefore  there  is  much  in  the  right  ven¬ 
tricle,  little  in  the  left;  circumstances  which 
probably  led  the  ancients  to  believe  that  the 
arteries  (as  their  name  implies)  contained  noth¬ 
ing  but  spirits  during  the  life  of  an  animal.  The 
true  cause  of  the  difference  is  this  perhaps:  that 
as  there  is  no  passage  to  the  arteries,  save 
through  the  lungs  and  heart,  when  an  animal 
has  ceased  to  breathe  and  the  lungs  to  move, 
the  blood  in  the  pulmonary  artery  is  prevented 
from  passing  into  the  pulmonary  veins,  and 
from  thence  into  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart; 
just  as  we  have  already  seen  the  same  transit 
prevented  in  the  embryo,  by  the  want  of  move¬ 
ment  in  the  lungs  and  the  alternate  opening 
and  shutting  of  their  minute  orifices  and  invis¬ 
ible  pores.  But  the  heart  not  ceasing  to  act  at 
the  same  precise  moment  as  the  lungs,  but  sur¬ 
viving  them  and  continuing  to  pulsate  for  a 
time,  the  left  ventricle  and  arteries  go  on  dis¬ 
tributing  their  blood  to  the  body  at  large  and 
sending  it  into  the  veins;  receiving  none  from 
the  lungs,  however,  they  are  soon  exhausted, 
and  left,  as  it  were,  empty.  But  even  this  fact 
confirms  our  views,  in  no  trifling  manner,  see¬ 
ing  that  it  can  be  ascribed  to  no  other  than  the 
cause  we  have  just  assumed. 

Moreover,  it  appears  from  this  that  the  more 
frequently  or  forcibly  the  arteries  pulsate,  the 
more  speedily  will  the  body  be  exhausted  in  an 
hemorrhagy.  Hence,  also,  it  happens,  that  in 
fainting  fits  and  in  states  of  alarm,  when  the 
heart  beats  more  languidly  and  with  less 
force,  hemorrhages  are  diminished  or  arrested. 

Still  further,  it  is  from  this  that  after  death, 
when  the  heart  has  ceased  to  beat,  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  by  dividing  either  the  jugular  or  femoral 


veins  and  arteries,  by  any  effort  to  force  out 
more  than  one  half  of  the  whole  mass  of  the 
blood.  Neither  could  the  butcher,  did  he  neg¬ 
lect  to  cut  the  throat  of  the  ox  which  he  has 
knocked  on  the  head  and  stunned,  until  the 
heart  had  ceased  beating,  ever  bleed  the  car¬ 
cass  effectually. 

Finally,  we  are  now  in  a  condition  to  suspect 
wherefore  it  is  that  no  one  has  yet  said  anything 
to  the  purpose  upon  the  anastomosis  of  the 
veins  and  arteries,  either  as  to  where  or  how  it 
is  effected,  or  for  what  purpose.  I  now  enter 
upon  the  investigation  of  the  subject. 

CHAPTER  10.  The  first  position :  of  the  quantity  of 

blood  passing  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries;  and  that 

there  is  a  circuit  of  the  blood,  freed  from  objections, 

and  further  confirmed  by  experiment 

So  far  our  first  position  is  confirmed,  whether 
the  thing  be  referred  to  calculation  or  to  experi¬ 
ment  and  dissection,  viz.,  that  the  blood  is  in¬ 
cessantly  infused  into  the  arteries  in  larger 
quantities  than  it  can  be  supplied  by  the  food; 
so  that  the  whole  passing  over  in  a  short  space 
of  time,  it  is  matter  of  necessity  that  the  blood 
perform  a  circuit,  that  it  return  to  whence  it 
set  out. 

But  if  anyone  shall  here  object  that  a  large 
quantity  may  pass  through  and  yet  no  neces¬ 
sity  be  found  for  a  circulation,  that  all  may 
come  from  the  meat  and  drink  consumed,  and 
quote  as  an  illustration  the  abundant  supply  of 
milk  in  the  mammse — for  a  cow  will  give  three, 
four,  and  even  seven  gallons  and  more  in  a  day, 
and  a  woman  two  or  three  pints  whilst  nursing 
a  child  or  twins,  which  must  manifestly  be  de¬ 
rived  from  the  food  consumed;  it  may  be  an¬ 
swered,  that  the  heart  by  computation  does  as 
much  and  more  in  the  course  of  an  hour  or  two. 

And  if  not  yet  convinced,  he  shall  still  insist, 
that  when  an  artery  is  divided  a  preternatural 
route  is,  as  it  were,  opened,  and  that  so  the 
blood  escapes  in  torrents,  but  that  the  same 
thing  does  not  happen  in  the  healthy  and  unin¬ 
jured  body  when  no  outlet  is  made;  and  that  in 
arteries  filled,  or  in  their  natural  state,  so  large 
a  quantity  of  blood  cannot  pass  in  so  short  a 
space  of  time  as  to  make  any  return  necessary; 
to  all  this  it  may  be  answered,  that  from  the 
calculation  already  made,  and  the  reasons  as¬ 
signed,  it  appears  that,  by  so  much  as  the  heart 
in  its  dilated  state  contains  in  addition  to  its 
contents  in  the  state  of  constriction,  so  much  in 
a  general  way  must  it  emit  upon  each  pulsation, 
and  in  such  quantity  must  the  blood  pass,  the 
body  being  healthy  and  naturally  constituted. 


MOTION  OF 

But  in  serpents,  and  several  fishes,  by  tying 
the  veins  some  way  below  the  heart,  you  will 
perceive  a  space  between  the  ligature  and  the 
heart  speedily  to  become  empty;  so  that,  un¬ 
less  you  would  deny  the  evidence  of  your 
senses,  you  must  needs  admit  the  return  of  the 
blood  to  the  heart.  The  same  thing  will  also 
plainly  appear  when  we  come  to  discuss  our 
second  position. 

Let  us  here  conclude  with  a  single  example, 
confirming  all  that  has  been  said,  and  from 
which  everyone  may  obtain  conviction 
through  the  testimony  of  his  own  eyes. 

If  a  live  snake  be  laid  open,  the  heart  will  be 
seen  pulsating  quietly,  distinctly,  for  more 
than  an  hour,  moving  like  a  worm,  contracting 
in  its  longitudinal  dimensions  (for  it  is  of  an 
oblong  shape),  and  propelling  its  contents;  be¬ 
coming  of  a  paler  colour  in  the  systole,  of  a 
deeper  tint  in  the  diastole;  and  almost  all  things 
else  by  which  I  have  already  said  that  the  truth 
I  contend  for  is  established,  only  that  here 
everything  takes  place  more  slowly,  and  is  more 
distinct.  This  point  in  particular  may  be  ob¬ 
served  more  clearly  than  the  noonday  sun;  the 
vena  cava  enters  the  heart  at  its  lower  part,  the 
artery  quits  it  at  the  superior  part;  the  vein  be¬ 
ing  now  seized  either  with  forceps  or  between 
the  finger  and  thumb,  and  the  course  of  the 
blood  for  some  space  below  the  heart  inter¬ 
rupted,  you  will  perceive  the  part  that  inter¬ 
venes  between  the  fingers  and  the  heart  almost 
immediately  to  become  empty,  the  blood  being 
exhausted  by  the  action  of  the  heart;  at  the 
same  time  the  heart  will  become  of  a  much 
paler  colour,  even  in  its  state  of  dilatation,  than 
it  was  before;  it  is  also  smaller  than  at  first,  from 
wanting  blood;  and  then  it  begins  to  beat  more 
slowly,  so  that  it  seems  at  length  as  if  it  were 
about  to  die.  But  the  impediment  to  the  flow 
of  blood  being  removed,  instantly  the  colour 
and  the  size  of  the  heart  are  restored. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  artery  instead  of  the 
vein  be  compressed  or  tied,  you  will  observe 
the  part  between  the  obstacle  and  the  heart, 
and  the  heart  itself,  to  become  inordinately  dis¬ 
tended,  to  assume  a  deep  purple  or  even  livid 
colour,  and  at  length  to  be  so  much  oppressed 
with  blood  that  you  will  believe  it  about  to  be 
choked;  but  the  obstacle  removed,  all  things 
immediately  return  to  their  pristine  state — 
the  heart  to  its  colour,  size,  stroke,  &c. 

Here  then  we  have  evidence  of  two  kinds  of 
death:  extinction  from  deficiency,  and  suffoca¬ 
tion  from  excess.  Examples  of  both  have  now 
been  set  before  you,  and  you  have  had  oppor¬ 


THE  HEART  289 

tunity  of  viewing  the  truth  contended  for  with 
your  own  eyes  in  the  heart. 

CHAPTER  11.  The  second  position  is  demonstrated 

That  this  may  the  more  clearly  appear  to 
everyone,  I  have  here  to  cite  certain  experi¬ 
ments,  from  which  it  seems  obvious  that  the 
blood  enters  a  limb  by  the  arteries,  and  returns 
from  it  by  the  veins;  that  the  arteries  are  the 
vessels  carrying  the  blood  from  the  heart,  and 
the  veins  the  returning  channels  of  the  blood 
to  the  heart;  that  in  the  limbs  and  extreme 
parts  of  the  body  the  blood  passes  either  im¬ 
mediately  by  anastomosis  from  the  arteries  in¬ 
to  the  veins,  or  mediately  by  the  pores  of  the 
flesh,  or  in  both  Ways,  as  has  already  been  said 
in  speaking  of  the  passage  of  the  blood  through 
the  lungs;  whence  it  appears  manifest  that  in 
the  circuit  the  blood  moves  from  thence  hither, 
and  from  hence  thither;  from  the  centre  to  the 
extremities,  to  wit;  and  from  the  extreme  parts 
back  again  to  the  centre.  Finally,  upon  grounds 
of  calculation,  with  the  same  elements  as  be¬ 
fore,  it  will  be  obvious  that  the  quantity  can 
neither  be  accounted  for  by  the  ingesta,  nor 
yet  be  held  necessary  to  nutrition. 

The  same  thing  will  also  appear  in  regard  to 
ligatures,  and  wherefore  they  are  said  to  draw; 
though  this  is  neither  from  the  heat,  nor  the 
pain,  nor  the  vacuum  they  occasion,  nor  indeed 
from  any  other  cause  yet  thought  of;  it  will  also 
explain  the  uses  and  advantages  to  be  derived 
from  ligatures  in  medicine,  the  principle  upon 
which  they  either  suppress  or  occasion  hemor¬ 
rhage;  how  they  induce  sloughing  and  more  ex¬ 
tensive  mortification  in  extremities;  and  how 
they  act  in  the  castration  of  animals  and  the 
removal  of  warts  and  fleshy  tumours.  But  it  has 
come  to  pass,  from  no  one  having  duly  weighed 
and  understood  the  causes  and  rationale  of 
these  various  effects,  that  though  almost  all, 
upon  the  faith  of  the  old  writers,  recommend 
ligatures  in  the  treatment  of  disease,  yet  very 
few  comprehend  their  proper  employment,  or 
derive  any  real  assistance  from  them  in  effect¬ 
ing  cures. 

Ligatures  are  either  very  tight  or  of  middling 
tightness.  A  ligature  I  designate  as  tight  or  per¬ 
fect  when  it  is  drawn  so  close  about  an  extrem¬ 
ity  that  no  vessel  can  be  felt  pulsating  beyond 
it.  Such  a  ligature  we  use  in  amputations  to 
control  the  flow  of  blood ;  and  such  also  are  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  castration  of  animals  and  the  re¬ 
moval  of  tumours.  In  the  latter  instances,  all 
afflux  of  nutriment  and  heat  being  prevented 
by  the  ligature,  we  see  the  testes  and  large 


290  WILLIAM 

fleshy  tumours  dwindle,  and  die,  and  finally 
fall  off. 

Ligatures  of  middling  tightness  I  regard  as 
those  which  compress  a  limb  firmly  all  around, 
but  short  of  pain,  and  in  such  a  way  as  still  suf¬ 
fers  a  certain  degree  of  pulsation  to  be  felt  in 
the  artery  beyond  them.  Such  a  ligature  is  in 
use  in  bloodletting,  an  operation  in  which  the 
fillet  applied  above  the  elbow  is  not  drawn  so 
tight  but  that  the  arteries  at  the  wrist  may  still 
be  felt  beating  under  the  finger. 

Now  let  any  one  make  an  experiment  upon 
the  arm  of  a  man,  either  using  such  a  fillet  as  is 
employed  in  bloodletting,  or  grasping  the  limb 
lightly  with  his  hand,  the  best  subject  for  it 
being  one  who  is  lean,  and  who  has  large  veins, 
and  the  best  time  after  exercise,  when  the  body 
is  warm,  the  pulse  is  full,  and  the  blood  carried 
in  larger  quantity  to  the  extremities,  for  all 
then  is  more  conspicuous;  under  such  circum¬ 
stances  let  a  ligature  be  thrown  about  the  ex¬ 
tremity,  and  drawn  as  tightly  as  can  be  borne, 
it  will  first  be  perceived  that  beyond  the  liga¬ 
ture,  neither  in  the  wrist  nor  anywhere  else,  do 
the  arteries  pulsate,  at  the  same  time  that  im¬ 
mediately  above  the  ligature  the  artery  begins 
to  rise  higher  at  each  diastole,  to  throb  more 
violently,  and  to  swell  in  its  vicinity  with  a 
kind  of  tide,  as  if  it  strove  to  break  through 
and  overcome  the  obstacle  to  its  current;  the 
artery  here,  in  short,  appears  as  if  it  were  pre- 
ternaturally  full.  The  hand  under  such  circum¬ 
stances  retains  its  natural  colour  and  appear¬ 
ance;  in  the  course  of  time  it  begins  to  fall  some¬ 
what  in  temperature,  indeed,  but  nothing  is 
drawn  into  it. 

After  the  bandage  has  been  kept  on  for  some 
short  time  in  this  way,  let  it  be  slackened  a 
little,  brought  to  that  state  or  term  of  middling 
tightness  which  is  used  in  bleeding,  and  it  will 
be  seen  that  the  whole  hand  and  arm  will  in¬ 
stantly  become  deeply  suffused  and  distended, 
and  the  veins  show  themselves  tumid  and  knot¬ 
ted;  after  ten  or  fifteen  pulses  of  the  artery,  the 
hand  will  be  perceived  excessively  distended, 
injected,  gorged  with  blood,  drawn^  as  it  is  said, 
by  this  middling  ligature,  without  pain,  or 
heat,  or  any  horror  of  a  vacuum,  or  any  other 
cause  yet  indicated. 

If  the  finger  be  applied  over  the  artery  as  it  is 
pulsating  by  the  edge  of  the  fillet,  at  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  slackening  it,  the  blood  will  be  felt  to 
glide  through,  as  it  were,  underneath  the  fin¬ 
ger;  and  he,  too,  upon  whose  arm  the  experi¬ 
ment  is  made,  when  the  ligature  is  slackened,  is 
distinctly  conscious  of  a  sensation  of  warmth, 


HARVEY 

and  of  something,  viz.,  a  stream  of  blood  sud¬ 
denly  making  its  way  along  the  course  of  the 
vessels  and  diffusing  itself  through  the  hand, 
which  at  the  same  time  begins  to  feel  hot,  and 
becomes  distended. 

As  we  had  noted,  in  connexion  with  the  tight 
ligature,  that  the  artery  above  the  bandage  was 
distended  and  pulsated,  not  below  it,  so,  in  the 
case  of  the  moderately  tight  bandage,  on  the 
contrary,  do  we  find  that  the  veins  below,  never 
above,  the  fillet,  swell,  and  become  dilated, 
whilst  the  arteries  shrink;  and  such  is  the  degree 
of  distention  of  the  veins  here  that  it  is  only 
very  strong  pressure  that  will  force  the  blood 
beyond  the  fillet,  and  cause  any  of  the  veins  in 
the  upper  part  of  the  arm  to  rise. 

From  these  facts  it  is  easy  for  every  careful 
observer  to  learn  that  the  blood  enters  an  ex¬ 
tremity  by  the  arteries;  for  when  they  are  effec¬ 
tually  compressed  nothing  is  dratvn  to  the  mem¬ 
ber;  the  hand  preserves  its  colour;  nothing  flows 
into  it,  neither  is  it  distended;  but  when  the 
pressure  is  diminished,  as  it  is  with  the  bleeding 
fillet,  it  is  manifest  that  the  blood  is  instantly 
thrown  in  with  force,  for  then  the  hand  begins 
to  swell;  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  that  when 
the  arteries  pulsate  the  blood  is  flowing  through 
them,  as  it  is  when  the  moderately  tight  liga¬ 
ture  is  applied;  but  where  they  do  not  pulsate, 
as,  when  a  tight  ligature  is  used,  they  cease  from 
transmitting  anything;  they  are  only  distended 
above  the  part  where  the  ligature  is  applied. 
The  veins  again  being  compressed,  nothing  can 
flow  through  them;  the  certain  indication  of 
which  is  that  below  the  ligature  they  are  much 
more  tumid  than  above  it  and  than  they  usu¬ 
ally  appear  when  there  is  no  bandage  upon  the 
arm. 

It  therefore  plainly  appears  that  the  ligature 
prevents  the  return  of  the  blood  through  the 
veins  to  the  parts  above  it,  and  maintains  those 
beneath  it  in  a  state  of  permanent  distention. 
But  the  arteries,  in  spite  of  its  pressure,  and 
under  the  force  and  impulse  of  the  heart,  send 
on  the  blood  from  the  internal  parts  of  the  body 
to  the  parts  beyond  the  bandage.  And  herein 
consists  the  difference  between  the  tight  and 
the  medium  bandage,  that  the  former  not  only 
prevents  the  passage  of  the  blood  in  the  veins, 
but  in  the  arteries  also;  the  latter,  however, 
whilst  it  does  not  prevent  the  pulsific  force 
from  extending  beyond  it,  and  so  propelling 
the  blood  to  the  extremities  of  the  body,  com¬ 
presses  the  veins,  and  greatly  or  altogether  im¬ 
pedes  the  return  of  the  blood  through  them. 

Seeing,  therefore,  that  the  moderately  tight 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


ligature  renders  the  veins  turgid,  and  the  whole 
hand  full  of  blood,  I  ask,  whence  is  this  ?  Does 
the  blood  accumulate  below  the  ligature  com¬ 
ing  through  the  veins,  or  through  the  arteries, 
or  passing  by  certain  secret  pores?  Through  the 
veins  it  cannot  come;  still  less  can  it  come  by 
any  system  of  invisible  pores;  it  must  needs 
arrive  by  the  arteries,  then,  in  conformity  with 
all  that  has  been  already  said.  That  it  cannot 
flow  in  by  the  veins  appears  plainly  enough 
from  the  fact  that  the  blood  cannot  be  forced 
towards  the  heart  unless  the  ligature  be  re¬ 
moved;  when  on  a  sudden  all  the  veins  collapse, 
and  disgorge  themselves  of  their  contents  into 
the  superior  parts,  the  hand  at  the  same  time 
resuming  its  natural  pale  colour,  the  tumefac¬ 
tion  and  the  stagnating  blood  have  disappeared. 

Moreover,  he  whose  arm  or  wrist  has  thus 
been  bound  for  some  little  time  with  the  me¬ 
dium  bandage,  so  that  it  has  not  only  got  swol¬ 
len  and  livid  but  cold,  when  the  fillet  is  undone 
is  aware  of  something  cold  making  its  way  up¬ 
wards  along  with  the  returning  blood,  and 
reaching  the  elbow  or  the  axilla.  And  I  have 
myself  been  inclined  to  think  that  this  cold 
blood  rising  upwards  to  the  heart  was  the  cause 
of  the  fainting  that  often  occurs  after  bloodlet¬ 
ting:  fainting  frequently  supervenes  even  in 
robust  subjects,  and  mostly  at  the  moment  of 
undoing  the  fillet,  as  the  vulgar  say,  from  the 
turning  of  the  blood. 

Further,  when  we  see  the  veins  below  the  lig¬ 
ature  instantly  swell  up  and  become  gorged, 
when  from  extreme  tightness  it  is  somewhat 
relaxed,  the  arteries  meantime  continuing  un¬ 
affected,  this  is  an  obvious  indication  that  the 
blood  passes  from  the  arteries  into  the  veins, 
and  not  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries,  and 
that  there  is  either  an  anastomosis  of  the  two 
orders  of  vessels,  or  pores  in  the  flesh  and  solid 
parts  generally  that  are  permeable  to  the  blood. 
It  is  further  an  indication  that  the  veins  have 
frequent  communications  with  one  another, 
because  they  all  become  turgid  together,  whilst 
under  the  medium  ligature  applied  above  the 
elbow;  and  if  any  single  small  vein  be  pricked 
with  a  lancet,  they  all  speedily  shrink,  and  dis- 
burthening  themselves  into  this  they  subside 
almost  simultaneously. 

These  considerations  will  enable  anyone  to 
understand  the  nature  of  the  attraction  that  is 
exerted  by  ligatures,  and  perchance  of  fluxes 
generally;  how,  for  example,  the  veins  when 
compressed  by  a  bandage  of  medium  tightness 
applied  above  the  elbow,  the  blood  cannot  es¬ 
cape,  whilst  it  still  continues  to  be  driven  in,  to 


291 

wit,  by  the  forcing  power  of  the  heart,  by  which 
the  parts  are  of  necessity  filled,  gorged  with 
blood.  And  how  should  it  be  othersvise?  Heat 
and  pain  and  the  vis  vacni  draw,  indeed;  but  in 
such  wise  only  that  parts  are  filled,  not  preter- 
natu rally  distended  or  gorged,  not  so  suddenly 
and  violently  overwhelmed  with  the  charge  of 
blood  forced  in  upon  them,  that  the  flesh  is 
lacerated  and  the  vessels  ruptured.  Nothing  of 
the  kind  as  an  effect  of  heat,  or  pain,  or  the  vacu¬ 
um  force,  is  either  credible  or  demonstrable. 

Besides,  the  ligature  is  competent  to  occasion 
the  afflux  in  question  without  either  pain,  or 
heat,  or  vis  vacni.  Were  pain  in  any  way  the 
cause,  how  should  it  happen  that,  with  the  arm 
bound  above  the  elbow,  the  hand  and  fingers 
should  swell  below  the  bandage,  and  their  veins 
become  distended  ?  The  pressure  of  the  bandage 
certainly  prevents  the  blood  from  getting  there 
by  the  veins.  And  then,  wherefore  is  there  nei¬ 
ther  swelling  nor  repletion  of  the  veins,  nor  any 
sign  or  symptom  of  attraction  or  afflux,  above 
the  ligature?  But  this  is  the  obvious  cause  of 
the  preternatural  attraction  and  swelling  below 
the  bandage,  and  in  the  hand  and  fingers,  that 
the  blood  is  entering  abundantly,  and  with  force, 
but  cannot  pass  out  again. 

Now  is  not  this  the  cause  of  all  tumefaction, 
as  indeed  Avicenna  has  it,  and  of  all  oppressive 
redundancy  in  parts,  that  the  access  to  them  is 
open,  but  the  egress  from  them  is  closed? 
Whence  it  comes  that  they  are  gorged  and  tume¬ 
fied.  And  may  not  the  same  thing  happen  in 
local  inflammations,  where,  so  long  as  the  swell¬ 
ing  is  on  the  increase,  and  has  not  reached  its  ex¬ 
treme  term,  a  full  pulse  is  felt  in  the  part,  es¬ 
pecially  when  the  disease  is  of  the  more  acute 
kind,  and  the  swelling  usually  takes  place  most 
rapidly.  But  these  are  matters  for  after  dis¬ 
cussion.  Or  does  this,  which  occurred  in  my 
own  case,  happen  from  the  same  cause  ? Thrown 
from  a  carriage  upon  one  occasion,  I  struck  my 
forehead  a  blow  upon  the  place  where  a  twig  of 
the  artery  advances  from  the  temple,  and  im¬ 
mediately,  within  the  time  in  which  twenty 
beats  could  have  been  made,  I  felt  a  tumour  the 
size  of  an  egg  developed,  without  either  heat  or 
any  great  pain:  the  near  vicinity  of  the  artery 
had  caused  the  blood  to  be  effused  into  the 
bruised  part  with  unusual  force  and  quickness. 

And  now,  too,  we  understand  wherefore  in 
phlebotomy  we  apply  our  fillet  above  the  part 
that  is  punctured,  not  below  it;  did  the  flow 
come  from  above,  not  from  below,  the  bandage 
in  this  case  would  not  only  be  of  no  service,  but 
would  prove  a  positive  hinderance;  it  would 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


292 

have  to  be  applied  below  the  orifice,  in  order  to 
have  the  flow  more  free,  did  the  blood  descend 
by  the  veins  from  superior  to  inferior  parts;  but 
as  it  is  elsewhere  forced  through  the  extreme 
arteries  into  the  extreme  veins,  and  the  return 
in  these  last  is  opposed  by  the  ligature,  so  do 
they  fill  and  swell,  and  being  thus  filled  and  dis¬ 
tended,  they  are  made  capable  of  projecting 
their  charge  with  force,  and  to  a  distance,  when 
any  one  of  them  is  suddenly  punctured;  but  the 
fillet  being  slackened,  and  the  returning  chan¬ 
nels  thus  left  open,  the  blood  forthwith  no  long¬ 
er  escapes,  save  by  drops;  and,  as  all  the  world 
knows,  if  in  performing  phlebotomy  the  band¬ 
age  be  either  slackened  too  much  or  the  limb  be 
bound  too  tightly,  the  blood  escapes  without 
force,  because  in  the  one  case  the  returning 
channels  are  not  adequately  obstructed;  in  the 
other  the  channels  of  influx,  the  arteries,  are 
impeded. 

CHAPTER  12.  That  there  is  a  circulation  of  the 
blood  is  shown  from  the  second  position  demon¬ 
strated 

If  these  things  be  so,  another  point  which  I 
have  already  referred  to,  viz.,  the  continual  pas¬ 
sage  of  the  blood  through  the  heart  will  also  be 
confirmed.  We  have  seen  that  the  blood  passes 
from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  not  from  the 
veins  into  the  arteries;  we  have  seen,  further, 
that  almost  the  whole  of  the  blood  may  be  with¬ 
drawn  from  a  puncture  made  in  one  of  the  cu¬ 
taneous  veins  of  the  arm  if  a  bandage  properly 
applied  be  used;  we  have  seen,  still  further,  that 
the  blood  flows  so  freely  and  rapidly  that  not 
only  is  the  whole  quantity  which  was  contained 
in  the  arm  beyond  the  ligature,  and  before  the 
puncture  was  made,  discharged,  but  the  whole 
which  is  contained  in  the  body,  both  that  of 
the  arteries  and  that  of  the  veins. 

Whence  we  must  admit,  first,  that  the  blood 
is  sent  along  with  an  impulse,  and  that  is  urged 
with  force  below  the  fillet;  for  it  escapes  with 
force,  which  force  it  receives  from  the  pulse  and 
power  of  the  heart;  for  the  force  and  motion  of 
the  blood  are  derived  from  the  heart  alone. 
Second,  that  the  afflux  proceeds  from  the  heart, 
and  through  the  heart  by  a  course  from  the 
great  veins;  for  it  gets  into  the  parts  below  the 
ligature  through  the  arteries,  not  through  the 
veins;  and  the  arteries  nowhere  receive  blood 
from  the  veins,  nowhere  receive  blood  save  and 
except  from  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart.  Nor 
could  so  large  a  quantity  of  blood  be  drawn  from 
one  vein  (a  ligature  having  been  duly  applied), 
nor  with  such  impetuosity,  such  readiness,  such 


celerity,  unless  through  the  medium  of  the  im¬ 
pelling  power  of  the  heart. 

But  if  all  things  be  as  they  are  now  repre¬ 
sented,  we  shall  feeel  ourselves  at  liberty  to  cal¬ 
culate  the  quantity  of  the  blood,  and  to  reason 
on  its  circular  motion.  Should  anyone,  for  in¬ 
stance,  in  performing  phlebotomy,  suffer  the 
blood  to  flow  in  the  manner  it  usually  does,  with 
force  and  freely,  for  some  half  hour  or  so,  no 
question  but  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  blood 
being  abstracted,  faintings  and  syncopes  would 
ensue,  and  that  not  only  would  the  arteries  but 
the  great  veins  also  be  nearly  emptied  of  their 
contents.  It  is  only  consonant  with  reason  to 
conclude  that  in  the  course  of  the  half  hour 
hinted  at,  so  much  as  has  escaped  has  also  passed 
from  the  great  veins  through  the  heart  into  the 
aorta.  And  further,  if  we  calculate  how  many 
ounces  flow  through  one  arm,  or  how  many  pass 
in  twenty  or  thirty  pulsations  under  the  medi¬ 
um  ligature,  we  shall  have  some  grounds  for  esti¬ 
mating  how  much  passes  through  the  other  arm 
in  the  same  space  of  time,  how  much  through 
both  lower  extremities,  how  much  through  the 
neck  on  either  side,  and  through  all  the  other 
arteries  and  veins  of  the  body,  all  of  which  have 
been  supplied  with  fresh  blood;  and  as  this  blood 
must  have  passed  through  the  lungs  and  ventri¬ 
cles  of  the  heart,  and  must  have  come  from  the 
great  veins,  we  shall  perceive  that  a  circulation 
is  absolutely  necessary,  seeing  that  the  quanti¬ 
ties  hinted  at  cannot  be  supplied  immediately 
from  the  ingesta,  and  are  vastly  more  than  can 
be  requisite  for  the  mere  nutrition  of  the  parts. 

It  is  still  further  to  be  observed  that  the  truths 
contended  for  are  sometimes  confirmed  in  an¬ 
other  way;  for  having  tied  up  the  arm  properly, 
and  made  the  puncture  duly,  still,  if  from  alarm 
or  any  other  causes,  a  state  of  faintness  super¬ 
venes,  in  which  the  heart  always  pulsates  more 
languidly,  the  blood  does  not  flow  freely,  but 
distils  by  drops  only.  The  reason  is  that  with 
the  somewhat  greater  than  usual  resistance  of¬ 
fered  to  the  transit  of  the  blood  by  the  bandage, 
coupled  with  the  weaker  action  of  the  heart, 
and  its  diminished  impelling  power,  the  stream 
cannot  make  its  way  under  the  fillet;  and  fur¬ 
ther,  owing  to  the  weak  and  languishing  state 
of  the  heart,  the  blood  is  not  transferred  in  such 
quantity  as  wont  from  the  veins  to  the  arteries 
through  the  sinuses  of  that  organ.  So  also,  and 
for  the  same  reasons,  are  the  menstrual  fluxes  of 
women,  and  indeed  hemorrhages  of  every  kind, 
controlled.  And  now,  a  contrary  state  of  things 
occurring,  the  patient  getting  rid  of  his  fear  and 
recovering  his  courage,  the  pulsific  power  is  in- 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


creased,  the  arteries  begin  again  to  beat  with 
greater  force,  and  to  drive  the  blood  even  into 
the  part  that  is  bound;  so  that  the  blood  now 
springs  from  the  puncture  in  the  vein,  and  flows 
in  a  continuous  stream. 

CHAPTER  13.  The  third  position  is  confirmed;  and 

the  circulation  of  the  blood  is  demonstrated  from  it 

Thus  far  have  we  spoken  of  the  quantity  of 
blood  passing  through  the  heart  and  the  lungs 
in  the  centre  of  the  body,  and  in  like  manner 
from  the  arteries  into  the  veins  in  the  peri¬ 
pheral  parts  and  the  body  at  large.  We  have 
yet  to  explain,  however,  in  what  manner  the 
blood  finds  its  way  back  to  the  heart  from  the  ex¬ 
tremities  by  the  veins,  and  how  and  in  what  way 
these  are  the  only  vessels  that  convey  the  blood 
from  the  external  to  the  central  parts;  which 
done,  I  conceive  that  the  three  fundamental 
propositions  laid  down  for  the  circulation  of  the 
blood  will  be  so  plain,  so  well  established,  so  ob¬ 
viously  true,  that  they  may  claim  general  cre¬ 
dence.  Now  the  remaining  position  will  be  made 
sufficiently  clear  from  the  valves  which  are 
found  in  the  cavities  of  the  veins  themselves, 
from  the  uses  of  these,  and  from  experiments 
cognizable  by  the  senses. 

The  celebrated  Hieronymus  Fabricius  of 
Aquapendente,  a  most  skilful  anatomist,  and 
venerable  old  man,  or,  as  the  learned  Riolan  will 
have  it.  Jacobus  Silvius,  first  gave  representa¬ 
tions  of  the  valves  in  the  veins,  which  consist  of 
raised  or  loose  portions  of  the  inner  membranes 
of  these  vessels,  of  extreme  delicacy,  and  a  sig¬ 
moid  or  semilunar  shape.  They  are  situated  at 
different  distances  from  one  another,  and  di¬ 
versely  in  different  individuals;  they  are  connate 
at  the  sides  of  the  veins;  they  are  directed  up¬ 
wards  or  towards  the  trunks  of  the  veins;  the 
two— for  there  are  for  the  most  part  two  togeth¬ 
er — regard  each  other,  mutually  touch,  and  are 
so  ready  to  come  into  contact  by  their  edges, 
that  if  anything  attempt  to  pass  from  the  trunks 
into  the  branches  of  the  veins,  or  from  the  great¬ 
er  vessels  into  the  less,  they  completely  prevent 
it;  they  are  further  so  arranged  that  the  horns 
of  those  that  succeed  are  opposite  the  middle  of 
the  convexity  of  those  that  precede,  and  so  on 
alternately. 

The  discoverer  of  these  valves  did  not  rightly 
understand  their  use,  nor  have  succeeding  anat¬ 
omists  added  anything  to  our  knowledge:  for 
their  office  is  by  no  means  explained  when  we 
are  told  that  it  is  to  hinder  the  blood,  by  its 
weight,  from  all  flowing  into  inferior  parts;  for 
the  edges  of  the  valves  in  the  jugular  veins  hang 


293 

downwards,  and  are  so  contrived  that  they  pre¬ 
vent  the  blood  from  rising  upwards;  the  valves, 
in  a  word,  do  not  invariably  look  upwards,  but 
always  towards  the  trunks  of  the  veins,  invari¬ 
ably  towards  the  seat  of  the  heart.  I,  and  indeed 
others,  have  sometimes  found  valves  in  the 
emulgent  veins,  and  in  those  of  the  mesentery, 
the  edges  of  which  were  directed  towards  the 
vena  cava  and  vena  portae.  Let  it  be  added  that 
there  are  no  valves  in  the  arteries,  and  that  dogs, 
oxen,  &c.,  have  invariably  valves  at  the  divisions 
of  their  crural  veins,  in  the  veins  that  meet 
towards  the  top  of  the  os  sacrum,  and  in  those 
branches  which  come  from  the  haunches,  in 
which  no  such  effect  of  gravity  from  the  erect 
positon  was  to  be  apprehended.  Neither  are 
there  valves  in  the  jugular  veins  for  the  purpose 
of  guarding  against  apoplexy,  as  some  have  said; 
because  in  sleep  the  head  is  more  apt  to  be  in¬ 
fluenced  by  the  contents  of  the  carotid  arteries. 
Neither  are  the  valves  present,  in  order  that  the 
blood  may  be  retained  in  the  divarications  or 
smaller  trunks  and  minuter  branches,  and  not  be 
suffered  to  flow  entirely  into  the  more  open  and 
capacious  channels;  for  they  occur  where  there 
are  no  divarications;  although  it  must  be  owned 
that  they  are  most  frequent  at  the  points  where 
branches  join.  Neither  do  they  exist  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  rendering  the  current  of  blood  more  slow 
from  the  centre  of  the  body;  for  it  seems  likely 
that  the  blood  would  be  disposed  to  flow  with 
sufficient  slowness  of  its  own  accord,  as  it  would 
have  to  pass  from  larger  into  continually  smaller 
vessels,  being  separated  from  the  mass  and  foun¬ 
tain  head,  and  attaining  from  warmer  into  cold¬ 
er  places. 

But  the  valves  are  solely  made  and  instituted 
lest  the  blood  should  pass  from  the  greater  into 
the  lesser  veins,  and  either  rupture  them  or 
cause  them  to  become  varicose;  lest,  instead  of 
advancing  from  the  extreme  to  the  central  parts 
of  the  body,  the  blood  should  rather  proceed 
along  the  veins  from  the  centre  to  the  extremi¬ 
ties;  but  the  delicate  valves,  while  they  readily 
open  in  the  right  direction,  entirely  prevent  all 
such  contrary  motion,  being  so  situated  and  ar¬ 
ranged,  that  if  anything  escapes,  or  is  less  per¬ 
fectly  obstructed  by  the  cornua  of  the  one  above, 
the  fluid  passing,  as  it  were,  by  the  chinks  be¬ 
tween  the  cornua,  it  is  immediately  received  on 
the  convexity  of  the  one  beneath,  which  is 
placed  transversely  with  reference  to  the  for¬ 
mer,  and  so  is  effectually  hindered  from  getting 
any  farther. 

And  this  I  have  frequently  experienced  in  my 
dissections  of  the  veins:  if  I  attempted  to  pass 


294  WILLIAM 

a  probe  from  the  trunk  of  the  veins  into  one  of 
the  smaller  branches,  whatever  care  I  took  I 
found  it  impossible  to  introduce  it  far  any  way, 
by  reason  of  the  valves;  whilst,  on  the  contrary, 
it  was  most  easy  to  push  it  along  in  the  opposite 
direction,  from  without  inwards,  or  from  the 
branches  towards  the  trunks  and  roots.  In  many 
places  two  valves  are  so  placed  and  fitted  that 
when  raised  they  come  exactly  together  in  the 
middle  of  the  vein,  and  are  there  united  by  the 
contact  of  their  margins;  and  so  accurate  is  the 
adaptation,  that  neither  by  the  eye  nor  by  any 
other  means  of  examination  can  the  slightest 
chink  along  the  line  of  con  tact  be  perceived.  But 
if  the  probe  be  now  introduced  from  the  ex¬ 
treme  towards  the  more  central  parts,  the  valves, 
like  the  floodgates  of  a  river,  give  way,  and  are 
most  readily  pushed  aside.  The  effect  of  this  ar¬ 
rangement  plainly  is  to  prevent  all  motion  of 
the  blood  from  the  heart  and  vena  cava,  wheth¬ 
er  it  be  upwards  towards  the  head,  or  downwards 
towards  the  feet,  or  to  either  side  towards  the 
arms,  not  a  drop  can  pass;  all  motion  of  the 
hlood,  beginning  in  the  larger  and  tending 
towards  the  smaller  veins,  is  opposed  and  re¬ 
sisted  by  them;  whilst  the  motion  that  proceeds 
from  the  lesser  to  end  in  the  larger  branches  is 
favoured,  or,  at  all  events,  a  free  and  open  pas¬ 
sage  is  left  for  it. 

But  that  this  truth  may  be  made  the  more 
apparent,  let  an  arm  be  tied  up  above  the  elbow 
as  if  for  phlebotomy  {AA,Jig.  i).  At  intervals 
in  the  course  of  the  veins,  especially  in  labouring 
people  and  those  whose  veins  are  large,  certain 
knots  or  elevations  (B,  C,  D,  E,  F)  will  be  per¬ 
ceived,  and  this  not  only  at  the  places  where  a 
branch  is  received  (E,  E),  but  also  where  none 
enters  (C,  D):  these  knots  or  risings  are  all 
formed  by  valves,  which  thus  show  themselves 
externally.  And  now  if  you  press  the  blood  from 
the  space  above  one  of  the  valves,  from  H  to 

ifiS'  2),  and  keep  the  point  of  a  finger  upon 
the  vein  inferiorly,  you  will  see  no  influx  of 
blood  from  above;  the  portion  of  the  vein  be¬ 
tween  the  point  of  the  finger  and  the  valve  O 
will  be  obliterated;  yet  will  the  vessel  continue 
sufficiently  distended  above  that  valve  (O,  G). 
The  blood  being  thus  pressed  out,  and  the  vein 
emptied,  if  you  now  apply  a  finger  of  the  other 
hand  upon  the  distended  part  of  the  vein  above 
the  valve  O,  (^^.3),  and  press  downwards,  you 
will  find  that  you  cannot  force  the  blood  through 
or  beyond  the  valve;  but  the  greater  effort  you 
use,  you  will  only  see  the  portion  of  vein  that  is 
between  thefinger  and  the  valve  become  more  dis¬ 
tended,  that  portion  of  the  vein  which  is  below 


HARVEY 

the  valve  remaining  all  the  while  empty  (f/, 
O.Jig-  3)- 

It  would  therefore  appear  that  the  function 
of  the  valves  in  the  veins  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  three  sigmoid  valves  which  we  find  at  the 
commencement  of  the  aorta  and  pulmonary  ar¬ 
tery,  viz.,  to  prevent  all  reflux  of  the  blood  that 
is  passing  over  them. 

Further,  the  arm  being  bound  as  before,  and 
the  veins  looking  full  and  distended,  if  you  press 
at  one  part  in  the  course  of  a  vein  with  the  point 
of  a  finger  (L,  Jig,  4),  and  then  with  another 
finger  streak  the  blood  upwards  beyond  the  next 
valve  (N),  you  will  perceive  that  this  portion  of 
the  vein  continues  empty  (L,  N),  and  that  the 
blood  cannot  retrograde,  precisely  as  we  have 
already  seen  the  case  to  be  in  fig.  2;  but  the  fin¬ 
ger  first  applied  (H,Jig,  2,  L,Jig,  4),  being  re¬ 
moved,  immediately  the  vein  is  filled  from  be¬ 
low,  and  the  arm  becomes  as  it  appears  at  E)  C, 
fig.  I.  That  the  blood  in  the  veins  therefore  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  inferior  or  more  remote  to  superior 
parts,  and  towards  the  heart,  moving  in  these 
vessels  in  this  and  not  in  the  contrary  direction, 
appears  most  obviously.  And  although  in  some 
places  the  valves,  by  not  acting  with  such  per¬ 
fect  accuracy,  or  where  there  is  but  a  single 
valve,  do  not  seem  totally  to  prevent  the  pas¬ 
sage  of  the  blood  from  the  centre,  still  the 
greater  number  of  them  plainly  do  so;  and  then, 
where  things  appear  contrived  more  negligently, 
this  is  compensated  either  by  the  more  frequent 
occurrence  or  more  perfect  action  of  the  suc¬ 
ceeding  valves  or  in  some  other  way:  the  veins, 
in  short,  as  they  are  the  free  and  open  conduits 
of  the  blood  returning  ro  the  heart,  so  are  they 
effectually  prevented  from  serving  as  its  chan¬ 
nels  of  distribution  from  the  heart. 

But  this  other  circumstance  has  to  be  noted: 
the  arm  being  bound,  and  the  veins  made  tur¬ 
gid,  and  the  valves  prominent,  as  before,  apply 
the  thumb  or  finger  over  a  vein  in  the  situation 
of  one  of  the  valves  in  such  a  way  as  to  compress 
it,  and  prevent  any  blood  from  passing  upwards 
from  the  hand;  then,  with  a  finger  of  the  other 
hand,  streak  the  blood  in  the  vein  upwards  till 
it  has  passed  the  next  valve  above  (N,fg,  4),  the 
vessel  now  remainsempty ;  but  the  finger  at  L  be¬ 
ing  removed  for  an  instant,  the  vein  is  immedi¬ 
ately  filled  from  below;  apply  the  finger  again, 
and  having  in  the  same  manner  streaked  the 
blood  upwards,  again  remove  the  finger  below, 
and  again  the  vessel  becomes  distended  as  before ; 
and  this  repeat,  say  a  thousand  times,  in  a  short 
space  of  time.  And  now  compute  the  quantity 
of  blood  which  you  have  thus  pressed  up  beyond 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


295 


the  valve,  and  then  multiplying  the  assumed 
quantity  by  one  thousand,  you  will  find  that  so 
much  blood  has  passed  through  a  certain  portion 
of  the  vessel;  and  I  do  now  believe  that  you  will 
find  yourself  convinced  of  the  circulation  of  the 
blood,  and  of  its  rapid  motion.  But  if  in  this  ex¬ 
periment  you  say  that  a  violence  is  done  to 
nature,  I  do  not  doubt  but  that,  if  you  proceed 
in  the  same  way,  only  taking  as  great  a  length 
of  vein  as  possible,  and  merely  remark  with  what 
rapidity  the  blood  flows  upwards,  and  fills  the 


vessel  from  below,  you  will  come  to  the  same 
conclusion. 

CHAPTER  14.  Conclusion  of  the  demonstration  of 
the  circulation 

And  now  I  may  be  allowed  to  give  in  brief  my 
view  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and  to  pro¬ 
pose  it  for  general  adoption. 

Since  all  things,  both  argument  and  ocular 
demonstration,  show  that  the  blood  passes 
through  the  lungs  and  heart  by  the  action  of. 


296  WILLIAM 

the  auricles  and  ventricles,  and  is  sent  for  distrh 
bution  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  where  it  makes 
its  way  into  the  veins  and  pores  of  the  flesh, 
and  then  flows  by  the  veins  from  the  circum¬ 
ference  on  every  side  to  the  centre,  from  the 
lesser  to  the  greater  veins,  and  is  by  them  fi¬ 
nally  discharged  into  the  vena  cava  and  right 
auricle  of  the  heart,  and  this  in  such  a  quantity 
or  in  such  a  flux  and  reflux  thither  by  the  ar¬ 
teries,  hither  by  the  veins,  as  cannot  possibly 
be  supplied  by  the  ingesta,  and  is  much  greater 
than  can  be  required  for  mere  purposes  of  nu¬ 
trition;  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  conclude 
that  the  blood  in  the  animal  body  is  impelled 
in  a  circle,  and  is  in  a  state  of  ceaseless  motion; 
that  this  is  the  act  or  function  which  the  heart 
performs  by  means  of  its  pulse;  and  that  it  is 
the  sole  and  only  end  of  the  motion  and  con¬ 
traction  of  the  heart. 

CHAPTER  15.  The  circulation  of  the  blood  is 
further  confirmed  by  probable  reasons 

It  will  not  be  foreign  to  the  subject  if  I  here 
show  further,  from  certain  familiar  reasonings, 
that  the  circulation  is  matter  both  of  conven¬ 
ience  and  necessity.  In  the  first  place,  since 
death  is  a  corruption  which  takes  place  through 
deficiency  of  heat,^  and  since  all  living  things 
are  warm,  all  dying  things  cold,  there  must  be 
a  particular  seat  and  fountain,  a  kind  of  home 
and  hearth,  where  the  cherisher  of  nature,  the 
original  of  the  native  fire,  is  stored  and  pre¬ 
served;  whence  heat  and  life  are  dispensed  to 
all  parts  as  from  a  fountain  head;  whence  sus¬ 
tenance  may  be  derived;  and  upon  which  con¬ 
coction  and  nutrition,  and  all  vegetative  energy 
may  depend.  Now,  that  the  heart  is  this  place, 
that  the  heart  is  the  principle  of  life,  and  that 
all  passes  in  the  manner  just  m^entioned,  I  trust 
no  one  will  deny. 

The  blood,  therefore,  required  to  have  mo¬ 
tion,  and  indeed  such  a  motion  that  it  should 
return  again  to  the  heart;  for  sent  to  the  exter¬ 
nal  parts  of  the  body  far  from  its  fountain,  as 
Aristotle  says,  and  without  motion,  it  would 
become  congealed.  For  we  see  motion  generat¬ 
ing  and  keeping  up  heat  and  spirits  under  all 
circumstances,  and  rest  allowing  them  to  es¬ 
cape  and  be  dissipated.  The  blood,  therefore, 
become  thick  or  congealed  by  the  cold  of  the 
extreme  and  outward  parts,  and  robbed  of  its 
spirits,  just  as  it  is  in  the  dead,  it  was  impera¬ 
tive  that  from  its  fount  and  origin,  it  should 
again  receive  heat  and  spirits,  and  all  else  req- 

^  Aristotle,  On  Youths  LifCy  and  Breathingy  23,  24; 
On  the  Parts  of  Animals y  II,  7. 


HARVEY 

uisite  to  its  preservation — that,  by  returning, 
it  should  be  renovated  and  restored. 

We  frequently  see  how  the  extremities  are 
chilled  by  the  external  cold,  how  the  nose  and 
cheeks  and  hands  look  blue,  and  how  the  blood, 
stagnating  in  them  as  in  the  pendent  or  lower 
parts  of  a  corpse,  becomes  of  a  dusky  hue;  the 
limbs  at  the  same  time  getting  torpid,  so  that 
they  can  scarcely  be  moved,  and  seem  almost 
to  have  lost  their  vitality.  Now  they  can  by 
no  means  be  so  effectually,  and  especially  so 
speedily  restored  to  heat  and  colour  and  life,  as 
by  a  new  afflux  and  appulsion  of  heat  from  its 
source.  But  how  can  parts  attract  in  which  the 
heat  and  life  are  almost  extinct  ?  Or  how  should 
they  whose  passages  are  filled  with  condensed 
and  frigid  blood,  admit  fresh  aliment — reno¬ 
vated  blood — unless  they  had  first  got  rid  of 
their  old  contents.*^  Unless  the  heart  were  truly 
that  fountain  where  life  and  heat  are  restored 
to  the  refrigerated  fluid,  and  whence  new 
blood,  warm,  imbued  with  spirits,  being  sent 
out  by  the  arteries,  that  which  has  become 
cooled  and  effete  is  forced  on,  and  all  the  par¬ 
ticles  recover  their  heat  which  was  failing,  and 
their  vital  stimulus  well-nigh  exhausted. 

Hence  it  is  that  if  the  heart  be  unaffected, 
life  and  health  may  be  restored  to  almost  all  the 
other  parts  of  the  body;  but  the  heart  being 
chilled,  or  smitten  with  any  serious  disease,  it 
seems  matter  of  necessity  that  the  whole  ani¬ 
mal  fabric  should  suffer  and  fall  into  decay. 
When  the  source  is  corrupted,  there  is  nothing, 
as  Aristotle  says,^  which  can  be  of  service  either 
to  it  or  aught  that  depends  on  it.  And  hence,  by 
the  way,  it  may  perchance  be  wherefore  grief, 
and  love,  and  envy,  and  anxiety,  and  all  affec¬ 
tions  of  the  mind  of  a  similar  kind  are  accom¬ 
panied  with  emaciation  and  decay,  or  with 
cacochemy  and  crudity,  which  engender  all 
manner  of  diseases  and  consume  the  body  of 
man.  For  every  affection  of  the  mind  that  is 
attended  with  either  pain  or  pleasure,  hope  or 
fear,  is  the  cause  of  an  agitation  whose  influence 
extends  to  the  heart,  and  there  induces  change 
from  the  natural  constitution,  in  the  tempera¬ 
ture,  the  pulse  and  the  rest,  which  impairing  all 
nutrition  in  its  source  and  abating  the  powers 
at  large,  it  is  no  wonder  that  various  forms  of 
incurable  disease  in  the  extremities  and  in  the 
trunk  are  the  consequence,  inasmuch  as  in  such 
circumstances  the  whole  body  labours  under 
the  effects  of  vitiated  nutrition  and  a  want  of 
native  heat. 

Moreover,  when  we  see  that  all  animals  live 

2  On  the  Parts  of  Animalsy  iii. 


MOTION  OF 

through  food  concocted  in  their  interior,  it  is 
imperative  that  the  digestion  and  distribution 
be  perfect;  and,  as  a  consequence,  that  there  be 
a  place  and  receptacle  where  the  aliment  is  per¬ 
fected  and  whence  it  is  distributed  to  the  sev¬ 
eral  members.  Now  this  place  is  the  heart,  for  it 
is  the  only  organ  in  the  body  which  contains 
blood  for  the  general  use;  all  the  others  receive 
it  merely  for  their  peculiar  or  private  advan¬ 
tage,  just  as  the  heart  also  has  a  supply  for  its 
own  especial  behoof  in  its  coronary  veins  and 
arteries;  but  it  is  of  the  store  which  the  heart 
contains  in  its  auricles  and  ventricles  that  I  here 
speak;  and  then  the  heart  is  the  only  organ 
which  is  so  situated  and  constituted  that  it  can 
distribute  the  blood  in  due  proportion  to  the 
several  parts  of  the  body,  the  quantity  sent  to 
each  being  according  to  the  dimensions  of  the 
artery  which  supplies  it,  the  heart  serving  as  a 
magazine  or  fountain  ready  to  meet  its  de¬ 
mands. 

Further,  a  certain  impulse  or  force,  as  well  as 
an  impeller  or  forcer,  such  as  the  heart,  was  re¬ 
quired  to  effect  this  distribution  and  motion  of 
the  blood;  both  because  the  blood  is  disposed 
from  slight  causes,  such  as  cold,  alarm,  horror, 
and  the  like,  to  collect  in  its  source,  to  concen¬ 
trate  like  parts  to  a  whole,  or  the  drops  of  water 
spilt  upon  a  table  to  the  mass  of  liquid;  and 
then  because  it  is  forced  from  the  capillary 
veins  into  the  smaller  ramifications,  and  from 
these  into  the  larger  trunks  by  the  motion  of 
the  extremities  and  the  compression  of  the 
muscles  generally.  The  blood  is  thus  more  dis¬ 
posed  to  move  from  the  circumference  to  the 
centre  than  in  the  opposite  direction,  were 
there  even  no  valves  to  oppose  its  motion; 
whence  that  it  may  leave  its  source  and  enter 
more  confined  and  colder  channels,  and  flow 
against  the  direction  to  which  it  spontaneously 
inclines,  the  blood  requires  both  force  and  an 
impelling  power.  Now  such  is  the  heart  and  the 
heart  alone,  and  that  in  the  way  and  manner 
already  explained. 

CHAPTER  16.  The  circulation  of  the  blood  is 
further  proved  from  certain  consequences 

There  are  still  certain  phenomena,  which,  tak¬ 
en  as  consequences  of  this  truth  assumed  as 
proven,  are  not  without  their  use  in  exciting 
belief,  as  it  were,  a  posteriori;  and  which,  al¬ 
though  they  may  seem  to  be  involved  in  much 
doubt  and  obscurity,  nevertheless  readily  ad¬ 
mit  of  having  reasons  and  causes  assigned  for 
them.  The  phenomena  alluded  to  are  those  that 
present  themselves  in  connexion  with  contag¬ 


THE  HEART  297 

ions,  poisoned  wounds,  the  bites  of  serpents 
and  rabid  animals,  lues  venerea  and  the  like. 
We  sometimes  see  the  whole  system  contami¬ 
nated,  though  the  part  first  infected  remains 
sound;  the  lues  venerea  has  occasionally  made 
its  attack  with  pains  in  the  shoulders  and  head, 
and  other  symptoms,  the  genital  organs  being 
all  the  while  unaffected;  and  then  we  know 
that  the  wound  made  by  a  rabid  dog  having 
healed,  fever  and  a  train  of  disastrous  symptoms 
nevertheless  supervene.  Whence  it  appears 
that  the  contagion  impressed  upon  or  deposited 
in  a  particular  part,  is  by  and  by  carried  by  the 
returning  current  of  blood  to  the  heart,  and  by 
that  organ  is  sent  to  contaminate  the  whole 
body. 

In  tertian  fever,  the  morbific  cause  seeking 
the  heart  in  the  first  instance,  and  hanging 
about  the  heart  and  lungs,  renders  the  patient 
short-winded,  disposed  to  sighing,  indisposed 
to  exertion;  because  the  vital  principle  is  op¬ 
pressed  and  the  blood  forced  into  the  lungs  and 
rendered  thick,  does  not  pass  through  their  sub¬ 
stance  (as  I  have  myself  seen  in  opening  the 
bodies  of  those  who  had  died  in  the  beginning 
of  the  attack)  when  the  pulse  is  always  fre¬ 
quent,  small,  and  occasionally  irregular;  but  the 
heat  increasing,  the  matter  becoming  attenu¬ 
ated,  the  passages  forced,  and  the  transit  made, 
the  whole  body  begins  to  rise  in  temperature, 
and  the  pulse  becomes  fuller,  stronger — the 
febrile  paroxysm  is  fully  formed,  whilst  the  pre¬ 
ternatural  heat  kindled  in  the  heart  is  thence 
diffused  by  the  arteries  through  the  whole  body 
along  with  the  morbific  matter,  which  is  in  this 
way  overcome  and  dissolved  by  nature. 

When  we  perceive,  further,  that  medicines 
applied  externally  exert  their  influence  on  the 
body  just  as  if  they  had  been  taken  internally, 
the  truth  we  are  contending  for  is  confirmed. 
Colocynth  and  aloes  move  the  belly,  canthar- 
ides  excite  the  urine,  garlic  applied  to  the  soles  of 
the  feet  assists  expectoration,  cordials  strength¬ 
en,  and  an  infinite  number  of  examples  of  the 
same  kind  might  be  cited.  It  will  not,  therefore, 
be  found  unreasonable  perchance,  if  we  say  that 
the  veins,  by  means  of  their  orifices,  absorb 
some  of  the  things  that  are  applied  externally 
and  carry  this  inwards  with  the  blood,  not 
otherwise,  it  may  be,  than  those  of  the  mesen¬ 
tery  imbibe  the  chyle  from  the  intestines  and 
carry  it  mixed  with  the  blood  to  the  liver.  For 
the  blood  entering  the  mesentery  by  the  coeliac 
artery,  and  the  superior  and  inferior  mesen¬ 
teries,  proceeds  to  the  intestines,  from  which, 
along  with  the  chyle  that  has  been  attracted 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


298 

into  the  veins,  it  returns  by  their  numerous 
ramifications  into  the  vena  portse  of  the  liver, 
and  from  this  into  the  vena  cava,  and  this  in 
such  wise  that  the  blood  in  these  veins  has  the 
same  colour  and  consistency  as  in  other  veins, 
in  opposition  to  what  many  believe  to  be  the 
fact.  Nor  indeed  can  we  imagine  two  contrary 
motions  in  any  capillary  system—the  chyle  up¬ 
wards,  the  blood  downwards.  Fhis  could  scarcely 
take  place,  and  must  be  held  as  altogether  im¬ 
probable.  But  is  not  the  thing  rather  arranged 
as  it  is  by  the  consummate  providence  of  na¬ 
ture?  For  were  the  chyle  mingled  with  the 
blood,  the  crude  with  the  concoted,  in  equal 
proportions,  the  result  would  not  be  concoc¬ 
tion,  transmutation,  and  sanguification,  but 
rather,  and  because  they  are  severally  active 
and  passive,  a  mixture  or  combination,  or  me¬ 
dium  compound  of  the  two,  precisely  as  happens 
when  wine  is  mixed  with  water  and  syrup. 
But  when  a  very  minute  quantity  of  chyle  is 
mingled  with  a  very  large  quantity  of  circulat¬ 
ing  blood,  a  quantity  of  chyle  that  bears  no 
kind  of  proportion  to  the  mass  of  blood,  the 
effect  is  the  same,  as  Aristotle  says,  as  when  a 
drop  of  water  is  added  to  a  cask  of  wine,  or  the 
contrary;  the  mass  does  not  then  present  itself 
as  a  mixture,  but  is  still  sensibly  either  wine  or 
water.  So  in  the  mesenteric  veins  of  an  animal 
we  do  not  find  either  chyme  or  chyle  and  blood, 
blended  together  or  distinct,  but  only  blood, 
the  same  in  colour,  consistency,  and  other  sen¬ 
sible  properties,  as  it  appears  in  the  veins  gen¬ 
erally.  Still  as  there  is  a  certain  though  small 
and  inappreciable  proportion  of  chyle  or  un¬ 
concocted  matter  mingled  with  this  blood,  na¬ 
ture  has  interposed  the  liver,  in  whose  mean¬ 
dering  channels  it  suffers  delay  and  undergoes 
additional  change,  lest  arriving  prematurely  and 
crude  at  the  heart,  it  should  oppress  the  vital 
principle.  Hence  in  the  embryo,  there  is  almost 
no  use  for  the  liver,  but  the  umbilical  vein 
passes  directly  through,  a  foramen  or  anastom¬ 
osis  existing  from  the  vena  portae,  so  that  the 
blood  returns  from  the  intestines  of  the  foetus, 
not  through  the  liver,  but  into  the  umbilical 
vein  mentioned,  and  flows  at  once  into  the  heart, 
mingled  with  the  natural  blood  which  is  return¬ 
ing  from  the  placenta;  whence  also  it  is  that  in 
the  development  of  the  foetus  the  liver  is  one 
of  the  organs  that  is  last  formed;  1  have  ob¬ 
served  all  the  members  perfectly  marked  out  in 
the  human  foetus,  even  the  genital  organs, 
whilst  there  was  yet  scarcely  any  trace  of  the 
liver.  And  indeed  at  the  period  when  all  the 
parts,  like  the  heart  itself  in  the  beginning,  are 


still  white,  and  save  in  the  veins  there  is  no  ap¬ 
pearance  of  redness,  you  shall  see  nothing  in  the 
seat  of  the  liver  but  a  shapeless  collection,  as  it 
were,  of  extravasated  blood,  which  you  might 
take  for  the  effects  of  a  contusion  or  ruptured 
vein. 

But  in  the  incubated  egg  there  are,  as  it  were, 
two  umbilical  vessels,  one  from  the  albumen 
passing  entire  through  the  liver,  and  going 
straight  to  the  heart;  another  from  the  yelk, 
ending  in  the  vena  portse;  for  it  appears  that 
the  chick,  in  the  first  instance,  is  entirely  formed 
and  nourished  by  the  white;  but  by  the  yelk 
after  it  has  come  to  perfection  and  is  excluded 
from  the  shell;  for  this  part  may  still  be  found 
in  the  abdomen  of  the  chick  many  days  after 
its  exclusion,  and  is  a  substitute  for  the  milk 
to  other  animals. 

But  these  matters  will  be  better  spoken  of  in 
my  observations  on  the  formation  of  the  foetus, 
\vhere  many  propositions,  the  following  among 
the  number,  will  be  discussed:  wherefore  is  this 
part  formed  or  perfected  first,  that  last?— and 
of  the  several  members:  what  part  is  the  cause 
of  another?  And  many  points  having  special 
reference  to  the  heart,  such  as:  wherefore  does 
it  first  acquire  consistency,  and  appear  to  pos¬ 
sess  life,  motion,  sense,  before  any  other  part  of 
the  body  is  perfected,  as  Aristotle  says  in  On 
the  Farts  of  Animals^  iii  ?  And  so  also  of  the 
blood:  wherefore  does  it  precede  all  the  rest? 
And  in  wEat  way  does  it  possess  the  vital  and 
animal  principle  ?  And  show'  a  tendency  to  mo¬ 
tion,  and  to  be  impelled  hither  and  thither,  the 
end  for  which  the  heart  appears  to  be  made?  In 
the  same  w'ay,  in  considering  the  pulse:  where¬ 
fore  one  kind  of  pulse  should  indicate  death, 
another  recovery?  And  so  of  all  the  other  kinds 
of  pulse,  wEat  may  be  the  cause  and  indication 
of  each.  So  also  in  the  consideration  of  crises 
and  natural  critical  discharges;  of  nutrition,  and 
especially  the  distribution  of  the  nutriment; 
and  of  defluxions  of  every  description.  Finally, 
reflecting  on  every  part  of  medicine,  physiol¬ 
ogy,  pathology,  semeiotics,  therapeutics,  when 
I  see  how’  many  questions  can  be  answ  ered,  how 
many  doubts  resolved,  how  much  obscurity  il¬ 
lustrated,  by  the  truth  we  have  declared,  the 
light  we  have  made  to  shine,  I  see  a  field  of  such 
vast  extent  in  which  I  might  proceed  so  far, 
and  expatiate  so  widely,  that  this  my  tractate 
would  not  only  swell  out  into  a  \'olume,  w  hich 
w'as  beyond  my  purpose,  but  my  wEole  life, 
perchance,  would  not  suffice  for  its  contpletion. 

In  this  place,  therefore,  and  that  indeed  in  a 
single  chapter,  I  shall  only  endeavour  to  refer 


MOTION  OF 

the  various  particulars  that  present  themselves 
in  the  dissection  of  the  heart  and  arteries  to 
their  several  uses  and  causes;  for  so  I  shall  meet 
with  many  things  which  receive  light  from  the 
truth  I  have  been  contending  for,  and  which,  in 
their  turn,  render  it  more  obvious.  And  indeed 
1  would  have  it  confirmed  and  illustrated  by 
anatomical  arguments  above  all  others. 

There  is  but  a  single  point  which  indeed 
would  be  more  correctly  placed  among  our  ob¬ 
servations  on  the  use  of  the  spleen,  but  which  it 
will  not  be  altogether  impertinent  to  notice  in 
this  place  incidentally.  From  the  splenic  branch 
which  passes  into  the  pancreas,  and  from  the 
upper  part,  arise  the  posterior  coronary,  gas¬ 
tric,  and  gastroepiploic  veins,  all  of  which  are 
distributed  upon  the  stomach  in  numerous 
branches  and  twigs,  just  as  the  mesenteric  ves¬ 
sels  are  upon  the  intestines;  in  like  manner, 
from  the  inferior  part  of  the  same  splenic  branch, 
and  along  the  back  of  the  colon  and  rectum 
proceed  the  hemorrhoidal  veins.  The  blood  re¬ 
turning  by  these  veins,  and  bringing  the  cruder 
juices  along  with  it,  on  the  one  hand  from  the 
stomach,  where  they  are  thin,  watery,  and  not 
yet  perfectly  chylified;  on  the  other  thick  and 
more  earthy,  as  derived  from  the  faeces,  but  all 
poured  into  this  splenic  branch,  are  duly  tem¬ 
pered  by  the  admixture  of  contraries;  and  na¬ 
ture  mingling  together  these  two  kinds  of 
juices,  difficult  of  coction  by  reason  of  most  op¬ 
posite  defects,  and  then  diluting  them  with  a 
large  quantity  of  warm  blood  (for  we  see  that 
the  quantity  returned  from  the  spleen  must  be 
very  large  when  we  contemplate  the  size  of  its 
arteries),  they  are  brought  to  the  porta  of  the 
liver  in  a  state  of  higher  preparation;  the  de¬ 
fects  of  either  extreme  are  supplied  and  com¬ 
pensated  by  this  arrangement  of  the  veins. 

CHAPTER  17.  The  motion  and  circulation  of  the 
blood  are  confirmed  from  the  particulars  apparent 
in  the  structure  of  the  heart,  and  from  those  things 
which  dissection  unfolds 

I  do  not  find  the  heart  as  a  distinct  and  separate 
part  in  all  animals;  some,  indeed,  such  as  the 
zoophytes,  have  no  heart;  this  is  because  these 
animals  are  coldest,  of  no  great  bulk,  of  soft  tex¬ 
ture  or  of  a  certain  uniform  sameness  or  sim¬ 
plicity  of  structure;  among  the  number  I  may 
instance  grubs  and  earthworms,  and  those  that 
are  engendered  of  putrefaction  and  do  not  pre¬ 
serve  their  species.  These  have  no  heart,  as  not 
requiring  any  impeller  of  nourishment  into  the 
extreme  parts;  for  they  have  bodies  which  are 
connate  and  homogeneous,  and  without  limbs; 


THE  HEART  299 

so  that  by  the  contraction  and  relaxation  of  the 
whole  body  they  assume  and  expel,  move  and 
remove  the  aliment.  Oysters,  mussels,  sponges, 
and  the  whole  genus  of  zoophytes  or  plant-ani¬ 
mals  have  no  heart;  for  the  whole  body  is  used 
as  a  heart,  or  the  whole  animal  is  a  heart.  In  a 
great  number  of  animals,  almost  the  whole  tribe 
of  insects,  we  cannot  see  distinctly  by  reason  of 
the  smallness  of  the  body;  still  in  bees,  flies, 
hornets,  and  the  like,  we  can  perceive  with 
the  help  of  a  magnifying  glass  something  pul¬ 
sating;  in  pediculi,  also,  the  same  thing  may  be 
seen,  and  as  the  body  is  transparent,  the  passage 
of  the  food  through  the  intestines,  like  a  black 
spot  or  stain,  may  be  perceived  by  the  aid  of 
the  same  magnifying  glass. 

In  some  of  the  bloodless  and  colder  animals, 
further,  as  in  snails,  whelks,  shrimps,  and  shell¬ 
fish,  there  is  a  part  which  pulsates — a  kind  of 
vesicle  or  auricle  without  a  heart — slowly  in¬ 
deed,  and  not  to  be  perceived  save  in  the  warmer 
season  of  the  year.  In  these  creatures  this  part 
is  so  contrEed  that  it  shall  pulsate,  as  there  is 
here  a  necessity  for  some  impulse,  to  distribute 
the  nutritive  fluid,  by  reason  of  the  variety  of 
organic  parts,  or  of  the  density  of  the  substance; 
but  the  pulsations  occur  infrequently,  and 
sometimes  in  consequence  of  the  cold  not  at  all, 
an  arrangement  the  best  adapted  to  them  as 
being  of  a  doubtful  nature,  so  that  sometimes 
they  appear  to  live,  sometimes  to  die;  some¬ 
times  they  show  the  vitality  of  an  animal,  some¬ 
times  of  a  vegetable.  This  seems  also  to  be  the 
case  with  the  insects  which  conceal  themselves 
in  winter,  and  lie,  as  it  were,  defunct,  or  merely 
manifesting  a  kind  of  vegetative  existence.  But 
whether  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  case  of 
certain  animals  that  have  red  blood,  such  as 
frogs,  tortoises,  serpents,  swallows,  may  be 
made  a  question  without  any  kind  of  impro¬ 
priety. 

In  all  the  larger  and  warmer,  because  blooded 
animals,  there  was  need  of  an  impeller  of  the 
nutritive  fluid,  and  that  perchance  possessing  a 
considerable  amount  of  power.  In  fishes,  ser¬ 
pents,  lizards,  tortoises,  frogs,  and  others  of  the 
same  kind  there  is  a  heart  present,  furnished 
with  both  an  auricle  and  a  ventricle,  whence  it 
is  perfectly  true,  as  Aristotle  has  observed,^ 
that  no  blooded  animal  is  without  a  heart,  by 
the  impelling  power  of  which  the  nutritive 
fluid  is  forced,  both  with  greater  vigour  and 
rapidity  to  a  greater  distance;  it  is  not  merely 
agitated  by  an  auricle  as  it  is  in  lower  forms. 
And  then  in  regard  to  animals  that  are  yet 

^  On  the  Parts  of  Animals,  iii. 


300  WILLIAM 

larger,  warmer,  and  more  perfect,  as  they  abound 
in  blood,  which  is  ever  hotter  and  more  spiritu¬ 
ous,  and  possess  bodies  of  greater  size  and  con¬ 
sistency,  they  require  a  larger,  stronger,  and 
more  fleshy  heart,  in  order  that  the  nutritive 
fluid  may  be  propelled  with  yet  greater  force 
and  celerity.  And  further,  inasmuch  as  the  more 
perfect  animals  require  a  still  more  perfect  nu¬ 
trition,  and  a  larger  supply  of  native  heat,  in 
order  that  the  aliment  may  be  thoroughly  con¬ 
cocted  and  acquire  the  last  degree  of  perfection, 
they  required  both  lungs  and  a  second  ven¬ 
tricle,  which  should  force  the  nutritive  fluid 
through  them. 

Every  animal  that  has  lungs  has,  therefore, 
two  ventricles  to  its  heart,  one  right,  another 
left;  and  wherever  there  is  a  right,  there  also  is 
there  a  left  ventricle;  but  the  contrary  of  this 
does  not  hold  good:  where  there  is  a  left  there 
is  not  always  a  right  ventricle.  The  left  ven¬ 
tricle  I  call  that  which  is  distinct  in  office,  not 
in  place  from  the  other,  that  one  namely  which 
distributes  the  blood  to  the  body  at  large,  not 
to  the  lungs  only.  Hence  the  left  ventricle  seems 
to  form  the  principal  part  of  the  heart;  situated 
in  the  middle,  more  strongly  marked,  and  con¬ 
structed  with  greater  care,  the  heart  seems 
formed  for  the  sake  of  the  left  ventricle,  and 
the  right  but  to  minister  to  it;  for  the  right 
neither  reaches  to  the  apex  of  the  heart,  nor  is 
it  nearly  of  such  strength,  being  three  times 
thinner  in  its  walls,  and  in  some  sort  jointed  on 
to  the  left  (as  Aristotle  says) ;  though  indeed  it 
is  of  greater  capacity,  inasmuch  as  it  has  not 
only  to  supply  material  to  the  left  ventricle, 
but  Jikewise  to  furnish  aliment  to  the  lungs. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  all  this  is 
otherwise  in  the  embryo,  where  there  is  not 
such  a  difference  between  the  two  ventricles; 
but  as  in  a  double  nut,  they  are  nearly  equal  in 
all  respects,  the  apex  of  the  right  reaching  to 
the  apex  of  the  left,  so  that  the  heart  presents 
itself  as  a  sort  of  double-pointed  cone.  And  this 
is  so,  because  in  the  foetus,  as  already  said,  whilst 
the  blood  is  not  passing  through  the  lungs  from 
the  right  to  the  left  cavities  of  the  heart,  but 
flowing  by  the  foramen  ovale  and  ductus  ar¬ 
teriosus,  directly  from  the  vena  cava  into  the 
aorta,  whence  it  is  distributed  to  the  whole 
body,  both  ventricles  have  in  fact  the  same 
office  to  perform,  whence  their  equality  of  con¬ 
stitution.  It  is  only  when  the  lungs  come  to  be 
used,  and  it  is  requisite  that  the  passages  indi¬ 
cated  should  be  blocked  up,  that  the  difference 
in  point  of  strength  and  other  things  between 
the  two  ventricles  begins  to  be  apparent:  in  the 


HARVEY 

altered  circumstances  the  right  has  only  to 
throw  the  blood  through  the  lungs,  whilst  the 
left  has  to  impel  it  through  the  whole  body. 

There  are  further  within  the  heart  numerous 
braces,  so  to  speak,  fleshy  columns  and  fibrous 
bands,  which  Aristotle,  in  his  third  book  on 
Respiration,  and  the  Parts  of  Animals,  entitles 
nerves.  These  are  variously  extended,  and  are 
either  distinct  or  contained  in  grooves  in  the 
walls  and  partition,  where  they  occasion  nu¬ 
merous  pits  or  depressions.  They  constitute  a 
kind  of  small  muscles,  which  are  superadded 
and  supplementary  to  the  heart,  assisting  it  to 
execute  a  more  powerful  and  perfect  contrac¬ 
tion,  and  so  proving  subservient  to  the  com¬ 
plete  expulsion  of  the  blood.  They  are  in  some 
sort  like  the  elaborate  and  artful  arrangement 
of  ropes  in  a  ship,  bracing  the  heart  on  every 
side  as  it  contracts,  and  so  enabling  it  more  ef¬ 
fectually  and  forcibly  to  expel  the  charge  of 
blood  from  its  ventricles.  This  much  is  plain, 
at  all  events,  that  some  animals  have  them 
strongly  marked,  others  have  them  less  so;  and, 
in  all  that  have  them,  they  are  more  numerous 
and  stronger  in  the  left  than  in  the  right  ven¬ 
tricle;  and  whilst  some  have  them  in  the  left, 
there  are  yet  none  present  in  the  right  ventri¬ 
cle.  In  the  human  subject,  again,  these  fleshy 
columns  and  braces  are  more  numerous  in  the 
left  than  in  the  right  ventricle,  and  they  are 
more  abundant  in  the  ventricles  than  in  the 
auricles;  occasionally,  indeed,  in  the  auricles 
there  appear  to  be  none  present  whatsoever.  In 
large,  more  muscular  and  hardier  bodies,  as  of 
countrymen,  they  are  numerous;  in  more  slen¬ 
der  frames  and  in  females  they  are  fewer. 

In  those  animals  in  which  the  ventricles  of 
the  heart  are  smooth  within,  and  entirely  with¬ 
out  fibres  or  muscular  bands,  or  anything  like 
fovese,  as  in  almost  all  the  smaller  birds,  the 
partridge  and  the  common  fowl,  serpents,  frogs, 
tortoises,  and  also  fishes,  for  the  major  part, 
there  are  no  chordae  tendineae,  nor  bundles  of 
fibres,  neither  are  there  any  tricuspid  valves  in 
the  ventricles. 

Some  animals  have  the  right  ventricle  smooth 
internally,  but  the  left  provided  with  fibrous 
bands,  such  as  the  goose,  swan,  and  larger  birds; 
and  the  reason  here  is  still  the  same  as  elsewhere : 
as  the  lungs  are  spongy,  and  loose,  and  soft,  no 
great  amount  of  force  is  required  to  force  the 
blood  through  them;  hence  the  right  ventricle 
is  either  without  the  bundles  in  question,  or 
they  are  fewer  and  weaker,  not  so  fleshy  or  like 
muscles;  those  of  the  left  ventricle,  however, 
are  both  stronger  and  more  numerous,  more 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


fleshy  and  muscular,  because  the  left  ventricle 
requires  to  be  stronger,  inasmuch  as  the  blood 
which  it  propels  has  to  be  driven  through  the 
whole  body.  And  this,  too,  is  the  reason  why 
the  left  ventricle  occupies  the  middle  of  the 
heart,  and  has  parietes  three  times  thicker  and 
stronger  than  those  of  the  right.  Hence  all  ani¬ 
mals — and  among  men  it  is  not  otherwise — 
that  are  endowed  with  particularly  strong 
frames,  and  that  have  large  and  fleshy  limbs  at 
a  great  distance  from  the  heart,  have  this  cen¬ 
tral  organ  of  greater  thickness,  strength,  and 
muscularity.  And  this  is  both  obvious  and  neces¬ 
sary.  Those,  on  the  contrary,  that  are  of  softer 
and  more  slender  make  have  the  heart  more 
flaccid,  softer,  and  internally  either  sparely  or 
not  at  all  fibrous.  Consider  further  the  use  of 
the  several  valves,  which  are  all  so  arranged 
that  the  blood  once  received  into  the  ventricles 
of  the  heart  shall  never  regurgitate,  once  forced 
into  the  pulmonary  artery  and  aorta  shall  not 
flow  back  upon  the  ventricles.  When  the  valves 
are  raised  and  brought  together  they  form  a 
three-cornered  line,  such  as  is  left  by  the  bite 
of  a  leech;  and  the  more  they  are  forced,  the 
more  firmly  do  they  oppose  the  passage  of  the 
blood.  The  tricuspid  valves  are  placed,  like 
gate-keepers,  at  the  entrance  into  the  ventri¬ 
cles  from  the  venae  cavae  and  pulmonary  veins, 
lest  the  blood  when  most  forcibly  impelled 
should  flow  back:  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that 
they  are  not  found  in  all  animals;  neither  do 
they  appear  to  have  been  constructed  with 
equal  care  in  all  the  animals  in  which  they  are 
found;  in  some  they  are  more  accurately  fitted, 
in  others  more  remissly  or  carelessly  contrived, 
and  always  with  a  view  to  their  being  closed 
under  a  greater  or  a  slighter  force  of  the  ven¬ 
tricle.  In  the  left  ventricle,  therefore,  and  in 
order  that  the  occlusion  may  be  the  more  per¬ 
fect  against  the  greater  impulse,  there  are  only 
two  valves,  like  a  mitre,  and  produced  into  an 
elongated  cone,  so  that  they  come  together  and 
touch  to  their  middle;  a  circumstance  which 
perhaps  led  Aristotle  into  the  error  of  supposing 
this  ventricle  to  be  double,  the  division  taking 
place  transversely.  For  the  same  reason,  indeed, 
and  that  the  blood  may  not  regurgitate  upon 
the  pulmonary  veins,  and  thus  the  force  of  the 
ventricle  in  propelling  the  blood  through  the 
system  at  large  come  to  be  neutralized,  it  is 
that  these  mitral  valves  excel  those  of  the  right 
ventricle  in  size  and  strength,  and  exactness  of 
closing.  Hence,  too,  it  is  essential  that  there  can 
be  no  heart  without  a  ventricle,  since  this  must 
be  the  source  and  storehouse  of  the  blood.  The 


301 

same  law  does  not  hold  good  in  reference  to  the 
brain.  For  almost  no  genus  of  birds  has  a  ven¬ 
tricle  in  the  brain,  as  is  obvious  in  the  goose  and 
swan,  the  brains  of  which  nearly  equal  that  of  a 
rabbit  in  size;  now  rabbits  have  ventricles  in 
the  brain,  whilst  the  goose  has  none.  In  like 
manner,  wherever  the  heart  has  a  single  ven¬ 
tricle,  there  is  an  auricle  appended,  flaccid, 
membranous,  hollow,  filled  with  blood;  and 
where  there  are  two  ventricles,  there  are  like¬ 
wise  two  auricles.  On  the  other  hand,  however, 
some  animals  have  an  auricle  without  any  ven¬ 
tricle;  or  at  all  events  they  have  a  sac  analogous 
to  an  auricle;  or  the  vein  itself,  dilated  at  a  par¬ 
ticular  part,  performs  pulsations,  as  is  seen  in 
hornets,  bees,  and  other  insects,  which  certain 
experiments  of  my  own  enable  me  to  demon¬ 
strate  have  not  only  a  pulse,  but  a  respiration 
in  that  part  which  is  called  the  tail,  whence  it  is 
that  this  part  is  elongated  and  contracted  now 
more  rarely,  now  more  frequently,  as  the  crea¬ 
ture  appears  to  be  blown  and  to  require  a  larger 
quantity  of  air.  But  of  these  things,  more  in  our 
Treatise  on  Respiration. 

It  is  in  like  manner  evident  that  the  auricles 
pulsate,  contract,  as  I  have  said  before,  and 
throw  the  blood  into  the  ventricles;  so  that 
wherever  there  is  a  ventricle  an  auricle  is  nec¬ 
essary,  not  merely  that  it  may  serve,  according 
to  the  general  belief,  as  a  source  and  magazine 
for  the  blood :  for  what  were  the  use  of  its  pul¬ 
sations  had  it  nothing  to  do  save  to  contain? 
No;  the  auricles  are  prime  movers  of  the  blood, 
especially  the  right  auricle,  which  is  “the  first 
to  live,  the  last  to  die”;  as  already  said;  whence 
they  are  subservient  to  sending  the  blood  into 
the  ventricle,  which,  contracting  incontinently, 
more  readily  and  forcibly  expels  the  blood  al¬ 
ready  in  motion;  just  as  the  ball-player  can 
strike  the  ball  more  forcibly  and  farther  if  he 
takes  it  on  the  rebound  than  if  he  simply  threw 
it.  Moreover,  and  contrary  to  the  general  opin¬ 
ion,  since  neither  the  heart  nor  anything  else 
can  dilate  or  distend  itself  so  as  to  draw  aught 
into  its  cavity  during  the  diastole,  unless,  like  a 
sponge,  it  has  been  first  compressed,  and  as  it  is 
returning  to  its  primary  condition;  but  in  ani¬ 
mals  all  local  motion  proceeds  from,  and  has  its 
original  in  the  contraction  of  some  part:  it  is 
consequently  by  the  contraction  of  the  auricles 
that  the  blood  is  thrown  into  the  ventricles,  as 
I  have  already  shown,  and  from  thence,  by  the 
contraction  of  the  ventricles,  it  is  propelled  and 
distributed.  Which  truth  concerning  local  mo¬ 
tions,  and  how  the  immediate  moving  organ  in 
every  motion  of  an  animal  primarily  endowed 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


302 

with  a  motive  spirit  (as  Aristotle  has  it),^  is 
contractile;  and  in  what  way  the  \\ord  vevpov 
is  derived  from  vei'Oiy  nutOy  contniho;  and  how 
Aristotle  was  acquainted  with  the  muscles,  and 
did  not  unadvisedly  refer  all  motion  in  animals 
to  the  nerves,  or  to  the  contractile  element, 
and  therefore  called  those  little  bands  in  the 
heart  nerves— all  this,  if  I  am  permitted  to  pro¬ 
ceed  in  my  purpose  of  making  a  particular  dem¬ 
onstration  of  the  organs  of  motion  in  animals 
from  observations  in  my  possession,  I  trust  I 
shall  be  able  to  make  sufficiently  plain. 

But  that  we  may  go  on  with  the  subject  we 
have  in  hand,  viz.,  the  use  of  the  auricles  in 
filling  the  ventricles:  we  should  expect  that  the 
more  dense  and  compact  the  heart,  the  thicker 
its  parietes,  the  stronger  and  more  muscular 
must  be  the  auricle  to  force  and  fill  it,  and  vice 
versa.  Now  this  is  actually  so:  in  some  the  auricle 
presents  itself  as  a  sanguinolent  vesicle,  as  a  thin 
membrane  containing  blood,  as  in  fishes,  in 
which  the  sac  that  stands  in  lieu  of  the  auricle, 
is  of  such  delicacy  and  ample  capacity,  that  it 
seems  to  be  suspended  or  to  float  above  the 
heart;  in  those  fishes  in  which  the  sac  is  some¬ 
what  more  fleshy,  as  in  the  carp,  barbel,  tench, 
and  others,  it  bears  a  wonderful  and  strong  re¬ 
semblance  to  the  lungs. 

In  some  men  of  sturdier  frame  and  stouter 
make,  the  right  auricle  is  so  strong,  and  so  curi¬ 
ously  constructed  within  of  bands  and  variously 
interlacing  fibres,  that  it  seems  to  equal  the 
ventricle  of  the  heart  in  other  subjects;  and  I 
must  say  that  I  am  astonished  to  find  such  di¬ 
versity  in  this  particular  in  different  individu¬ 
als.  It  is  to  be  observ^cd,  however,  that  in  the 
foetus  the  auricles  are  out  of  all  proportion  large, 
which  is  because  they  are  present  before  the 
heart  makes  its  appearance  or  suffices  for  its 
office  even  when  it  has  appeared,  and  they, 
therefore,  have,  as  it  were,  the  duty  of  the 
whole  heart  committed  to  them,  as  has  already 
been  demonstrated.  But  what  I  have  observed 
in  the  formation  of  the  foetus  as  before  remarked 
(and  Aristotle  had  already  confirmed  all  in 
studying  the  incubated  egg)  throws  the  greatest 
light  and  likelihood  upon  the  point.  Whilst  the 
foetus  is  yet  in  the  guise  of  a  soft  worm,  or,  as 
is  commonly  said,  in  the  milk,  there  is  a  mere 
bloody  point  or  pulsating  vesicle,  a  portion  ap¬ 
parently  of  the  umbilical  vein,  dilated  at  its 
commencement  or  base;  by  and  by,  when  the 
outline  of  the  foetus  is  distinctly  indicated,  and 
it  begins  to  have  greater  bodily  consistence,  the 
vesicle  in  question  having  become  more  fleshy 

'  In  the  book,  De  spiritUy  and  elsewhere. 


and  stronger,  and  changed  its  position,  passes 
into  the  auricles,  ov-er  or  upon  which  the  body 
of  the  heart  begins  to  sprout,  though  as  yet  it 
apparently  performs  no  duty;  but  when  the 
foetus  is  farther  advanced,  when  the  bones  can 
be  distinguished  from  the  soft  parts,  and  move¬ 
ments  take  place,  then  it  has  also  a  heart  inter- 
nately  which  pulsates,  and,  as  I  have  said, 
throws  blood  by  either  ventricle  from  the  vena 
cava  into  the  arteries. 

Thus  nature,  ever  perfect  and  divine,  doing 
nothing  in  vain,  has  neither  giv^en  a  heart  where 
it  was  not  required,  nor  produced  it  before  its 
office  had  become  necessar^q  but  by  the  same 
stages  in  the  development  of  every  animal, 
passing  through  the  constitutions  of  all,  as  I 
may  say  (ovum,  worm,  foetus),  it  acquires  per¬ 
fection  in  each.  These  points  will  be  found 
elsewhere  confirmed  by  numerous  observations 
on  the  formation  of  the  foetus. 

Finally,  it  was  not  without  good  grounds 
that  Hippocrates,  in  his  book,  De  cordey  entitles 
it  a  muscle;  as  its  action  is  the  same,  so  is  its 
function,  viz.y  to  contract  and  move  something 
else,  in  this  case,  the  charge  of  blood. 

Further,  as  in  muscles  at  large,  so  can  we  in¬ 
fer  the  action  and  use  of  the  heart  from  the 
arrangement  of  its  fibres  and  its  general  struc¬ 
ture.  .All  anatomists  admit  with  Galen  that  the 
body  of  the  heart  is  made  up  of  v'arious  courses 
of  fibres  running  straight,  obliquely,  and  trans¬ 
versely,  with  reference  to  one  another:  but  in  a 
heart  which  has  been  boiled  the  arrangement 
of  the  fibres  is  seen  to  be  different:  all  the  fibres 
in  the  parietes  and  septum  are  circular,  as  in  the 
sphincters;  those,  again,  which  are  in  the  co- 
lumnae  extend  lengthwise,  and  are  oblique  longi¬ 
tudinally;  and  so  it  comes  to  pass  that,  when  all 
the  fibres  contract  simultaneously,  the  apex  of 
the  cone  is  pulled  towards  its  base  by  the  co- 
lumnae,  the  walls  are  drawn  circularly  together 
into  a  globe,  the  whole  heart  in  short  is  con¬ 
tracted,  and  the  ventricles  narrowed;  it  is  there¬ 
fore  impossible  not  to  perceive  that,  as  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  the  organ  is  so  plainly  contraction,  its 
function  is  to  propel  the  blood  into  the  arteries. 

Nor  are  we  the  less  to  agree  with  Aristotle  in 
regard  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  heart;  nor  are 
we  to  inquire  whether  it  receives  sense  and  mo¬ 
tion  from  the  brain  whether  blood  from  the 
liver.?  whether  it  be  the  origin  of  the  veins  and 
of  the  blood .?  and  more  of  the  same  description. 
They  w'ho  affirm  these  propositions  against 
Aristotle,  overlook,  or  do  not  rightly  under¬ 
stand  the  principal  argument,  to  the  effect  that 
the  heart  is  the  first  part  which  exists,  and  that 


MOTION  OF  THE  HEART 


it  contains  within  itself  blood,  life,  sensation, 
motion,  before  either  the  brain  or  the  liver 
were  in  being,  or  had  appeared  distinctly,  or,  at 
all  events,  before  they  could  perform  any  func¬ 
tion.  The  heart,  ready  furnished  with  its  proper 
organs  of  motion,  like  a  kind  of  internal  crea¬ 
ture,  is  of  a  date  anterior  to  the  body:  first 
formed,  nature  willed  that  it  should  afterwards 
fashion,  nourish,  preserve,  complete  the  entire 
animal,  as  its  work  and  dwelling  place:  the 
heart,  like  the  prince  in  a  kingdom,  in  whose 
hands  lie  the  chief  and  highest  authority,  rules 
over  all;  it  is  the  original  and  foundation  from 
which  all  power  is  derived,  on  which  all  power 
depends  in  the  animal  body. 

And  many  things  having  reference  to  the 
arteries  further  illustrate  and  confirm  this  truth. 
Why  does  not  the  arteria  venosa  pulsate,  seeing 
that  it  is  numbered  among  the  arteries?  Or 
wherefore  is  there  a  pulse  in  the  vena  arteriosa  ? 
Because  the  pulse  of  the  arteries  is  derived  from 
the  impulse  of  the  blood.  Why  does  an  artery 
differ  so  much  from  a  vein  in  the  thickness  and 
strength  of  its  coats?  Because  it  sustains  the 
shock  of  the  impelling  heart  and  streaming 
blood.  Hence,  as  perfect  nature  does  nothing  in 
vain,  and  suffices  under  all  circumstances,  we 
find  that  the  nearer  the  arteries  are  to  the  heart, 
the  more  do  they  differ  from  the  veins  in  struc¬ 
ture;  here  they  are  both  stronger  and  more  lig¬ 
amentous,  whilst  in  extreme  parts  of  the  body, 
such  as  the  feet  and  hands,  the  brain,  the  mes¬ 
entery,  and  the  testicles,  the  two  orders  of  ves¬ 
sels  are  so  much  alike  that  it  is  impossible  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  between  them  with  the  eye.  Now  this 
is  for  the  following  very  sufficient  reasons:  for 
the  more  remote  vessels  are  from  the  heart, 
with  so  much  the  Itss  force  are  they  impinged 
upon  by  the  stroke  of  the  heart,  which  is  broken 
by  the  great  distance  at  which  it  is  given.  Add 
to  this,  that  the  impulse  of  the  heart  exerted 
upon  the  mass  of  blood,  which  must  needs  fill 
the  trunks  and  branches  of  the  arteries,  is  di¬ 
verted,  divided,  as  it  were,  and  diminished  at 
every  subdivision;  so  that  the  ultimate  capil¬ 
lary  divisions  of  the  arteries  look  like  veins,  and 
this  not  merely  in  constitution  but  in  function; 
for  they  have  either  no  perceptible  pulse,  or 
they  rarely  exhibit  one,  and  never  save  where 
the  heart  beats  more  violently  than  wont,  or  at 
a  part  where  the  minute  vessel  is  more  dilated 
or  open  than  elsewhere.  Hence  it  happens  that 
at  times  we  are  aware  of  a  pulse  in  the  teeth,  in 
inflammatory"  tumours,  and  in  the  fingers;  at 
another  time  we  feel  nothing  of  the  sort.  Hence, 
too,  by  this  single  symptom  I  have  ascertained 


303 

for  certain  that  young  persons,  whose  pulses  are 
naturally  rapid,  were  labouring  under  fever;  in 
like  manner,  on  compressing  the  fingers  in  youth¬ 
ful  and  delicate  subjects  during  a  febrile  par¬ 
oxysm,  I  have  readily  perceived  the  pulse  there. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  heart  pulsates 
more  languidly,  it  is  often  impossible  to  feel 
the  pulse  not  merely  in  the  fingers,  but  at  the 
wrist,  and  even  at  the  temple;  this  is  the  case 
in  persons  afflicted  with  lipothymise  and  as¬ 
phyxia,  and  hysterical  symptoms,  as  also  in 
persons  of  very  weak  constitution  and  in  the 
moribund. 

And  here  surgeons  are  to  be  advised  that, 
when  the  blood  escapes  with  force  in  the  ampu¬ 
tation  of  limbs,  in  the  removal  of  tumours,  and 
in  wounds,  it  constantly  comes  from  an  artery; 
not  always  per  saltiim^  however,  because  the 
smaller  arteries  do  not  pulsate,  especially  if  a 
tourniquet  has  been  applied. 

And  then  the  reason  is  the  same  wherefore 
the  pulmonary  artery  has  not  only  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  an  artery,  but  wherefore  it  does  not 
differ  so  widely  in  the  thickness  of  its  tunics 
from  the  veins  as  the  aorta:  the  aorta  sustains  a 
more  powerful  shock  from  the  left  ventricle 
than  the  pulmonary  artery  does  from  the  right; 
and  the  tunics  of  this  last  vessel  are  thinner  and 
softer  than  those  of  the  aorta  in  the  same  pro¬ 
portion  as  the  walls  of  the  right  ventricle  of  the 
heart  are  weaker  and  thinner  than  those  of  the 
left  ventricle;  and  in  like  manner,  in  the  same 
degree  in  which  the  lungs  are  softer  and  laxer 
in  structure  than  the  flesh  and  other  constitu¬ 
ents  of  the  body  at  large,  do  the  tunics  of  the 
branches  of  the  pulmonary  artery  differ  from 
the  tunics  of  the  vessels  derived  from  the  aorta. 
And  the  same  proportion  in  these  several  par¬ 
ticulars  is  universally  preserved.  The  more  mus¬ 
cular  and  powerful  men  are,  the  firmer  their 
flesh,  the  stronger,  thicker,  denser,  and  more 
fibrous  their  heart,  in  the  same  proportion  are 
the  auricles  and  arteries  in  all  respects  thicker, 
closer,  and  stronger.  And  again,  and  on  the 
other  hand,  in  those  animals  the  ventricles  of 
whose  heart  are  smooth  within,  without  villi  or 
valves,  and  the  walls  of  which  are  thinner,  as  in 
fishes,  serpents,  birds,  and  very  many  genera  of 
animals,  in  all  of  them  the  arteries  differ  little 
or  nothing  in  the  thickness  of  their  coats  from 
the  veins. 

Further,  the  reason  why  the  lungs  have  such 
ample  vessels,  both  arteries  and  veins  (for  the 
capacity  of  the  pulmonary  veins  exceeds  that 
of  both  the  crural  and  jugular  vessels),  and  why 
they  contain  so  large  a  quantity  of  blood,  as  by 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


304 

experience  and  ocular  inspection  we  know  they 
do,  admonished  of  the  fact  indeed  by  Aristotle, 
and  not  led  into  error  by  the  appearances  found 
in  animals  which  have  been  bled  to  death,  is, 
because  the  blood  has  its  fountain,  and  store¬ 
house,  and  the  workshop  of  its  last  perfection 
in  the  heart  and  lungs.  Why,  in  the  same  way 
we  find  in  the  course  of  our  anatomical  dissec¬ 
tions  the  arteria  venosa  and  left  ventricle  so 
full  of  blood,  of  the  same  black  colour  and  clot¬ 
ted  character,  too,  as  that  with  which  the  right 
ventricle  and  pulmonary  artery  are  filled,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  the  blood  is  incessantly  passing  from 
one  side  of  the  heart  to  the  other  through  the 
lungs.  Wherefore,  in  fine,  the  pulmonary  artery 
or  vena  arteriosa  has  the  constitution  of  an  ar¬ 
tery,  and  the  pulmonary  veins  or  arteriae  veno- 


sae  have  the  structure  of  veins;  because,  in 
sooth,  in  function  and  constitution,  and  every¬ 
thing  else,  the  first  is  an  artery,  the  others  are 
veins,  in  opposition  to  what  is  commonly  be¬ 
lieved;  and  why  the  pulmonary  artery  has  so 
large  an  orifice,  because  it  transports  much 
more  blood  than  is  requisite  for  the  nutrition 
of  the  lungs. 

All  these  appearances,  and  many  others,  to  be 
noted  in  the  course  of  dissection,  if  rightly 
weighed,  seem  clearly  to  illustrate  and  fully  to 
confirm  the  truth  contended  for  throughout 
these  pages,  and  at  the  same  time  to  stand  in 
opposition  to  the  vulgar  opinion;  for  it  would 
be  very  difficult  to  explain  in  any  other  way 
to  what  purpose  all  is  constructed  and  arranged 
as  we  have  seen  it  to  be. 


The  First  Anatomical  Disquisition  on  the  Circu¬ 
lation  of  the  Blood,  Addressed  to  John  Riolan 


Some  few  months  ago  there  appeared  a  small 
anatomical  and  pathological  work  from  the  pen 
of  the  celebrated  Riolanus,  for  which,  as  sent 
to  me  by  the  author  himself,  I  return  him  my 
grateful  thanksd  I  also  congratulate  this  author 
on  the  highly  laudable  undertaking  in  which  he 
has  engaged.  To  demonstrate  the  seats  of  all 
diseases  is  a  task  that  can  only  be  achieved  un¬ 
der  favour  of  the  highest  abilities;  for  surely  he 
enters  on  a  difficult  province  who  proposes  to 
bring  under  the  cognizance  of  the  eyes  those 
diseases  which  almost  escape  the  keenest  un¬ 
derstanding.  But  such  efforts  become  the  prince 
of  anatomists;  for  there  is  no  science  which  does 
not  spring  from  preexisting  knowledge,  and  no 
certain  and  definite  idea  which  has  not  derived 
its  origin  from  the  senses.  Induced  therefore  by 
the  subject  itself,  and  the  example  of  so  dis¬ 
tinguished  an  individual,  which  makes  me  think 
lightly  of  the  labour,  I  also  intend  putting  to 
press  my  Medical  Anatomy^  or  Anatomy  in  its 
Application  to  Medicine.  Not  with  the  purpose, 
like  Riolanus,  of  indicating  the  seats  of  diseases 
from  the  bodies  of  healthy  subjects,  and  dis¬ 
cussing  the  several  diseases  that  make  their  ap- 
pearance  there,  according  to  the  views  which 
others  have  entertained  of  them;  but  that  I  may 
relate  from  the  many  dissections  I  have  made  of 
the  bodies  of  persons  diseased,  worn  out  by  seri¬ 
ous  and  strange  affections,  how  and  in  what 
way  the  internal  organs  were  changed  in  their 
situation,  size,  structure,  figure,  consistency, 
and  other  sensible  qualities,  from  their  natural 
forms  and  appearances,  such  as  they  are  usually 
described  by  anatomists;  and  in  what  various 
and  remarkable  ways  they  were  affected.  For 
even  as  the  dissection  of  healthy  and  well-con¬ 
stituted  bodies  contributes  essentially  to  the 
advancement  of  philosophy  and  sound  physi¬ 
ology,  so  does  the  inspection  of  diseased  and  ca¬ 
chectic  subjects  powerfully  assist  philosophical 
pathology.  And,  indeed,  the  physiological 

^  ETicheiridium  anatomicum  et  pathologicuniy  i2mo, 
Parisiis,  1648. 


consideration  of  the  things  which  are  according 
to  nature  is  to  be  first  undertaken  by  medical 
men;  since  that  which  is  in  conformity  with 
nature  is  right,  and  serves  as  a  rule  both  to  it¬ 
self  and  to  that  which  is  amiss;  by  the  light  it 
sheds,  too,  aberrations  and  affections  against 
nature  are  defined;  pathology  then  stands  out 
more  clearly;  and  from  pathology  the  use  and 
art  of  healing,  as  well  as  occasions  for  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  many  new  remedies,  are  perceived. 
Nor  could  anyone  readily  imagine  how  exten¬ 
sively  internal  organs  are  altered  in  diseases, 
especially  chronic  diseases,  and  what  monstrosi¬ 
ties  among  internal  parts  these  diseases  engen¬ 
der.  So  that  I  venture  to  say,  that  the  examina¬ 
tion  of  a  single  body  of  one  who  has  died  of 
tabes  or  some  other  disease  of  long  standing,  or 
poisonous  nature,  is  of  more  service  to  medicine 
than  the  dissection  of  the  bodies  of  ten  men 
who  have  been  hanged. 

I  would  not  have  it  supposed  by  this  that  I  in 
any  way  disapprove  of  the  purpose  of  Riolanus, 
that  learned  and  skilful  anatomist;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  I  think  it  deserving  of  the  highest  praise, 
as  likely  to  be  extremely  useful  to  medicine,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  it  illustrates  the  physiological  branch 
of  this  science;  but  I  have  thought  that  it  would 
scarcely  turn  out  less  profitable  to  the  art  of 
healing,  did  I  place  before  the  eyes  of  my  read¬ 
ers  not  only  the  places,  but  the  affections  of 
these  places,  illustrating  them  as  I  proceed  with 
observations,  and  recording  the  results  of  my 
experience  derived  from  my  numerous  dissec¬ 
tions. 

But  it  is  imperative  on  me  first  to  dispose  of 
those  observations  contained  in  the  work  re¬ 
ferred  to,  which  bear  upon  the  circulation  of 
the  blood  as  discovered  by  me,  and  which  seem 
to  require  especial  notice  at  my  hands.  For  the 
judgment  of  such  a  man,  who  is  indeed  the 
prince  and  leader  of  all  the  anatomists  of  the 
present  age,  in  such  a  matter,  is  not  to  be 
lightly  esteemed,  but  is  rather  to  be  held  of 
greater  weight  and  authority,  either  for  praise 


3o6  william 

or  blame,  than  the  commendations  or  censure 
of  all  the  world  besides. 

Riolanus,  then,  admits  our  motion  of  the 
blood  in  animals,^  and  falls  in  with  our  conclu¬ 
sions  in  regard  to  the  circulation;  yet  not  en¬ 
tirely  and  avowedly;  for  he  says^  that  the  blood 
contained  in  the  vena  portae  does  not  circulate 
like  that  in  the  vena  cava;  and  again  he  states^ 
that  there  is  some  blood  which  circulates,  and 
that  the  circulatory  vessels  are  the  aorta  and 
vena  cava;  but  then  he  denies  that  the  continu¬ 
ations  of  these  trunks  have  any  circulation,  “be¬ 
cause  the  blood  is  effused  into  all  the  parts  of 
the  second  and  third  regions,  where  it  remains 
for  purposes  of  nutrition;  nor  does  it  return  to 
any  greater-vessels,  unless  forcibly  drawn  back 
when  there  is  a  great  lack  of  blood  in  the  main 
channels,  or  driven  by  a  fit  of  passion  when  it 
Hows  to  the  greater  circulatory  vessels”;  and 
shortly  after\vards:  “thus,  as  the  blood  of  the 
veins  naturally  ascends  incessantly  or  returns  to 
the  heart,  so  the  blood  of  the  arteries  descends 
or  departs  from  the  heart;  still,  if  the  smaller 
veins  of  the  arms  and  legs  be  empty,  the  blood 
filling  the  empty  channels  in  succession,  may 
descend  in  the  veins,  as  I  have  clearly  shown,” 
he  says,  “against  Harvey  and  Walaeus.”  And  as 
the  authority  of  Galen  and  daily  experience 
confirm  the  anastomoses  of  the  arteries  and 
veins,  and  the  necessity  of  the  circulation  of 
the  blood,  “you  perceive,”  he  continues,  “how 
the  circulation  is  effected,  without  any  pertur¬ 
bation  or  confusion  of  fluids  and  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  the  ancient  system  of  medicine.” 

These  words  explain  the  motives  by  which 
this  illustrious  anatomist  was  actuated  when  he 
was  led  partly  to  admit,  partly  to  deny  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  the  blood;  and  why  he  only  ven¬ 
tures  on  an  undecided  and  inconclusive  opinion 
of  the  subject;  his  fear  is  lest  it  destroy  the  an¬ 
cient  medicine.  Not  yielding  implicitly  to  the 
truth,  which  it  appears  he  could  not  help  see¬ 
ing,  but  rather  guided  by  caution,  he  fears 
speaking  plainly  out,  lest  he  offend  the  ancient 
physic,  or  perhaps  seem  to  retract  the  physio¬ 
logical  doctrines  he  supports  in  h\s  Anthropology, 
The  circulation  of  the  blood  does  not  shake,  but 
much  rather  confirms  the  ancient  medicine; 
though  it  runs  counter  to  the  physiology  of 
physicians,  and  their  speculations  upon  natural 
subjects,  and  opposes  the  anatomical  doctrine 
of  the  use  and  action  of  the  heart  and  lungs, 
and  rest  of  the  viscera.  That  this  is  so  shall 

*  Enchiridion^  Book  in,  chap.  8, 

2  Ihid.y  Book  ii,  chap.  21. 

3  Ibid.^  Book  iii,  chap.  8. 


HARVEY 

readily  be  made  to  appear,  both  from  his  own 
words  and  avowal,  and  partly  also  from  what  I 
shall  supply;  viz.,  that  the  whole  of  the  blood, 
wherever  it  be  in  the  living  body,  moves  and 
changes  its  place,  not  merely  that  which  is  in 
the  larger  vessels  and  their  continuations,  but 
that  also  which  is  in  their  minute  subdivisions, 
and  which  is  contained  in  the  pores  or  inter¬ 
stices  of  every  part;  that  it  flows  from  and  back 
to  the  heart  ceaselessly  and  without  pause,  and 
could  not  pause  for  ever  so  short  a  time  without 
detriment,  although  I  admit  that  occasionally, 
and  in  some  places,  its  motion  is  quicker  or 
slower.^ 

In  the  first  place,  then,  our  learned  anatomist 
only  denies  that  the  contents  of  the  branches  in 
continuation  of  the  vena  portae  circulate;  but 
he  could  neither  oppose  nor  deny  this,  did  he 
not  conceal  from  himself  the  force  of  his  own 
arguments;  for  he  says  in  his  Third  Book,  chap¬ 
ter  8  ....,  “If  the  heart  at  each  pulsation  admits  a 
drop  of  blood  which  it  throws  into  the  aorta, 
and  in  the  course  of  an  hour  makes  two  thou¬ 
sand  beats,  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  that 
the  quantity  of  blood  transmitted  must  be 
great.”  He  is  further  forced  to  admit  as  much  in 
reference  to  the  mesentery,  when  he  sees  that 
far  more  than  single  drops  of  blood  are  sent 
into  the  coeliac  and  mesenteric  arteries  at  each 
pulsation;  so  that  there  must  either  be  some 
outlet  for  the  fluid,  of  magnitude  commen¬ 
surate  with  its  quantity,  or  the  branches  of  the 
vena  portae  must  give  way.  Nor  can  the  explan¬ 
ation  that  is  had  recourse  to  with  a  view  of 
meeting  the  difficulty,  viz,^  that  the  blood  of 
the  mesentery  ebbs  and  flows  by  the  same  chan¬ 
nels,  after  the  manner  of  Euripus,  be  received 
as  either  probable  or  possible.  Neither  can  the 
reflux  from  the  mesentery  be  effected  by  those 
passages  and  that  system  of  translation,  by 
which  he  will  have  it  to  disgorge  itself  into  the 
aorta;  this  were  against  the  force  of  the  existing 
current,  and  by  a  contrary  motion;  nor  can  any¬ 
thing  like  pause  or  alternation  be  admitted, 
where  there  is  very  certainly  an  incessant  in¬ 
flux:  the  blood  sent  into  the  mesentery  must  as 
inevitably  go  elsewhere  as  that  which  is  poured 
into  the  heart.  And  this  is  obvious;  were  it  other¬ 
wise,  indeed,  everything  like  a  circulation 
might  be  overturned  upon  the  same  showing 
and  by  the  same  subterfuge;  it  might  just  as 
well  be  said  that  the  blood  contained  in  the  left 
ventricle  of  the  heart  is  propelled  into  the  aorta 
during  the  systole,  and  flows  back  to  it  during 

^  See  Chapter  3,  of  the  Disquisition  on  the  Motion  of 
the  Heart  and  Blood. 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


the  diastole,  the  aorta  disgorging  itself  into  the 
ventricle,  precisely  as  the  ventricle  has  dis¬ 
gorged  itself  into  the  aorta.  There  would  thus 
be  circulation  neither  in  the  heart  nor  in  the 
mesentery,  but  an  alternate  flux  and  reflux — 
a  useless  labour,  as  it  seems.  If,  therefore,  and 
for  the  reason  assigned  and  approved  by  him,  a 
circulation  through  the  heart  be  argued  for  as  a 
thing  necessary,  the  argument  has  precisely  the 
same  force  when  applied  to  the  mesentery:  if 
there  be  no  circulation  in  the  mesentery,  nei¬ 
ther  is  there  any  in  the  heart;  for  both  affirma¬ 
tions,  this  in  reference  to  the  heart,  that  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  the  mesentery,  merely  changing  the 
words,  stand  or  fall  together,  by  force  of  the 
very  same  arguments. 

He  says:  “The  sigmoid  valves  prevent  regur¬ 
gitation  into  the  heart;  but  there  are  no  valves 
in  the  mesentery.”  To  this  I  reply,  that  the 
thing  is  not  so;  for  there  is  a  valve  in  the  splenic 
vein,  and  sometimes  also  in  other  veins.  And 
besides,  valves  are  not  met  with  universally  in 
veins;  there  are  few  or  none  in  the  deep-seated 
veins  of  the  extremities,  but  many  in  the  sub¬ 
cutaneous  branches.  For  where  the  blood  is 
flowing  naturally  from  smaller  into  greater 
branches,  into  which  it  is  disposed  to  enter,  the 
pressure  of  the  circumjacent  muscles  is  enough, 
and  more  than  enough  to  prevent  all  retrograde 
movement,  and  it  is  forced  on  where  the  way 
lies  open;  in  such  circumstances,  what  use  \vere 
there  for  valves  ?  But  the  quantity  of  blood  that 
is  forced  into  the  mesentery  by  each  stroke  of 
the  heart,  may  be  estimated  in  the  same  way  as 
you  estimate  the  quantity  impelled  into  the 
hand  when  you  bind  a  ligature  with  medium 
tightness  about  the  wrist:  if  in  so  many  beats 
the  vessels  of  the  hand  become  distended,  and 
the  whole  extremity  sw^ells,  you  will  find  that 
much  more  than  a  single  drop  of  blood  has  en¬ 
tered  with  each  pulse,  and  which  cannot  re¬ 
turn,  but  must  remain  to  fill  the  hand  and  in¬ 
crease  its  size.  But  analogy  permits  us  to  say 
that  the  same  thing  takes  place  in  reference  to 
the  mesentery  and  its  vessels,  in  an  equal  de¬ 
gree  at  least,  if  not  in  a  greater  degree,  seeing 
that  the  vessels  of  the  mesentery  are  consider¬ 
ably  larger  than  those  of  the  carpus.  And  if  any¬ 
one  will  but  think  on  the  difficulty  that  is  ex¬ 
perienced  with  all  the  aid  supplied  by  com¬ 
presses,  bandages,  and  a  multiplied  apparatus, 
in  restraining  the  flow  of  blood  from  the  small¬ 
est  artery  when  wounded,  with  what  force  it 
overcomes  all  obstacles  and  soaks  through  the 
whole  apparatus,  he  will  scarcely,  I  imagine, 
think  it  likely  that  there  can  be  any  retrograde 


307 

motion  against  such  an  impulse  and  influx  of 
blood,  any  retrograde  force  to  meet  and  over¬ 
come  a  direct  force  of  such  power.  Turning 
over  these  things  in  his  mind,  I  say,  no  one  will 
ever  be  brought  to  believe  that  the  blood  from 
the  branches  of  the  vena  portae  can  possibly 
make  its  way  by  the  same  channels  against  an 
influx  by  the  artery  of  such  impetuosity  and 
force,  and  so  unload  the  mesentery. 

Moreover,  if  the  learned  anatomist  does  not 
think  that  the  blood  is  moved  and  changed  by 
a  circular  motion,  but  that  the  same  fluid  al¬ 
ways  stagnates  in  the  channels  of  the  mesentery, 
he  appears  to  suppose  that  there  are  two  descrip¬ 
tions  of  blood,  serving  different  uses  and  ends; 
that  the  blood  of  the  vena  portae,  and  that  of 
the  vena  cava  are  dissimilar  in  constitution, 
seeing  that  the  one  requires  a  circulation  for  its 
preservation,  the  other  requires  nothing  of  the 
kind;  which  neither  appears  on  the  face  of  the 
thing,  nor  is  its  truth  demonstrated  by  him. 
Our  author  then  refers  to  “A  fourth  order  of 
mesenteric  vessels,  the  lacteal  vessels,  discov¬ 
ered  by  Asellius”;^  and  having  mentioned 
these,  he  seems  to  infer  that  they  extract  all  the 
nutriment  from  the  intestines,  and  transfer  this 
to  the  liver,  the  workshop  of  the  blood,  whence, 
having  been  concocted  and  changed  into  blood 
(so  he  says  in  his  Third  Boo\j  chapter  8),  the 
blood  is  transferred  from  the  liver  to  the  right 
ventricle  of  the  heart.  “Which  things  pre¬ 
mised,”  he  continues,  “all  the  difficulties 
which  were  formerly  experienced  in  regard  to 
the  distribution  of  the  chyle  and  blood  by  the 
same  channel  come  to  an  end;  for  the  lacteal 
veins  carry  the  chyle  to  the  liver,  and  as  these 
canals  are  distinct,  so  may  they  be  severally  ob¬ 
structed.”^  But  truly  I  would  here  ask:  how 
this  milky  fluid  can  be  poured  into  and  pass 
through  the  liver,  and  how  from  thence  gain 
the  vena  cava  and  the  ventricle  of  the  heart 
when  our  author  denies  that  the  blood  of  the 
vena  portse  passes  through  the  liver,  and  that 
so  a  circulation  is  established.  I  pause  for  a 
reply.  I  would  fain  know  how  such  a  thing  can 
be  shown  to  be  probable;  especially  when  the 
blood  appears  to  be  both  more  spirituous  or 
subtile  and  penetrating  than  the  chyle  or  milk 
contained  in  these  lacteal  vessels,  and  is  further 
impelled  by  the  pulsations  of  the  arteries  that 
it  may  find  a  passage  by  other  channels. 

Our  learned  author  mentions  a  certain  tract 
of  his  on  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood:  I  wish  I 
could  obtain  a  sight  of  it;  perhaps  I  might  re- 

^  Enchiridion^  Book  ii,  chap.  18. 

2  Ibid, 


3o8  william 

tract.  But  had  the  learned  writer  been  so  dis¬ 
posed,  I  do  not  see  but  that  having  admitted  the 
circular  motion  of  the  bloodd  all  the  difficulties 
which  were  formerly  felt  in  connexion  with  the 
distribution  of  the  chyle  and  the  blood  by  the 
same  channels  are  brought  to  an  equally  satis¬ 
factory  solution;  so  much  so  indeed  that  there 
would  be  no  necessity  for  inquiring  after  or 
laying  down  any  separate  vessels  for  the  chyle. 
Even  as  the  umbilical  veins  absorb  the  nutri¬ 
tive  juices  from  the  fluids  of  the  egg  and  trans¬ 
port  them  for  the  nutrition  and  growth  of  the 
chick,  in  its  embryo  state,  so  do  the  meseraic 
veins  suck  up  the  chyle  from  the  intestines  and 
transfer  it  to  the  liver;  and  why  should  we  not 
maintain  that  they  perform  the  same  office  in 
the  adult.?  For  all  the  mooted  difficulties  van¬ 
ish  when  we  cease  to  suppose  two  contrary  mo¬ 
tions  in  the  same  vessels,  and  admit  but  one 
and  the  same  continuous  motion  in  the  mesen¬ 
teric  vessels  from  the  intestines  to  the  liver. 

1  shall  elsewhere  state  my  views  of  the  lacteal 
veins  when  I  treat  of  the  milk  found  in  dif¬ 
ferent  parts  of  new-born  animals,  especially  of 
the  human  subject;  for  it  is  met  with  in  the  mes¬ 
entery  and  all  its  glands,  in  the  thymus,  in  the 
axillae,  also  in  the  breasts  of  infants.  This  milk 
the  midwifes  are  in  the  habit  of  pressing  out,  for 
the  health,  as  they  believe,  of  the  infants.  But 
it  has  pleased  the  learned  Riolanus,  not  only  to 
take  away  circulation  from  the  blood  contained 
in  the  mesentery;  he  affirms  that  neither  do  the 
vessels  in  continuation  of  the  vena  cava,  nor 
the  arteries,  nor  any  of  the  parts  of  the  second 
and  third  regions,  admit  of  circulation,  so  that 
he  entitles  and  enumerates  as  circulating  vessels 
the  vena  cava  and  aorta  only.  For  this  he  ap¬ 
pears  to  me  to  give  a  very  indifferent  reason: 
“The  blood,”  he  says,  “effused  into  all  the  parts 
of  the  second  and  third  regions,  remains  there 
for  their  nutrition;  nor  does  it  return  to  the 
great  vessels,  unless  forcibly  drawn  back  by  an 
extreme  dearth  of  blood  in  the  great  vessels, 
nor,  unless  carried  by  an  impulse,  does  it  flow  to 
the  circulatory  vessels.”^ 

That  so  much  of  the  blood  must  remain  as  is 
appropriated  to  the  nutrition  of  the  tissues,  is 
matter  of  necessity;  for  it  cannot  nourish  unless 
it  be  assimilated  and  become  coherent,  and 
form  substance  in  lieu  of  that  which  is  lost;  but 
that  the  whole  of  the  blood  which  flows  into  a 

^  Enchiridion,  Book  iii,  chap.  8:  “The  blood  incessantly 
and  naturally  ascends  or  flows  back  to  the  heart  in  the 
veins,  as  in  the  arteries  it  descends  or  departs  from  the 
heart.” 

2  Ibid. 


HARVEY 

part  should  there  remain,  in  order  that  so  small 
a  portion  should  undergo  transformation,  is  no¬ 
wise  necessary;  for  no  part  uses  so  much  blood 
for  its  nutrition  as  is  contained  in  its  arteries, 
veins,  and  interstices.  Nor  because  the  blood  is 
continually  coming  and  going  is  it  necessary  to 
suppose  that  it  leaves  nothing  for  nutriment  be¬ 
hind  it.  Consequently  it  is  by  no  means  neces¬ 
sary  that  the  whole  remain  in  order  that  nutri¬ 
tion  be  effected.  But  our  learned  author,  in  the 
same  book,  where  he  affirms  so  much,  appears 
almost  every^vhere  else  to  assert  the  contrary. 
In  that  paragraph  especially  where  he  describes 
the  circulation  in  the  brain,  he  says:  “And  the 
brain  by  means  of  the  circulation  sends  back 
blood  to  the  heart,  and  thus  refrigerates  the 
organ.”  And  in  the  same  way  are  all  the  more 
remote  parts  said  to  refrigerate  the  heart;  thus 
in  fevers,  when  the  prsecordia  are  scorched  and 
burn  with  febrile  heat,  patients  baring  their 
limbs  and  casting  off  the  bedclothes,  seek  to 
cool  their  heart;  and  the  blood  generally,  tem¬ 
pered  and  cooled  down,  as  our  learned  author 
states  it  to  be  with  reference  to  the  brain  in 
particular,  returns  by  the  veins  and  refriger¬ 
ates  the  heart.  Our  author,  therefore,  appears 
to  insinuate  a  certain  necessity  for  a  circula¬ 
tion  from  every  part,  as  well  as  from  the  brain, 
in  opposition  to  what  he  had  before  said  in  very 
precise  terms.  But  then  he  cautiously  and  am¬ 
biguously  asserts,  that  the  blood  does  not  re¬ 
turn  from  the  parts  composing  the  second  and 
third  regions,  unless,  as  he  says,  it  is  drawn  by 
force,  and  through  a  signal  deficiency  of  blood 
in  the  larger  vessels,  &c.,  which  is  most  true  if 
these  words  be  rightly  understood;  for  by  the 
larger  vessels,  in  which  the  deficiency  is  said  to 
cause  the  reflux,  I  think  he  must  be  held  to 
mean  the  veins  not  the  arteries;  for  the  arteries 
are  never  emptied,  save  into  the  veins  or  in¬ 
terstices  of  parts,  but  are  incessantly  filled  by 
the  strokes  of  the  heart;  but  in  the  vena  cava 
and  other  returning  channels,  in  which  the 
blood  glides  rapidly  on,  hastening  to  the  heart, 
there  would  speedily  be  a  great  deficiency  of 
blood  did  not  every  part  incessantly  restore  the 
blood  that  is  incessantly  poured  into  it.  Add  to 
this,  that  by  the  impulse  of  the  blood  which  is 
forced  with  each  stroke  into  every  part  of  the 
second  and  third  regions,  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  in  the  pores  or  interstices  is  urged  into 
the  smaller  veins,  from  which  it  passes  into 
larger  vessels,  its  motion  assisted  besides  by  the 
motion  and  pressure  of  circumjacent  parts;  for 
from  every  containing  thing  compressed  and 
constringed,  contained  matters  are  forced  out. 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


And  thus  it  is  that  by  the  motions  of  the  mus¬ 
cles  and  extremities,  the  blood  contained  in  the 
minor  vessels  is  forced  onwards  and  delivered 
into  the  larger  trunks.  But  that  the  blood  is 
incessantly  driven  from  the  arteries  into  every 
part  of  the  body,  there  gives  a  pulse  and  never 
flows  back  in  these  channels,  cannot  be  doubted, 
if  it  be  admitted  that  with  each  pulse  of  the 
heart  all  the  arteries  are  simultaneously  dis¬ 
tended  by  the  blood  sent  into  them;  and  as  our 
learned  author  himself  allows  that  the  diastole 
of  the  arteries  is  occasioned  by  the  systole  of 
the  heart,  and  that  the  blood  once  out  of  the 
heart  can  never  get  back  into  the  ventricles  by 
reason  of  the  opposing  valves;  if  I  say,  our 
learned  author  believes  that  these  things  are  so, 
it  will  be  as  manifestly  true  with  regard  to  the 
force  and  impulse  by  which  the  blood  con¬ 
tained  in  the  vessels  is  propelled  into  every  part 
of  every  region  of  the  body.  For  wheresoever 
the  arteries  pulsate,  so  far  must  the  impulse  and 
influx  extend,  and  therefore  is  the  impulse  felt 
in  every  part  of  each  several  region;  for  there  is 
a  pulse  everywhere,  to  the  very  points  of  the 
fingers  and  under  the  nails,  nor  is  there  any  part 
of  the  body  where  the  shooting  pain  that  ac¬ 
companies  each  pulse  of  the  artery,  and  the  ef¬ 
fort  made  to  effect  a  solution  of  the  continuity 
is  not  experienced  when  it  is  the  seat  of  a  phleg¬ 
mon  or  furuncle. 

But,  further,  that  the  blood  contained  in  the 
pores  of  the  living  tissues  returns  to  the  heart, 
is  manifest  from  what  we  observe  in  the  hands 
and  feet.  For  we  frequently  see  the  hands  and 
feet,  in  young  persons  especially,  during  severe 
weather,  become  so  cold  that  to  the  touch  they 
feel  like  ice,  and  they  are  so  benumbed  and 
stiffened  that  they  seem  scarcely  to  retain  a 
trace  of  sensibility  or  to  be  capable  of  any  mo¬ 
tion;  still  are  they  all  the  while  surcharged  with 
blood,  and  look  red  or  livid.  Yet  can  the  ex¬ 
tremities  be  warmed  in  no  way,  save  by  circu¬ 
lation;  the  chilled  blood,  which  has  lost  its  spirit 
and  heat,  being  driven  out,  and  fresh,  warm, 
and  vivified  blood  flowing  in  by  the  arteries  in 
its  stead,  which  fresh  blood  cherishes  and  warms 
the  parts,  and  restores  to  them  sense  and  mo¬ 
tion;  nor  could  the  extremities  be  restored  by 
the  warmth  of  a  fire  or  other  external  heat,  any 
more  than  those  of  a  dead  body  could  be  so  re¬ 
covered:  they  are  only  brought  to  life  again,  as 
it  were,  by  an  influx  of  internal  warmth.  And 
this  indeed  is  the  principal  use  and  end  of  the 
circulation;  it  is  that  for  which  the  blood  is  sent 
on  its  ceaseless  course,  and  to  exert  its  influence 
continually  in  its  circuit,  to  wit,  that  all  parts 


dependent  on  the  primary  innate  heat  may  be 
retained  alive,  in  their  state  of  vital  and  vege¬ 
tative  being,  and  apt  to  perform  their  func¬ 
tions;  whilst,  to  use  the  language  of  physiolo¬ 
gists,  they  are  sustained  and  actuated  by  the  in¬ 
flowing  heat  and  vital  spirits.  Thus,  by  the  aid 
of  two  extremes,  viz.,  cold  and  heat,  is  the  tem¬ 
perature  of  the  animal  body  retained  at  its 
mean.  For  as  the  air  inspired  tempers  the  too 
great  heat  of  the  blood  in  the  lungs  and  centre 
of  the  body,  and  effects  the  expulsion  of  suffo¬ 
cating  fumes,  so  in  its  turn  does  the  hot  blood, 
thrown  by  the  arteries  into  all  parts  of  the 
body,  cherish  and  nourish  and  keep  them  in 
life,  defending  them  from  extinction  through 
the  power  of  external  cold. 

It  would,  therefore,  be  in  some  sort  unfair 
and  extraordinary  did  not  every  particle  com¬ 
posing  the  body  enjoy  the  advantages  of  the 
circulation  and  transmutation  of  the  blood;  the 
ends  for  which  the  circulation  was  mainly  es¬ 
tablished  by  nature  would  no  longer  be  ef¬ 
fected.  To  conclude  then:  you  see  how  circula¬ 
tion  may  be  accomplished  without  confusion  or 
admixture  of  humours,  through  the  whole  body, 
and  each  of  its  individual  parts,  in  the  smaller 
as  well  as  in  the  larger  vessels;  and  all  as  matter 
of  necessity  and  for  the  general  advantage; 
without  circulation,  indeed,  there  would  be  no 
restoration  of  chilled  and  exhausted  parts,  no 
continuance  of  these  in  life;  since  it  is  apparent 
enough  that  the  whole  influence  of  the  preserv¬ 
ative  heat  comes  by  the  arteries,  and  is  the 
work  of  the  circulation. 

It,  therefore,  appears  to  me  that  the  learned 
Riolanus  speaks  rather  expediently  than  truly, 
when  in  his  Enchiridion  he  denies  a  circulation 
to  certain  parts;  it  would  seem  as  though  he  had 
wished  to  please  the  mass,  and  oppose  none ;  to 
have  written  with  such  a  bias  rather  than  rigid¬ 
ly  and  in  behalf  of  the  simple  truth.  This  is  also 
apparent  when  he  would  have  the  blood  to 
make  its  way  into  the  left  ventricle  through  the 
septum  of  the  heart,  by  certain  invisible  and 
unknown  passages,  rather  than  through  those 
ample  and  abundantly  pervious  channels,  the 
pulmonary  vessels,  furnished  with  valves,  op¬ 
posing  all  reflux  or  regurgitation.  He  informs  us 
that  he  has  elsewhere  discussed  the  reasons  of 
the  impossibility  or  inconvenience  of  this:  I 
much  desire  to  see  his  disquisition.  It  would  be 
extraordinary,  indeed,  were  the  aorta  and  pul¬ 
monary  artery,  with  the  same  dimensions,  pro¬ 
perties,  and  structure,  not  to  have  the  same 
functions.  But  it  would  be  more  wonderful 
still  were  the  whole  tide  of  the  blood  to  reach 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


310 

the  left  ventricle  by  a  set  of  inscrutable  pas¬ 
sages  of  the  septum,  a  tide  which,  in  quantity 
must  correspond,  first  to  the  influx  from  the 
vena  cava  into  the  right  side  of  the  heart,  and 
next  to  the  efflux  from  the  left,  both  of  which 
require  such  ample  conduits.  But  our  author 
has  adduced  these  matters  inconsistently,  for 
he  has  established  the  lungs  as  an  emunctory 
or  passage  from  the  heart and  he  says:  “The 
lung  is  affected  by  the  blood  which  passes 
through  it,  the  sordes  flowing  along  with  the 
blood.”  And,  again:  “The  lungs  receive  injury 
from  distempered  and  ill-conditioned  viscera; 
these  deliver  an  impure  blood  to  the  heart, 
which  it  cannot  correct  except  by  multiplied 
circulations.”  In  the  same  place,  he  further  pro¬ 
ceeds,  whilst  speaking  against  Galen  of  blood¬ 
letting  in  peripneumonia  and  the  communica¬ 
tion  of  the  veins:  “Were  it  true  that  the  blood 
naturally  passed  from  the  right  ventricle  of  the 
heart  to  the  lungs,  that  it  might  be  carried  into 
the  left  ventricle  and  from  thence  into  the  aor¬ 
ta;  and  were  the  circulation  of  the  blood  ad¬ 
mitted,  who  does  not  see  that  in  affections  of 
the  lungs  the  blood  would  flow  to  them  in 
larger  quantity  and  w^ould  oppress  them,  un¬ 
less  it  were  taken  aw^ay,  first,  freely,  and  then  in 
repeated  smaller  quantities  in  order  to  relieve 
them,  which  indeed  w^as  the  advice  of  Hippo¬ 
crates,  who,  in  affections  of  the  lungs  takes 
aw^ay  blood  from  every  part — the  head,  nose, 
tongue,  arms  and  feet,  in  order  that  its  quan¬ 
tity  may  be  diminished  and  a  diversion  effected 
from  the  lungs;  he  takes  away  blood  till  the 
body  is  almost  bloodless.  Now  admitting  the 
circulation,  the  lungs  are  most  readily  depleted 
by  opening  a  vein;  but  rejecting  it,  I  do  not 
sec  how  any  revulsion  of  the  blood  can  be  ac¬ 
complished  by  this  means;  for  did  it  flow  back 
by  the  pulmonary  artery  upon  the  right  ven¬ 
tricle,  the  sigmoid  valves  would  oppose  its  en¬ 
trance,  and  any  escape  from  the  right  ventricle 
into  the  vena  cava  is  prevented  by  the  tricus¬ 
pid  valves.  The  blood,  therefore,  is  soon  ex¬ 
hausted  when  a  vein  is  opened  in  the  arm  or 
f(X)t,  if  we  admit  the  circulation;  and  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  Fernelius  is  at  the  same  time  upset  by 
this  admission,  m.,  that  in  affections  of  the 
lungs  it  is  better  to  bleed  from  the  right  than 
the  left  arm;  because  the  blood  cannot  flow 
backw'ards  into  the  vena  cava  unless  the  tw^o 
barriers  situated  in  the  heart  be  first  broken 
down.” 

He  adds  yet  further  in  the  same  place:  “If 
the  circulation  of  the  blood  be  admitted,  and  it 

^  Encheiridion^  Book  111,  chap.  6. 


be  acknow  ledged  that  this  fluid  generally  passes 
through  the  lungs,  not  through  the  middle  par¬ 
tition  of  the  heart,  a  double  circulation  be¬ 
comes  requisite;  one  ellected  through  the  lungs, 
in  the  course  of  which  the  blood  quitting  the 
right  ventricle  of  the  heart  passes  through  the 
lungs  in  order  that  it  may  arrive  at  the  left  ven¬ 
tricle;  leaving  the  heart  on  the  one  hand,  there¬ 
fore,  the  blood  speedily  returns  to  it  again;  an¬ 
other  and  longer  circulation  proceeding  from 
the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart  performs  the  cir¬ 
cuit  of  the  whole  body  by  the  arteries,  and  by 
the  veins  returns  to  the  right  side  of  the  heart.”^ 

The  learned  anatomist  might  here  have  added 
a  third  and  extremely  short  circulation,  viz., 
from  the  left  to  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart, 
with  that  blood  which  courses  through  the  coro¬ 
nary  arteries  and  veins,  and  by  their  ramifica¬ 
tions  is  distributed  to  the  body,  walls,  and  sep¬ 
tum  of  the  heart. 

“He  who  admits  one  circulation,”  proceeds 
our  author,  “cannot  repudiate  the  other”;  and 
he  might,  as  it  appears,  have  added,  “the  third.” 
For  why  should  the  coronary  arteries  of  the 
heart  pulsate,  if  it  were  not  to  force  on  the 
blood  by  their  pulsations.?  and  why  should 
there  be  coronary  veins,  the  end  and  office  of 
all  veins  being  to  receive  the  blood  brought 
by  the  arteries,  were  it  not  to  deliver  and  dis¬ 
charge  the  blood  sent  into  the  substance  of  the 
heart.?  In  this  consideration  let  it  be  remem¬ 
bered  that  a  valve  is  very  commonly  found  at 
the  orifice  of  the  coronary  vein,  as  our  learned 
author  himself  admits,^  preventing  all  ingress, 
but  offering  no  obstacle  to  the  egress  of  the 
blood.  It  therefore  seems  that  he  cannot  do 
otherwise  than  admit  this  third  circulation, 
who  acknowledges  a  general  circulation  through 
the  body,  and  that  the  blood  also  passes  through 
the  lungs  and  the  brain.^  Nor,  indeed,  can  he 
deny  a  similar  circulation  to  every  other  part 
of  every  other  region.  The  blood  flowing  in 
under  the  influence  of  the  arterial  pulse,  and 
returning  by  the  veins,  every  particle  of  the 
body  has  its  circulation. 

From  the  words  of  our  learned  writer  quoted 
above,  consequently,  his  opinion  may  be  gath¬ 
ered  both  of  the  general  circulation,  and  then 
of  the  circulation  through  the  lungs  and  the 
several  parts  of  the  body;  for  he  who  admits  the 
first,  manifestly  cannot  refuse  to  acknowledge 
the  others.  How^  indeed  could  he  who  has  re¬ 
peatedly  asserted  a  circulation  through  the 

2  Ibid. 

3  Ibid.^  chap.  9. 

^  Ibid..,  Book  iv,  chap.  2. 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


general  system  and  the  greater  vessels,  deny  a 
circulation  in  the  branches  continuous  with 
these  vessels,  or  in  the  several  parts  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  and  third  regions  ?  as  if  all  the  veins,  and 
those  he  calls  greater  circulator)^  vessels,  were 
not  enumerated  by  every  anatomist,  and  by 
himself,  as  being  within  the  second  region  of 
the  body.  Is  it  possible  that  there  can  be  a  cir¬ 
culation  which  is  universal,  and  which  yet  does 
not  extend  through  every  part?  Where  he 
denies  it,  then,  he  does  so  hesitatingly,  and 
vacillates  between  negations,  giving  us  mere 
words.  Where  he  asserts  the  circulation,  on  the 
contrary,  he  speaks  out  heartily,  and  gives  suf¬ 
ficient  reasons,  as  becomes  a  philosopher;  and 
then,  when  he  relics  on  this  opinion  in  a  parti¬ 
cular  instance,  he  delivers  himself  like  an  ex¬ 
perienced  physician  and  honest  man,  and,  in 
opposition  to  Galen  and  his  favorite  Fernelius, 
advises  blood-letting  as  the  chief  remedy  in 
dangerous  diseases  of  the  lungs. 

No  learned  man  and  Christian,  having  doubts 
in  such  a  case,  would  have  recommended  his 
experience  to  posterity,  to  the  imminent  risk, 
and  even  loss  of  human  life;  neither  would  he 
without  very  sufficient  reasons,  have  repudi¬ 
ated  the  authority  of  Galen  and  Fernelius, 
which  has  usually  such  weight  with  him.  What¬ 
ever  he  has  denied  in  the  circulation  of  the 
blood,  therefore,  whether  with  reference  to  the 
mesentery  or  any  other  part,  and  with  an  eye 
to  the  lacteal  veins  or  the  ancient  system  of 
physic,  or  any  other  consideration,  must  be  as¬ 
cribed  to  his  courtesy  and  modesty,  and  is  to  be 
excused. 

Thus  far,  I  think,  it  appears  plain  enough, 
from  the  very  words  and  arguments  of  our 
author,  that  there  is  a  circulation  everywhere; 
that  the  blood,  wherever  it  is,  changes  its  place, 
and  by  the  veins  returns  to  the  heart;  so  that 
our  learned  author  seems  to  be  of  the  same 
opinion  as  myself.  It  would  therefore  be  labour 
in  vain,  did  I  here  quote  at  greater  length  the 
various  reasons  which  I  have  consigned  in  my 
work  on  the  Motion  of  the  Bloody  in  confirma¬ 
tion  of  my  opinions,  and  which  are  derived 
from  the  structure  of  the  vessels,  the  position 
of  the  valves,  and  other  matters  of  experience 
and  observation;  and  this  the  more,  as  I  have 
not  yet  seen  the  treatise  on  the  Circulation  of 
the  Blood  of  the  learned  writer;  nor,  indeed, 
have  I  yet  met  with  a  single  argument  of  his,  or 
more  than  his  simple  negation,  which  would 
lead  me  to  see  wherefore  he  should  reject  a  cir¬ 
culation  which  he  admits  as  universal,  in  certain 
parts,  regions,  and  vessels. 


It  is  true  that  by  way  of  subterfuge  he  has 
recourse  to  an  anastomosis  of  the  vessels  on  the 
authority  of  Galen,  and  the  evidence  of  daily 
experience.  But  so  distinguished  a  personage, 
an  anatomist  so  expert,  so  inquisitive,  and  care¬ 
ful,  should  first  have  shown  anastomoses  be¬ 
tween  the  larger  arteries  and  larger  veins,  and 
these,  both  obvious  and  ample,  having  mouths 
in  relation  with  such  a  torrent  as  is  constituted 
by  the  whole  mass  of  the  blood,  and  larger  than 
the  capacity  of  the  continuous  branches  (from 
which  he  takes  away  all  circulation),  before  he 
had  rejected  those  that  are  familiarly  known, 
that  are  more  likely  and  more  open;  he  ought 
to  have  clearly  shown  us  where  these  anasto¬ 
moses  are,  and  how  they  are  fashioned,  whether 
they  be  adapted  only  to  permit  the  access  of 
the  blood  into  the  veins,  and  not  to  allow  of  its 
regurgitation,  in  the  same  way  as  we  see  the 
ureters  connected  with  the  urinary  bladder,  or 
in  what  other  manner  things  are  contrived.  But 
— and  here  I  speak  over  boldly  perhaps — 
neither  our  learned  author  himself,  nor  Galen, 
nor  any  experience,  has  ever  succeeded  in  mak¬ 
ing  such  anastomoses  as  he  imagines,  sensible  to 
the  eye. 

I  have  myself  pursued  this  subject  of  the  an¬ 
astomosis  with  all  the  diligence  I  could  com¬ 
mand,  and  have  given  not  a  little  both  of  time 
and  labour  to  the  inquiry;  but  I  have  never  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  tracing  any  connexion  between  ar¬ 
teries  and  veins  by  a  direct  anastomosis  of  their 
orifices.  I  would  gladly  learn  of  those  who  give 
so  much  to  Galen,  how  they  dare  swear  to  what 
he  says.  Neither  in  the  liver,  spleen,  lungs,  kid¬ 
neys,  nor  any  other  viscus,  is  such  a  thing  as  an 
anastomosis  to  be  seen;  and  by  boiling,  I  have 
rendered  the  whole  parenchyma  of  these  organs 
so  friable  that  it  could  be  shaken  like  dust  from 
the  fibres,  or  picked  away  with  a  needle,  until 
I  could  trace  the  fibres  of  every  subdivision, 
and  see  every  capillary  filament  distinctly.  I 
can  therefore  boldly  affirm,  that  there  is  neither 
any  anastomosis  of  the  vena  portae  with  the 
cava,  of  the  arteries  with  the  veins,  or  of  the 
capillary  ramifications  of  the  biliary  ducts, 
which  can  be  traced  through  the  entire  liver, 
with  the  veins.  This  alone  may  be  observed  in 
the  recent  liver:  all  the  branches  of  the  vena 
cava  ramifying  through  the  convexity  of  the 
liver,  have  their  tunics  pierced  with  an  infinity 
of  minute  holes,  as  is  a  sieve,  and  are  fashioned 
to  receive  the  blood  in  its  descent.  The  branches 
of  the  porta  are  not  so  constituted,  but  simply 
spread  out  in  subdivisions;  and  the  distribution 
of  these  two  vessels  is  such  that,  whilst  the  one 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


312 

runs  upon  the  convexity,  the  other  proceeds 
aiong  the  concavity  of  the  liver  to  its  outer 
margin,  and  all  the  while  without  anastomos¬ 
ing. 

In  three  places  only  do  I  find  anything  that 
can  be  held  equivalent  to  an  anastomosis.  From 
the  carotids,  as  they  are  creeping  over  the  base 
of  the  brain,  numerous  interlaced  fibres  arise, 
which  afterwards  form  the  choroid  plexus,  and 
passing  through  the  lateral  ventricles,  finally 
unite  and  terminate  in  the  third  sinus,  which 
performs  the  office  of  a  vein.  In  the  spermatic 
vessels,  commonly  called  vasa  praeparantia,  cer¬ 
tain  minute  arteries  proceeding  from  the  great 
artery  adhere  to  the  venae  praeparantes,  which 
they  accompany,  and  are  at  length  taken  in  and 
included  within  their  coats,  in  such  a  way  that 
they  seem  to  have  a  common  ending,  so  that 
where  they  terminate  on  the  upper  portion  of 
the  testis,  on  that  cone-shaped  process  called 
the  corpus  varkosum  et  pampiniforme,  it  is 
altogether  uncertain  whether  we  are  to  re¬ 
gard  their  terminations  as  veins,  or  as  arteries, 
or  as  both.  In  the  same  way  are  the  ultimate 
ramifications  of  the  arteries  which  run  to 
the  umbilical  vein,  lost  in  the  tunics  of  this 
vessel. 

What  doubt  can  there  be,  if  by  such  channels 
the  great  arteries,  distended  by  the  stream  of 
blood  sent  into  them,  are  relieved  of  so  great 
and  obvious  a  torrent,  but  that  nature  would 
not  have  denied  distinct  and  visible  passages, 
vortices,  and  estuaries,  had  she  intended  to 
divert  the  whole  current  of  the  blood,  and  had 
wished  in  this  way  to  deprive  the  lesser  branches 
and  the  solid  parts  of  all  the  benefit  of  the  in¬ 
flux  of  that  fluid  ? 

Finally,  I  shall  quote  this  single  experiment, 
which  appears  to  me  sufficient  to  clear  up  all 
doubts  about  the  anastomoses,  and  their  uses, 
if  any  exist,  and  to  set  at  rest  the  question  of  a 
passage  of  the  blood  from  the  veins  to  the  ar¬ 


teries,  by  any  special  channels,  or  by  regurgita¬ 
tion. 

Having  laid  open  the  thorax  of  an  animal, 
and  tied  the  vena  cava  near  the  heart,  so  that 
nothing  shall  pass  from  that  vessel  into  its  cavi¬ 
ties,  and  immediately  after\vards,  having  di¬ 
vided  the  carotid  arteries  on  both  sides,  the  jug¬ 
ular  veins  being  left  untouched;  if  the  arteries 
be  now  perceived  to  become  empty  but  not  the 
veins,  I  think  it  will  be  manifest  that  the  blood 
does  nowhere  pass  from  the  veins  into  the  ar¬ 
teries  except  through  the  ventricles  of  the 
heart.  Were  it  not  so,  as  observed  by  Galen,  we 
should  see  the  veins  as  well  as  the  arteries  em¬ 
ptied  in  a  very  short  time,  by  the  efflux  from 
their  corresponding  arteries. 

For  what  further  remains,  oh  Riolanus!  I 
congratulate  both  myself  and  you:  myself,  for 
the  opinion  with  which  you  have  graced  my 
circulation;  and  you,  for  your  learned,  polished, 
and  terse  production,  than  which  nothing  more 
elegant  can  be  imagined.  For  the  favour  you 
have  done  me  in  sending  me  this  work,  I  feel 
most  grateful,  and  I  would  gladly,  as  in  duty 
bound,  proclaim  my  sense  of  its  merits,  but  I 
confess  myself  unequal  to  the  task;  for  I  know 
that  the  Enchiridion  bearing  the  name  of  Rio¬ 
lanus  inscribed  upon  it,  has  thereby  more  of 
honour  conferred  upon  it  than  it  can  derive 
from  any  praise  of  mine,  which  nevertheless  I 
would  yield  without  reserve.  The  famous  book 
will  live  for  ever;  and  when  marble  shall  have 
mouldered,  will  proclaim  to  posterity  the  glory 
that  belongs  to  your  name.  You  have  most  hap¬ 
pily  conjoined  anatomy  with  pathology,  and 
have  greatly  enriched  the  subject  with  a  new 
and  most  useful  osteology.  Proceed  in  your 
worthy  career,  most  illustrious  Riolanus,  and 
love  him  who  wishes  that  you  may  enjoy  both 
happiness  and  length  of  days,  and  that  all  your 
admirable  works  may  conduce  to  your  eternal 
fame.  William  Harvey 


A  Second  Disquisition  to  John  Riolan 


It  is  now  many  years,  most  learned  Riolanus, 
since,  with  the  aid  of  the  press,  I  published  a 
portion  of  my  work.  But  scarce  a  day,  scarce  an 
hour,  has  passed  since  the  birth-day  of  the 
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  that  I  have  not 
heard  something  for  good  or  for  evil  said  of  this 
my  discovery.  Some  abuse  it  as  a  feeble  infant, 
and  yet  unworthy  to  have  seen  the  light; 
others,  again,  think  the  bantling  deserves  to  be 
cherished  and  cared  for;  these  oppose  it  with 
much  ado,  those  patronize  it  with  abundant 
commendation;  one  party  holds  that  I  have 
completely  demonstrated  the  circulation  of  the 
blood  by  experiment,  observation,  and  ocular 
inspection,  against  all  force  and  array  of  argu¬ 
ment;  another  thinks  it  scarcely  yet  sufficient¬ 
ly  illustrated — not  yet  cleared  of  all  objections. 
There  are  some,  too,  who  say  that  I  have  shown 
a  vainglorious  love  of  vivisections,  and  who 
scoff  at  and  deride  the  introduction  of  frogs 
and  serpents,  flies,  and  others  of  the  lower  ani¬ 
mals  upon  the  scene,  as  a  piece  of  puerile  levity, 
not  even  refraining  from  opprobrious  epithets. 

To  return  evil  speaking  with  evil  speaking, 
however,  I  hold  to  be  unworthy  in  a  philos¬ 
opher  and  searcher  after  truth;  I  believe  that  I 
shall  do  better  and  more  advisedly  if  I  meet  so 
many  indications  of  ill  breeding  with  the  light 
of  faithful  and  conclusive  observation.  It  can¬ 
not  be  helped  that  dogs  bark  and  vomit  their 
foul  stomachs,  or  that  cynics  should  be  num¬ 
bered  among  philosophers;  but  care  can  be  tak¬ 
en  that  they  do  not  bite  or  inoculate  their  mad 
humours,  or  with  their  dogs’  teeth  gnaw  the 
bones  and  foundations  of  truth. 

Detractors,  mummers,  and  writers  defiled 
with  abuse,  as  I  resolved  with  myself  never  to 
read  them,  satisfied  that  nothing  solid  or  excel¬ 
lent,  nothing  but  foul  terms,  was  to  be  expected 
from  them,  so  have  I  held  them  still  less  worthy 
of  an  answer.  Let  them  consume  on  their  own 
ill  nature;  they  will  scarcely  find  many  well- 
disposed  readers,  I  imagine,  nor  does  God  give 
that  which  is  most  excellent  and  chiefly  to  be 
desired — wisdom,  to  the  wicked;  let  them  go  on 
railing,  I  say,  until  they  are  weary,  if  not 
ashamed. 


If  for  the  sake  of  studying  the  meaner  ani¬ 
mals  you  should  even  enter  the  bakehouse  with 
Heraclitus,  as  related  in  Aristotle,  I  bid  you 
approach;  for  neither  are  the  immortal  gods  ab¬ 
sent  here,  and  the  great  and  Almighty  Father 
is  sometimes  most  visible  in  His  lesser,  and  to 
the  eye  least  considerable  works. 

In  my  book  On  the  Motion  of  the  Heart 
and  Blood  in  Animals,  I  have  only  adduced 
those  facts  from  among  many  other  observa¬ 
tions,  by  which  either  errors  were  best  refuted, 
or  truth  was  most  strongly  supported;  I  have 
left  many  proofs,  won  by  dissection  and  ap¬ 
preciable  to  sense,  as  redundant  and  unneces¬ 
sary;  some  of  these,  however,  I  now  supply  in 
brief  terms,  for  the  sake  of  the  studious,  and 
those  who  have  expressed  their  desire  to  have 
them. 

The  authority  of  Galen  is  of  such  weight 
with  all,  that  I  have  seen  several  hesitate  great¬ 
ly  with  that  experiment  before  them,  in  which 
the  artery  is  tied  upon  a  tube  placed  within  its 
cavity;  and  by  which  it  is  proposed  to  prove 
that  the  arterial  pulse  is  produced  by  a  power 
communicated  from  the  heart  through  the 
coats  of  the  arteries,  and  not  from  the  shock  of 
the  blood  contained  within  them;  and  thence, 
that  the  arteries  dilate  as  bellows,  are  not  filled 
as  sacs.  This  experiment  is  spoken  of  by  Vesalius, 
the  celebrated  anatomist;  but  neither  Vesalius 
nor  Galen  says  that  he  had  tried  the  experi¬ 
ment,  which,  however,  I  did.  Vesalius  only  pre¬ 
scribes,  and  Galen  advises  it,  to  those  anxious 
to  discover  the  truth,  and  for  their  better  as¬ 
surance,  not  thinking  of  the  difficulties  that  at¬ 
tend  its  performance,  nor  of  its  futility  when 
done;  for  indeed,  although  executed  with  the 
greatest  skill,  it  supplies  nothing  in  support  of 
the  opinion  which  maintains  that  the  coats  of  the 
vessel  are  the  cause  of  the  pulse;  it  much  rather 
proclaims  that  this  is  owing  to  the  impulse  of 
the  blood.  For  the  moment  you  have  thrown 
your  ligature  around  the  artery  upon  the  reed 
or  tube,  immediately,  by  the  force  of  the  blood 
thrown  in  from  above,  it  is  dilated  beyond  the 
circle  of  the  tube,  by  which  the  flow  is  im¬ 
peded,  and  the  shock  is  broken;  so  that  the  ar- 


313 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


3M 

tery  which  is  tied  only  pulsates  obscurely,  being 
now  cut  ofl  from  the  full  force  of  the  blood  that 
hows  through  it,  the  shock  being  reverberated, 
as  it  were,  from  that  part  of  the  vessel  which  is 
above  the  ligature;  but  if  the  artery  below  the 
ligature  be  now  divided,  the  contrary  of  what 
has  been  maintained  will  be  apparent,  from 
the  spurting  of  the  blood  impelled  through  the 
tube;  just  as  happens  in  the  eases  of  aneurism, 
referred  to  in  my  book  On  the  Motion  of  the 
Bloody  whieh  arise  from  an  erosion  of  the  coats 
of  the  vessel,  and  when  the  blood  is  contained 
in  a  membranous  sac,  formed  not  by  the  coats 
of  the  vessel  dilated,  but  preternaturally  pro¬ 
duced  from  the  surrounding  tissues  and  flesh. 
1’he  arteries  beyond  an  aneurism  of  this  kind 
will  be  felt  beating  very  feebly,  whilst  in  those 
above  it  and  in  the  swelling  itself  the  pulse  will  be 
perceived  of  great  strength  and  fulness.  And 
here  we  cannot  imagine  that  the  pulsation  and 
dilatation  take  place  by  the  coats  of  the  arter¬ 
ies,  or  any  power  communicated  to  the  walls  of 
the  sac;  they  are  plainly  due  to  the  shock  of  the 
blood. 

But  that  the  error  of  Vesalius,  and  the  inex- 
jierience  of  those  who  assert  their  belief  that 
the  part  below  the  tube  does  not  pulsate  when 
the  ligature  is  tied,  may  be  made  the  more  ap¬ 
parent,  I  can  state,  after  having  made  the  trial, 
that  the  inferior  part  will  continue  to  pulsate  if 
the  experiment  be  properly  performed;  and 
whilst  they  say  that  when  you  have  undone  the 
ligature  the  inferior  arteries  begin  again  to  pul¬ 
sate,  1  maintain  that  the  part  below  beats  less 
forcibly  when  the  ligature  is  untied  than  it  did 
when  the  thread  was  still  tight.  But  the  ef¬ 
fusion  of  blood  from  the  wound  confuses  every¬ 
thing,  and  renders  the  whole  experiment  unsat¬ 
isfactory  and  nugatory,  so  that  nothing  certain 
can  be  shown,  by  reason,  as  I  have  said,  of  the 
hemorrhage.  But  if,  as  I  know  by  experience, 
you  lay  bare  an  artery,  and  control  the  divided 
portion  by  the  pressure  of  your  fingers,  you 
may  try  many  things  at  pleasure  by  which  the 
truth  will  be  made  to  appear.  In  the  first  place, 
you  will  feel  the  blood  coming  down  in  the  ar¬ 
tery  at  each  pulsation,  and  visibly  dilating  the 
vessel.  You  may  also  at  will  suffer  the  blood  to 
escape,  by  relaxing  the  pressure,  and  leaving  a 
small  outlet;  and  you  will  see  that  it  jets  out 
with  each  stroke,  with  each  contraction  of  the 
heart,  and  with  each  dilatation  of  the  artery, 
as  I  have  said  in  speaking  of  arteriotomy,  and 
the  experiment  of  perforating  the  heart.  And 
if  you  suffer  the  efflux  to  go  on  uninterrupted¬ 
ly,  either  from  the  simple  divided  artery  or 


from  a  tube  inserted  into  it,  you  will  be  able  to 
perceive  by  the  sight,  and  if  you  apply  your 
hand,  by  the  touch  likewise,  every  character  of 
the  stroke  of  the  heart  in  the  jet;  the  rhythm, 
order,  intermission,  force,  &c.,  of  its  pulsations, 
all  becoming  sensible  there,  no  otherwise  than 
would  the  jets  from  a  syringe,  pushed  in  succes¬ 
sion  and  with  different  degrees  of  force,  re¬ 
ceived  upon  the  palm  of  the  hand,  be  obvious 
to  sight  and  touch.  I  have  occasionally  observed 
the  jet  from  a  divided  carotid  artery  to  be  so 
forcible,  that,  when  received  on  the  hand,  the 
blood  rebounded  to  the  distance  of  four  or  five 
feet. 

But  that  the  question  under  discussion,  viz., 
that  the  pulsific  power  does  not  proceed  from 
the  heart  by  the  coats  of  the  vessels,  may  be 
set  in  yet  a  clearer  light,  I  beg  here  to  refer  to 
a  portion  of  the  descending  aorta,  about  a  span 
in  length,  with  its  division  into  the  two  crural 
trunks,  which  I  removed  from  the  body  of  a 
nobleman,  and  which  is  converted  into  a  bony 
tube;  by  this  hollow  tube,  nevertheless,  did  the 
arterial  blood  reach  the  lower  extremities  of 
this  nobleman  during  his  life,  and  cause  the  ar¬ 
teries  in  these  to  beat;  and  yet  the  main  trunk 
was  precisely  in  the  same  condition  as  is  the  ar¬ 
tery  in  the  experiment  of  Galen,  when  it  is  tied 
upon  a  hollow  tube;  where  it  was  converted 
into  bone  it  could  neither  dilate  nor  contract 
like  bellows,  nor  transmit  the  pulsific  power 
from  the  heart  to  the  inferior  vessels;  it  could 
not  convey  a  force  which  it  was  incapable  of  re¬ 
ceiving  through  the  solid  matter  of  the  bone. 
In  spite  of  all,  however,  I  well  remember  to 
have  frequently  noted  the  pulse  in  the  legs  and 
feet  of  this  patient  whilst  he  lived,  for  I  was 
myself  his  most  attentive  physician,  and  he  my 
very  particular  friend.  The  arteries  in  the  in¬ 
ferior  extremities  of  this  nobleman  must  there¬ 
for  and  of  necessity  have  been  dilated  by  the 
impulse  of  the  blood  like  flaccid  sacs,  and  not 
have  expanded  in  the  manner  of  bellows  through 
the  action  of  their  tunics.  It  is  obvious  that, 
whether  an  artery  be  tied  over  a  hollow  tube,  or 
its  tunics  be  converted  into  a  bony  and  un¬ 
yielding  canal,  the  interruption  to  the  pulsific 
power  in  the  inferior  part  of  the  vessel  must  be 
the  same. 

I  have  known  another  instance  in  which  a 
portion  of  the  aorta  near  the  heart  was  found 
converted  into  bone,  in  the  bodyof a  nobleman, 
a  man  of  great  muscular  strength.  The  experi¬ 
ment  of  Galen,  therefore,  or,  at  all  events,  a 
state  analogous  to  it,  not  effected  on  purpose 
but  encountered  by  accident,  makes  it  suffi- 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


ciently  to  appear  that  compression  or  ligature  of 
the  coats  of  an  artery  does  not  interfere  with  the 
pulsative  properties  of  its  derivative  branches; 
and  indeed,  if  the  experiment  which  Galen  rec¬ 
ommends  were  properly  performed  by  anyone, 
its  results  would  be  found  in  opposition  to  the 
views  which  Vesalius  believed  they  would  sup- 
port. 

But  we  do  not  therefore  deny  everything 
like  motion  to  the  tunics  of  the  arteries;  on  the 
contary,  we  allow  them  the  same  motions 
which  we  concede  to  the  heart,  viz.,  a  diastole, 
and  a  systole  or  return  from  the  distended  to 
the  natural  state;  this  much  we  believe  to  be  ef¬ 
fected  by  a  power  inherent  in  the  coats  them¬ 
selves.  But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  they  are  not 
both  dilated  and  contracted  by  the  same,  but 
by  different  causes  and  means;  as  may  be  ob¬ 
served  of  the  motions  of  all  parts,  and  of  the 
ventricle  of  the  heart  itself,  which  is  distended 
by  the  auricle,  contracted  by  its  own  inherent 
power;  so,  the  arteries  are  dilated  by  the  stroke 
of  the  heart,  but  they  contract  or  collapse  of 
themselves.^ 

You  may  also  perform  another  experiment 
at  the  same  time:  if  you  fill  one  of  two  basins  of 
the  same  size  with  blood  issuing saltum  from 
an  artery,  the  other  with  venous  blood  from  a 
vein  of  the  same  animal,  you  will  have  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  perceiving  by  the  eye,  both  im¬ 
mediately  and  by  and  by,  when  the  blood  in 
either  vessel  has  become  cold,  what  differences 
there  are  between  them.  You  will  find  that  it  is 
not  as  they  believe  who  fancy  that  there  is  one 
kind  of  blood  in  the  arteries  and  another  in  the 
veins,  that  in  the  arteries  being  of  a  more  florid 
colour,  more  frothy,  and  imbued  with  an  abun¬ 
dance  of  I  know  not  what  spirits,  effervescing 
and  swelling,  and  occupying  a  greater  space, 
like  milk  or  honey  set  upon  the  fire.  For  were 
the  blood  which  is  thrown  from  the  left  ven¬ 
tricle  of  the  heart  into  the  arteries,  fermented 
into  any  such  frothy  and  flatulent  fluid,  so  that 
a  drop  or  two  distended  the  whole  cavity  of 
the  aorta;  unquestionably,  upon  the  subsidence 
of  this  fermentation,  the  blood  would  return  to 
its  original  quantity  of  a  few  drops  (and  this, 
indeed,  is  the  reason  that  some  assign  for  the 
usually  empty  state  of  the  arteries  in  the  dead 
body);  and  so  should  it  be  with  the  arterial 
blood  in  the  cup,  for  so  it  is  with  boiling  milk 
and  honey  when  they  come  to  cool.  But  if  in 
either  basin  you  find  blood  nearly  of  the  same 
colour,  not  of  very  different  consistency  in  the 

^  See  Chapter  3,  of  the  Disquisition  on  the  Motion  of 
the  Heart  and  Blood. 


coagulated  state,  forcing  out  serum  in  the  same 
manner,  and  filling  the  cups  to  the  same  height 
when  cold  that  it  did  when  hot,  this  will  be 
enough  for  any  one  to  rest  his  faith  upon,  and 
afford  argument  enough,  I  think,  for  rejecting 
the  dreams  that  have  been  promulgated  on  the 
subject.  Sense  and  reason  alike  assure  us  that  the 
blood  contained  in  the  left  ventricle  is  not  of  a 
different  nature  from  that  in  the  right.  And 
then,  when  we  see  that  the  mouth  of  the  pul¬ 
monary  artery  is  of  the  same  size  as  the  aorta, 
and  in  other  respects  equal  to  that  vessel,  it 
were  imperative  on  us  to  affirm  that  the  pul¬ 
monary  artery  was  distended  by  a  single  drop 
of  spumous  blood,  as  well  as  the  aorta,  and  so 
that  the  right  as  well  as  the  left  side  of  the 
heart  was  filled  with  a  brisk  or  fermenting 
blood. 

The  particulars  which  especially  dispose  men's 
minds  to  admit  diversity  in  the  arterial  and  ve¬ 
nous  blood  are  three  in  number:  one,  because  in 
arteriotomy  the  blood  that  flows  is  of  a  more 
florid  hue  than  that  which  escapes  from  a  vein; 
a  second,  because  in  the  dissection  of  dead 
bodies  the  left  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  the 
arteries  in  general,  are  mostly  found  empty; 
a  third,  because  the  arterial  blood  is  believed 
to  be  more  spirituous,  and  being  replete  with 
spirit  is  made  to  occupy  a  much  larger  space. 
The  causes  and  reasons,  however,  wherefore  all 
these  things  are  so,  present  themselves  to  us 
when  we  ask  after  them. 

1st.  With  reference  to  the  colour  it  is  to  be 
observed  that  wherever  the  blood  issues  by  a 
very  small  orifice,  it  is  in  some  measure  strained, 
and  the  thinner  and  lighter  part,  which  usually 
swims  on  the  top  and  is  the  most  penetrating,  is 
emitted.  Thus,  in  phlebotomy,  when  the  blood 
escapes  forcibly  and  to  a  distance,  in  a  full 
stream,  and  from  a  large  orifice,  it  is  thicker, 
has  more  body,  and  a  darker  colour;  but,  if  it 
flows  from  a  small  orifice,  and  only  drop  by 
drop,  as  it  usually  does  when  the  bleeding  fillet 
is  untied,  it  is  of  a  brighter  hue;  for  then  it  is 
strained  as  it  were,  and  the  thinner  and  more 
penetrating  portion  only  escapes;  in  the  same 
way,  in  the  bleeding  from  the  nose,  in  that 
which  takes  place  from  a  leech-bite,  or  from 
scarifications,  or  in  any  other  way  by  diapedesis 
or  transudation,  the  blood  is  always  seen  to 
have  a  brighter  cast,  because  the  thickness  and 
firmness  of  the  coats  of  the  arteries  render  the 
outlet  or  outlets  smaller,  and  less  disposed  to 
yield  a  ready  passage  to  the  outpouring  blood; 
it  happens  also  that  when  fat  persons  are  let 
blood,  the  orifice  of  the  vein  is  apt  to  be  com- 


3i6  william 

pressed  by  the  subcutaneous  fat,  by  which  the 
blood  is  made  to  appear  thinner,  more  florid, 
and  in  some  sort  arterious.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  blood  that  flows  into  a  basin  from  a  large  ar¬ 
tery  freely  divided,  will  look  venous.  The  blood 
in  the  lungs  is  of  a  much  more  florid  colour  than 
it  is  in  the  arteries,  and  we  know  how  it  is 
strained  through  the  pulmonary  tissue. 

2d.  The  emptiness  of  the  arteries  in  the  dead 
body,  which  probably  mislead  Erasistratus  in 
supposing  that  they  only  contained  aereal  spir¬ 
its,  is  caused  by  this,  that  when  respiration 
ceases  the  lungs  collapse,  and  then  the  passages 
through  them  are  closed;  the  heart,  however, 
continues  fora  time  to  contract  upon  the  blood, 
whence  we  find  the  left  auricle  more  contracted, 
and  the  corresponding  ventricle,  as  well  as  the 
arteries  at  large,  appearing  empty,  simply  be¬ 
cause  there  is  no  supply  of  blood  flowing  round 
to  fill  them.  In  cases,  however,  in  which  the 
heart  has  ceased  to  pulsate  and  the  lungs  to 
afford  a  passage  to  the  blood  simultaneously,  as 
in  those  have  died  from  drowning  or  syncope, 
or  who  die  suddenly,  you  will  find  the  arteries, 
as  well  as  the  veins,  full  of  blood. 

3d.  With  reference  to  the  third  point,  or  that 
of  the  spirits,  it  may  be  said  that,  as  it  is  still  a 
question  what  they  are,  how  extant  in  the 
body,  of  what  consistency,  whether  separate 
and  distinct  from  the  blood  and  solids,  or  min¬ 
gled  with  these — upon  each  and  all  of  these 
points  there  are  so  many  and  such  conflicting 
opinions,  that  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the  spir¬ 
its,  whose  nature  is  thus  left  so  wholly  ambigu¬ 
ous,  should  serve  as  the  common  subterfuge  of 
ignorance.  Persons  of  limited  information, 
when  they  are  at  a  loss  to  assign  a  cause  for  any¬ 
thing,  very  commonly  reply  that  it  is  done  by 
the  spirits;  and  so  they  bring  the  spirits  into 
play  upon  all  occasions;  even  as  indifferent 
poets  are  always  thrusting  the  gods  upon  the 
stage  as  a  means  of  unravelling  the  plot,  and 
bringing  about  the  catastrophe. 

Fernelius,  and  many  others,  suppose  that 
there  are  aereal  spirits  and  invisible  substances. 
Fernelius  proves  that  there  are  animal  spirits, 
by  saying  that  the  cells  in  the  brain  are  appar¬ 
ently  unoccupied,  and  as  nature  abhors  a  vacu¬ 
um,  he  concludes  that  in  the  living  body  they 
are  filled  with  spirits,  just  as  Erasistratus  had 
held  that,  because  the  arteries  were  empty  of 
blood,  therefore  they  must  be  filled  with  spirits. 
But  medical  schools  admit  three  kinds  of  spir¬ 
its:  the  natural  spirits  flowing  through  the 
veins,  the  vital  spirits  through  the  arteries,  and 
the  animal  spirits  through  the  nerves;  whence 


HARVEY 

physicians  say,  out  of  Galen,  that  sometimes 
the  parts  of  the  brain  are  oppressed  by  sympa¬ 
thy,  because  the  faculty  with  the  essence,  i,  <?., 
the  spirit,  is  overwhelmed;  and  sometimes  this 
happens  independently  of  the  essence.  Further, 
besides  the  three  orders  of  influxive  spirits  ad¬ 
verted  to,  a  like  number  of  implanted  or  sta¬ 
tionary  spirits  seem  to  be  acknowledged;  but 
we  have  found  none  of  all  these  spirits  by  dis¬ 
section,  neither  in  the  veins,  nerves,  arteries, 
nor  other  parts  of  living  animals.  Some  speak 
of  corporeal,  others  of  incorporeal  spirits;  and 
they  who  advocate  the  corporeal  spirits  will 
have  the  blood,  or  the  thinner  portion  of  the 
blood,  to  be  the  bond  of  union  with  the  soul, 
the  spirit  being  contained  in  the  blood  as  the 
flame  is  in  the  smoke  of  a  lamp  or  candle,  and 
held  admixed  by  the  incessant  motion  of  the 
fluid;  others,  again,  distinguish  between  the 
spirits  and  the  blood.  They  who  advocate  in¬ 
corporeal  spirits  have  no  ground  of  experience 
to  stand  upon;  their  spirits  indeed  are  synony¬ 
mous  with  powers  or  faculties,  such  as  a  con- 
coctive  spirit,  a  chylopoietic  spirit,  a  procre¬ 
ative  spirit,  &c. — they  admit  as  many  spir¬ 
its,  in  short,  as  there  are  faculties  or  organs. 

But  then  the  schoolmen  speak  of  a  spirit  of 
fortitude,  prudence,  patience,  and  the  other 
virtues,  and  also  of  a  most  holy  spirit  of  wisdom, 
and  of  every  divine  gift;  and  they  besides  sup¬ 
pose  that  there  are  good  and  evil  spirits  that 
roam  about  or  possess  the  body,  that  assist  or 
cast  obstacles  in  the  way.  They  hold  some  dis¬ 
eases  to  be  owing  to  a  Cacodasmon  or  evil  spirit, 
as  there  are  others  that  are  due  to  a  cacochemy 
or  defective  assimilation. 

Although  there  is  nothing  more  uncertain 
and  questionable,  then,  than  the  doctrine  of 
spirits  that  is  proposed  to  us,  nevertheless  phy¬ 
sicians  seem  for  the  major  part  to  conclude, 
with  Hippocrates,  that  our  body  is  composed 
or  made  up  of  three  elements,  viz,^  containing 
parts,  contained  parts,  and  causes  of  action, 
spirits  being  understood  by  the  latter  term.  But 
if  spirits  are  to  be  taken  as  synonymous  with 
causes  of  activity,  whatever  has  power  in  the 
living  body  and  a  faculty  of  action  must  be  in¬ 
cluded  under  the  denomination.  It  would  ap¬ 
pear,  therefore,  that  all  spirits  were  neither 
aereal  substances,  nor  powers,  nor  habits;  and 
that  all  were  not  incorporeal. 

But  keeping  in  view  the  points  that  espe¬ 
cially  interest  us,  others,  as  leading  to  tedious¬ 
ness,  being  left  unnoticed,  it  seems  that  the 
spirits  which  flow  by  the  veins  or  the  arteries 
are  not  distinct  from  the  blood,  any  more  than 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


the  flame  of  a  lamp  is  distinct  from  the  inflam¬ 
mable  vapour  that  is  on  fire;  in  short,  that  the 
blood  and  these  spirits  signify  one  and  the  same 
thing,  though  diiferent — like  generous  wine 
and  its  spirit;  for  as  wine,  when  it  has  lost  all  its 
spirit,  is  no  longer  wine,  but  a  vapid  liquor  or 
vinegar;  so  blood  without  spirit  is  not  blood, 
but  something  else — clot  or  cruor;  even  as  a 
hand  of  stone,  or  of  a  dead  body,  is  no  hand  in 
the  most  complete  sense,  neither  is  blood  void 
of  the  vital  principle  proper  blood;  it  is  imme¬ 
diately  to  be  held  as  corrupt  when  deprived  of 
its  spirit.  The  spirit,  therefore,  which  inheres  in 
the  arteries,  and  especially  in  the  blood  which 
fills  them,  is  to  be  regarded  either  as  its  act  or 
agent,  in  the  same  way  as  the  spirit  of  wine  in 
wine,  and  the  spirit  of  aqua  vitae  in  brandy,  or 
as  a  flame  kindled  in  alcohol,  which  lives  and 
feeds  on,  or  is  nourished  by  itself.  The  blood, 
consequently,  though  richly  imbued  with  spir¬ 
its,  does  not  swell,  nor  ferment,  nor  rise  to  a 
head  through  them,  so  as  to  require  and  occupy 
a  larger  space — a  fact  that  may  be  ascertained 
beyond  the  possibility  of  question  by  the  two 
cups  of  equal  size;  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  wine, 
possessed  of  a  large  amount  of  spirits,  or,  in  the 
Hippocratic  sense,  of  signal  powers  of  acting 
and  effecting. 

It  is,  therefore,  the  same  blood  in  the  arteries 
that  is  found  in  the  veins,  although  it  may  be 
admitted  to  be  more  spirituous,  possessed  of 
higher  vital  force  in  the  former  than  in  the 
latter;  but  it  is  not  changed  into  anything  more 
vaporous,  or  more  aereal,  as  if  there  were  no 
spirits  but  such  as  are  aereal,  and  no  cause  of 
action  or  activity  that  is  not  of  the  nature  of 
flatus  or  wind.  But  neither  the  animal,  natural, 
nor  vital  spirits  which  inhere  in  the  solids,  such 
as  the  ligaments  and  nerves  (especially  if  they 
be  of  so  many  different  species),  and  are  con¬ 
tained  within  the  viewless  interstices  of  the  tis¬ 
sues,  are  to  be  regarded  as  so  many  different 
aereal  forms,  or  kinds  of  vapour.’ 

And  here  I  would  gladly  be  informed  by 
those  who  admit  corporeal  spirits,  but  of  a  gas¬ 
eous  or  vaporous  consistency,  in  the  bodies  of 
animals,  whether  or  not  they  have  the  power  of 
passing  hither  and  thither,  like  distinct  bodies 
independently  of  the  blood?  Or  whether  the 
spirits  follow  the  blood  in  its  motions,  either  as 
integral  parts  of  the  fluid  or  as  indissolubly  con¬ 
nected  with  it,  so  that  they  can  neither  quit 
the  tissues  nor  pass  hither  nor  thither  without 
the  influx  and  reflux,  and  motion  of  the  blood  ? 
For  if  the  spirits  exhaling  from  the  blood,  like 
the  vapour  of  water  attenuated  by  heat,  exist 


in  a  state  of  constant  flow  and  succession  as  the 
pabulum  of  the  tissues,  it  necessarily  follows 
that  they  are  not  distinct  from  this  pabulum, 
but  are  incessantly  disappearing;  whereby  it 
seems  that  they  can  neither  have  influx  nor  re¬ 
flux,  nor  passage,  nor  yet  remain  at  rest  without 
the  influx,  the  reflux,  the  passage  of  the  blood, 
which  is  the  fluid  that  serves  as  their  vehicle  or 
pabulum. 

And  next  I  desire  to  know  of  those  who  tell 
us  that  the  spirits  are  formed  in  the  heart,  being 
compounded  of  the  vapours  or  exhalations  of 
the  blood  (excited  either  by  the  heat  of  the 
heart  or  the  concussion)  and  the  inspired  air, 
whether  such  spirits  are  not  to  be  accounted 
much  colder  than  the  blood,  seeing  that  both 
the  elements  of  their  composition,  namely,  air 
and  vapour,  are  much  colder?  For  the  vapour 
of  boiling  water  is  much  more  bearable  than 
the  water  itself;  the  flame  of  a  candle  is  less 
burning  than  the  red-hot  snuff,  and  burning 
charcoal  than  incandescent  iron  or  brass.  Whence 
it  would  appear  that  spirits  of  this  nature  rather 
receive  their  heat  from  the  blood,  than  that  the 
blood  is  warmed  by  these  spirits;  such  spirits 
are  rather  to  be  regarded  as  fumes  and  excre- 
mentitious  effluvia  proceeding  from  the  body 
in  the  manner  of  odours,  than  in  any  way  as 
natural  artificers  of  the  tissues;  a  conclusion 
which  we  are  the  more  disposed  to  admit,  when 
we  see  that  they  so  speedily  lose  any  virtue  they 
may  possess,  and  which  they  had  derived  from 
the  blood  as  their  source — they  are  at  best  of  a 
very  frail  and  evanescent  nature.  Whence  also 
it  becomes  probable  that  the  expiration  of  the 
lungs  is  a  means  by  which  these  vapours  being 
cast  off,  the  blood  is  fanned  and  purified;  whilst 
inspiration  is  a  means  by  which  the  blood  in  its 
passage  between  the  two  ventricles  of  the  heart 
is  tempered  by  the  cold  of  the  ambient  atmos¬ 
phere,  lest,  getting  heated,  and  blown  up  with 
a  kind  of  fermentation,  like  milk  or  honey  set 
over  the  fire,  it  should  so  distend  the  lungs  that 
the  animal  got  suffocated;  somewhat  in  the 
same  way,  perchance,  as  one  labouring  under  a 
severe  asthma,  which  Galen  himself  seems  to 
refer  to  its  proper  cause  when  he  says  it  is  owing 
to  an  obstruction  of  the  smaller  arteries,  viz,^ 
the  vasa  venosa  et  arteriosa.  And  I  have  found 
by  experience  that  patients  affected  with  asthma 
might  be  brought  out  of  states  of  very  immi¬ 
nent  danger  by  having  cupping-glasses  applied, 
and  a  plentiful  and  sudden  affusion  of  cold 
water.  Thus  much — and  perhaps  it  is  more  than 
was  necessary — have  I  said  on  the  subject  of 
spirits  in  this  place,  for  I  felt  it  proper  to  define 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


318 

them,  and  to  say  something  of  their  nature  in  a 
physiological  disquisition. 

1  shall  only  further  add  that  they  who  des¬ 
cant  on  the  calidum  innatum  or  innate  heat,  as 
an  instrument  of  nature  available  for  every 
purpose,  and  who  speak  of  the  necessity  of  heat 
as  the  chcrisher  and  retainer  in  life  of  the  sev¬ 
eral  parts  of  the  body,  who  at  the  same  time  ad¬ 
mit  that  this  heat  cannot  exist  unless  connected 
with  something,  and  because  they  find  no  sub¬ 
stance  of  anything  like  commensurate  mobility, 
or  which  might  keep  pace  with  the  rapid  influx 
and  reflux  of  this  heat  (in  affections  of  the  mind 
especially),  take  refuge  in  spirits  as  most  subtile 
substances,  possessed  of  the  most  penetrating 
qualities,  and  highest  mobility — these  persons 
see  nothing  less  than  the  wonderful  and  almost 
divine  character  of  the  natural  operations  as 
proceeding  from  the  instrumentality  of  this 
common  agent,  vtz.y  the  calidum  innatum;  they 
further  regard  these  spirits  as  of  a  sublime,  lucid, 
ethereal,  celestial,  or  divine  nature,  and  the 
bond  of  the  soul;  even  as  the  vulgar  and  unlet¬ 
tered,  when  they  do  not  comprehend  the  causes 
of  various  effects,  refer  them  to  the  immediate 
interposition  of  the  Deity.  Whence  they  de¬ 
clare  that  the  heat  perpetually  flowing  into  the 
several  parts  is  in  virtue  of  the  influx  of  spirits 
through  the  channels  of  the  arteries;  as  if  the 
blood  could  neither  move  so  swiftly,  nor  pen¬ 
etrate  so  intimately,  nor  cherish  so  effectually. 
And  such  faith  do  they  put  in  this  opinion, 
such  lengths  are  they  carried  by  their  belief, 
that  they  deny  the  contents  of  the  arteries  to 
be  blood!  And  then  they  proceed  with  trivial 
reasonings  to  maintain  that  the  arterial  blood 
is  of  a  peculiar  kind,  or  that  the  arteries  are 
filled  with  such  aereal  spirits,  and  not  with 
blood;  all  the  while,  in  opposition  to  every¬ 
thing  which  Galen  has  advanced  against  Erasis- 
tratus,  both  on  grounds  of  experiment  and  of 
reason.  But  that  arterial  blood  differs  in  noth¬ 
ing  essential  from  venous  blood  has  been  al¬ 
ready  sufficiently  demonstrated;  and  our  senses 
likewise  assure  us  that  the  blood  and  spirits  do 
not  flow  in  the  arteries  separately  and  disjoined, 
but  as  one  body. 

We  have  occasion  to  observe  so  often  as  our 
hands,  feet,  or  ears  have  become  stiff  and  cold, 
that  as  they  recover  again  by  the  warmth  that 
flows  into  them,  they  acquire  their  natural 
colour  and  heat  simultaneously;  that  the  veins 
which  had  become  small  and  shrunk,  swell 
visibly  and  enlarge,  so  that  when  they  regain 
their  heat  suddenly  they  become  painful;  from 
which  it  appears  that  that  which  by  its  influx 


brings  heat  is  the  same  which  causes  repletion 
and  colour;  now  this  can  be  and  is  nothing  but 
blood. 

When  an  artery  and  a  vein  are  divided,  any¬ 
one  may  clearly  see  that  the  part  of  the  vein 
towards  the  heart  pours  out  no  blood,  whilst 
that  beyond  the  wound  gives  a  torrent;  the  di¬ 
vided  artery,  on  the  contrary  (as  in  my  experi¬ 
ment  on  the  carotids),  pours  out  a  flood  of  pure 
blood  from  the  orifice  next  the  heart,  and  in 
jets  as  if  it  were  forced  from  a  syringe,  whilst 
from  the  farther  orifice  of  the  divided  artery 
little  or  no  blood  escapes.  This  experiment 
therefore  plainly  proves  in  what  direction  the 
current  sets  in  either  order  of  vessels — towards 
the  heart  in  the  veins,  from  the  heart  in  the 
arteries;  it  also  shows  with  what  velocity  the 
current  moves,  not  gradually  and  by  drops,  but 
even  with  violence.  And  lest  anyone,  by  way  of 
subterfuge,  should  take  shelter  in  the  notion  of 
invisible  spirits,  let  the  orifice  of  the  divided 
vessel  be  plunged  under  water  or  oil,  when,  if 
there  be  any  air  contained  in  it,  the  fact  will  be 
proclaimed  by  a  succession  of  visible  bubbles. 
Hornets,  wasps,  and  other  insects  of  the  same 
description  plunged  in  oil,  and  so  suffocated, 
emit  bubbles  of  air  from  their  tail  whilst  they 
are  dying;  whence  it  is  not  improbable  that 
they  thus  respire  when  alive;  for  all  animals 
submerged  and  drowned,  when  they  finally  sink 
to  the  bottom  and  die,  emit  bubbles  of  air  from 
the  mouth  and  lungs.  It  is  also  demonstrated  by 
the  same  experiment,  that  the  valves  of  the 
veins  act  with  such  accuracy,  that  air  blown  in¬ 
to  them  does  not  penetrate;  much  less  then  can 
blood  make  its  way  through  them:  it  is  certain, 
I  say,  that  neither  sensibly  nor  insensibly,  nor 
gradually  and  drop  by  drop,  can  any  blood  pass 
from  the  heart  by  the  veins. 

And  that  no  one  may  seek  shelter  in  asserting 
that  these  things  are  so  when  nature  is  disturbed 
and  opposed,  but  not  when  she  is  left  to  herself 
and  at  liberty  to  act;  that  the  same  things  do 
not  come  to  pass  in  morbid  and  unusual  states 
as  in  the  healthy  and  natural  condition;  they 
are  to  be  met  by  saying  that,  if  it  were  so,  if  it 
happened  that  so  much  blood  was  lost  from  the 
farther  orifice  of  a  divided  vein  because  nature 
was  disturbed,  still  that  the  incision  does  not 
close  the  nearer  orifice,  from  which  nothing 
either  escapes  or  can  be  expressed,  whether  na¬ 
ture  be  disturbed  or  not.  Others  argue  in  the 
same  way,  maintaining  that,  although  the  blood 
immediately  spurts  out  in  such  profusion  with 
every  beat,  when  an  artery  is  divided  near  the 
heart,  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  the 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


blood  is  propelled  by  the  pulse  when  the  heart 
and  artery  are  entire.  It  is  most  probable,  how¬ 
ever,  that  every  stroke  impels  something;  and 
that  there  would  be  no  pulse  of  the  container, 
without  an  impulse  being  communicated  to  the 
thing  contained,  seems  certain.  Yet  some,  that 
they  may  seize  upon  a  further  means  of  defence, 
and  escape  the  necessity  of  admitting  the  circu¬ 
lation,  do  not  fear  to  affirm  that  the  arteries  in 
the  living  body  and  in  the  natural  state  are 
already  so  full  of  blood  that  they  are  incapable 
of  receiving  another  drop;  and  so  also  of  the 
ventricles  of  the  heart.  But  it  is  indubitable 
that,  whatever  the  degree  of  distension  and  the 
extent  of  contraction  of  the  heart  and  arteries, 
they  are  still  in  a  condition  to  receive  an  addi¬ 
tional  quantity  of  blood  forced  into  them,  and 
that  this  is  far  more  than  is  usually  reckoned  in 
grains  or  drops,  seems  also  certain.  For  if  the 
ventricles  become  so  excessively  distended  that 
they  will  admit  no  more  blood,  the  heart  ceases 
to  beat  (and  we  have  occasional  opportunities 
of  observing  the  fact  in  our  vivisections)  and, 
continuing  tense  and  resisting,  death  by  as¬ 
phyxia  ensues. 

In  the  work.  On  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and 
Blood,  I  have  already  sufficiently  discussed  the 
question  as  to  whether  the  blood  in  its  motion 
was  attracted,  or  impelled,  or  moved  by  its  own 
inherent  nature.  I  have  there  also  spoken  at 
length  of  the  action  and  office,  of  the  dilatation 
and  contraction  of  the  heart,  and  have  shown 
what  these  truly  are,  and  how  the  heart  con¬ 
tracts  during  the  diastole  of  the  arteries;  so  that 
I  must  hold  those  who  take  points  for  dispute 
from  among  them  as  either  not  understanding 
the  subject,  or  as  unwilling  to  look  at  things  for 
themselves,  and  to  investigate  them  with  their 
own  senses.^ 

For  my  part,  I  believe  that  no  other  kind  of 
attraction  can  be  demonstrated  in  the  living 
body  save  that  of  the  nutriment,  which  gradu¬ 
ally  and  incessantly  passes  on  to  supply  the 
waste  that  takes  place  in  the  tissues;  in  the 
same  way  as  the  oil  rises  in  the  wick  of  a  lamp  to 
be  consumed  by  the  flame.  Whence  I  conclude 
that  the  primary  and  common  organ  of  all  sen¬ 
sible  attraction  and  impulsion  is  of  the  nature 
of  sinew  {nervus),  or  fibre,  or  muscle,  and  this  to 
the  end  that  it  may  be  contractile,  that  con¬ 
tracting  it  may  be  shortened,  and  so  either 
stretch  out,  draw  towards,  or  propel.  But  these 
topics  will  be  better  discussed  elsewhere,  when 
we  speak  of  the  organs  of  motion  in  the  animal 
body. 

^  See  chapter  14. 


319 

To  those  who  repudiate  the  circulation  be¬ 
cause  they  neither  see  the  efficient  nor  final 
cause  of  it,  and  who  exclaim,  cui  bono?  I  have 
yet  to  reply,  having  hitherto  taken  no  note  of 
the  ground  of  objection  which  they  take  up. 
And  first  I  own  I  am  of  opinion  that  our  first 
duty  is  to  inquire  whether  the  thing  be  or  not, 
before  asking  wherefore  it  is.f^  for  from  the  facts 
and  circumstances  which  meet  us  in  the  circula¬ 
tion  admitted,  established,  the  ends  and  objects 
of  its  institution  are  especially  to  be  sought. 
Meantime  I  would  only  ask,  how  many  things 
we  admit  in  physiology,  pathology,  and  thera¬ 
peutics,  the  causes  of  which  are  unknown  to  us } 
That  there  are  many,  no  one  doubts — the  causes 
of  putrid  fevers,  of  revulsions,  of  the  purgation 
of  excrementitious  matters,  among  the  number. 

Whoever,  therefore,  sets  himself  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  the  circulation,  because,  if  it  be  ac¬ 
knowledged,  he  cannot  account  fora  variety  of 
medical  problems,  nor  in  the  treatment  of  dis¬ 
eases  and  the  administration  of  medicines,  give 
satisfactory  reasons  for  the  phenomena  that  ap¬ 
pear;  or  who  will  not  see  that  the  precepts  he 
has  received  from  his  teachers  are  false;  or  who 
thinks  it  unseemly  to  give  up  accredited  opin¬ 
ions;  or  who  regards  it  as  in  some  sort  criminal 
to  call  in  question  doctrines  that  have  descended 
through  a  long  succession  of  ages,  and  carry  the 
authority  of  the  ancients — to  all  of  these  I  reply: 
that  the  facts  cognizable  by  the  senses  wait  upon 
no  opinions,  and  that  the  works  of  nature  bow  to 
no  antiquity;  for  indeed  there  is  nothing  either 
more  ancient  orof  higher  authority  than  nature. 

To  those  who  object  to  the  circulation  as 
throwing  obstacles  in  the  way  of  their  explana¬ 
tions  of  the  phenomena  that  occur  in  medical 
cases  (and  there  are  persons  who  will  not  be 
content  to  take  up  with  a  new  system,  unless  it 
explains  everything,  as  in  astronomy),  and  who 
oppose  it  with  their  own  erroneous  assump¬ 
tions,  such  as  that,  if  it  be  true,  phlebotomy 
cannot  cause  revulsion,  seeing  that  the  blood 
will  still  continue  to  be  forced  into  the  affected 
part;  that  the  passage  of  excrementitious  mat¬ 
ters  and  foul  humours  through  the  heart,  that 
most  noble  and  principal  viscus,  is  to  be  appre¬ 
hended;  that  an  efflux  and  excretion,  occasion¬ 
ally  of  foul  and  corrupt  blood,  takes  place  from 
the  same  body,  from  different  parts,  even  from 
the  same  part  and  at  the  same  time,  which, 
were  the  blood  agitated  by  a  continuous  cur¬ 
rent,  would  be  shaken  and  effectually  mixed  in 
passing  through  the  heart,  and  many  points  of 
the  like  kind  admitted  in  our  medical  schools, 
which  are  seen  to  be  repugnant  to  the  doctrine 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


320 

of  the  circulation — to  them  I  shall  not  answer 
further  here,  than  that  the  circulation  is  not 
always  the  same  in  every  place,  and  at  every 
time,  but  is  contingent  upon  many  circum¬ 
stances:  the  more  rapid  or  slower  motion  of  the 
blood,  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  heart  as 
the  propelling  organ,  the  quantity  and  quality 
or  constitution  of  the  blood,  the  rigidity  or 
laxity  of  the  tissues,  and  the  like.  A  thicker 
blood,  of  course,  moves  more  slowly  through 
narrower  channels;  it  is  more  effectually  strained 
in  its  passage  through  the  substance  of  the  liver 
than  through  that  of  the  lungs.  It  has  not  the 
same  velocity  through  flesh  and  the  softer  par¬ 
enchymatous  structures  and  through  sine^vy 
parts  of  greater  compactness  and  consistency: 
for  the  thinner  and  purer  and  more  spirituous 
part  permeates  more  quickly,  the  thicker  more 
earthy  and  indifferently  concocted  portion 
moves  more  slowly,  or  is  refused  admission.  The 
nutritive  portion,  or  ultimate  aliment  of  the 
tissues,  the  dew  or  cambium,  is  of  a  more  pene¬ 
trating  nature,  inasmuch  as  it  has  to  be  added 
everywhere,  and  to  everything  that  grows  and 
is  nourished  in  its  length  and  thickness,  even  to 
the  horns,  nails,  hair  and  feathers;  and  then  the 
excrementitious  matters  have  to  be  secreted  in 
some  places,  where  they  accumulate,  and  either 
prove  a  burthen  or  are  concocted.  But  I  do  not 
imagine  that  the  excrementitious  fluids  or  bad 
humours  when  once  separated,  nor  the  milk, 
the  phlegm,  and  the  spermatic  fluid,  nor  the 
ultimate  nutritive  part,  the  dew  or  cambium, 
necessarily  circulate  with  the  blood:  that  which 
nourishes  every  part  adheres  and  becomes  ag¬ 
glutinated  to  it.  Upon  each  of  these  topics  and 
various  others  besides,  to  be  discussed  and  dem¬ 
onstrated  in  their  several  places,  viz.,  in  the 
physiology  and  other  parts  of  the  art  of  medi¬ 
cine,  as  well  as  of  the  consequences,  advantages 
or  disadvantages  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood, 
I  do  not  mean  to  touch  here;  it  were  fruitless 
indeed  to  do  so  until  the  circulation  has  been  es¬ 
tablished  and  conceded  as  a  fact.  And  here  the 
example  of  astronomy  is  by  no  means  to  be  fol¬ 
lowed,  in  which  from  mere  appearances  or 
phenomena  that  which  is  in  fact,  and  the  reason 
wherefore  it  is  so,  are  investigated.  But  as  he 
who  inquires  into  the  cause  of  an  eclipse  must 
be  placed  beyond  the  moon  if  he  would  ascer¬ 
tain  it  by  sense,  and  not  by  reason,  still,  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  things  sensible,  things  that  come  un¬ 
der  the  cognizance  of  the  senses,  no  more  cer¬ 
tain  demonstration  or  means  of  gaining  faith 
can  be  adduced  than  examination  by  the  senses, 
than  ocular  inspection. 


There  is  one  remarkable  experiment  which  I 
would  have  every  one  try  who  is  anxious  for 
truth,  and  by  which  it  is  clearly  shown  that  the 
arterial  pulse  is  owing  to  the  impulse  of  the 
blood.  Let  a  portion  of  the  dried  intestine  of  a 
dog  or  wolf,  or  any  other  animal,  such  as  we  see 
hung  up  in  the  druggists’  shops,  be  taken  and 
filled  with  water,  and  then  secured  at  both  ends 
like  a  sausage:  by  tapping  with  the  finger  at  one 
extremity,  you  will  immediately  feel  a  pulse 
and  vibration  in  any  other  part  to  which  you 
apply  the  fingers,  as  you  do  when  you  feel  the 
pulse  at  the  wrist.  In  this  way,  indeed,  and  also 
by  means  of  a  distended  vein,  you  may  accurate¬ 
ly  either  in  the  dead  or  living  body,  imitate 
and  show  every  variety  of  the  pulse,  whether  as 
to  force,  frequency,  volume,  rhythm,  &c.  Just 
as  in  a  long  bladder  full  of  fluid,  or  in  an  oblong 
drum,  every  stroke  upon  one  end  is  imme¬ 
diately  felt  at  the  other;  so  also  in  a  dropsy  of  the 
belly  and  in  abscesses  under  the  skin,  we  are  ac¬ 
customed  to  distinguish  between  collections  of 
fluid  and  of  air,  between  anasarca  and  tympan¬ 
ites  in  particular.  If  a  slap  or  push  given  on  one 
side  is  clearly  felt  by  a  hand  placed  on  the  other 
side,  we  Judge  the  case  to  be  tympanites,  not,  as 
falsely  asserted,  because  we  hear  a  sound  like 
that  of  a  drum,  and  this  produced  by  flatus, 
which  never  happens;  but  because,  as  in  a 
drum,  even  the  slightest  tap  passes  through  and 
produces  a  certain  vibration  on  the  opposite 
side;  for  it  indicates  that  there  is  a  serous  and 
ichorous  substance  present,  of  such  a  consist¬ 
ency  as  urine,  and  not  any  sluggish  or  viscid 
matter  as  in  anasarca,  which  when  struck  re¬ 
tains  the  impress  of  the  blow  or  pressure,  and 
does  not  transmit  the  impulse. 

Having  brought  forward  this  experiment  I 
may  observe  that  a  most  formidable  objection 
to  the  circulation  of  the  blood  rises  out  of  it, 
which,  however,  has  neither  been  observed  nor 
adduced  by  anyone  who  has  written  against 
me.  When  we  see  by  the  experiment  just  de¬ 
scribed,  that  the  systole  and  diastole  of  the 
pulse  can  be  accurately  imitated  without  any 
escape  of  fluid,  it  is  obvious  that  the  same  thing 
may  take  place  in  the  arteries  from  the  stroke 
of  the  heart,  without  the  necessity  for  a  circu¬ 
lation,  but  like  Euripus,  with  a  mere  motion  of 
the  blood  alternately  backwards  and  forwards. 
But  we  have  already  satis&ctorily  replied  to 
this  difficulty;  and  now  we  venture  to  say  that 
the  thing  could  not  be  so  in  the  arteries  of  a  liv¬ 
ing  animal;  to  be  assured  of  this  it  is  enough  to 
see  that  the  right  auricle  is  incessantly  injecting 
the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  with  blood,  the 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


return  of  which  is  effectually  prevented  by  the 
tricuspid  valves;  the  left  auricle  in  like  manner 
filling  the  left  ventricle,  the  return  of  the  blood 
there  being  opposed  by  the  mitral  valves;  and 
then  the  ventricles  in  their  turn  are  propelling 
the  blood  into  either  great  artery,  the  reflux  in 
each  being  prevented  by  the  sigmoid  valves  in 
its  orifice.  Either,  consequently,  the  blood  must 
move  on  incessantly  through  the  lungs,  and  in 
like  manner  within  the  arteries  of  the  body,  or 
stagnating  and  pent  up,  it  must  rupture  the 
containing  vessels,  or  choke  the  heart  by  over 
distension,  as  I  have  shown  it  to  do  in  the  vivi¬ 
section  of  a  snake,  described  in  my  book  On  the 
Motion  of  the  Blood.  To  resolve  this  doubt  I 
shall  relate  two  experiments  among  many 
others,  the  first  of  which,  indeed,  I  have  al¬ 
ready  adduced,  and  which  show  with  singular 
clearness  that  the  blood  flows  incessantly  and 
with  great  force  and  in  ample  abundance  in  the 
veins  towards  the  heart.  The  internal  jugular 
vein  of  a  live  fallow  deer  having  been  exposed 
(many  of  the  nobility  and  his  Most  Serene 
Majesty  the  King,  my  master,  being  present), 
was  divided;  but  a  few  drops  of  blood  were  ob¬ 
served  to  escape  from  the  lower  orifice  rising  up 
from  under  the  clavicle;  whilst  from  the  supe¬ 
rior  orifice  of  the  vein  and  coming  down  from 
the  head,  a  round  torrent  of  blood  gushed  forth. 
You  may  observe  the  same  fact  any  day  in 
practising  phlebotomy:  if  with  a  finger  you 
compress  the  vein  a  little  below  the  orifice,  the 
flow  of  blood  is  immediately  arrested;  but  the 
pressure  being  removed,  forthwith  the  flow  re¬ 
turns  as  before. 

From  any  long  vein  of  the  forearm  get  rid  of 
the  blood  as  much  as  possible  by  holding  the 
hand  aloft  and  pressing  the  blood  towards  the 
trunk,  you  will  perceive  the  vein  collapsed  and 
leaving,  as  it  were,  in  a  furrow  of  the  skin;  but 
now  compress  the  vein  with  the  point  of  a  fin¬ 
ger,  and  you  will  immediately  perceive  all  that 
part  of  it  which  is  towards  the  hand,  to  enlarge 
and  to  become  distended  with  the  blood  that  is 
coming  from  the  hand.  How  comes  it  when  the 
breath  is  held  and  the  lungs  thereby  com¬ 
pressed,  a  large  quantity  of  air  having  been 
taken  in,  that  the  vessels  of  the  chest  are  at  the 
same  time  obstructed,  the  blood  driven  into 
the  face,  and  the  eyes  rendered  red  and  suf¬ 
fused  Why  is  it,  as  Aristotle  asks  in  his  Prob- 
lemSy  that  all  the  actions  are  more  energetically 
performed  when  the  breath  is  held  than  when 
it  is  given?  In  like  manner,  when  the  frontal 
and  lingual  veins  are  incised,  the  blood  is  made 
to  flow  more  freely  by  compressing  the  neck 


and  holding  the  breath.  I  have  several  times 
opened  the  breast  and  pericardium  of  a  man 
within  two  hours  after  his  execution  by  hang¬ 
ing,  and  before  the  colour  had  totally  left  the 
face,  and  in  presence  of  many  witnesses,  have 
demonstrated  the  right  auricle  of  the  heart  and 
the  lungs  distended  with  blood;  the  auricle  in 
particular  of  the  size  of  a  large  man’s  fist,  and  so 
full  of  blood  that  it  looked  as  if  it  would  burst. 
This  great  distension,  however,  had  disap¬ 
peared  next  day,  the  body  having  stiffened  and 
become  cold,  and  the  blood  having  made  its 
escape  through  various  channels.  These  and 
other  similar  facts,  therefore,  make  it  suf¬ 
ficiently  certain  that  the  blood  flows  through 
the  whole  of  the  veins  of  the  body  towards  the 
base  of  the  heart,  and  that  unless  there  was  a 
further  passage  afforded  it,  it  would  be  pent  up 
in  these  channels,  or  would  oppress  and  over¬ 
whelm  the  heart;  as  on  the  other  hand,  did  it 
not  flow  outwards  by  the  arteries,  but  was 
found  regurgitating,  it  would  soon  be  seen  how 
much  it  would  oppress. 

I  add  another  observation.  A  noble  knight. 
Sir  Robert  Darcy,  an  ancestor  of  that  cele¬ 
brated  physician  and  most  learned  man,  my 
very  dear  friend  Dr.  Argent,  when  he  had 
reached  to  about  the  middle  period  of  life, 
made  frequent  complaint  of  a  certain  distressing 
pain  in  the  chest,  especially  in  the  night  season; 
so  that  dreading  at  one  time  syncope,  at  an¬ 
other  suffocation  in  his  attacks  he  led  an  un¬ 
quiet  and  anxious  life.  He  tried  many  reme¬ 
dies  in  vain,  having  had  the  advice  of  almost 
every  medical  man.  The  disease  going  on  from 
bad  to  worse,  he  by  and  by  became  cachectic  and 
dropsical,  and  finally,  grievously  distressed,  he 
died  in  one  of  his  paroxysms.  In  the  body  of 
this  gentlenian,  at  the  inspection  of  which 
there  were  present  Dr.  Argent,  then  president 
of  the  College  of  Physicians,  and  Dr.  Gorge,  a 
distinguished  theologian  and  preacher,  who  was 
pastor  of  the  parish,  we  found  the  wall  of  the 
left  ventricle  of  the  heart  ruptured,  having  a 
rent  in  it  of  size  sufficient  to  admit  any  of  my 
fingers,  although  the  wall  itself  appeared  suf¬ 
ficiently  thick  and  strong;  this  laceration  had 
apparently  been  caused  by  an  impediment  to 
the  passage  of  the  blood  from  the  left  ventricle 
into  the  arteries. 

I  was  acquainted  with  another  strong  man, 
who  having  received  an  injury  and  affront  from 
one  more  powerful  than  himself,  and  upon 
whom  he  could  not  have  his  revenge,  was  so 
overcome  with  hatred  and  spite  and  passion, 
which  he  yet  communicated  to  no  one,  that  at 


WILLIANl  HARVEY 


322 

last  he  fell  into  a  strange  distemper,  suffering 
from  extreme  oppression  and  pain  of  the  heart 
and  breast,  and  the  prescriptions  of  none  of  the 
ver)'  best  physicians  proving  of  any  avail,  he 
fell  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  into  a  scorbutic 
and  cachectic  state,  became  tabid  and  died. 
This  patient  only  received  some  little  relief 
when  the  whole  of  his  chest  was  pummelled  or 
kneaded  by  a  strong  man,  as  a  baker  kneads 
dough.  His  friends  thought  him  poisoned  by 
some  maleficent  influence,  or  possessed  with  an 
evil  spirit.  His  jugular  arteries,  enlarged  to  the 
size  of  the  thumb,  looked  like  the  aorta  itself, 
or  they  were  as  large  as  the  descending  aorta; 
they  had  pulsated  violently,  and  appeared  like 
two  long  aneurisms.  These  symptoms  had  led 
to  tr)'ing  the  effects  of  arteriotomy  in  the  tem¬ 
ples,  but  with  no  relief.  In  the  dead  body  I 
found  the  heart  and  aorta  so  much  gorged  and 
distended  with  blood,  that  the  cavities  of  the 
ventricles  equalled  those  of  a  bullock’s  heart  in 
size.  Such  is  the  force  of  the  blood  pent  up,  and 
such  are  the  effects  of  its  impulse. 

We  may,  therefore,  conclude,  that  although 
there  may  be  impulse  without  any  exit,  as  il¬ 
lustrated  in  the  experiment  lately  spoken  of, 
still  that  this  could  not  take  place  in  the  vessels 
of  living  creatures  without  most  serious  dangers 
and  impediments.  From  this,  however,  it  is 
manifest  that  the  blood  in  its  course  does  not 
everywhere  pass  with  the  same  celerity,  nei¬ 
ther  with  the  same  force  in  all  places  and  at  all 
times,  but  that  it  varies  greatly  according  to 
age,  sex,  temperament,  habit  of  body,  and 
other  contingent  circumstances,  external  as 
well  as  internal,  natural  or  non-natural.  For  it 
does  not  course  through  intricate  and  obstruct¬ 
ed  passages  with  the  same  readiness  that  it  does 
through  straight,  unimpeded,  and  pervious 
channels.  Neither  does  it  run  through  close, 
hard,  and  crowded  parts  with  the  same  velocity 
as  through  spongy,  soft,  and  permeable  tissues. 
Neither  does  it  flow  and  penetrate  with  such 
swiftness  when  the  impulse  is  slow  and  weak,  as 
when  this  is  forcible  and  frequent,  in  which 
case  the  blood  is  driven  onwards  with  vigour 
and  in  large  quantity.  Nor  is  the  same  blood, 
when  it  has  become  more  consistent  or  earthy, 
so  penetrati\'e  as  when  it  is  more  serous  and  at¬ 
tenuated  or  liquid.  And  then  it  seems  only  rea¬ 
sonable  to  think  that  the  blood  in  its  circuit 
passes  more  slowly  through  the  kidneys  than 
through  the  substance  of  the  heart;  more  swift¬ 
ly  through  the  liver  than  through  the  kidneys; 
through  the  spleen  more  quickly  than  through 
the  lungs,  and  through  the  lungs  more  .speedily 


than  through  any  of  the  other  viscera  or  the 
muscles,  in  proportion  always  to  the  denseness 
or  sponginess  of  the  tissue  of  each. 

We  may  be  permitted  to  take  the  same  view 
of  the  influence  of  age,  sex,  temperament,  and 
habit  of  body,  whether  this  be  hard  or  soft;  of 
that  of  the  ambient  cold  which  condenses  bod¬ 
ies,  and  makes  the  veins  in  the  extremities  to 
shrink  and  almost  to  disappear,  and  deprives 
the  surface  both  of  colour  and  heat;  and  also  of 
that  of  meat  and  drink  which  render  the  blood 
more  watery,  by  supplying  fresh  nutritive  mat¬ 
ter.  From  the  veins,  therefore,  the  blood  flows 
more  freely  in  phlebotomy  when  the  body  is 
warm  than  when  it  is  cold.  We  also  obsers'e  the 
signal  influence  of  the  affections  of  the  mind 
when  a  timid  person  is  bled  and  happens  to 
faint:  immediately  the  flow  of  blood  is  arrested, 
a  deadly  pallor  overspreads  the  surface,  the 
limbs  stiffen,  the  ears  sing,  the  eyes  are  dazzled 
or  blinded,  and,  as  it  were,  convulsed.  But  here 
I  come  upon  a  field  where  I  might  roam  freely 
and  give  myself  up  to  speculation.  And,  in¬ 
deed,  such  a  flood  of  light  and  truth  breaks  in 
upon  me  here;  occasion  offers  of  explaining  so 
many  problems,  of  resolving  so  many  doubts, 
of  discovering  the  causes  of  so  many  slighter  and 
more  serious  diseases,  and  of  suggesting  reme¬ 
dies  for  their  cure,  that  the  subject  seems  al¬ 
most  to  demand  a  separate  treatise.  And  it  will 
be  my  business  in  my  Medical  Obsewations,  to 
lay  before  my  reader  matter  upon  all  these  top¬ 
ics  which  shall  be  worthy  of  the  gravest  con¬ 
sideration. 

And  what  indeed  is  more  deserving  of  atten¬ 
tion  than  the  fact  that  in  almost  every  affec¬ 
tion,  appetite,  hope,  or  fear,  our  body  suffers, 
the  countenance  changes,  and  the  blood  appears 
to  course  hither  and  thither.  In  anger  the  eyes 
are  fiery  and  the  pupils  contracted;  in  modesty 
the  cheeks  are  suffused  with  blushes;  in  fear, 
and  under  a  sense  of  infamy  and  of  shame,  the 
face  is  pale,  but  the  ears  burn  as  if  for  the  evil 
they  heard  or  were  to  hear;  in  lust  how  quickly 
is  the  member  distended  with  blood  and  erect¬ 
ed!  But,  above  all,  and  this  is  of  the  highest  in¬ 
terest  to  the  medical  practitioner,  how  speedily 
is  pain  relieved  or  removed  by  the  detraction 
of  blood,  the  application  of  cupping-glasses,  or 
the  compression  of  the  arter\'  which  leads  to  a 
part!  It  sometimes  vanishes  as  if  by  magic.  But 
these  are  topics  that  I  must  refer  to  my  Medical 
Observations^  where  they  will  be  found  exposed 
at  length  and  explained. 

Some  weak  and  inexperienced  persons  vainly 
seek  by  dialectics  and  far-fetched  arguments. 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


either  to  upset  or  establish  things  that  are  only 
to  be  founded  on  anatomical  demonstration, 
and  believed  on  the  evidence  of  the  senses.  He 
who  truly  desires  to  be  informed  of  the  question 
in  hand,  and  whether  the  facts  alleged  be  sensi¬ 
ble,  visible,  or  not,  must  be  held  bound  either 
to  look  for  himself,  or  to  take  on  trust  the  con¬ 
clusions  to  which  they  have  come  who  have 
looked;  and  indeed  there  is  no  higher  method  of 
attaining  to  assurance  and  certainty.  Who 
would  pretend  to  persuade  those  who  had  never 
tasted  wine  that  it  was  a  drink  much  pleasanter 
to  the  palate  than  water.?  By  what  reasoning 
should  we  give  the  blind  from  birth  to  know 
that  the  sun  was  luminous,  and  far  surpassed  the 
stars  in  brightness?  And  so  it  is  with  the  circu¬ 
lation  of  the  blood,  which  the  world  has  now 
had  before  it  for  so  many  years,  illustrated  by 
proofs  cognizable  by  the  senses,  and  confirmed 
by  various  experiments.  No  one  has  yet  been 
found  to  dispute  the  sensible  facts,  the  motion, 
efflux  and  afflux  of  the  blood,  by  like  observa¬ 
tions  based  on  the  evidence  of  sense,  or  to 
oppose  the  experiments  adduced,  by  other 
experiments  of  the  same  character;  nay,  no  one 
has  yet  attempted  an  opposition  on  the  ground 
of  ocular  testimony. 

There  have  not  been  wanting  many  who,  in¬ 
experienced  and  ignorant  of  anatomy,  and  mak¬ 
ing  no  appeal  to  the  senses  in  their  opposition, 
have,  on  the  contrary,  met  it  with  empty  as¬ 
sertions,  and  mere  suppositions,  with  assertions 
derived  from  the  lessons  of  teachers  and  cap¬ 
tious  cavillings;  many,  too,  have  vainly  sought 
refuge  in  words,  and  these  not  always  very 
nicely  chosen,  but  reproachful  and  contume¬ 
lious;  which,  however,  have  no  further  effect 
than  to  expose  their  utterer’s  vanity  and  weak¬ 
ness,  and  ill  breeding  and  lack  of  the  arguments 
that  are  to  be  sought  in  the  conclusions  of  the 
senses,  and  false  sophistical  reasonings  that  seem 
utterly  opposed  to  sense.  Even  as  the  waves  of 
the  Sicilian  sea,  excited  by  the  blast,  dash 
against  the  rocks  around  Charybdis,  and  then 
hiss  and  foam,  and  are  tossed  hither  and  thither; 
so  do  they  who  reason  against  the  evidence  of 
their  senses. 

Were  nothing  to  be  acknowledged  by  the 
senses  without  evidence  derived  from  reason,  or 
occasionally  even  contrary  to  the  previously  re¬ 
ceived  conclusions  of  reason,  there  would  now 
be  no  problem  left  for  discussion.  Had  we  not 
our  most  perfect  assurances  by  the  senses,  and 
were  not  their  perceptions  confirmed  by  rea¬ 
soning,  in  the  same  way  as  geometricians  pro¬ 
ceed  with  their  figures,  we  should  admit  no 


science  of  any  kind;  for  it  is  the  business  of  ge¬ 
ometry,  from  things  sensible,  to  make  rational 
demonstration  of  things  that  are  not  sensible; 
to  render  credible  or  certain  things  abstruse 
and  beyond  sense  from  things  more  manifest 
and  better  known.  Aristotle  counsels  us  better 
when,  in  treating  of  the  generation  of  bees,  he 
says:  “Faith  is  to  be  given  to  reason,  if  the  mat¬ 
ters  demonstrated  agree  with  those  that  are 
perceived  by  the  senses;  when  the  things  have 
been  thoroughly  scrutinized,  then  are  the  senses 
to  be  trusted  rather  than  the  reason.”^  Whence 
it  is  our  duty  to  approve  or  disapprove,  to  re¬ 
ceive  or  reject  everything  only  after  the  most 
careful  examination;  but  to  examine,  to  test 
whether  anything  have  been  well  or  ill  ad¬ 
vanced,  to  ascertain  whether  some  falsehood 
does  not  lurk  under  a  proposition,  it  is  impera¬ 
tive  on  us  to  bring  it  to  the  proof  of  sense,  and 
to  admit  or  reject  it  on  the  decision  of  sense. 
Whence  Plato  in  his  Critias^  says  that  the  ex¬ 
planation  of  those  things  is  not  difficult  of 
which  we  can  have  experience;  whilst  they  are 
not  of  apt  scientific  apprehension  who  have  no 
experience. 

How  difficult  is  it  to  teach  those  who  have  no 
experience,  the  things  of  which  they  have  not 
any  knowledge  by  their  senses!  And  how  use¬ 
less  and  intractable,  and  unimpregnable  to  true 
science  are  such  auditors!  They  show  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  the  blind  in  regard  to  colours,  of  the 
deaf  in  reference  to  concords.  Who  ever  pre¬ 
tended  to  teach  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide,  or 
from  a  diagram  to  demonstrate  the  measure¬ 
ments  of  the  angles  and  the  proportions  of  the 
sides  of  a  triangle  to  a  blind  man,  or  to  one  who 
had  never  seen  the  sea  nor  a  diagram  ?  He  who 
is  not  conversant  with  anatomy,  inasmuch  as 
he  forms  no  conception  of  the  subject  from  the 
evidence  of  his  own  eyes,  is  virtually  blind  to 
all  that  concerns  anatomy,  and  unfit  to  appre¬ 
ciate  what  is  founded  thereon;  he  knows  noth¬ 
ing  of  that  which  occupies  the  attention  of  the 
anatomist,  nor  of  the  principles  inherent  in 
the  nature  of  the  things  which  guide  him  in  his 
reasonings;  facts  and  inferences  as  well  as  their 
sources  are  alike  unknown  to  such  a  one.  But 
no  kind  of  science  can  possibly  flow,  save  from 
some  preexisting  knowledge  of  more  obvious 
things;  and  this  is  one  main  reason  why  our 
science  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  celestial  bod¬ 
ies,  is  so  uncertain  and  conjectural.  I  would  ask 
of  those  who  profess  a  knowledge  of  the  causes 
of  all  things,  why  the  two  eyes  keep  constantly 
moving  together,  up  or  down,  to  this  side  or  to 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  in.  lo. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


324 

that,  and  not  independently,  one  looking  this 
way,  another  that;  why  the  two  auricles  of  the 
heart  contract  simultaneously,  and  the  like? 
Are  fevers,  pestilence,  and  the  wonderful  prop¬ 
erties  of  various  medicines  to  be  denied  because 
their  causes  are  unknown  ?  Who  can  tell  us  why 
the  foetus  in  utero,  breathing  no  air  up  to  the 
tenth  month  of  its  existence,  is  yet  not  suffo¬ 
cated?  Born  in  the  course  of  the  seventh  or 
eighth  month,  and  having  once  breathed,  it  is 
nevertheless  speedily  suffocated  if  its  respira¬ 
tion  be  interrupted.  Why  can  the  foetus  still 
contained  within  the  uterus,  or  enveloped  in 
the  membranes,  live  without  respiration;  whilst 
once  exposed  to  the  air,  unless  it  breathes  it  in¬ 
evitably  dies?^ 

Observing  that  many  hesitate  to  acknowl¬ 
edge  the  circulation,  and  others  oppose  it,  be¬ 
cause,  as  I  conceive,  they  have  not  rightly  un¬ 
derstood  me,  I  shall  here  recapitulate  briefly 
what  I  have  said  in  my  work  On  the  Motion  of 
the  Heart  and  Blood.  The  blood  contained  in  the 
veins,  in  its  magazine,  and  where  it  is  collected 
in  largest  quantity,  viz.,  in  the  vena  cava,  close 
to  the  base  of  the  heart  and  right  auricle,  grad¬ 
ually  increasing  in  temperature  by  its  internal 
heat,  and  becoming  attenuated,  swells  and  rises 
like  bodies  in  a  state  of  fermentation,  whereby 
the  auricle  being  dilated,  and  then  contracting, 
in  virtue  of  its  pulsative  power,  forthwith  de¬ 
livers  its  charge  into  the  right  ventricle;  which 
being  filled,  and  the  systole  ensuing,  the  charge, 
hindered  from  returning  into  the  auricle  by  the 
tricuspid  valves,  is  forced  into  the  pulmonary 
artery,  which  stands  open  to  receive  it,  and  is 
immediately  distended  with  it.  Once  in  the 
pulmonary  artery,  the  blood  cannot  return,  by 
reason  of  the  sigmoid  valves;  and  then  the 
lungs,  alternately  expanded  and  contracted 
during  inspiration  and  expiration,  afford  it  pas¬ 
sage  by  the  proper  vessels  into  the  pulmonary 
veins;  from  the  pulmonary  veins,  the  left  auri¬ 
cle,  acting  equally  and  synchronously  with  the 
right  auricle,  delivers  the  blood  into  the  left 
ventricle;  which  acting  harmoniously  with  the 
right  ventricle,  and  all  regress  being  prevented 
by  the  mitral  valves,  the  blood  is  projected  into 
the  aorta,  and  consequently  impelled  into  all 
the  arteries  of  the  body.  The  arteries,  filled  by 
this  sudden  push,  as  they  cannot  discharge 
themselves  so  speedily,  are  distended;  they  re¬ 
ceive  a  shock,  or  undergo  their  diastole.  But  as 
this  process  goes  on  incessantly,  I  infer  that  the 
arteries  both  of  the  lungs  and  of  the  body  at' 

^  See  Chapter  6,  of  the  Disquisition  on  the  Motion  of 
the  Heart  and  Blood. 


large,  under  the  influence  of  such  a  multitude 
of  strokes  of  the  heart  and  injections  of  blood, 
would  finally  become  so  over-gorged  and  dis¬ 
tended  that  either  any  further  injection  must 
cease,  or  the  vessels  would  burst,  or  the  whole 
blood  in  the  body  would  accumulate  within 
them,  were  there  not  an  exit  provided  for  it. 

The  same  reasoning  is  applicable  to  the  ven¬ 
tricles  of  the  heart:  distended  by  the  ceaseless 
action  of  the  auricles,  did  they  not  disburthen 
themselves  by  the  channels  of  the  arteries,  they 
would  by  and  by  become  over-gorged,  and  be 
fixed  and  made  incapable  of  all  motion.  Now 
this,  my  conclusion,  is  true  and  necessary,  if 
my  premises  be  true;  but  that  these  are  either 
true  or  false,  our  senses  must  inform  us,  not  our 
reason— ocular  inspection,  not  any  process  of 
the  mind. 

I  maintain,  further,  that  the  blood  in  the 
veins  always  and  everywhere  flows  from  less  to 
greater  branches,  and  from  every  part  towards 
the  heart;  whence  I  gather  that  the  whole 
charge  which  the  arteries  receive,  and  which  is 
incessantly  thrown  into  them,  is  delivered  to 
the  veins,  and  flows  back  by  them  to  the  source 
whence  it  came.  In  this  way,  indeed,  is  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  the  blood  established:  by  an  efflux 
and  reflux  from  and  to  the  heart;  the  fluid  be¬ 
ing  forcibly  projected  into  the  arterial  system, 
and  then  absorbed  and  imbibed  from  every 
part  by  the  veins,  it  returns  through  these  in  a 
continuous  stream.  That  all  this  is  so,  sense  as¬ 
sures  us;  and  necessary  inference  from  the  per¬ 
ceptions  of  sense  takes  away  all  occasion  for 
doubt.  Lastly,  this  is  what  I  have  striven,  by 
my  observations  and  experiments,  to  illustrate 
and  make  known;  I  have  not  endeavoured  from 
causes  and  probable  principles  to  demonstrate 
my  propositions,  but,  as  of  higher  authority,  to 
establish  them  by  appeals  to  sense  and  experi¬ 
ment,  after  the  manner  of  anatomists. 

And  here  I  would  refer  to  the  amount  of 
force,  even  of  violence,  which  sight  and  touch 
make  us  aware  of  in  the  heart  and  greater  arter¬ 
ies;  and  to  the  systole  and  diastole  constituting 
the  pulse  in  the  large  warm-blooded  animals, 
which  I  do  not  say  is  equal  in  all  the  vessels  con¬ 
taining  blood,  nor  in  all  animals  that  have 
blood;  but  which  is  of  such  a  nature  and 
amount  in  all,  that  a  flow  and  rapid  passage  of 
the  blood  through  the  smaller  arteries,  the  in¬ 
terstices  of  the  tissues,  and  the  branches  of  the 
veins,  must  of  necessity  take  place;  and,  there¬ 
fore,  there  is  a  circulation. 

For  neither  do  the  most  minute  arteries,  nor 
the  veins,  pulsate;  but  the  larger  arteries  and 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


those  near  the  heart  pulsate,  because  they  do 
not  transmit  the  blood  so  quickly  as  they  re¬ 
ceive  itd  Having  exposed  an  artery,  and  di¬ 
vided  it  so  that  the  blood  shall  flow  out  as  fast 
and  freely  as  it  is  received,  you  will  scarcely 
perceive  any  pulse  in  that  vessel;  and  for  the 
simple  reason  that,  an  open  passage  being  af¬ 
forded,  the  blood  escapes,  merely  passing 
through  the  vessel,  not  distending  it.  In  fishes, 
serpents,  and  the  colder  animals,  the  heart 
beats  so  slowly  and  feebly  that  a  pulse  can 
scarcely  be  perceived  in  the  arteries;  the  blood 
in  them  is  transmitted  gradually.  Whence  in 
them,  as  also  in  the  smaller  branches  of  the  ar¬ 
teries  in  man,  there  is  no  distinction  between 
the  coats  of  the  arteries  and  veins,  because  the 
arteries  have  to  sustain  no  shock  from  the  im¬ 
pulse  of  the  blood. 

An  artery  denuded  and  divided  in  the  way  I 
have  indicated,  sustains  no  shock,  and  therefore 
does  not  pulsate;  whence  it  clearly  appears  that 
the  arteries  have  no  inherent  pulsative  power, 
and  that  neither  do  they  derive  any  from  the 
heart;  but  that  they  undergo  their  diastole 
solely  from  the  impulse  of  the  blood ;  for  in  the 
full  stream,  flowing  to  a  distance,  you  may  see 
the  systole  and  diastole,  all  the  motions  of  the 
heart — their  order,  force,  rhythm,  &c.,^  as  it 
were  in  a  mirror,  and  even  perceive  them  by 
the  touch.  Precisely  as  in  the  water  that  is 
forced  aloft,  through  a  leaden  pipe,  by  work¬ 
ing  the  piston  of  a  forcing-pump,  each  stroke  of 
which,  though  the  jet  be  many  feet  distant,  is 
nevertheless  distinctly  perceptible — the  begin¬ 
ning,  increasing  strength,  and  end  of  the  im¬ 
pulse,  as  well  as  its  amount,  and  the  regularity 
or  irregularity  with  which  it  is  given,  being  in¬ 
dicated,  the  same  precisely  is  the  case  from  the 
orifice  of  a  divided  artery;  whence,  as  in  the  in¬ 
stance  of  the  forcing  engine  quoted,  you  will 
perceive  that  the  efflux  is  uninterrupted,  al¬ 
though  the  Jet  is  alternately  greater  and  less. 
In  the  arteries,  therefore,  besides  the  concussion 
or  impulse  of  the  blood,  the  pulse  or  beat  of  the 
artery,  which  is  not  equally  exhibited  in  all, 
there  is  a  perpetual  flow  and  motion  of  the 
blood,  which  returns  in  an  unbroken  stream  to 
the  point  from  whence  it  commenced — the 
right  auricle  of  the  heart. 

All  these  points  you  may  satisfy  yourself 
upon,  by  exposing  one  of  the  longer  arteries, 
and  having  taken  it  between  your  finger  and 
thumb,  dividing  it  on  the  side  remote  from  the 

^  See  Chapter  3,  of  the  Disquisition  on  the  Motion  of 
the  Heart  and  Blood. 

^Ibid. 


heart.  By  the  greater  or  less  pressure  of  your 
fingers,  you  can  have  the  vessel  pulsating  less  or 
more,  or  losing  the  pulse  entirely,  and  recover¬ 
ing  it  at  will.  And  as  these  things  proceed  thus 
when  the  chest  is  uninjured,  so  also  do  they  go 
on  for  a  short  time  when  the  thorax  is  laid  open, 
and  the  lungs  having  collapsed,  all  the  respira¬ 
tory  motions  have  ceased;  here,  nevertheless, 
for  a  little  while  you  may  perceive  the  left  auri¬ 
cle  contracting  and  emptying  itself,  and  becom¬ 
ing  whiter;  but  by  and  by  growing  weaker  and 
weaker,  it  begins  to  intermit,  as  does  the  left 
ventricle  also,  and  then  it  ceases  to  beat  alto¬ 
gether,  and  becomes  quiescent.  Along  with 
this,  and  in  the  same  measure,  does  the  stream 
of  blood  from  the  divided  artery  grow  less  and 
less,  the  pulse  of  the  vessel  weaker  and  weaker, 
until  at  last,  the  supply  of  blood  and  the  im¬ 
pulse  of  the  left  ventricle  failing,  nothing  es¬ 
capes  from  it.  You  may  perform  the  same  ex¬ 
periment,  tying  the  pulmonary  veins,  and  so 
taking  away  the  pulse  of  the  left  auricle,  or 
relaxing  the  ligature,  and  restoring  it  at  pleas¬ 
ure.  In  this  experiment,  too,  you  will  observe 
what  happens  in  moribund  animals,  viz.,  that 
the  left  ventricle  first  ceases  from  pulsation  and 
motion,  then  the  left  auricle,  next  the  right 
ventricle,  finally  the  right  auricle;  so  that 
where  the  vital  force  and  pulse  first  begin,  there 
do  they  also  last  fail. 

All  of  these  particulars  having  been  recog¬ 
nized  by  the  senses,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
blood  passes  through  the  lungs,  not  through 
the  septum,  and  only  through  them  when  they 
are  moved  in  the  act  of  respiration,  not  when 
they  are  collapsed  and  quiescent;  whence  we  see 
the  probable  reason  wherefore  nature  has  in¬ 
stituted  the  foramen  ovale  in  the  foetus,  instead 
of  sending  the  blood  by  the  way  of  the  pulmo¬ 
nary  artery  into  the  left  auricle  and  ventricle, 
which  foramen  she  closes  when  the  newborn 
creature  begins  to  breathe  freely.  We  can  also 
now  understand  why,  when  the  vessels  of  the 
lungs  become  congested  and  oppressed,  and  in 
those  who  are  affected  with  serious  diseases,  it 
should  be  so  dangerous  and  fatal  a  symptom 
when  the  respiratoryorgans  become  implicated. 

We  perceive,  further,  why  the  blood  is  so 
florid  in  the  lungs,  which  is,  because  it  is  thin¬ 
ner,  as  having  there  to  undergo  filtration. 

Still  further;  from  the  summary  which  pre¬ 
cedes,  and  by  way  of  satisfying  those  who  are 
importunate  in  regard  to  the  causes  of  the  cir¬ 
culation,  and  incline  to  regard  the  power  of  the 
heart  as  competent  to  everything — as  that  it  is 
not  only  the  seat  and  source  of  the  pulse  which 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


326 

propels  the  blood,  but  also,  as  Aristotle  thinks, 
of  the  power  which  attracts  and  produces  it; 
moreover,  that  the  spirits  are  engendered  by  the 
heart,  and  the  influxive  vital  heat,  in  virtue  of 
the  innate  heat  of  the  heart,  as  the  immediate 
instrument  of  the  soul,  or  common  bond  and 
prime  organ  in  the  performance  of  every  act  of 
vitality;  in  a  word,  that  the  motion,  perfec¬ 
tion,  heat,  and  every  property  besides  of  the 
blood  and  spirits  are  derived  from  the  heart,  as 
their  fountain  or  original  (a  doctrine  as  old  as 
Aristotle,  who  maintained  all  these  qualities  to 
inhere  in  the  blood,  as  heat  inheres  in  boiling 
water  or  pottage),  and  that  the  heart  is  the 
primary  cause  of  pulsation  and  life;  to  those 
persons,  did  I  speak  openly,  I  should  say  that  I 
do  not  agree  with  the  common  opinion;  there 
are  numerous  particulars  to  be  noted  in  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  the  parts  of  the  body  which  incline 
me  this  way,  but  which  it  does  not  seem  ex¬ 
pedient  to  enter  upon  here.  Before  long,  per¬ 
haps,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  lay  before  the 
world  things  that  are  more  wonderful  than 
these,  and  that  are  calculated  to  throw  still 
greater  light  upon  natural  philosophy. 

Meantime  I  shall  only  say,  and,  without  pre¬ 
tending  to  demonstrate  it,  propound — with  the 
good  leave  of  our  learned  men,  and  with  all  re¬ 
spect  for  antiquity— that  the  heart,  with  the 
veins  and  arteries  and  the  blood  they  contain, 
is  to  be  regarded  as  the  beginning  and  author, 
the  fountain  and  original  of  all  things  in  the 
body,  the  primary  cause  of  life;  and  this  in  the 
same  acceptation  as  the  brain  with  its  nerves, 
organs  of  sense  and  spinal  marrow  inclusive,  is 
spoken  of  as  the  one  and  general  organ  of  sensa¬ 
tion.  But  if  by  the  word  “heart”  the  mere  body 
of  the  heart,  made  up  of  its  auricles  and  ven¬ 
tricles,  be  understood,  then  I  do  not  believe 
that  the  heart  is  the  fashioner  of  the  blood; 
neither  do  I  imagine  that  the  blood  has  powers, 
properties,  motion,  or  heat,  as  the  gift  of  the 
heart;  lastly,  neither  do  I  admit  that  the  cause 
of  the  systole  and  contraction  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  diastole  or  dilatation,  whether  in  the 
arteries,  auricles,  or  ventricles;  for  I  hold  that 
that  part  of  the  pulse  which  is  designated  the 
diastole  depends  on  another  cause  different 
from  the  systole,  and  that  it  must  always  and 
everywhere  precede  any  systole;  I  hold  that  the 
innate  heat  is  the  first  cause  of  dilatation,  and 
that  the  primary  dilatation  is  in  the  blood  it¬ 
self,  after  the  manner  of  bodies  in  a  state  of  fer¬ 
mentation,  gradually  attenuated  and  swelling, 
and  that  in  the  blood  is  this  finally  extinguished; 
I  assent  to  Aristotle’s  example  of  gruel  or  milk 


upon  the  fire,  to  this  extent,  that  the  rising  and 
falling  of  the  blood  does  not  depend  upon  va¬ 
pours  or  exhalations,  or  spirits,  or  anything  ris¬ 
ing  in  a  vaporous  or  aereal  shape,  nor  upon  any 
external  agency,  but  upon  an  internal  prin¬ 
ciple  under  the  control  of  nature. 

Nor  is  the  heart,  as  some  imagine,  anything 
like  a  chauffer  or  fire,  or  heated  kettle,  and  so 
the  source  of  the  heat  of  the  blood;  the  blood, 
instead  of  receiving,  rather  gives  heat  to  the 
heart,  as  it  does  to  all  the  other  parts  of  the 
body;  for  the  blood  is  the  hottest  element  in 
the  body;  and  it  is  on  this  account  that  the 
heart  is  furnished  with  coronary  arteries  and 
veins;  it  is  for  the  same  reason  that  other  parts 
have  vessels,  viz.y  to  secure  the  access  of  warmth 
for  their  due  conservation  and  stimulation;  so 
that  the  warmer  any  part  is,  the  greater  is  its 
supply  of  blood,  or  otherwise;  where  the  blood 
is  in  largest  quantity,  there  also  is  the  heat  high¬ 
est.  For  this  reason  is  the  heart,  remarkable 
through  its  cavities,  to  be  viewed  as  the  elabora- 
tory,  fountain,  and  perennial  focus  of  heat,  and 
as  comparable  to  a  hot  kettle,  not  because  of  its 
proper  substance,  but  because  of  its  contained 
blood;  for  the  same  reason,  because  they  have 
numerous  veins  or  vessels  containing  blood,  are 
the  liver,  spleen,  lungs,  &c.  reputed  hot  parts. 
And  in  this  way  do  I  view  the  native  or  innate 
heat  as  the  common  instrument  of  every  func¬ 
tion,  the  prime  cause  of  the  pulse  among  the 
rest.  This,  however,  I  do  not  mean  to  state  ab¬ 
solutely,  but  only  propose  it  by  way  of  thesis. 
Whatever  may  be  objected  to  it  by  good  and 
learned  men,  without  abusive  or  contemptuous 
language,  I  shall  be  ready  to  listen  to— I  shall 
even  be  most  grateful  to  any  one  who  will  take 
up  and  discuss  the  subject. 

These  then,  are,  as  it  were,  the  very  ele¬ 
ments  and  indications  of  the  passage  and  circu¬ 
lation  of  the  blood,  viz.y  from  the  right  auricle 
into  the  right  ventricle;  from  the  right  ven¬ 
tricle  by  the  way  of  the  lungs  into  the  left 
auricle;  thence  into  the  left  ventricle  and  aorta; 
whence  by  the  arteries  at  large  through  the 
pores  or  interstices  of  the  tissues  into  the  veins, 
and  by  the  veins  back  again  with  great  rapidity 
to  the  base  of  the  heart. 

There  is  an  experiment  on  the  veins  by  which 
any  one  that  chooses  may  convince  himself  of 
this  truth:  let  the  arm  be  bound  with  a  moder¬ 
ately  tight  bandage,  and  then,  by  opening  and 
shutting  the  hand,  make  all  the  veins  to  swell  as 
much  as  possible,  and  the  integuments  below 
the  fillet  to  become  red;  and  now  let  the  arm 
and  hand  be  plunged  into  very  cold  water,  or 


CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD 


snow,  until  the  blood  pent  up  in  the  veins  shall 
have  become  cooled  down;  then  let  the  fillet  be 
undone  suddenly,  and  you  will  perceive,  by  the 
cold  blood  returning  to  the  heart,  with  what 
celerity  the  current  flows,  and  what  an  effect 
it  produces  when  it  has  reached  the  heart;  so 
that  you  will  no  longer  be  surprised  that  some 
should  faint  when  the  fillet  is  undone  after  ve¬ 
nesection.^  This  experiment  shows  that  the 
veins  swell  below  the  ligature  not  with  attenu¬ 
ated  blood,  or  with  blood  raised  by  spirits  or 
vapours,  for  the  immersion  in  the  cold  water 
would  repress  their  ebullition,  but  with  blood 
only,  and  such  as  could  never  make  its  way 
back  into  the  arteries,  either  by  open-mouthed 
communications  or  by  devious  passages;  it 
shows,  moreover,  how  and  in  what  way  those 
who  are  travelling  over  snowy  mountains  are 
sometimes  stricken  suddenly  with  death,  and 
other  things  of  the  same  kind. 

Lest  it  should  seem  difficult  for  the  blood  to 
make  its  way  through  the  pores  of  the  various 
structures  of  the  body,  I  shall  add  one  illustra¬ 
tion:  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  bodies  of 
those  that  are  hanged  or  strangled,  as  in  the  arm 
that  is  bound  with  a  fillet:  all  the  parts  beyond 
the  noose — the  face,  lips,  tongue,  eyes,  and 
every  part  of  the  head  appear  gorged  with  blood, 
swollen  and  of  a  deep  red  or  livid  colour;  but 
if  the  noose  be  relaxed,  in  whatever  position 
you  have  the  body,  before  many  hours  have 
passed  you  will  perceive  the  whole  of  the  blood 
to  have  quitted  the  head  and  face,  and  gravitat¬ 
ed  through  the  pores  of  the  skin,  flesh,  and 
other  structures,  from  the  superior  parts  to¬ 
wards  those  that  are  inferior  and  dependent, un¬ 
til  they  become  tumid  and  of  a  dark  colour. 
But  if  this  happens  in  the  dead  body,  with  the 
blood  dead  and  coagulated,  the  frame  stif¬ 
fened  with  the  chill  of  death,  the  passages  all 
compressed  or  blocked  up,  it  is  easy  to  per¬ 
ceive  how  much  more  apt  it  will  be  to  occur  in 
the  living  subject,  when  the  blood  is  alive  and 
replete  with  spirits,  when  the  pores  are  all  open, 
the  fluid  ready  to  penetrate,  and  the  passage  in 
every  way  made  easy. 

When  the  ingenious  and  acute  Descartes 
(whose  honourable  mention  of  my  name  de¬ 
mands  my  acknowledgments)  and  others,  hav¬ 
ing  taken  out  the  heart  of  a  fish,  and  put  it  on  a 
plate  before  them,  see  it  continuing  to  pulsate 
(in  contracting),  and  when  it  raises  or  erects  it¬ 
self  and  becomes  firm  to  the  touch,  they  think 
it  enlarges,  expands,  and  that  its  ventricles 

^  See  Chapter  ii,  of  the  Disquisition  on  the  Motion  of 
the  Heart  and  Blood. 


thence  become  more  capacious.  But,  in  my 
opinion,  they  do  not  observe  correctly;  for,  at 
the  time  the  heart  gathers  itself  up,  and  be¬ 
comes  erect,  it  is  certain  that  it  is  rather  less¬ 
ened  in  every  one  of  its  dimensions;  that  it  is  in 
its  systole,  in  short,  not  in  its  diastole.  Neither, 
on  the  contrary,  when  it  collapses  and  sinks 
down,  is  it  then  properly  in  its  state  of  diastole 
and  distension,  by  which  the  ventricles  become 
more  capacious.  But  as  we  do  not  say  that  the 
heart  is  in  the  state  of  diastole  in  the  dead 
body,  as  having  sunk  relaxed  after  the  systole, 
but  is  then  collapsed,  and  without  all  motion- 
in  short,  is  in  a  state  of  rest,  and  not  distended. 
It  is  only  truly  distended,  and  in  the  proper 
state  of  diastole,  when  it  is  filled  by  the  charge 
of  blood  projected  into  it  by  the  contraction  of 
the  auricles;  a  fact  which  sufficiently  appears  in 
the  course  of  vivisections.  Descartes,  therefore, 
does  not  perceive  how  much  the  relaxation  and 
subsidence  of  the  heart  and  arteries  differ  from 
their  distension  or  diastole;  and  that  the 
cause  of  the  distension,  relaxation,  and  con¬ 
striction  is  not  one  and  the  same;  as  contrary  ef¬ 
fects  so  must  they  rather  acknowledge  con¬ 
trary  causes;  as  different  movements  they  must 
have  different  motors;  just  as  all  anatomists 
know  that  the  flexion  and  extension  of  an  ex¬ 
tremity  are  accomplished  by  opposite  antago¬ 
nist  muscles,  and  contrary  or  diverse  motions  are 
necessarily  performed  by  contrary  and  diverse 
organs  instituted  by  nature  for  the  purpose. 
Neither  do  I  find  the  efficient  cause  of  the  pulse 
aptly  explained  by  this  philosopher,  when  with 
Aristotle  he  assumes  the  cause  of  the  systole  to 
be  the  same  as  that  of  the  diastole,  viz..,  an  ef¬ 
fervescence  of  the  blood  due  to  a  kind  of  ebulli¬ 
tion.  For  the  pulse  is  a  succession  of  sudden 
strokes  and  quick  percussions;  but  we  know  of 
no  kind  of  fermentation  or  ebullition  in  which 
the  matter  rises  and  falls  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye;  the  heaving  is  always  gradual  where  the 
subsidence  is  notable.  Besides,  in  the  body  of  a 
living  animal  laid  open,  we  can  with  our  eyes 
perceive  the  ventricles  of  the  heart  both  charged 
and  distended  by  the  contraction  of  the  auri¬ 
cles,  and  more  or  less  increased  in  size  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  charge;  and,  further,  we  can  see  that 
the  distension  of  the  heart  is  rather  a  violent 
motion,  the  effect  of  an  impulsion,  and  not 
performed  by  any  kind  of  attraction. 

Some  are  of  opinion  that,  as  no  kind  of  im¬ 
pulse  of  the  nutritive  juices  is  required  in  vege¬ 
tables,  but  that  these  are  attracted  by  the  parts 
which  require  them,  and  flow  in  to  take  the 
place  of  what  has  been  lost;  so  neither  is  there 


328  WILLIAM 

any  necessity  for  an  impulse  in  animals,  the 
vegetative  faculty  in  both  working  alike.  But 
there  is  a  difference  between  plants  and  ani¬ 
mals.  In  animals,  a  constant  supply  of  warmth 
is  required  to  cherish  the  members,  to  main¬ 
tain  them  in  life  by  the  vivifying  heat,  and 
to  restore  parts  injured  from  without.  It  is 
not  merely  nutrition  that  has  to  be  provided 
for. 

So  much  for  the  circulation;  any  impedi¬ 
ment,  or  perversion  or  excessive  excitement  of 
which,  is  followed  by  a  host  of  dangerous  dis¬ 
eases  and  remarkable  symptoms:  in  connexion 
with  the  veins— varices,  abscesses,  pains,  hem¬ 
orrhoids,  hemorrhages;  in  connexion  with  the 
arteries— enlargements,  phlegmons,  severe  and 
lancinating  pains,  aneurisms,  sarcoses,  fluxions, 
sudden  attacks  of  suffocation,  asthmas,  stupors, 
apoplexies,  and  innumerable  other  affections. 
But  this  is  not  the  place  to  enter  on  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  these;  neither  may  I  say  under 
what  circumstances  and  how  speedily  some  of 
these  diseases,  that  are  even  reputed  incurable, 
are  remedied  and  dispelled,  as  if  by  enchant¬ 
ment.  I  shall  have  much  to  put  forth  in  my 
Medical  Observations  and  Pathology ^  which,  so 


HARVEY 

far  as  I  know,  has  as  yet  been  observed  by  no  one. 

That  I  may  afford  you  still  more  ample  satis¬ 
faction,  most  learned  Riolanus,  as  you  do  not 
think  there  is  a  circulation  in  the  vessels  of  the 
mesentery,  I  shall  conclude  by  proposing  the 
following  experiment:  throw  a  ligature  around 
the  porta  close  to  the  liver,  in  a  living  animal, 
which  is  easily  done.  You  will  forthwith  per¬ 
ceive  the  veins  below  the  ligature  swelling  in 
the  same  way  as  those  of  the  arm  when  the 
bleeding  fillet  is  bound  above  the  elbow;  a  cir¬ 
cumstance  which  will  proclaim  the  course  of 
the  blood  there.  And  as  you  still  seem  to  think 
that  the  blood  can  regurgitate  from  the  veins 
into  the  arteries  by  open  anastomoses,  let  the 
vena  cava  be  tied  in  a  living  animal  near  the 
divarication  of  the  crural  veins,  and  immediate¬ 
ly  afterwards  let  an  artery  be  opened  to  give  is¬ 
sue  to  the  blood:  you  will  soon  observe  the 
whole  of  the  blood  discharged  from  all  the 
veins,  that  of  the  ascending  cava  among  the 
number,  with  the  single  exception  of  the  crural 
veins,  which  will  continue  full;  and  this  cer¬ 
tainly  could  not  happen  were  there  any  retro¬ 
grade  passage  for  the  blood  from  the  veins  to 
the  arteries  by  open  anastomoses. 


Anatomical  Exercises  on  the  Generation 
of  Animals 


To  THE  LEARNED  AND  ILLUSTRIOUS  THE  PRESIDENT  AND  FeLLOWS 
OF  THE  College  of  Physicians  of  London 


Harass  ED  with  anxious,  and  in  the  end  not  much 
availing  cares,  about  Christmas  last,  I  sought  to 
rid  my  spirit  of  the  cloud  that  oppressed  it,  by 
a  visit  to  that  great  man,  the  chief  honour  and 
ornament  of  our  College,  Dr.  William  Harvey, 
then  dwelling  not  far  from  the  city.  I  found 
him.  Democritus-like,  busy  with  the  study  of 
natural  things,  his  countenance  cheerful,  his 
mind  serene,  embracing  all  within  its  sphere.  I 
forthwith  saluted  him,  and  asked  if  all  were 
well  with  him.?^  “How  can  it,”  said  he,  “whilst 
the  Commonwealth  is  full  of  distractions,  and  I 
myself  am  still  in  the  open  sea  ?  And  truly,”  he 
continued,  “did  I  not  find  solace  in  my  studies, 
and  a  balm  for  my  spirit  in  the  memory  of  my 
observations  of  former  years,  I  should  feel  little 
desire  for  longer  life.  But  so  it  has  been,  that 
this  life  of  obscurity,  this  vacation  from  public 
business,  which  causes  tedium  and  disgust  to  so 
many,  has  proved  a  sovereign  remedy  to  me.” 

I  answering  said,  “I  can  readily  account  for 
this:  whilst  most  men  are  learned  through  oth¬ 
ers’  wits,  and  under  cover  of  a  different  diction 
and  a  new  arrangement,  vaunt  themselves  on 
things  that  belong  to  the  ancients,  thou  ever 
interrogatest  nature  herself  concerning  her  mys¬ 
teries.  And  this  line  of  study  as  it  is  less  likely 
to  lead  into  error,  so  is  it  also  more  fertile  in  en¬ 
joyment,  inasmuch  as  each  particular  point  ex¬ 
amined  often  leads  to  others  which  had  not  be¬ 
fore  been  surmised.  You  yourself,  I  well  remem¬ 
ber,  informed  me  once  that  you  had  never  dis¬ 
sected  any  animal — and  many  and  many  a  one 
have  you  examined — but  that  you  discovered 
something  unexpected,  something  of  which  you 
were  formerly  uninformed.” 

“It  is  true,”  said  he:  “the  examination  of  the 
bodies  of  animals  has  always  been  my  delight; 
and  I  have  thought  that  we  might  thence  not 
only  obtain  an  insight  into  the  lighter  mysteries 
of  nature,  but  there  perceive  a  kind  of  image 
or  reflex  of  the  omnipotent  Creator  himself. 


And  though  much  has  already  been  made  out 
by  the  learned  men  of  former  times,  I  have  still 
thought  that  much  more  remained  behind,  hid¬ 
den  by  the  dusky  night  of  nature,  uninterro¬ 
gated;  so  that  I  have  oftentimes  wondered  and 
even  laughed  at  those  who  have  fancied  that 
everything  had  been  so  consummately  and  ab¬ 
solutely  investigated  by  an  Aristotle  or  a  Galen, 
or  some  other  mighty  name,  that  nothing  could 
by  possibility  be  added  to  their  knowledge. 
Nature,  however,  is  the  best  and  most  faithful 
interpreter  of  her  own  secrets;  and  what  she 
presents  either  more  briefly  or  obscurely  in  one 
department,  that  she  explains  more  fully  and 
clearly  in  another.  No  one  indeed  has  ever 
rightly  ascertained  the  use  or  function  of  a  part 
who  has  not  examined  its  structure,  situation, 
connexions  by  means  of  vessels,  and  other  acci¬ 
dents,  in  various  animals,  and  carefully  weighed 
and  considered  all  he  has  seen.  The  ancients, 
our  authorities  in  science,  even  as  their  knowl¬ 
edge  of  geography  was  limited  by  the  bounda¬ 
ries  of  Greece,  so  neither  did  their  knowledge 
of  animals,  vegetables,  and  other  natural  objects 
extend  beyond  the  confines  of  their  country. 
But  to  us  the  whole  earth  lies  open,  and  the 
zeal  of  our  travellers  has  made  us  familiar  not 
only  with  other  countries  and  the  manners  and 
customs  of  their  inhabitants,  but  also  with  the 
animals,  vegetables,  and  minerals  that  are  met 
with  in  each.  And  truly  there  is  no  nation  so 
barbarous  which  has  not  discovered  something 
for  the  general  good,  whether  led  to  it  by  acci¬ 
dent  or  compelled  by  necessity,  which  had  been 
overlooked  by  more  civilized  communities. 
But  shall  we  imagine  that  nothing  can  accrue 
to  the  wide  domains  of  science  from  such  ad¬ 
vantages,  or  that  all  knowledge  was  exhausted 
by  the  first  ages  of  the  world?  If  we  do,  the 
blame  very  certainly  attaches  to  our  indolence, 
nowise  to  nature. 

“To  this  there  is  another  evil  added:  many 


329 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


330 

persons,  wholly  without  experience,  from  the 
presumed  verisimilitude  of  a  previous  opinion, 
are  often  led  by  and  by  to  speak  of  it  boldly,  as 
a  matter  that  is  certainly  known;  whence  it 
comes,  that  not  only  are  they  themselves  de¬ 
ceived,  but  that  they  likewise  lead  other  in¬ 
cautious  persons  into  error.” 

Discoursing  in  this  manner,  and  touching  up¬ 
on  many  topics  besides  with  wonderful  fluency 
and  facility,  as  is  his  custom,  I  interposed  by 
observing,  “How  free  you  yourself  are  from  the 
fault  you  indicate  all  know  who  are  acquainted 
with  you;  and  this  is  the  reason  wherefore  the 
learned  world,  who  are  aware  of  your  unwearied 
industr)'  in  the  study  of  philosophy,  are  eagerly 
looking  for  your  further  experiments.” 

“And  would  you  be  the  man,”  said  Harvey, 
smiling,  “who  should  recommend  me  to  quit 
the  peaceful  haven,  where  I  now  pass  my  life, 
and  launch  again  upon  the  faithless  sea.?  You 
know  full  well  what  a  storm  my  former  lucu¬ 
brations  raised.  Much  better  is  it  oftentimes  to 
grow  wise  at  home  and  in  private,  than  by  pub¬ 
lishing  what  you  have  amassed  with  infinite  la¬ 
bour,  to  stir  up  tempests  that  may  rob  you  of 
peace  and  quiet  for  the  rest  of  your  days.” 

“True,”  said  I;  “it  is  the  usual  reward  of  vir¬ 
tue  to  have  received  ill  for  having  merited  well. 
But  the  winds  which  raised  those  storms,  like 
the  northwestern  blast,  which  drowns  itself  in 
its  own  rain,  have  only  drawn  mischief  on 
themselves.” 

Upon  this  he  showed  me  his  Exercises  on  the 
Generation  of  Animals^  a  work  composed  with 
vast  labour  and  singular  care;  and  having  it  in 
my  hands,  I  exclaimed,  “Now  have  I  what  I 
so  much  desired!  and  unless  you  consent  to 
make  this  work  public,  I  must  say  that  you  will 
be  wanting  both  to  your  own  fame  and  to  the 
public  usefulness.  Nor  let  any  fear  of  further 
trouble  in  the  matter  induce  you  to  withhold  it 
longer:  I  gladly  charge  myself  with  the  whole 
business  of  correcting  the  press.” 

Making  many  difficulties  at  first,  urging, 
among  other  things,  that  his  work  must  be  held 
imperfect,  as  not  containing  his  investigations 
on  the  generation  of  insects,  I  nevertheless  pre¬ 
vailed  at  length,  and  he  said  to  me,  “I  intrust 
these  papers  to  your  care  with  full  authority 
either  speedily  to  commit  them  to  the  press,  or 
to  suppress  them  till  some  future  time.”  Having 
returned  him  many  thanks,  I  bade  him  adieu, 
and  took  my  leave,  feeling  like  another  Jason 
laden  with  the  Golden  Fleece.  On  returning 
home  I  forthwith  proceeded  to  examine  my 
prize  in  all  its  parts,  and  could  not  but  wonder 


with  myself  that  such  a  treasure  should  have 
lain  so  long  concealed;  and  that  whilst  others 
produce  their  trifles  and  emptinesses  with  much 
ado,  their  messes  twice,  aye,  an  hundred  times, 
heated  up,  our  Harvey  should  set  so  little  store 
by  his  admirable  observations.  And  indeed,  so 
often  as  he  has  sent  forth  any  of  his  discoveries 
to  the  world,  he  has  not  comported  himself  like 
those  who,  when  they  publish,  would  have  us 
believe  that  an  oak  had  spoken,  and  that  they 
had  merited  the  rarest  honours — a  draught  of 
hen’s  milk  at  the  least.  Our  Harvey  rather 
seems  as  though  discovery  were  natural  to  him, 
a  thing  of  ease  and  of  course,  a  matter  of  ordi¬ 
nary  business;  though  he  may  nevertheless  have 
expended  infinite  labour  and  study  on  his  works. 
And  we  have  evidence  of  his  singular  candour 
in  this,  that  he  never  hostilely  attacks  any  pre¬ 
vious  writer,  but  ever  courteously  sets  down 
and  comments  upon  the  opinions  of  each;  and 
indeed  he  is  wont  to  say  that  it  is  argument  of 
an  indifferent  cause  when  it  is  contended  for 
with  violence  and  distemper;  and  that  truth 
scarce  wants  an  advocate. 

It  would  have  been  easy  for  our  illustrious 
colleague  to  have  woven  the  whole  of  this  web 
from  materials  of  his  own;  but  to  escape  the 
charge  of  envy,  he  has  rather  chosen  to  take 
Aristotle  and  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente  as  his 
guides,  and  to  appear  as  contributing  but  his 
portion  to  the  general  fabric.  Of  him,  whose 
virtue,  candour,  and  genius  are  so  well  known 
to  you  all,  I  shall  say  no  more,  lest  I  should 
seem  to  praise  to  his  face  one  whose  singular 
worth  has  exalted  him  beyond  the  reach  of  all 
praise.  Of  myself  I  shall  only  say  that  I  have 
done  no  more  than  perform  the  midwife’s  office 
in  this  business,  ushering  into  the  light  this 
product  of  our  colleague’s  genius  as  you  see  it, 
consummate  and  complete,  but  long  delayed, 
and  fearing  perchance  some  envious  blast:  in 
other  words,  I  have  overlooked  the  press;  and  as 
our  author  writes  a  hand  which  no  one  witlwut 
practice  can  easily  read  (a  thing  that  is  common 
among  our  men  of  letters),  I  have  taken  some 
pains  to  prevent  theprintercommittingany  \  ery^ 
grave  blunders  through  this — a  point  which  I 
observe  not  to  have  been  sufficiently  attended  to 
in  the  small  w  ork  of  his  which  lately  appeared. 

Here  then,  my  learned  friends,  you  have  the 
cause  of  my  addressing  you  at  this  time,  viz., 
that  you  may  know  that  our  Harvxy  presents 
an  offering  to  the  benefit. of  the  republic  of  let¬ 
ters,  to  your  honour,  to  his  own  eternal  fame. 

Farewell,  and  prosper. 

George  Ent 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


INTRODUCTION 

It  will  not,  I  trust,  be  unwelcome  to  you,  can¬ 
did  reader,  if  I  yield  to  the  wishes,  I  might  even 
say  the  entreaties,  of  many,  and  in  these  Exer¬ 
cises  on  Animal  Generation^  lay  before  the  stu¬ 
dent  and  lover  of  truth  what  I  have  observed 
on  this  subject  from  anatomical  dissections, 
which  turns  out  to  be  very  different  from  any¬ 
thing  that  is  delivered  by  authors,  whether 
philosophers  or  physicians. 

Physicians,  following  Galen,  teach  that  from 
the  semen  of  the  male  and  female  mingled  in 
coition  the  offspring  is  produced,  and  resembles 
one  or  other,  according  to  the  predominance  of 
this  one  or  of  that;  and,  further,  that  in  virtue 
of  the  same  predominance,  it  is  either  male  or 
female.  Sometimes  they  declare  the  semen  mas- 
culinum  as  the  efficient  cause,  and  the  semen 
femininum  as  supplying  the  matter;  and  some¬ 
times,  again,  they  advocate  precisely  the  oppo¬ 
site  doctrine.  Aristotle,  one  of  Nature’s  most 
diligent  inquirers,  however,  affirms  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  generation  to  be  the  male  and  the  fe¬ 
male,  she  contributing  the  matter,  he  The  form; 
and  that  immediately  after  the  sexual  act  the 
vital  principle  and  the  first  particle  of  the  fu¬ 
ture  foetus,  viz,,  the  heart,  in  animals  that  have 
red  blood,  are  formed  from  the  menstrual  blood 
in  the  uterus. 

But  that  these  are  erroneous  and  hasty  con¬ 
clusions  is  easily  made  to  appear:  like  phantoms 
of  darkness  they  suddenly  vanish  before  the 
light  of  anatomical  inquiry.  Nor  is  any  long 
refutation  necessary  where  the  truth  can  be 
seen  with  one’s  proper  eyes;  where  the  inquirer 
by  simple  inspection  finds  everything  in  con¬ 
formity  with  reason;  and  where  at  the  same 
time  he  is  made  to  understand  how  unsafe,  how 
base  a  thing  it  is  to  receive  instruction  from 
others’  comments  without  examination  of  the 
objects  themselves,  the  rather  as  the  book  of 
Nature  lies  so  open  and  is  so  easy  of  consultation. 

What  I  shall  deliver  in  these  my  Exercises  on 
Animal  Generation  I  am  anxious  to  make  pub¬ 
licly  known,  not  merely  that  posterity  may 
there  perceive  the  sure  and  obvious  truth,  but 
further,  and  especially,  that  by  exhibiting  the 
method  of  investigation  which  I  have  followed, 
I  may  propose  to  the  studious  a  new  and,  unless 
I  mistake,  a  safer  way  to  the  attainment  of 
knowledge. 

For  although  it  is  a  new  and  difficult  road  in 
studying  nature,  rather  to  question  things  them¬ 
selves  than,  by  turning  over  books,  to  discover 
the  opinions  of  philosophers  regarding  them, 


still  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  it  is  the  more 
open  path  to  the  secrets  of  natural  philosophy, 
and  that  which  is  less  likely  to  lead  into  error. 

Nor  is  there  any  just  cause  wherefore  the  la¬ 
bour  should  deter  anyone,  if  he  will  but  think 
that  he  himself  only  lives  through  the  ceaseless 
working  of  his  heart.  Neither,  indeed,  would 
the  way  I  propose  be  felt  as  so  barren  and  lonely, 
but  for  the  custom,  or  vice  rather,  of  the  age 
we  live  in,  when  men,  inclined  to  idleness,  pre¬ 
fer  going  wrong  with  the  many,  to  becoming 
wise  with  the  few  through  dint  of  toil  and  out¬ 
lay  of  money.  The  ancient  philosophers,  whose 
industry  even  we  admire,  went  a  different  way 
to  work,  and  by  their  unwearied  labour  and 
variety  of  experiments,  searching  into  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things,  have  left  us  no  doubtful  light  to 
guide  us  in  our  studies.  In  this  way  it  is  that 
almost  everything  we  yet  possess  of  note  or 
credit  in  philosophy,  has  been  transmitted  to 
us  through  the  industry  of  ancient  Greece.  But 
when  we  acquiesce  in  the  discoveries  of  the 
ancients,  and  believe  (which  we  are  apt  to  do 
through  indolence)  that  nothing  further  re¬ 
mains  to  be  known,  we  suffer  the  edge  of  our 
ingenuity  to  be  taken  off,  and  the  lamp  which 
they  delivered  to  us  to  be  extinguished.  No  one 
of  a  surety  will  allow  that  all  truth  was  en¬ 
grossed  by  the  ancients,  unless  he  be  utterly 
ignorant  (to  pass  by  other  arts  for  the  present) 
of  the  many  remarkable  discoveries  that  have 
lately  been  made  in  anatomy,  these  having 
been  principally  achieved  by  individuals  who, 
either  intent  upon  some  particular  matter,  fell 
upon  the  novelty  by  accident,  or  (and  this  is 
the  more  excellent  way)  who,  following  the 
traces  of  nature  with  their  own  eyes,  pursued 
her  through  devious  but  most  assured  ways  till 
they  reached  her  in  the  citadel  of  truth.  And 
truly  in  such  pursuits  it  is  sweet  not  merely  to 
toil,  but  even  to  grow  weary,  when  the  pains  of 
discovering  are  amply  compensated  by  the 
pleasures  of  discovery.  Eager  for  novelty,  we 
are  wont  to  travel  far  into  unknown  countries 
that,  with  our  own  eyes,  we  may  witness  what 
we  have  heard  reported  as  having  been  seen  by 
others,  where,  however,  we  for  the  most  part 
find 

- minuit  praesentia  famam : 

that  the  presence  lessens  the  repute.  It  were 
disgraceful,  therefore,  with  this  most  spacious 
and  admirable  realm  of  nature  before  us,  and 
where  the  reward  ever  exceeds  the  promise,  did 
we  take  the  reports  of  others  upon  trust,  and  go 
on  coining  crude  problems  out  of  these,  and  on 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


332 

them  hanging  knotty  and  captious  and  petty 
disputations.  Nature  is  herself  to  be  addressed; 
the  paths  she  shows  us  are  to  be  boldly  trodden; 
for  thus,  and  whilst  we  consult  our  proper 
senses,  from  inferior  advancing  to  superior  lev¬ 
els,  shall  we  penetrate  at  length  into  the  heart 
of  her  mystery. 

Of  the  Manner  and  Order  of  acquiring  Knowl¬ 
edge 

Although  there  is  but  one  road  to  science, 
that,  to  wit,  in  which  we  proceed  from  things 
more  known  to  things  less  known,  from  mat¬ 
ters  more  manifest  to  matters  more  obscure; 
and  universal  are  principally  known  to  us, 
science  springing  by  reasonings  from  universals 
to  particulars;  still  the  comprehension  of  uni¬ 
versals  by  the  understanding  is  based  upon  the 
perception  of  individual  things  by  the  senses. 
Both  of  Aristotle’s  propositions,  therefore,  are 
true:  first,  the  one  in  his  Physics}  where  he  says, 
“The  way  is  naturally  prepared,  from  those 
things  that  are  more  obvious  and  clear  to  us,  to 
those  things  that  are  more  obvious  and  clear  by 
nature.  For,  indeed,  the  same  things  are  not 
both  known  to  us  and  extant  simply:  whence  it 
is  indispensable  to  proceed  in  this  way,  viz., 
from  those  things  that  are  of  a  more  obscure 
nature,  but  to  us  are  more  apparent,  to  those 
that  are  of  a  nature  more  obvious  and  distinct. 
Now  those  things  are,  in  the  first  instance, 
more  perspicuous  and  manifest  to  us  that  are 
most  confused  in  fact;  whence  it  is  necessary  to 
proceed  from  universals  to  particulars;  for  the 
whole,  according  to  the  dictates  of  sense,  is  the 
more  obvious;  and  the  universal  is  a  certain 
whole.”  And  again,  that  other  in  his  Analytics} 
where  he  thus  expresses  himself:  “Singulars  are 
to  us  more  known,  and  are  the  first  that  exist 
according  to  the  information  of  sense;  for,  in¬ 
deed,  there  is  nothing  in  the  understanding 
which  was  not  first  in  the  sense.  And  although 
that  reasoning  is  naturally  prior  and  more 
known  which  proceeds  by  syllogism,  still  is 
that  more  perspicuous  to  us  which  is  based  on 
induction.  And,  therefore,  do  we  more  readily 
define  singulars  than  universals,  for  there  is 
more  of  equivocation  in  universals:  whence  it  is 
advisable  from  singulars  to  pass  to  universals.” 

All  this  agrees  with  what  we  have  previously 
said,  although  at  first  blush  it  may  seem  con¬ 
tradictory;  inasmuch  as  universals  are  first  im¬ 
bibed  from  particulars  by  the  senses,  and  in  so 
far  are  only  known  to  us  as  an  universal  is  a  cer- 

^  Book  1,1. 

^  Posterior  Analytics^  1,  2. 


tain  whole  and  indistinct  thing,  and  a  whole  is 
known  to  us  according  to  sense.  For  though  in 
all  knowledge  we  begin  from  sense,  because,  as 
the  philosopher  quoted  has  it,  sensible  particu¬ 
lars  are  better  known  to  sense,  still  the  sensa¬ 
tion  itself  is  an  universal  thing.  For,  if  you  ob¬ 
serve  rightly,  although  in  the  external  sense  the 
object  perceived  is  singular,  as,  for  example,  the 
colour  which  we  call  yellow  in  the  eye,  still 
when  this  impression  comes  to  be  made  an 
abstraction,  and  to  be  judged  of  and  under¬ 
stood  by  the  internal  sensorium,  it  is  an  uni¬ 
versal.  Whence  it  happens  that  several  persons 
abstract  several  species,  and  conceive  different 
notions,  from  viewing  the  same  object  at  the 
same  time.  'This  is  conspicuous  among  poets 
and  painters,  who,  although  they  contemplate 
one  and  the  same  object  in  the  same  place  at 
the  same  moment,  and  with  all  other  circum¬ 
stances  agreeing,  nevertheless  regard  and  de¬ 
scribe  it  variously,  and  as  each  has  conceived  or 
formed  an  idea  of  it  in  his  imagination.  In  the 
same  way,  the  painter  having  a  certain  portrait 
to  delineate,  if  he  draw  the  outline  a  thousand 
times,  he  will  still  give  a  different  face,  and  each 
not  only  differing  from  the  other,  but  from  the 
original  countenance;  with  such  slight  variety, 
however,  that  looking  at  them  singly,  you  shall 
conceive  you  have  still  the  same  portrait  set 
before  you,  although,  when  set  side  by  side,  you 
perceive  how  different  they  are.  Now  the  rea¬ 
son  is  this:  that  in  vision,  or  the  act  of  seeing 
itself,  each  particular  is  clear  and  distinct;  but 
the  moment  the  object  is  removed,  as  it  is  by 
merely  shutting  the  eyes,  when  it  becomes  an 
abstraction  in  the  fancy,  or  is  only  retained  in 
the  memory,  it  appears  obscure  and  indistinct; 
neither  is  it  any  longer  apprehended  as  a  partic¬ 
ular,  but  as  a  something  that  is  common  and 
universal.  Seneca  explains  this  subtlety,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Plato’s  views,  in  very  elegant  terms:  “An 
idea,”  he  says,  “is  an  eternal  copy  of  the  things 
that  have  place  in  nature.  I  add  an  explanation 
of  this  definition,  that  the  matter  may  be  made 
plainer  to  you.  I  desire  to  take  your  portrait; 
I  have  you  as  the  prototype  of  the  picture, 
from  which  my  mind  takes  a  certain  impression 
which  it  transfers  to  the  canvass.  The  counte¬ 
nance,  therefore,  which  teaches  and  directs  me, 
and  from  which  the  imitation  is  sought,  is  the 
idea.”^  A  little  farther  on  he  proceeds:  “I  havx 
but  just  made  use  of  the  image  which  a  painter 
forms  in  his  mind,  by  way  of  illustration.  Now, 
if  he  would  paint  a  likeness  of  Virgil,  he  forms 
an  intuitive  image  of  his  subject:  the  idea  is  the 
3  Letter  58. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


face  of  Virgil,  the  type  of  his  future  work;  and 
this  which  the  artist  conveys  and  transfers  to 
his  work  is  the  resemblance  or  portrait.  What 
difference  is  there .f*  you  ask:  the  one  is  the  pat¬ 
tern  or  prototype,  the  other  the  form  taken 
from  the  pattern  and  fixed  in  the  work;  the 
artist  imitates  the  one,  he  creates  the  other.  A 
statue  has  a  certain  expression  of  face;  this  is 
the  eidos^  the  species  or  representation;  the 
prototype  himself  has  a  certain  expression, 
which  the  statuary  conceiving,  transfers  to  his 
statue:  this  is  the  idea.  Do  you  desire  yet  an¬ 
other  illustration  of  the  distinction }  The  eidos 
is  in  the  work;  the  idea  without  the  work,  and 
not  only  without  the  work,  but  it  even  existed 
before  the  work  was  begun.”  For  the  things 
that  have  formerly  been  noted,  and  that  by 
use  or  wont  have  become  firmly  fixed  in  the 
mind  of  the  artist,  do,  in  fact,  constitute  art 
and  the  artistic  faculty;  art,  indeed,  is  the  rea¬ 
son  of  the  work  in  the  mind  of  the  artist.  On 
the  same  terms,  therefore,  as  art  is  attained  to, 
is  all  knowledge  and  science  acquired ;  for  as  art 
is  a  habit  with  reference  to  things  to  be  done, 
so  is  science  a  habit  in  respect  of  things  to  be 
known:  as  that  proceeds  from  the  imitation 
of  types  or  forms,  so  this  proceeds  from  the 
knowledge  of  natural  things.  Each  has  its 
origin  in  sense  and  experience,  and  it  is  im¬ 
possible  that  there  can  rightly  be  either  art  or 
science  without  visible  instance  or  example.  In 
both,  that  which  we  perceive  in  sensible  ob¬ 
jects  differs  from  the  image  itself  which  we  re¬ 
tain  in  our  imagination  or  memory.  That  is  the 
type,  idfea;  forma  informans;  this  is  the  imita¬ 
tion,  the  eidoSy  the  abstract  species.  That  is  a 
thing  natural,  a  real  entity;  this  a  representa¬ 
tion  or  similitude,  and  a  thing  of  the  reason. 
That  is  occupied  with  the  individual  thing,  and 
itself  is  single  and  particular;  this  is  a  certain 
universal  and  common  thing.  That  in  the  artist 
and  man  of  science  is  a  sensible  thing,  clearer, 
more  perfect;  this  a  matter  of  reason  and  more 
obscure:  for  things  perceived  by  sense  are  more 
assured  and  manifest  than  matters  inferred  by 
reason,  inasmuch  as  the  latter  proceed  from 
and  are  illustrated  by  the  former.  Finally,  sen¬ 
sible  things  are  of  themselves  and  antecedent; 
things  of  intellect,  however,  are  consequent, 
and  arise  from  the  former,  and,  indeed,  we  can 
in  no  way  attain  to  them  without  the  help  of 
the  others.  And  hence  it  is,  that  without  the 
due  admonition  of  the  senses,  without  frequent 
observation  and  reiterated  experiment,  our 
mind  goes  astray  after  phantoms  and  appear¬ 
ances.  Diligent  observation  is,  therefore,  req¬ 


uisite  in  every  science,  and  the  senses  are  fre¬ 
quently  to  be  appealed  to.  We  are,  I  say,  to 
strive  after  personal  experience,  not  to  rely  on 
the  experience  of  others;  without  which,  in¬ 
deed,  no  one  can  properly  become  a  student  of 
any  branch  of  natural  science,  nor  show  him¬ 
self  a  competent  judge  of  what  I  am  about  to 
say  on  the  subject  of  generation;  for  without 
experience  and  skill  in  anatomy,  he  would  not 
better  understand  me  than  could  one  born 
blind  appreciate  the  nature  and  difference  of 
colours,  or  one  deaf  from  birth  judge  of  sounds. 
I  would,  therefore,  have  you,  gentle  reader,  to 
take  nothing  on  trust  from  me  concerning  the 
generation  of  animals;  I  appeal  to  your  own 
eyes  as  my  witnesses  and  judge.  For  as  all  true 
science  rests  upon  those  principles  which  have 
their  origin  in  the  operation  of  the  senses,  par¬ 
ticular  care  is  to  be  taken  that  by  repeated  dis¬ 
section  the  grounds  of  our  present  subject  be 
fully  established.  If  we  do  otherwise,  we  shall 
but  come  to  empty  and  unstable  opinions;  solid 
and  true  science  will  escape  us  altogether:  just 
as  commonly  happens  to  those  who  form  their 
notions  of  distant  countries  and  cities,  or  who 
pretend  to  get  a  knowledge  of  the  parts  of  the 
human  body,  from  drawings  and  engravings, 
which  but  too  frequently  present  things  under 
false  and  erroneous  points  of  view.  And  so  it  is, 
that  in  the  present  age  we  have  an  abundance 
of  writers  and  pretenders  to  knowledge,  but 
very  few  who  are  really  learned  and  philoso¬ 
phers. 

Thus  much  have  I  thought  good,  gentle 
reader,  to  present  to  you,  by  way  of  preface, 
that  understanding  the  nature  of  the  assistance 
to  which  I  have  trusted,  and  the  counsel  by 
which  I  have  been  led  in  publishing  these  my 
observations  and  experiments;  and  that  you 
yourself  in  passing  over  the  same  ground,  may 
not  merely  be  in  a  condition  to  judge  between 
Aristotle  and  Galen,  but,  quitting  subtleties 
and  fanciful  conjectures,  embracing  nature 
with  your  own  eyes,  that  you  may  discover 
many  things  unknown  to  others,  and  of  great 
importance. 

Of  the  same  matterSy  according  to  Aristotle 

There  is  no  such  thing  as  innate  knowledge, 
according  to  Aristotle;  neither  opinion,  nor  art, 
nor  understanding,  nor  speech,  nor  reason  it¬ 
self,  inhere  in  us  by  nature  and  from  our  birth; 
but  all  of  these,  as  well  as  the  qualities  and  habi¬ 
tudes,  which  are  believed  to  be  spontaneous, 
and  to  lie  under  the  control  of  our  will,  are  to 
be  regarded  as  among  the  number  of  those 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


334 

things  that  reach  us  from  without  according  to 
nature:  such  as  the  virtues  and  the  vices,  for 
which  men  are  cither  praised  and  rewarded  or 
reproved  and  punished.  All  our  knowledge, 
therefore,  of  every  kind  has  to  be  acquired.  But 
this  is  not  the  place  to  inquire  into  the  first 
principles  of  knowledge. 

I  believe,  however,  that  it  will  not  be  useless 
if  1  premise  a  few  words  as  to  whence  and  how 
our  knowledge  reaches  us,  both  with  a  view  to 
rendering  what  I  shall  say  on  the  subject  of  gen¬ 
eration  more  readily  intelligible,  and  of  remov¬ 
ing  any  doubts  that  may  arise  out  of  this  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  Stagirite,^  who  asserts  that  all  doc¬ 
trine  and  discipline  based  on  reason  are  derived 
from  antecedent  knowledge;  whence  it  seems 
to  follow  that  there  is  either  no  first  knowledge, 
or  that  this  must  be  innate,  a  conclusion  which 
is  in  contradiction  with  what  has  already  been 
stated. 

The  doubt,  however,  is  by  and  by  resolved 
by  Aristotle^  himself,  when  he  treats  of  the 
mode  in  which  knowledge  is  acquired:  for  after 
he  has  taught  that  ail  certain  knowledge  is  ob¬ 
tained  through  syllogism  and  demonstration, 
and  made  it  manifest  that  every  demonstrative 
syllogism  proceeds  from  true  and  necessary  first 
principles;  he  goes  on  to  inquire  how^  principles 
become  know'n,  and  what  the  faculty  is  that 
know's;  at  the  same  time,  too,  he  discusses  the 
question:  whether  habits,  if  not  innate,  are  en¬ 
gendered;  and  whether,  being  innate,  they  lie 
concealed?  “We  have  not,”  he  says,  “these 
habits;  for  it  happens  that  they  are  concealed 
from  those  who  acquire  the  most  admirable 
kinds  of  knowledge  through  demonstration.  If, 
however,  we  receive  them,  not  having  had 
them  previously,  how  should  we  become  in¬ 
formed,  how'  learn  from  non-antecedent  know  l- 
edge?  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  they  are 
neither  possessed,  nor  can  they  be  engendered 
in  the  ignorant  and  those  who  are  endowed 
with  no  habit.  Whence  it  is  essential  that  some 
faculty  be  possessed,  not,  how'ever,  any  which 
were  more  excellent,  more  exquisite  than  they. 
Now  it  seems  a  thing  common  to  all  animals 
that  they  have  a  congenital  power  of  judging, 
w  hich  we  call  sense.  Since  sense  is  innate,  then, 
the  things  perceived  by  sense  remain  in  some 
animals;  in  others  they  do  not  remain.  Those  in 
whom  they  do  not  remain,  how'ever,  have 
either  no  knowledge  at  all,  or  at  least  none  be¬ 
yond  the  simple  perception  of  the  things  wTich 
do  not  remain;  others,  again,  when  they  per- 

^  Posterior  AnalytieSy  i.  i. 

Ibidy  II.  19. 


ceive,  retain  a  certain  something  in  their  soul. 
Now,  as  there  are  many  animals  of  this  descrip¬ 
tion,  there  is  already  a  distinction  between  one 
animal  and  another;  and  to  this  extent,  that  in 
some  there  is  reason  from  the  memory  of  things; 
and  in  others  there  is  none.  Memory,  therefore, 
as  is  said,  follows  from  sense;  but  from  repeated 
recollection  of  the  same  thing  springs  expe¬ 
rience  (for  repeated  acts  of  memory  constitute  a 
single  experience).  From  experience,  how’ever, 
or  from  the  w^hole  and  universal  stored  quietly 
in  the  mind  (one,  to  wit,  in  place  of  a  multitude 
— because  in  the  w’hole  crowed  of  particulars 
there  is  one  and  the  same  universal),  is  derived 
the  principle  of  art  and  of  science:  of  art,  if  it 
belong  to  production  (/.  e,y  action);  of  science, 
if  it  belong  to  that  which  is  (/.  e.y  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  entity).  Consequently,  thereare  neither 
any  definite  habits  that  are  innate,  nor  any 
habits  that  are  formed  from  other  and  more 
knowm  habits,  but  from  sense.” 

From  w  hich  words  of  Aristotle  it  plainly  ap¬ 
pears  by  w  hat  order  or  method  any  art  or  science 
is  acquired,  viz.y  the  thing  perceived  by  sense 
remains;  from  the  permanence  of  the  thing  per¬ 
ceived  results  memory;  from  multiplied  mem¬ 
ory,  experience;  from  experience,  universal  rea¬ 
son,  definitions,  and  maxims  or  common  axi¬ 
oms,  the  most  certain  principles  of  knowledge; 
for  example,  the  same  thing  under  like  condi¬ 
tions  cannot  be  and  not  be;  every  affirmation 
or  negation  is  either  true  or  false;  and  so  on. 

Wherefore,  as  we  have  said  above,  there  is 
no  perfect  knowledge  which  can  be  entitled 
ours,  that  is  innate;  none  but  what  has  been  ob¬ 
tained  from  experience,  or  derived  in  some  way 
from  our  senses;  all  knowledge,  at  all  events,  is 
examined  by  these,  approved  by  them,  and 
finally  presents  itself  to  us  firmly  grounded 
upon  some  preexisting  knowledge  which  w'C 
possessed :  because  w  ithout  memor)^  there  is  no 
experience,  which  is  nothing  else  than  reiter¬ 
ated  memory;  in  like  manner  memory  cannot 
exist  without  endurance  of  the  things  per¬ 
ceived,  and  the  thing  perceived  cannot  remain 
where  it  has  never  been. 

The  supreme  dictator  in  philosophy  again 
and  elsewhere  expresses  himself  very  elegantly 
in  the  same  direction:  “All  men  desire  by  na¬ 
ture  to  know^;  the  evidence  of  this.  is.  the  pleas¬ 
ure  they  take  in  using  their  senses,  among 
w^hich  the  sight  is  that  which  is  particularly 
preferred,  because  this  especially  serves  us  to 
acquire  know  ledge,  and  informs  us  of  the  great¬ 
est  number  of  differences.  Nature,  therefore, 
endowed  animals  with  sense;  some  of  them. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


however,  have  no  memory  from  the  operations 
of  their  senses;  others,  again,  have  memory; 
and  this  is  the  reason  wherefore  some  are  more 
intelligent,  and  some  more  capable  of  receiving 
instruction  than  others,  those,  namely,  that 
want  recollection.  Some  show  discretion  inde¬ 
pendently  of  tuition:  inasmuch  as  there  are 
many  that  do  not  hear,  such  as  bees  and  others 
of  the  same  kind.  But  all  animals  which  along 
with  memory  have  the  faculty  of  hearing  are 
susceptible  of  education.  Other  creatures, 
again,  live  possessed  of  fancy  and  memory,  but 
they  have  little  store  of  experience;  the  human 
kind,  however,  have  both  art  and  reasoning. 
Now  experience  comes  to  man  through  mem¬ 
ory;  for  many  memories  of  the  same  thing  have 
the  force  of  a  single  experience:  so  that  expe¬ 
rience  appears  to  be  almost  identical  with  cer¬ 
tain  kinds  of  art  and  science;  and,  indeed,  men 
acquire  both  art  and  science  by  experience:  for 
experience,  as  Polus^  rightly  remarks,  begets 
art,  inexperience  is  waited  on  by  accident.”^ 

By  this  he  plainly  tells  us  that  no  one  can 
truly  be  entitled  discreet  or  well-informed,  who 
does  not  of  his  own  experience,  /.  ^.,  from  re¬ 
peated  memory,  frequent  perception  by  sense, 
and  diligent  observation,  know  that  a  thing  is 
so  in  fact.  Without  these,  indeed,  we  only  imag¬ 
ine  or  believe,  and  such  knowledge  is  rather  to 
be  accounted  as  belonging  to  others  than  to  us. 
The  method  of  investigating  truth  commonly 
pursued  at  this  time,  therefore,  is  to  be  held  as 
erroneous  and  almost  foolish,  in  which  so  many 
inquire  what  others  have  said,  and  omit  to  ask 
whether  the  things  themselves  be  actually  so  or 
not;  and  single  universal  conclusions  being  de¬ 
duced  from  several  premises,  and  analogies 
being  thence  shaped  out,  we  have  frequently 
mere  verisimilitudes  handed  down  to  us  instead 
of  positive  truths.  Whence  it  comes  that  pre¬ 
tenders  to  knowledge  and  sophists,  trimming 
up  the  discoveries  of  others,  changing  the  ar¬ 
rangement  only,  or  the  language,  and  adding  a 
few  things  of  no  importance,  audaciously  send 
them  forth  as  their  own,  and  so  render  philoso¬ 
phy,  which  ought  to  be  certain  and  perspicu¬ 
ous,  obscure  and  intricate.  For  he  who  reads 
the  words  of  an  author  and  fails,  through  his 
own  senses,  to  obtain  images  of  the  things  that 
are  conveyed  in  these  words,  derives  not  true 
ideas,  but  false  fancies  and  empty  visions; 
whence  he  conjures  up  shadows  and  chimeras, 
and  his  whole  theory  or  contemplation,  which, 
however,  he  regards  as  knowledge,  is  nothing 

^  Plato  in  Gorgtas, 

^  MetaphysicSf  i.  i. 


more  than  a  waking  dream,  or  such  a  delirium 
as  the  sick  fancy  engenders. 

I,  therefore,  whisper  in  your  ear,  friendly 
reader,  and  recommend  you  to  weigh  carefully 
in  the  balance  of  exact  experience  all  that  I 
shall  deliver  in  these  Exercises  on  the  Generation 
of  Animals;  I  would  not  that  you  gave  credit 
to  aught  they  contain  save  in  so  far  as  you  find 
it  confirmed  and  borne  out  by  the  unquestion¬ 
able  testimony  of  your  own  senses. 

The  same  course  is  even  advised  by  Aristotle, 
who,  after  having  gone  over  a  great  many  par¬ 
ticulars  about  bees,  says  at  length:  “That  the 
generation  of  bees  takes  place  in  this  way  ap¬ 
pears  both  from  reason  and  from  those  things 
that  are  seen  to  occur  in  their  kind.  Still  all  the 
incidents  have  not  yet  been  sufficiently  exam¬ 
ined.  And  when  the  investigation  shall  be  com¬ 
plete,  then  will  sense  be  rather  to  be  trusted 
than  reason;  reason,  however,  will  also  deserve 
credit,  if  the  things  demonstrated  accord  with 
the  things  that  are  perceived  by  sense. 

Of  the  Method  to  be  pursued  in  studying 
Generation 

Since  in  animal  generation  (and,  indeed,  in 
all  other  subjects  upon  which  information  is  de¬ 
sired)  inquiry  must  be  begun  from  the  causes, 
especially  the  material  and  efficient  ones,  it  ap¬ 
pears  advisable  to  me  to  look  back  from  the 
perfect  animal,  and  to  inquire  by  what  process 
it  has  arisen  and  grown  to  maturity,  to  retrace 
our  steps,  as  it  were,  from  the  goal  to  the  start¬ 
ing  place;  so  that  when  at  last  we  can  retreat  no 
farther,  we  shall  feel  assured  that  we  have  at¬ 
tained  to  the  principles;  at  the  same  time  we 
shall  perceive  from  what  primary  matter,  and 
from  what  efficient  principle,  and  in  what  way 
from  these  the  plastic  force  proceeds;  as  also 
what  processes  nature  brings  into  play  in  the 
work.  For  primary  and  more  remote  matter,  by 
abstraction  and  negation  (being  stripped  of  its 
garments,  as  it  were),  becomes  more  conspicu¬ 
ous;  and  whatever  is  first  formed  or  exists  pri¬ 
marily  in  generation  is  the  material  cause  of 
everything  that  succeeds.  For  example,  before 
a  man  attains  to  maturity,  he  was  a  boy,  an  in¬ 
fant,  an  embryo.  And  then  it  is  indispensable  to 
inquire  further  as  to  what  he  was  in  his  moth¬ 
er's  womb  before  he  was  an  embryo  or  foetus; 
whether  made  up  of  three  bubbles,  or  a  shape¬ 
less  mass,  or  a  conception  or  coagulum  proceed¬ 
ing  from  the  mingled  seminal  fluids  of  his  par¬ 
ents,  or  what  else,  as  we  have  it  delivered  to  us 
by  writers.  In  like  manner,  before  a  fowl  had 

3  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  iii.  lo. 


336  WILLIAM 

attained  to  maturity  or  perfection — because 
capable  of  engendering  its  like — it  was  a  chicken ; 
previous  to  which  it  was  an  embryo  or  foetus  in 
the  egg;  and  before  this,  Hieronymus  Fabricius 
of  Aquapendente,  has  observed  rudiments  of 
the  head,  eyes,  and  spine.  But  when  he  asserts 
that  the  bones  are  formed  before  the  muscles, 
heart,  liver,  lungs,  and  precordial  parts,  and 
contends  that  all  the  internal  organs  must  exist 
before  the  external  ones,  he  follows  probabili- 
ties  according  to  previous  notions  rather  than 
inspection;  and  quitting  the  evidences  of  sense 
that  rest  on  anatomy,  he  seeks  refuge  in  reason¬ 
ings  upon  mechanical  principles;  a  procedure 
that  is  anything  but  becoming  in  a  great  anato¬ 
mist,  whose  duty  it  was  faithfully  to  narrate  the 
changes  he  observed  taking  place  day  by  day  in 
the  egg,  up  to  the  period  when  the  foetus  is  per¬ 
fected;  and  this  the  rather  as  he  expressly  pro¬ 
posed  to  himself  to  write  the  history  of  the 
formation  of  the  chick  in  the  egg,  and  to  ex¬ 
hibit  in  figures  what  happens  in  the  course  of 
each  successive  day.  It  would  have  been  in  har¬ 
mony  with  such  a  design,  I  say,  had  we  been 
informed,  on  the  testimony  of  the  senses,  of 
what  parts  are  formed  first,  together,  or  sub¬ 
sequently  in  the  egg;  and  not  had  mere  opin¬ 
ions  or  .musty  conjectures,  and  the  instances 
of  houses  and  ships,  adduced  in  illustration 
of  the  order  and  mode  of  formation  of  the 
parts. 

We,  therefore,  in  conformity  with  the  method 
proposed,  shall  show  in  the  first  place  in  the 
egg,  and  then  in  the  conceptions  of  other  ani¬ 
mals,  what  parts  are  first,  and  what  are  sub¬ 
sequently  formed  by  the  great  God  of  Nature 
with  inimitable  providence  and  intelligence, 
and  most  admirable  order.  Next  we  shall  in¬ 
quire  into  the  primary  matter  out  of  which, 
and  the  efficient  cause  by  which  generation  is 
accomplished,  and  also  the  order  and  economy 
of  generation,  as  observed  by  us;  that  from 
thence,  from  its  own  work,  we  may  have  some 
certain  information  of  the  several  faculties  of 
the  formative  and  vegetative  soul,  and  of  the 
nature  of  the  soul  itself,  judging  from  its  mem¬ 
bers  or  organs,  and  their  functions. 

This,  indeed,  cannot  be  done  in  all  animals: 
first,  because  a  sufficient  number  of  several  of 
these  cannot  be  commanded;  and  again,  be¬ 
cause,  from  the  small  size  of  many,  they  escape 
our  powers  of  vision.  It  must  suffice,  therefore, 
that  this  is  done  in  some  kinds  which  are  more 
familiarly  known  to  us,  and  that  we  refer  all 
the  rest  to  these  as  types  or  standards. 

We  have,  therefore,  selected  those  that  may 


HARVEY 

tend  to  render  our  experiments  more  undeni¬ 
able,  viz,,  the  larger  and  more  perfect  animals, 
and  that  are  easily  within  reach.  For  in  the  larger 
animals  all  things  are  more  conspicuous;  in  the 
more  perfect,  they  are  also  more  distinct;  and 
in  those  that  we  can  command,  and  that  live 
with  us,  everything  is  more  readily  examined: 
we  have  it  in  our  power  so  often  as  we  please  to 
repeat  our  observations,  and  so  to  free  them 
from  all  uncertainty  and  doubt.  Now,  among 
oviparous  animals  of  this  description,  we  have 
the  common  fowl,  the  goose,  duck,  pigeon;  and 
then  we  have  frogs,  and  serpents,  and  fishes; 
Crustacea,  testacea,  and  mollusca;  among  in¬ 
sects,  bees,  wasps,  butterflies,  and  silkworms; 
among  viviparous  creatures,  we  have  sheep, 
goats,  dogs,  cats,  deer,  and  oxen;  lastly,  we 
have  the  most  perfect  of  all  animals,  man. 

Having  studied  and  made  ourselves  familiar 
with  these,  we  may  turn  to  the  consideration  of 
the  more  abstruse  nature  of  the  vegetative  soul, 
and  feel  ourselves  in  a  condition  to  understand 
the  method,  order,  and  causes  of  generation  in 
animals  generally;  for  all  animals  resemble  one 
or  other  of  those  above  mentioned,  and  agree 
with  them  either  generally  or  specifically,  and 
are  procreated  in  the  same  manner,  or  the  mode 
of  their  generation  at  least  is  referrible  by  anal¬ 
ogy  to  that  of  one  or  other  of  them.  For  Nature, 
perfect  and  divine,  is  ever  in  the  same  things 
harmonious  with  herself,  and  as  her  works  either 
agree  or  differ  {viz,,  in  genus,  species,  or  some 
other  proportion),  so  is  her  agency  in  these 
{viz.y  generation  or  development)  either  the 
same  or  diverse.  He  who  enters  on  this  new  and 
untrodden  path,  and  out  of  the  vast  realm  of 
Nature  endeavours  to  find  the  truth  by  means 
of  anatomical  dissections  and  experiments,  is 
met  by  such  a  multitude  of  facts,  and  these  of 
so  unusual  an  aspect,  that  he  may  find  it  more 
difficult  to  explain  and  describe  to  others  the 
things  he  has  seen,  than  he  reckoned  it  labour 
to  make  his  observations;  so  many  things  are 
encountered  that  require  naming;  such  is  the 
abundance  of  matter  and  the  dearth  of  words. 
But  if  he  would  have  recourse  to  metaphors, 
and  by  means  of  old  and  familiar  terms  would 
make  known  his  ideas  concerning  the  things  he 
has  newly  discovered,  the  reader  would  have 
little  chance  of  understanding  him  better  than 
if  they  were  riddles  that  were  propounded;  and 
of  the  thing  itself,  which  he  had  never  seen,  he 
could  have  no  conception.  But  then,  to  have 
recourse  to  new  and  unusual  terms  were  less  to 
bring  a  torch  to  lighten,  than  to  darken  things 
still  more  with  a  cloud:  it  were  to  attempt  an 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


explanation  of  a  matter  unknown  by  one  still 
more  unknown,  and  to  impose  a  greater  toil  on 
the  reader  to  understand  the  meaning  of  words 
than  to  comprehend  the  things  themselves. 
And  so  it  happens  that  Aristotle  is  believed  by 
the  inexperienced  to  be  obscure  in  many  places; 
and  on  this  account,  perhaps,  Fabricius  of  Aqua- 
pendente  rather  intended  to  exhibit  the  chick 
in  ovo  in  his  figures  than  to  explain  its  forma¬ 
tion  in  words. 

Wherefore,  courteous  reader,  be  not  dis¬ 
pleased  with  me,  if,  in  illustrating  the  history 
of  the  egg,  and  in  my  account  of  the  generation 
of  the  chick,  I  follow  a  new  plan,  and  occasion¬ 
ally  have  recourse  to  unusual  language.  Think 
me  not  eager  for  vainglorious  fame  rather  than 
anxious  to  lay  before  you  observations  that  are 
true,  and  that  are  derived  immediately  from 


337 

the  nature  of  things.  That  you  may  not  do  me 
this  injustice,  I  would  have  you  know  that  I 
tread  in  the  footsteps  of  those  who  have  already 
thrown  a  light  upon  this  subject,  and  that, 
wherever  I  can,  I  make  use  of  their  words.  And 
foremost  of  all  among  the  ancients  I  follow 
Aristotle;  among  the  moderns,  Fabricius  of 
Aquapendente;  the  former  as  my  leader,  the 
latter  as  my  informant  of  the  way.  For  even  as 
they  who  discover  new  lands,  and  first  set  foot 
on  foreign  shores,  are  wont  to  give  them  new 
names  which  mostly  descend  to  posterity,  so 
also  do  the  discoverers  of  things  and  the  earliest 
writers  with  perfect  propriety  give  names  to 
their  discoveries.  And  now  I  seem  to  hear  Galen 
admonishing  us,  that  we  should  but  agree  about 
the  things,  and  not  dispute  greatly  about  the 
words. 


On  Animal  Generation 


EXERCISE  1.  Wherefore  ive  begin  with  (he  history 
of  the  hen's  egg 

Hieronymus  Fabrici us  of  Aquapendente 
(whom,  as  I  have  said,  1  have  chosen  my  in¬ 
formant  of  the  way  I  am  to  follow),  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  his  book  on  the  Formation  of  the 
Ovum  and  ChicX,  has  these  words:  “My  purpose 
is  to  treat  of  the  formation  of  the  foetus  in  every 
animal,  setting  out  from  that  which  proceeds 
from  the  egg:  for  this  ought  to  take  precedence 
of  all  discussion  of  the  subject,  both  because 
from  this  it  is  not  difficult  to  make  out  Aris¬ 
totle’s  views  of  the  matter,  and  because  his 
treatise  on  the  Formation  of  the  Foetus  from  the 
egg,  is  by  far  the  fullest,  and  the  subject  is  by 
much  the  most  extensive  and  difficult.” 

We,  however,  commence  with  the  history 
of  the  hen’s  egg  as  well  for  the  reasons  above 
assigned,  as  because  we  can  thence  obtain  cer¬ 
tain  data  which,  as  more  familiar  to  us,  will 
serve  to  throw  light  on  the  generation  of  other 
animals;  for  as  eggs  cost  little,  and  are  always  to 
be  had,  we  have  an  opportunity  from  them  of 
observing  the  first  clear  and  unquestionable 
commencements  of  generation,  how  nature  pro¬ 
ceeds  in  the  process,  and  with  what  admirable 
foresight  she  governs  every  part  of  the  work. 

Fabricius  proceeds:  “Now  that  the  contem¬ 
plation  of  the  formation  of  the  chick  from  the 
egg  is  of  very  ample  scope,  appears  from  this 
that  the  greater  number  of  animals  are  pro¬ 
duced  from  ova.  Passing  by  almost  all  insects 
and  the  whole  of  the  less  perfect  animals,  which 
are  obviously  produced  from  eggs,  the  greater 
number  of  the  more  perfect  are  also  engendered 
from  eggs.”  And  then  he  goes  on  to  particu¬ 
larize:  “All  feathered  creatures;  fishes  likewise, 
with  the  single  exception  of  the  whale  tribes; 
Crustacea,  testacea,  and  all  mollusca;  among 
land  animals,  reptiles,  millepeds,  and  all  creep¬ 
ing  things;  and  among  quadrupeds,  the  entire 
tribe  of  lizards.” 

We,  however,  maintain  (and  shall  take  care 
to  show  that  it  is  so)  that  all  animals  whatso¬ 
ever,  even  the  viviparous,  and  man  himself  not 
excepted,  are  produced  from  ova;  that  the  first 
conception,  from  which  the  foetus  proceeds  in 


all,  is  an  ovum  of  one  description  or  another,  as 
well  as  the  seeds  of  all  kinds  of  plants.  Emped¬ 
ocles,  therefore,  spoke  not  improperly  of  the 
ovipartim  genus  arboreum^  “the  egg-bearing  race 
of  trees. The  history  of  the  egg  is,  therefore, 
of  the  widest  scope,  inasmuch  as  it  illustrates 
generation  of  every  description. 

We  shall,  therefore,  begin  by  showing  where, 
whence,  and  how  eggs  are  produced;  and  then 
inquire  by  what  means  and  order  and  successive 
steps  the  foetus  or  chick  is  formed  and  per¬ 
fected  in  and  from  the  egg. 

Fabricius  has  these  additional  words:  “The 
foetus  of  animals  is  engendered  in  one  case  from 
an  ovum,  in  another  from  the  seminal  fluid,  in 
a  third  from  putrefaction;  whence  some  crea¬ 
tures  are  oviparous,  others  viviparous,  and  yet 
others,  born  of  putrefaction  or  by  the  sponta¬ 
neous  act  of  nature,  automatically.” 

Such  a  division  as  this,  however,  does  not 
satisfy  me,  inasmuch  as  all  animals  whatsoever 
may  be  said  in  a  certain  sense  to  spring  from 
ova,  and  in  another  certain  sense  from  seminal 
fluid;  and  they  are  entitled  oviparous,  vivip¬ 
arous,  or  vermiparous,  rather  in  respect  of  their 
mode  of  bringing  forth  than  of  their  first  forma¬ 
tion.  Even  the  creatures  that  arise  spontane¬ 
ously  are  called  automatic,  not  because  they 
spring  from  putrefaction,  but  because  they 
have  their  origin  from  accident,  the  spontane¬ 
ous  act  of  nature,  and  are  equivocally  engen¬ 
dered,  as  it  is  said,  proceeding  from  parents  un¬ 
like  themselves.  And,  then,  certain  other  ani¬ 
mals  bring  forth  an  egg  or  a  worm  as  their  con¬ 
ception  and  semen,  from  which,  after  it  has 
been  exposed  abroad,  a  foetus  is  produced; 
whence  such  animals  are  called  oviparous  or 
vermiparous.  Viviparous  animals  are  so  en¬ 
titled  because  they  retain  and  cherish  their  con¬ 
ception  in  their  interior,  until  from  thence  the 
foetus  comes  forth  into  the  light  completely 
formed  and  alive. 

EXERCISE  2.  Of  the  seat  of  generation 

“Nature,”  says  Fabricius,  “was  first  solicitous 
about  the  place,  which  she  determined  should 
be  either  within  or  without  the  animal:  within 

'  Aristotle,  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  i.  20, 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


she  ordained  the  uterus;  without,  the  ovum:  in 
the  uterus  the  blood  and  seminal  fluid  engen¬ 
dering;  in  the  ovum,  however,  the  fluids  or  ele¬ 
ments  of  which  it  consists  supplying  pabulum 
for  the  production  of  the  foetus.’* 

Now,  whatever  is  procreated  of  the  semen 
properly  so  called  originates  and  is  perfected 
either  in  the  same  place  or  in  different  places. 
All  viviparous  creatures  derive  their  origin  and 
have  their  completion  in  the  uterus  itself;  but 
oviparous  animals,  as  they  have  their  beginning 
within  their  parents,  and  there  become  ova,  so 
is  it  beyond  their  parents  that  they  are  per¬ 
fected  into  the  foetal  state.  Among  oviparous 
animals,  however,  there  are  some  that  retain 
their  ova  till  such  time  as  they  are  mature  and 
perfect;  such  as  all  the  feathered  tribes,  reptiles 
and  serpents.  Others,  again,  extrude  their  se- 
mina  in  a  state  still  immature  and  imperfect,  and 
it  is  without  the  body  of  the  parent  that  in¬ 
crease,  maturity,  and  perfection,  are  attained. 
Under  this  head  we  range  frogs,  many  kinds  of 
fishes,  crustaceous,  molluscous,  and  testaceous 
animals,  the  ova  of  which,  when  first  extruded, 
are  but  beginnings,  sketches,  yelks  which  after¬ 
wards  surround  themselves  with  whites,  and  at¬ 
tracting,  concocting,  and  attaching  nutriment 
to  themselves,  are  changed  into  perfect  seeds  or 
eggs.  Such  also  are  the  semina  of  insects  (called 
worms  by  Aristotle),  which,  imperfect  on  their 
extrusion  and  in  the  beginning,  seek  food  for 
themselves,  upon  which  they  are  nourished, 
and  grow  from  a  grub  into  a  chrysalis:  from  an 
imperfect  into  a  perfect  egg  or  seed.  Birds, 
however,  and  the  rest  of  the  oviparous  tribes, 
lay  perfect  eggs;  whence  without  the  uterus  the 
foetus  is  engendered.  And  it  was  on  this  account 
that  Fabricius  admitted  two  seats  of  genera¬ 
tion  :  one  internal,  the  uterus;  another  external, 
the  ovum.  But  he  would  have  had  more  rea¬ 
son,  in  my  opinion,  had  he  called  the  nest,  or 
place  where  the  eggs  are  laid,  the  external  seat, 
that,  to  wit,  in  which  the  extruded  seed  or  egg 
is  cherished,  matured,  and  perfected  into  a 
foetus;  for  it  is  from  the  differences  of  this  seat 
that  the  generation  of  oviparous  animals  is 
principally  distinguished:  And  it  is,  indeed,  a 
thing  most  worthy  of  admiration  to  see  these 
creatures  selecting  and  preparing  their  nests 
with  so  much  foresight,  and  fashioning,  and 
furnishing,  and  concealing  them  with  such  in¬ 
imitable  art  and  ingenuity;  so  that  it  seems  im¬ 
perative  on  us  to  admit  in  them  a  certain  spark 
of  the  divine  flame  (as  the  poet  said  of  bees); 
and,  indeed,  we  can  more  readily  admire  than 
imitate  their  untaught  art  and  sapience. 


EXERCISE  3,  Of  the  upper  part  of  the  hen's  uterus^ 
or  the  ovary 

The  uterus  of  the  fowl  is  divided  by  Fabri¬ 
cius  into  the  superior  and  inferior  portions,  and 
the  superior  portion  he  calls  the  ovary. 

The  ovary  is  situated  immediately  beneath 
the  liver,  close  to  the  spine,  over  the  descend¬ 
ing  aorta.  In  this  situation,  in  the  larger  ani¬ 
mals  with  red  blood,  the  ccjeliac  artery  enters 
the  mesentery,  at  the  origin,  namely,  of  the 
emulgent  veins,  or  a  little  lower;  in  the  situa¬ 
tion  moreover  in  which  in  the  other  red- 
blooded  and  viviparous  animals  the  vasa  prae- 
parantia,  tending  to  the  testes,  take  their  ori¬ 
gin:  in  the  same  place  at  which  the  testes  of  the 
cock- bird  are  situated,  there  is  the  ovary  of  the 
hen  discovered.  For  some  animals  carry  their 
testicles  externally;  others  have  them  within 
the  body,  in  the  loins,  in  the  space  midway 
from  the  origins  of  the  vasa  praeparantia.  But 
the  cock  has  his  testicles  at  the  very  origin  of 
these  vessels,  as  if  his  spermatic  fluid  needed  no 
preparation. 

Aristotle^  says  that  the  ovum  begins  at  the 
diaphragm;  “I,  however,”  says  Fabricius,  ‘‘in 
my  treatise  on  Respiration  have  denied  that  the 
feathered  kinds  have  any  diaphragm.  The  dif¬ 
ficulty  is  resolved  by  admitting  that  birds  are 
not  entirely  destitute  of  a  kind  of  diaphragm, 
inasmuch  as  they  have  a  delicate  membrane  in 
the  place  of  this  septum,  which  Aristotle  calls  a 
cincture  and  septum.  Still  they  have  no  dia¬ 
phragm  that  is  muscular,  and  that  might  aid 
respiration,  like  other  animals.  But,  indeed, 
Aristotle  did  not  know  the  muscles.” 

Thus  is  the  prince  of  philosophers  accused 
and  excused  in  the  same  breath,  his  challenger 
being  himself  not  free  from  error;  because  it  is 
certain  that  Aristotle'  knew  both  the  muscles, 
as  I  have  elsewhere  shown,  and  the  membranes, 
which  in  birds  are  not  only  situated  transverse¬ 
ly  in  the  direction  of  the  cincture  of  the  body, 
but  extended  in  the  line  of  the  longitudinal 
direction  of  the  belly,  supplying  the  place  of 
the  diaphragm  and  being  subservient  to  respira¬ 
tion,  as  I  have  shown  in  the  clearest  manner  in 
my  disquisitions  on  the  Respiration  of  Animals, 
And,  passing  over  other  particulars  at  this  time, 
I  shall  only  direct  attention  to  the  fact  that 
birds  breathe  with  great  freedom,  and  in  sing¬ 
ing  also  modulate  their  voice  in  the  most  ad¬ 
mirable  manner,  their  lungs  all  the  while  being 
so  closely  connected  with  their  sides  and  ribs, 
that  they  can  neither  be  dilated  and  rise,  nor 
^  History  of  Animals^  vi.  2, 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


340 

suffer  contraction  in  any  considerable  de- 

grce. 

The  bronchia  or  ends  of  the  trachea  in  birds, 
moreover,  are  perforate,  and  open  into  the  ab¬ 
domen  (and  this  is  an  observation  which  I  do 
not  remember  to  have  met  with  elsewhere),  so 
that  the  air  inspired  is  received  into  and  stored 
up  within  the  cells  or  cavities  formed  by  the 
membranes  mentioned  above.  In  the  same  man¬ 
ner  as  fishes  and  serpents  draw  air  into  ample 
bladders  situated  in  the  abdomen,  and  there 
store  it  up,  by  which  they  are  thought  to  swim 
more  lightly;  and  as  frogs  and  toads,  when  in 
the  height  of  summer  they  respire  more  vigor¬ 
ously  assume  more  than  the  usual  quantity  of 
air  into  their  vesicular  lungs  (whence  they  ac¬ 
quire  so  large  a  size),  which  they  afterwards 
freely  expire,  croaking  all  the  while;  so  in  the 
feathered  tribes  are  the  lungs  rather  the  route 
and  passage  for  respiration  than  its  adequate 
instrument. 

Now,  had  Fabricius  seen  this,  he  would  never 
have  denied  that  these  membranes  (with  the 
assistance  of  the  abdominal  muscles  at  all  events) 
could  subserve  respiration  and  perform  the  of¬ 
fice  of  the  diaphragm,  which,  indeed,  of  itself, 
and  without  the  assistance  of  the  abdominal 
muscles,  were  incompetent  to  act  as  an  instru¬ 
ment  of  respiration.  And,  then,  the  diaphragm 
has  another  duty  to  perform  in  those  creatures 
in  whom  it  is  muscular  or  fleshy,  viz,y  to  depress 
the  stomach  filled  with  food,  and  the  intestines 
distended  with  flatus,  so  that  the  heart  and 
lungs  shall  not  be  invaded,  and  life  itself  op¬ 
pressed  in  its  citadel.  But  as  there  was  no  dan¬ 
ger  of  anything  of  this  kind  in  birds,  they  have 
a  membranous  septum,  perfectly  well  adapted 
to  the  purposes  of  respiration,  so  that  they  have 
very  properly  been  said  to  have  a  diaphragm. 
And  were  birds  even  entirely  without  any¬ 
thing  in  the  shape  of  a  diaphragm,  still  would 
Aristotle  not  be  liable  to  criticism  for  speaking 
of  the  ova  commencing  at  the  septum  trans- 
versum,  because  by  this  title  he  merely  indi¬ 
cates  the  place  where  the  diaphragm  is  usually 
met  with  in  other  animals.  In  the  same  way  we 
ourselves  say  that  the  ovary  is  situated  at  the 
origin  of  the  spermatic  vasa  prasparantia,  al¬ 
though  the  hen  has,  in  fact,  no  such  vessels. 

The  perforations  of  the  lungs  discovered  by 
me  (and  to  which  I  merely  direct  attention  in 
this  place)  are  neither  obscure  nor  doubtful, 
but,  in  birds  especially,  sufficiently  conspicuous, 
so  that  in  the  ostrich  I  found  many  conduits 
which  readily  admitted  the  points  of  my  fin¬ 


gers.  In  the  turkey,  fowl,  and,  indeed,  almost 
all  birds,  you  will  find  that  a  probe  passed  down¬ 
wards  by  the  trachea  makes  its  way  out  of  the 
lungs,  and  is  discovered  lying  naked  and  ex¬ 
posed  in  one  or  another  of  the  abdominal  cells. 
Air  blown  into  the  lungs  of  these  creatures  with 
a  pair  of  bellows  passes  on  with  a  certain  force 
even  into  the  most  inferior  of  these  cells. 

We  may  even  be  permitted  to  ask,  whether 
in  man,  whilst  he  lives,  there  is  not  a  passage 
from  openings  of  the  same  kind  into  the  cavity 
of  the  thorax?  For  how  else  should  the  pus 
poured  out  in  empyema  and  the  blood  extrava- 
sated  in  pleurisy  make  its  escape  ?  In  penetrating 
wounds  of  the  chest,  the  lungs  themselves  being 
uninjured,  air  often  escapes  by  the  wound;  or 
liquids  thrown  into  the  cavity  of  the  thorax, 
are  discharged  with  the  expectoration.  But  our 
views  of  this  subject  will  be  found  fully  ex¬ 
pressed  elsewhere,  viz.y  in  our  disquisitions  On 
the  CaiiseSy  UseSy  and  Organs  of  Respiration, 

1  return  to  the  ovary  and  the  upper  portion 
of  the  fowl’s  uterus,  in  which  the  rudiments  of 
the  eggs  are  produced.  These,  according  to 
Aristotle,^  in  the  first  instance  are  small,  and  of  a 
white  colour;  growing  larger,  they  subsequently 
become  of  a  paler  and  then  of  a  deeper  yellow. 

The  superior  uterus  of  Fabricius,  however, 
has  no  existence  until  after  the  hen  has  con¬ 
ceived,  and  contains  the  rudiments  of  ova  with¬ 
in  it;  when  it  may  be  designated  as  a  cluster  of 
papulae.  And  he  therefore  observes  very  prop¬ 
erly,  “The  superior  uterus  is  nothing  more  than 
an  almost  infinite  congeries  of  yelks,  which  ap¬ 
pear  collected  as  it  were  into  a  single  cluster,  of 
a  rounded  form,  and  of  every  size,  from  that  of 
a  grain  of  mustard  to  that  almost  of  a  walnut  or 
medlar.  This  multitude  of  vitelli  is  aggregated 
and  conjoined  very  much  in  the  manner  of  a 
bunch  of  grapes,  for  which  reason  I  shall  con¬ 
stantly  speak  of  it  as  the  vitellarium  or  raceme 
of  yelks;  a  comparison  which  Aristotle  himself 
made  in  speaking  of  the  soft  or  scaleless  fishes, 
when  he  says-  their  ovary  or  roe  is  extruded 
agglutinated  into  a  kind  of  raceme  or  bunch  of 
grapes.  And  in  the  same  way  as  in  a  bunch  of 
grapes  the  several  berries  are  seen  to  be  of  dif¬ 
ferent  sizes,  some  large,  some  small,  some  of 
very  diminutive  proportions,  each  hanging  by 
its  several  peduncle,  so  do  we  find  precisely  the 
same  thing  in  the  vitellarium  of  the  fowl.” 

In  fishes,  frogs,  Crustacea,  and  testacea,  how¬ 
ever,  matters  are  otherwise  arranged.  The  ovary 

^  History  of  Animals^  vi.  2. 

2  On  the  Generation  of  Animalsy  in.  8, 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


or  vitellary  here  contains  ova  of  one  uniform 
size  only,  which  being  extruded  increase,  at¬ 
tain  maturity,  and  give  birth  to  foetuses  simul¬ 
taneously.  But  in  the  ovary  of  the  common 
fowl,  and  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  oviparous 
tribes,  the  yelks  are  found  in  various  stages  of 
their  growth,  from  dimensions  that  are  scarcely 
visible  up  to  the  full  size.  Nevertheless  the  eggs 
of  the  fowl  and  other  birds  (not  otherwise  than 
in  those  cases  where  the  eggs  are  all  engendered 
and  laid  at  the  same  moment)  ripen  their  foe¬ 
tuses  under  the  influence  of  incubation  in  the 
same  nest,  and  produce  them  perfect,  nearly  at 
the  same  time.  In  the  family  of  the  pigeons, 
however  (which  lay  and  incubate  no  more  than 
two  eggs  in  the  same  nest),  I  have  observed 
that  all  the  ova  crowded  together  in  the  ovary, 
with  the  exception  of  a  single  pair,  were  of  the 
same  dimensions;  this  pair  was  very  much  larger 
than  any  of  the  others,  and  already  prepared  to 
descend  into  the  second  or  lower  uterus.  In 
these  creatures,  therefore,  the  number  of  young 
is  great,  not  because  of  the  multitude  produced 
at  a  time,  but  of  the  frequency  with  which 
births  take  place,  vtz,y  every  month.  In  the 
same  way,  among  cartilaginous  fishes,  such  as  the 
skates,  dog-fishes,  &c.,  two  eggs  only  come  to 
maturity  together,  one  of  which  descends  from 
the  right,  the  other  from  the  left  corner  of  the 
uterus  into  the  inferior  portion,  where  they  are 
cherished,  and  where  they  finally  produce  liv¬ 
ing  foetuses,  precisely  as  happens  among  vivip¬ 
arous  animals;  in  the  ovary,  nevertheless,  there 
is  almost  infinite  store  of  ova  of  various  sizes — 
in  the  ray  I  have  counted  upwards  of  a  hundred. 

The  ova  of  the  other  oviparous  tribes  are 
either  perfected  externally,  as  in  the  case  of 
fishes,  or  they  are  concocted  or  matured,  as  in 
the  instance  of  testacea,  Crustacea,  and  spiders. 
Testaceous  animals  lay  their  eggs  amidst  froth; 
the  crustaceous  tribes,  such  as  the  shrimp,  crab, 
and  lobster,  bear  them  about  with  them,  at¬ 
tached  to  certain  appendages;  and  the  spiders 
carry  them  about  and  cherish  them,  laid  up  in  a 
kind  of  purse  or  basket,  made  of  their  web.  The 
beetle  rolls  its  eggs  in  dung,  using  its  hind  legs 
in  the  operation,  and  buries  them.  Now,  in  all 
these  creatures  the  quantity  of  eggs  is  almost 
incredibly  great:  in  fishes  they  form  two  oblong 
bladders  or  follicles,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  carp, 
herring,  and  smelt,  in  all  of  which,  as  there  is  no 
uterus,  but  merely  an  ovary  present,  so  is  this 
sometimes  crowded  with  ova  to  such  a  degree 
that  it  comes  to  surpass  the  body  in  bulk. 

Of  such  ovaries  of  the  mullet  and  carp,  salted 


and  pressed,  and  dried  in  the  smoke,  was  pre¬ 
pared  that  article  of  food  in  such  request  among 
the  Greeks  and  old  Italians  (called  botorcha  by 
the  latter,  wd  rdptxa,  salted  eggs,  by  the 
former)  and  very  similar,  we  may  presume,  to 
the  masses  which  we  find  in  the  insides  of  our 
smoked  herrings,  and  to  the  compact  granular 
red-coloured  roe  of  our  lobsters.  The  article 
prepared  from  the  salted  roe  of  the  sturgeon, 
which  is  called  caviare,  and  resembles  black 
soap,  is  still  the  delight  of  epicures. 

In  those  fishes  that  are  highly  prolific  such  a 
quantity  of  eggs  is  engendered  that  the  whole 
abdomen  can  scarcely  contain  them,  even  when 
they  are  first  produced,  still  less  when  they 
have  grown  to  any  size.  In  fishes,  therefore, 
there  is  no  part  save  the  ovary  dedicated  to 
purposes  of  reproduction.  The  ova  of  these  ani¬ 
mals  continue  to  grow  without  the  body,  and 
do  not  require  the  protection  of  an  uterus  for 
their  evolution.  And  the  ovary  here  appears  to 
bear  an  analogy  to  the  testicles  or  vesiculse  semi- 
nales,  not  only  because  it  is  found  in  the  same 
place  as  the  testes  in  the  male  (the  testes  in  the 
cock  being  situated,  as  we  have  said,  close  to 
the  origin  of  the  coeliac  artery,  near  the  waist, 
in  the  very  same  place  as  the  ovary  in  the  hen), 
but  because  among  fishes,  in  both  sexes,  as  the 
time  of  spawning  approaches,  two  follicles,  alike 
in  situation,  size,  and  shape,  are  discovered,  ex¬ 
tending  the  whole  length  of  the  abdomen; 
which  increase  and  become  distended  at  the 
same  period:  in  the  male  with  a  homogeneous 
milky  spermatic  matter  (whence  the  term  milk 
or  milt  of  fishes);  in  the  female  with  innumer¬ 
able  granules,  which,  from  their  diminutive 
size  and  close  texture,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
season,  escape  the  powers  of  vision,  and  present 
themselves  as  constituting  an  uniform  body, 
bearing  the  strongest  resemblance  to  the  milt 
of  the  male  regularly  coagulated.  By  and  by 
they  are  seen  in  the  guise  of  minute  grains  of 
sand,  adhering  together  within  their  follicles. 

In  the  smaller  birds  that  lay  but  once  a  year, 
and  a  few  eggs  only,  you  will  scarcely  discover 
any  ovary.  Still,  in  the  place  where  the  testicles 
are  situated  in  the  male,  there  in  the  female, 
and  not  less  obviously  than  the  testicles  of  the 
male,  you  will  perceive  three  or  four  vesicles 
(the  number  being  in  proportion  to  that  of  the 
eggs  of  which  they  are  the  rudiments),  by  way 
of  ovary. 

In  the  cornua  of  the  uterus  of  snakes  (which 
resemble  the  vasa  deferentia  in  male  animals), 
the  first  rudiments  of  the  ova  present  them- 


342  WILLIAM 

selves  as  globules  strung  upon  a  thread,  in  the 
same  way  as  women’s  bracelets,  or  like  a  rosary 
composed  of  amber  beads. 

'rhose  ova  that  are  found  in  the  ovary  of  the 
fowl  consequently  are  not  to  be  regarded  as 
perfect  eggs,  but  only  as  their  rudiments;  and 
they  are  so  arranged  on  the  cluster,  they  sue- 
ceed  each  other  in  such  an  order  and  of  such 
dimensions,  that  they  are  always  ready  for  each 
day’s  laying.  But  none  of  the  eggs  in  the  ovary 
are  surrounded  with  albumen;  there  the  yelk 
exists  alone,  and  each,  as  it  enlarges,  extricates 
itself  from  the  general  congeries  of  smaller  ones, 
in  order  that  it  may  the  more  readily  find  space 
to  grow.  Fabricius,  therefore,  is  right  when  he 
says,  “The  yelks  which  are  on  the  surface  of  the 
cluster  are  larger  than  those  of  the  middle,  which 
are  surrounded  as  it  were  by  the  larger  ones. 
The  very  smallest  of  all  the  ova  are  situated 
towards  the  centre.”^  That  is  to  say,  those  that 
grow  acquire  larger  dimensions  and  become  de¬ 
tached  from  the  rest,  and  as  this  proceeds,  the 
several  yelks,  besides  their  tunica  propria,  are 
invested  with  another  from  the  ovary,  which 
embraces  them  externally,  and  connects  them 
with  the  base  whence  they  spring.  This  coat  is, 
therefore,  entitled  the  peduncle  by  Fabricius, 
and  its  office  is  that  of  a  foot-stalk,  viz.,  to  sup¬ 
ply  nourishment  to  the  ovum,  in  the  same  way 
as  fruit  is  nourished  through  the  stalk  by  which 
it  is  connected  with  the  tree.  “For  this  pedun¬ 
cle  is  a  hollow  membranous  bond  of  union,  ex¬ 
tending  from  the  foundation  of  the  cluster  to 
the  yelk,  coming  into  contact  with  which,  it  is 
dilated  and  expanded  in  the  same  way  as  the 
optic  nerve  in  the  eye,  and  covers  the  vitellus 
with  an  external  tunic.  This  perchance  was 
what  Aristotle  called  the  <jt6\ov  6jjL<j)a\o6)drjVj 
or  umbilical  appendix,  and  described  as  forming 
a  kind  of  tube.  This  peduncle  includes  numer¬ 
ous  vessels,  which  are  distributed  on  all  sides 
around  the  yelk.” 

So  much  is  accurately  related  by  Fabricius; 
but  he  errs  when  he  says,  “This  tunic  does  not 
surround  the  entire  vitellus,  but  only  extends 
upon  it  a  little  beyond  the  middle,  very  much 
in  the  manner  ofan  acorn  within  its  cup;  whence 
it  comes  that  the  outer  portion  of  the  yelk, 
which  is  not  invested  by  the  membrane  in  ques¬ 
tion,  presents  itself  free  from  vessels,  and  to  ap¬ 
pearance  naked.”  The  membrane,  nevertheless, 
surrounds  the  yelk  completely;  but  on  the 
outer  aspect  it  is  not  very  easily  distinguished 
from  the  tunica  propria,  both  of  them  being  of 
extreme  delicacy.  Posteriorly,  however,  and 

^  Op,  r//.,  p.  3. 


HARVEY 

where  the  yelk  is  turned  towards  the  basis  of 
the  cluster,  the  tunic  in  question  does  not  ad¬ 
here  to  the  vitellus,  neither  does  it  send  any 
vessels  to  this  part,  but  merely  embraces  it  in 
the  manner  of  a  sac. 

Each  vitellus  receives  a  distinct  tunic  from 
the  ovarian  basis;  whence  this  is  not  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  common  uterus,  since  nothing  is 
discovered  here  except  the  cluster  or  heap  of 
ova,  of  many  different  sizes,  proceeding  from 
the  same  foundation. 

Now,  this  foundation  or  basis  is  a  body  st4i 
generisj  arising  on  the  spine  of  the  feathered 
kinds,  connected  by  means  of  large  arteries  and 
veins,  and  of  a  loose,  porous,  and  spongy  tex¬ 
ture,  in  order  that  multitudes  of  ova  may  be 
produced  from  it,  and  that  it  may  supply  tunics 
to  all;  which  tunics,  when  the  yelks  have  grown 
to  their  full  size,  are  distended  by  them,  and 
then  the  tunics  surround  the  vitelli,  in  the  man¬ 
ner  of  sacks  with  narrower  necks  and  more  ca¬ 
pacious  bellies,  very  much  like  the  flasks  that 
are  formed  by  the  breath  of  the  glass-blower. 

Fabricius  then  proceeds:  “The  yelks,  as  they 
proceed  from  small  beginnings,  from  the  size  of 
millet  or  mustard  seeds,  and  are  at  first  not  only 
extremely  small,  but  colourless,  as  Aristotle 
says,  so  do  they  increase  by  degrees,  and,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Aristotle,  become  first  of  a  paler  and 
then  of  a  deeper  yellow,  until  they  have  at¬ 
tained  to  the  dimensions  familiar  to  all.”  I, 
however,  have  observed  ova  vastly  smaller 
than  millet  seeds,  ova  which,  like  papulae  or 
sudamina,  or  the  finest  grains  of  sand  (such  as 
we  have  indicated  as  found  in  the  roe  of  fishes), 
almost  escaped  the  powers  of  sight;  their  places, 
indeed,  were  only  proclaimed  by  a  kind  of 
roughness  of  the  membranes. 

EXERCISE  4.  Of  the  infundibulum 

The  next  succeeding  portion  of  the  uterus 
of  the  common  fowl  is  called  the  infundibulum 
by  Fabricius.  It  forms  a  kind  of  funnel  or  tube, 
extending  downwards  from  the  ovary  (which 
it  everywhere  embraces),  and  becoming  grad¬ 
ually  wider,  terminates  in  the  superior  pro¬ 
duced  portion  of  the  uterus.  This  infundibu¬ 
lum  yields  a  passage  to  the  yelks  when  they 
have  broken  from  their  foot-stalks  in  their 
descent  from  the  ovary  into  the  second  uterus 
(so  it  is  styled  by  Fabricius).  It  resembles  the 
tunica  vaginalis  in  the  scrotum,  and  is  a  most 
delicate  membrane,  very  easily  dilatable,  fitted 
to  receive  the  yelks  that  are  daily  cast  loose, 
and  to  transmit  them  to  the  uterus  men¬ 
tioned. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


Would  you  have  an  example  of  these  struc¬ 
tures  ?  Figure  to  yourself  a  small  plant,  whose 
tuberous  roots  should  represent  the  congeries 
of  yelks;  its  stalk  the  infundibulum.  Now,  as 
the  stalk  of  this  plant  dies  in  the  winter  and 
disappears,  in  like  manner,  when  the  fowl 
ceases  to  lay  eggs,  the  whole  ovary,  with  the 
infundibulum,  withers,  shrinks,  and  is  an¬ 
nulled;  the  basis  and  indication  of  the  roots 
being  still  left. 

This  infundibulum  seems  only  to  discharge 
the  office  of  a  conduit,  or  tube  of  passage:  the 
yelk  is  never  observed  sticking  in  it;  but  as  the 
testes  at  times  creep  upwards  through  the  tu- 
nicae  vaginales  into  the  groins,  and  in  some  ani¬ 
mals —  the  hare  and  the  mole — even  become 
concealed  within  the  abdomen,  and  neverthe¬ 
less  again  descend  and  show  themselves  exter¬ 
nally,  so  are  the  vitelli  transmitted  through 
the  infundibulum  from  the  ovary  into  the  ute¬ 
rus.  Its  office  is  served,  and  even  its  form  is 
imitated,  by  the  funnel  which  we  make  use  of 
when  we  pour  fluids  from  one  vessel  into  an¬ 
other  having  a  narrower  mouth. 

EXERCISE  5.  Of  the  external  portion  of  the  uterus 
of  the  common  fowl 

Fabricius  pursues  his  account  of  the  uterus 
after  having  described  the  ovary,  and  in  such 
an  inverse  order,  that  he  premises  a  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  superior  portion  or  appendage  of 
the  uterus  before  he  approaches  the  uterus  it¬ 
self.  He  assigns  to  it  three  turns  or  spirals,  with 
somewhat  too  much  of  precision  or  determin¬ 
ateness,  and  settles  the  respective  situations  of 
these  spirals,  which  are  nevertheless  of  uncer¬ 
tain  seat.  Here,  too,  he  very  unnecessarily  re¬ 
peats  his  definition  of  the  infundibulum.  I 
would,  therefore,  in  this  place,  beg  to  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  give  my  own  account  of  the  uterus  of 
the  fowl,  according  to  the  anatomical  method, 
which  I  consider  the  more  convenient,  and 
proceeding  from  external  to  internal  parts,  in 
opposition  to  the  method  of  Fabricius. 

In  the  fowl  stripped  of  its  feathers,  the  fun¬ 
dament  will  be  observed  not  contracted  cir¬ 
cularly,  as  in  other  animals,  but  forming  a  de¬ 
pressed  orifice,  slit  transversely,  and  consisting 
of  two  lips  lying  over  against  each  other,  the 
superior  of  the  two  covering  and  concealing 
the  inferior,  which  is  puckered  together.  The 
superior  labium,  or  velabrum,  as  it  is  called, 
arises  from  the  root  of  the  rump,  and  as  the 
upper  eyelid  covers  the  eye,  so  does  this  cover 
the  three  orifices  of  the  pudenda,  viz.,  the 
anus,  the  uterus,  and  the  ureters,  which  lie 


concealed  under  the  velabrum  as  under  a  kind 
of  prepuce;  very  much  as  in  the  pudenda  of 
the  woman  we  have  the  orifice  of  the  vulva 
and  the  meatus  urinarius  concealed  between 
the  labia  and  the  nymphae.  So  that  without  the 
use  of  the  knife,  or  a  somewhat  forcible  retrac¬ 
tion  of  the  velabrum  in  the  fowl,  neither  the 
orifice  by  which  the  faeces  pass  from  the  intes¬ 
tines,  nor  that  by  which  the  urine  issues  from 
the  ureters,  nor  yet  that  by  which  the  egg  es¬ 
capes  from  the  uterus,  can  be  perceived.  And 
as  the  two  excrementitious  discharges  (the 
urine  and  the  faeces)  are  expelled  together  as 
from  a  common  cloaca,  the  velabrum  being 
raised  at  the  time,  and  the  respective  outlets 
exposed;  so,  during  intercourse,  the  hen  on 
the  approach  of  the  cock  uncovers  the  vulva, 
and  prepares  for  his  reception,  a  circumstance 
observed  by  Fabricius  in  the  turkey  hen  when 
she  is  eager  for  the  male.  I  have  myself  ob¬ 
served  a  female  ostrich,  when  her  attendant 
gently  scratched  her  back,  which  seemed  to 
excite  the  sexual  appetite,  to  lie  down  on  the 
ground,  lift  up  the  velabrum,  and  exhibit  and 
protrude  the  vulva,  seeing  which  the  male, 
straightway  inflamed  with  a  like  oestrum, 
mounted,  one  foot  being  kept  firm  on  the 
ground,  the  other  set  upon  the  back  of  the 
prostrate  female;  the  immense  penis  (you 
might  imagine  it  a  neat’s  tongue!)  vibrated 
backwards  and  forwards,  and  the  process  of 
intercourse  was  accompanied  with  much  ado 
in  murmuring  and  noise — the  heads  of  the 
creatures  being  at  the  same  time  frequently 
thrust  out  and  retracted — and  other  indica¬ 
tions  of  enjoyment.  Nor  is  it  peculiar  to  birds, 
but  common  to  animals  at  large,  that,  wagging 
the  tail  and  protruding  the  genital  parts,  they 
prepare  for  the  access  of  the  male.  And,  in¬ 
deed,  the  tail  in  the  majority  of  animals  has 
almost  the  same  office  as  the  velabrum  in  the 
common  fowl;  unless  it  were  raised  or  drawn 
aside,  it  would  interfere  with  the  discharge  of 
the  faeces  and  the  access  of  the  male. 

In  the  female  red-deer,  fallow-deer,  roe,  and 
others  of  the  more  temperate  animals,  there  is 
a  corresponding  protection  to  their  private 
parts,  a  membranous  velabrum  covering  the 
vulva  and  meatus  urinarius,  which  must  be 
raised  before  the  penis  of  the  male  can  be  in¬ 
troduced. 

In  animals  that  have  a  tail,  moreover,  par¬ 
turition  could  not  take  place  unless  this  part 
were  lifted  up;  and  even  the  human  female  is 
assisted  in  her  labour  by  having  the  coccyx 
anointed  and  drawn  outwards  with  the  finger. 


344  WILLIAM 

A  surgeon,  a  trustworthy  man,  and  with 
whom  I  am  upon  intimate  terms,  on  his  return 
from  the  East  Indies  informed  me,  in  perfect 
sincerity,  that  some  inland  and  mountainous 
parts  of  the  island  of  Borneo  are  still  inhabited 
by  a  race  of  caudate  human  beings  (a  circum¬ 
stance  of  which  we  also  read  in  Pausanias),  one 
of  whom,  a  virgin,  who  had  only  been  cap¬ 
tured  with  great  difficulty,  for  they  live  in  the 
woods,  he  himself  had  seen,  with  a  tail,  thick, 
fleshy,  and  a  span  in  length,  reflected  between 
the  buttocks,  and  covering  the  anus  and  pu¬ 
denda:  so  regularly  has  nature  willed  to  cover 
these  parts. 

To  return.  The  structure  of  the  velabrum  in 
the  fowl  is  like  that  of  the  upper  eyelid;  that  is 
to  say,  it  is  a  fleshy  and  muscular  fold  of  the 
skin,  having  fibres  extending  from  the  circum¬ 
ference  on  every  side  towards  the  centre;  its 
inner  surface,  like  that  of  the  eyelid  and  pre¬ 
puce,  being  soft.  Along  its  margin  also  there  is 
a  semicircular  tarsus,  after  the  manner  of  that 
of  the  eyelid;  and  in  addition,  between  the 
skin  and  fleshy  membrane,  an  interposed  car¬ 
tilage,  extending  from  the  root  of  the  rump, 
the  sickle-shaped  tarsus  being  connected  with 
it  at  right  angles  (very  much  as  we  observe  a 
small  tail  comprehended  between  the  wing  on 
either  side,  in  bats).  By  this  structure  the  vela¬ 
brum  is  enabled  more  readily  to  open  and 
close  the  foramina  pudendi  that  have  been 
mentioned. 

The  velabrum  being  now  raised  and  re¬ 
moved,  certain  foramina  are  brought  into 
view,  some  of  which  are  very  distinct,  others 
more  obscure.  The  more  obvious  are  the  anus 
and  vulva,  or  the  outlet  of  the  fsecal  matters 
and  the  inlet  to  the  uterus.  The  more  obscure 
are,  first,  that  by  which  the  urine  is  excreted 
from  the  kidneys,  and,  second,  the  small  ori¬ 
fice  discovered  by  Fabricius,  “into  which,’*  he 
says,  “the  cock  immits  the  spermatic  fluid,”  a 
foramen,  however,  which  neither  Antony 
Ulm,  a  careful  dissector,  has  indicated  in  Al- 
drovandus,  nor  any  one  else  except  Fabricius, 
so  far  as  I  know,  has  ever  observed. 

All  these  foramina  are  so  close  to  one  an¬ 
other  that  they  seem  almost  to  meet  in  a  sin¬ 
gle  cavity,  which,  as  being  common  to  the 
fseces  and  urine,  may  be  called  the  cloaca.  In 
this  cavity,  the  urine,  as  it  descends  from  the 
kidneys,  is  mingled  with  the  feculent  matters 
of  the  bowels,  and  the  two  are  discharged  to¬ 
gether.  Through  this,  too,  the  egg,  as  it  is  laid, 
forces  itself  a  passage. 

Now,  the  arrangements  in  this  cavity  are 


HARVEY 

such,  that  both  excrements  descending  into  a 
common  sac,  the  urine  is  made  use  of  as  a  nat¬ 
ural  clyster  for  their  evacuation.  The  cloaca  is 
therefore  thicker  and  more  rugous  than  the 
intestine;  and  at  the  moment  of  laying  and  of 
coition,  it  is  everted  (the  velabrum  which 
covers  it  being  raised  as  I  have  already  said), 
the  lower  portion  of  the  bowel  being  as  it  were 
prolapsed.  At  this  moment  all  the  foramina 
that  terminate  in  the  cloaca  are  conspicuous; 
on  the  return  or  reduction  of  the  prolapsed 
portion,  however,  they  are  concealed,  being  all 
collected  together  as  it  were  into  the  common 
purse  or  pouch. 

The  more  conspicuous  foramina,  those,  viz.y 
of  the  anus  and  uterus,  are  situated,  with  ref¬ 
erence  to  one  another,  differently  in  birds 
from  what  they  are  in  other  animals.  In  these 
the  pudendum,  or  female  genital  part,  is  sit¬ 
uated  anteriorly  between  the  rectum  and 
bladder;  in  birds,  however,  the  excrementi- 
tious  outlet  is  placed  anteriorly,  so  that  the  in¬ 
let  to  the  uterus  is  situated  between  this  and 
the  rump. 

The  foramen,  into  which  Fabricius  believes 
the  cock  to  inject  his  fluid,  is  discovered  be¬ 
tween  the  orifice  of  the  vulva  and  the  rump. 
I,  however,  deny  any  such  use  to  this  foramen; 
for  in  young  chickens  it  is  scarcely  to  be  seen, 
and  in  adults  it  is  present  indifferently  both  in 
males  and  females.  It  is  obvious,  therefore, 
that  it  is  both  an  extremely  small  and  obscure 
orifice,  and  can  have  no  such  important  func¬ 
tion  to  perform:  it  will  scarcely  admit  a  fine 
needle  or  a  bristle,  and  it  ends  in  a  blind  cav¬ 
ity;  neither  have  I  ever  been  able  to  discover 
any  spermatic  fluid  within  it,  although  Fab¬ 
ricius  asserts  that  this  fluid  is  stored  up  there 
even  for  a  whole  year,  and  that  all  the  eggs 
contained  in  the  ovary  may  be  thence  fecun¬ 
dated,  as  it  is  afterwards  stated. 

All  birds,  serpents,  oviparous  quadrupeds, 
and  likewise  fishes,  as  may  readily  be  seen  in 
the  carp,  have  kidneys  and  ureters  through 
which  the  urine  distils,  a  fact  which  was  un¬ 
known  to  Aristotle  and  philosophers  up  to  this 
time.  In  birds  and  serpents,  which  have  spongy 
or  largely  vesicular  lungs,  the  quantity  of 
urine  secreted  is  small,  because  they  drink  lit¬ 
tle,  and  that  by  sipping;  there  was,  therefore, 
no  occasion  for  an  urinary  bladder  in  these 
creatures:  the  renal  secretion,  as  already 
stated,  is  accumulated  in  a  common  cavity 
or  cloaca,  along  with  the  drier  intestinal  ex¬ 
crement.  Nevertheless,  I  do  find  an  urinary 
bladder  in  the  carp  and  some  other  fishes. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  345 


In  the  common  fowl  the  ureters  descend 
from  the  kidneys,  which  are  situated  in  long 
and  ample  cavities  on  either  side  of  the  back, 
to  terminate  in  the  common  cavity  or  cloaca. 
Their  terminations,  however,  are  so  obscure 
and  so  hidden  by  the  margin  of  the  cavity, 
that  to  discover  them  from  without  and  pass  a 
fine  probe  into  them  would  be  found  impossi- 
ble.  Nor  is  this  at  all  surprising,  because  in  all, 
even  the  largest  animals,  the  insertion  of  the 
ureters  near  the  neck  of  the  bladder  is  so  tor¬ 
tuous  and  obscure,  that  although  the  urine  dis¬ 
tils  freely  from  them  into  the  bladder,  and  cal¬ 
culi  even  make  their  way  out  of  them,  still 
neither  fluids  nor  air  can  be  made  to  enter 
them  by  the  use  of  any  amount  of  force.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  birds  as  well  as  other  ani¬ 
mals,  a  probe  or  a  bristle  passed  downwards 
from  the  kidney  towards  the  bladder  by  the 
ureters,  readily  makes  its  way  into  the  cloaca 
or  bladder. 

These  facts  are  particularly  distinct  in  the 
ostrich,  in  which,  besides  the  external  orifice 
of  the  common  cavity  which  the  velabrum 
covers,  I  find  another  within  the  anus,  having 
a  round  and  constricted  orifice,  shutting  in 
some  sort  in  the  manner  of  a  sphincter. 

Passing  by  these  particulars,  however,  let  us 
turn  to  others  that  bear  more  immediately  up¬ 
on  our  subject.  The  uterine  outlet  or  vulva, 
then,  or  the  passage  from  the  common  cavity 
to  the  uterus  of  the  fowl,  is  a  certain  protuber¬ 
ance,  soft,  lax,  wrinkled,  and  orbicular,  resem¬ 
bling  the  orifice  of  the  prepuce  when  closed,  or 
appearing  as  if  formed  by  a  prolapse  of  the  in¬ 
ternal  membrane  of  the  uterus.  Now  this  outlet 
is  situated,  as  I  have  said,  between  the  anus  and 
rump,  and  slightly  to  the  left  of  the  middle  line 
of  the  body,  which  Ulysses  Aldrovandi  imag¬ 
ines  to  be  for  thepurposeof  “facilitating  inter¬ 
course,  and  the  entrance  of  the  genital  organ  of 
the  cock.”  I  have  myself  observed,  however,  re¬ 
peatedly,  that  the  hen  turned  the  common  ori¬ 
fice  to  the  right  or  left  indifferently,  according 
to  the  side  from  which  the  cock  approached 
her.  Neither  do  I  find  any  penis  in  the  cock — 
neither,  indeed,  could  Fabricius — although  in 
the  goose  and  duck  it  is  very  conspicuous.  But 
in  its  stead  I  discover  an  orifice  in  the  cock,  not 
otherwise  than  in  the  hen,  although  it  is  small¬ 
er  and  more  contracted  in  her  than  in  him;  and 
in  the  swan,  goose,  and  duck  the  same  thing 
also  appears,  the  penis  of  the  male  goose  and 
duck  protruding  through  this  orifice  during 
intercourse. 

In  a  black  drake  I  noticed  the  penis  of  such  a 


length  that  after  intercourse  it  trailed  on  the 
ground,  and  a  fowl  following,  pecked  at  it 
greedily,  thinking  it  an  earth-worm,  as  I  ima¬ 
gine,  so  that  it  was  retracted  more  quickly 
than  usual. 

In  the  male  ostrich  I  have  found  within  this 
pudendal  orifice  a  very  large  glans,  and  the  red 
body  of  the  penis,  as  we  discover  them  within 
the  prepuce  of  the  horse,  resembling  a  deer’s  or 
a  small  neat’s  tongue  in  form  and  magnitude; 
and  I  have  frequently  observed  this  organ,  rigid 
and  somewhat  hooked  during  the  coitus,  and 
when  entered  into  the  vulva  of  the  female,  held 
for  some  considerable  time  there  without  any 
movement:  it  was  precisely  as  if  the  two  crea¬ 
tures  had  been  fastened  together  with  a  nail. 
Meantime,  by  the  gesticulations  of  their  heads 
and  necks,  and  by  their  noises,  they  seemed  to 
notify  their  nuptials,  and  to  express  the  great 
degree  of  pleasure  they  experienced. 

I  have  read  in  a  treatise  of  Dr.  Du  Val,  a 
learned  physician  of  Rouen,  that  a  certain 
hermaphrodite  was  referred  to  the  surgeons 
and  accoucheurs,  that  they  might  determine 
whether  it  were  a  man  or  a  woman.  They,  from 
an  examination  of  the  genital  organs,  adjudged 
the  party  to  be  of  the  feminine  gender,  and  a 
dress  in  accordance  with  this  decision  was  or¬ 
dered.  By  and  by,  however,  the  individual  was 
accused  of  soliciting  women,  and  of  discharging 
the  man’s  office;  and  then  it  was  found,  that 
from  a  prepuce,  as  from  the  private  parts  of  a 
woman,  a  penis  protruded,  and  served  to  per¬ 
form  the  male’s  business.  I  have  myself  occasion¬ 
ally  seen  the  penis  of  a  certain  man  so  greatly 
shrunk  in  size,  that,  unless  when  excited,  noth¬ 
ing  was  visible  in  the  wrinkled  prepuce  above 
the  scrotum  but  the  extremity  of  the  glans. 

In  the  horse  and  some  other  animals,  the 
principal  and  ample  length  of  the  member  is 
protruded  from  its  concealment.  In  the  mole, 
too,  which  is  a  small  animal,  there  is  a  remark¬ 
able  retraction  of  the  penis  between  the  skin 
and  muscles  of  the  belly;  and  the  vulva  in  the 
female  of  this  creature  is  also  longer  and  deeper 
than  usual. 

The  cock,  which  is  without  a  penis,  performs 
copulation,  as  I  imagine,  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  smaller  birds,  among  which  the  process  is 
rapidly  executed,  and  by  mere  contact.  The 
orifices  of  the  male  and  female  cloaca,  which  at 
the  moment  are  protuberant  externally,  which, 
especially  in  the  male,  become  tense  and  in¬ 
jected,  like  the  glans  penis,  encounter,  and  coi¬ 
tion  is  effected  by  a  succession  of  salutes,  not 
by  any  longer  intromission  of  parts,  for  I  do 


346  WILLIAM 

not  think  that  the  organs  of  the  cock  enter 
those  of  the  hen  at  all. 

In  the  copulation  of  horses,  dogs,  cats,  and 
the  like,  the  female  presents  her  organ  rigid 
and  injected  to  the  penis  of  the  male.  And  this 
also  takes  place  in  birds  which,  if  they  be  tame 
and  suffer  themselves  to  be  handled,  when  in¬ 
flamed  with  desire  present  their  parts,  which 
will  then  be  found  resisting  and  hard  to  the 
finger. 

Bird'S  are  sometimes  so  lustful,  that  if  you 
but  stroke  their  backs  gently  with  your  hand, 
they  will  immediately  lie  down  and  expose  and 
protrude  their  uterine  orifice;  and  if  this  part 
be  touched  with  the  finger,  they  will  not  fail  to 
proclaim  their  satisfaction.  And  that  the  females 
may  thereby  be  made  to  lay  eggs,  as  testified  to 
by  Aristotle,^  I  have  myself  found  in  the  case  of 
the  blackbird,  thrush,  and  others.  I  learned  the 
fact,  indeed,  in  former  years  by  accident,  and 
to  my  detriment;  for  my  wife  had  a  beautiful 
parrot,  a  great  pet,  learned  and  talkative 
enough,  and  so  tame  that  it  was  allowed  to 
roam  at  liberty  about  the  house:  when  its  mis¬ 
tress  was  absent  it  sought  her  everywhere;  on 
her  return  it  caressed  her,  and  loudly  pro¬ 
claimed  its  joy;  when  called  to,  it  would  answer; 
would  fly  to  its  mistress,  and  then  seizing  her 
clothes  with  beak  and  feet  alternately,  it 
climbed  to  her  shoulder,  whence  creeping  down 
the  arm,  it  reached  her  hand,  its  usual  seat. 
When  ordered  to  speak  or  to  sing,  it  would 
obey,  although  it  were  the  night  season  and 
quite  dark.  Full  of  play  and  lasciviousness,  it 
would  frequently  sit  in  its  mistress’s  lap,  where 
it  loved  to  have  her  scratch  its  head  and  stroke 
its  back,  upon  which,  fluttering  with  its  wings 
and  making  a  gentle  noise,  it  testified  the  pleas¬ 
ure  it  experienced.  I  believed  all  this  to  pro¬ 
ceed  from  his  usual  familiarity  and  love  of  being 
noticed;  for  I  always  regarded  the  creature  as  a 
male,  by  reason  of  his  proficiency  in  talking 
and  singing.  For  among  birds,  the  females  rarely 
sing  or  challenge  one  another  by  their  note;  the 
males  alone  solace  their  mates  by  their  tuneful 
warblings,  and  call  them  to  the  rites  of  love. 
And  it  is  on  this  account  that  Aristotle  says, 
“If  partridges  be  placed  over  against  the  males, 
and  the  wind  blow  towards  them  from  where 
the  males  sit,  they  are  impregnated  and  con¬ 
ceive.  They  even  for  the  most  part  conceive 
from  the  note  of  the  male  bird,  if  they  be  in 
season  and  full  of  desire.  The  flight  of  the  male 
over  them  will  also  have  the  same  efl'ect,  the 
male  bird  casting  down  a  fertilizing  influence 

^  History  of  Animals^  vi.  2. 


HARVEY 

upon  the  female. Now  this  happens  especially 
in  the  spring  season,  whence  the  poet  sings: 

Earth  teems  in  Spring,  and  craves  the  genial 
seed. 

The  almighty  father,  JEther,  then  descends. 

In  fertilizing  showers,  into  the  lap 

Of  his  rejoicing  spouse,  and  mingling  there 

In  wide  embrace  sustains  the  progeny 

Innumerous  that  springs.  The  pathless  woods 

Then  ring  with  the  wild  bird's  song,  and 
focJ^s  and  herds 

Disport  and  spend  the  livelong  day  in  love? 

Not  long  after  the  caressings  mentioned,  the 
parrot,  which  had  lived  in  health  for  many 
years,  fell  sick,  and  by  and  by  being  seized  with 
repeated  attacks  of  convulsions,  seated  in  the 
lap  of  its  mistress,  it  expired,  grievously  re¬ 
gretted.  Having  opened  the  body  in  search  of 
the  cause  of  death,  I  discovered  an  egg,  nearly 
perfect,  in  the  uterus,  but  in  consequence  of 
the  want  of  a  male,  in  a  state  of  putrefaction; 
and  this,  indeed,  frequently  happens  among 
birds  confined  in  cages,  which  show  desire  for 
the  company  of  the  male. 

These  and  other  instances  induce  me  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  the  common  fowl  and  the  pheasant 
do  not  only  solace  their  females  with  their 
crowing,  but,  further,  give  them  the  faculty  of 
producing  eggs  by  its  means;  for  when  the  cock 
crows  in  the  night  some  of  the  hens  perched 
near  him  bestir  themselves,  clapping  their 
wings  and  shaking  their  heads;  shuddering  and 
gesticulating  as  they  are  wont  to  do  after  in¬ 
tercourse. 

A  certain  bird,  as  large  again  as  a  swan,  and 
which  the  Dutch  call  a  cassowary,  was  imported 
no  long  time  ago  from  the  island  of  Java,  in  the 
East  Indies,  into  Holland.  Ulysses  Aldrovan- 
dus^  gives  a  figure  of  this  bird,  and  informs  us 
that  it  is  called  an  emeu  by  the  Indians.  It  is 
not  a  two-toed  bird,  like  the  ostrich,  but  has 
three  toes  on  each  foot,  one  of  which  is  fur¬ 
nished  with  a  spur  of  such  length,  strength,  and 
hardness,  that  the  creature  can  easily  kick 
through  a  board  two  fingers’  breadth  in  thick¬ 
ness.  The  cassowary  defends  itself  by  kicking 
forwards.  In  the  body,  legs,  and  thighs  it  re¬ 
sembles  the  ostrich;  it  has  not  a  broad  bill  like 
the  ostrich  however,  but  one  that  is  rounded 
and  black.  On  its  head,  by  way  of  crest,  it  has 
an  orbicular  protuberant  horn.  It  has  no  tongue, 
and  devours  everything  that  is  presented  to  it 

^History  of  Animals,  v.  5;  vi.  2. 

^  Virgil,  Georgies,  ii. 

Ornithoh,  Book  xx,  p.  541. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


— stones,  coals,  even  though  alight,  pieces  of 
glass — all  without  distinction.  Its  feathers 
sprout  in  pairs  from  each  particular  quill,  and 
are  of  a  black  colour,  short  and  slender,  ap- 
proaching  to  hair  or  down  in  their  characters. 
Its  wings  are  very  short  and  imperfect.  The 
whole  aspect  of  the  creature  is  truculent,  and 
it  has  numbers  of  red  and  blue  wattles  longi¬ 
tudinally  disposed  along  the  neck. 

This  bird  remained  for  more  than  seven  years 
in  Holland,  and  was  then  sent,  among  other 
presents,  by  the  illustrious  Maurice  Prince  of 
Orange,  to  his  Serene  Majesty  our  King  James, 
in  whose  gardens  it  continued  to  live  for  a 
period  of  upwards  of  five  years.  By  and  by, 
however,  when  a  pair  of  ostriches,  male  and 
female,  were  brought  to  the  same  place,  and 
the  cassowary  heard  and  saw  these  in  a  neigh¬ 
bouring  inclosure,  at  their  amours,  unexpect¬ 
edly  it  began  to  lay  eggs,  excited,  as  I  imagine, 
through  sympathy  with  the  acts  of  an  allied 
genus;  I  say  unexpectedly,  for  all  who  saw  the 
cassowary,  judging  from  the  weapons  and  orna¬ 
ments,  had  regarded  it  as  a  male  rather  than  a 
female.  Of  these  eggs,  one  was  laid  entire,  and 
this  I  opened,  and  found  it  perfect:  the  yelk 
surrounded  by  the  white,  the  chalazae  attached 
on  either  side,  and  a  small  cavity  in  the  blunt 
end;  there  was  also  a  cicatricula  or  macula  alba 
present;  the  shell  was  thick,  hard,  and  strong; 
and  having  taken  off  the  top,  I  had  it  formed 
into  a  cup,  in  the  same  way  as  ostriches*  eggs  are 
commonly  fashioned.  This  egg  was  somewhat 
less  than  that  of  an  ostrich,  and,  as  I  have  said, 
perfect  in  all  respects.  Undoubtedly,  however, 
it  was  a  sort  of  accidental  egg,  and,  by  reason 
of  the  absence  of  the  male,  unfruitful.  I  pred¬ 
icated  the  death  of  the  cassowary  as  likely  to 
happen  soon  when  she  began  laying,  moved  to 
do  so  by  what  Aristotle  says:  “Birds  become 
diseased  and  die  unless  they  produce  fruitful 
eggs.”^  And  my  prediction  came  true  not  long 
afterwards.  On  opening  the  body  of  the  casso¬ 
wary,  I  discovered  an  imperfect  and  putrid  egg 
in  the  upper  part  of  the  uterus,  as  the  cause  of 
its  untimely  death,  just  as  I  had  found  the  same 
thing  in  the  parrot,  and  other  instances  be¬ 
sides. 

Many  birds,  consequently,  the  more  sala¬ 
cious  they  are,  the  more  fruitful  are  they;  and 
occasionally,  when  abundantly  fed,  or  from 
some  other  cause,  they  will  even  lay  eggs  with¬ 
out  the  access  of  the  male.  It  rarely  happens, 
however,  that  the  eggs  so  produced  are  either 
perfected  or  laid;  the  birds  are  commonly  soon 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  in. 


seized  with  serious  disorders,  and  at  length  die. 
The  common  fowl,  nevertheless,  not  only  con¬ 
ceives  eggs,  but  lays  them,  quite  perfect  in  ap¬ 
pearance  too;  but  they  are  always  wind  eggs, 
and  incapable  of  producing  a  chick.  In  like 
manner  many  insects,  among  the  number  silk¬ 
worms  and  butterflies,  conceive  eggs  and  lay 
them,  without  the  access  of  the  male,  but  they 
are  still  adventitious  and  barren.  Fishes  also  do 
the  same. 

It  is  of  the  same  significance  in  these  animals 
when  they  conceive  eggs,  as  it  is  in  young  wom¬ 
en  when  their  uterus  grows  hot,  their  menses 
flow,  and  their  bosoms  swell — in  a  word,  when 
they  become  marriageable;  and  w^ho,  if  they 
continue  too  long  unwedded,  are  seized  with 
serious  symptoms — hysterics,  furor  uterinus, 
&c.  or  fall  into  a  chachectic  state,  and  distem- 
peratures  of  various  kinds.  All  animals,  indeed, 
grow  savage  when  in  heat,  and  unless  they  are 
suffered  to  enjoy  one  another,  become  changed 
in  disposition.  In  like  manner  women  occasion¬ 
ally  become  insane  through  ungratified  desire, 
and  to  such  a  height  does  the  malady  reach  in 
some,  that  they  are  believed  to  be  poisoned,  or 
moon-struck,  or  possessed  by  a  devil.  And  this 
would  certainly  occur  more  frequently  than  it 
does,  without  the  influence  of  good  nurture,  re¬ 
spect  for  character,  and  the  modesty  that  is  in¬ 
nate  in  the  sex,  which  all  tend  to  tranquillize 
the  inordinate  passions  of  the  mind. 

EXERCISE  6.  Of  the  uterus  of  the  fowl 

The  passage  from  the  external  uterine  ori¬ 
fice  to  the  internal  parts  and  uterus  itself, 
where  the  egg  is  perfected,  is  by  that  part 
which  in  other  animals  is  called  the  vagina  or 
vulva.  In  the  fowl,  however,  this  passage  is  so 
intricate,  and  its  internal  membrane  is  so  loose 
and  wrinkled,  that  although  there  is  a  ready 
passage  from  within  outwards,  and  a  large  egg 
makes  its  way  through  all  without  much  diffi¬ 
culty,  still  it  scarcely  seems  likely  that  the 
penis  of  the  male  could  penetrate  or  the  sper¬ 
matic  fluid  make  its  way  through  it;  for  I  have 
found  it  impossible  to  introduce  either  a  probe 
or  a  bristle;  neither  could  Fabricius  pass  any¬ 
thing  of  the  sort,  and  he  says  that  he  could  not 
even  inflate  the  uterus  with  air.  Whence  he 
was  led  I  fancy  to  give  an  account  of  the  uter¬ 
us,  proceeding  from  more  internal  to  more  ex¬ 
ternal  parts.  Considering  this  structure  of  the 
uterus  also,  he  denies  that  the  spermatic  fluid 
of  the  male  can  reach  the  cavity  of  the  uterus, 
or  go  to  constitute  any  part  of  the  egg.^  To  this 
2  Op,  cit,,  p.  31. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


348 

Statement  I  most  willingly  subscribe;  for,  in¬ 
deed,  there  is  nothing  in  the  fruitful  egg  which 
is  not  also  in  the  barren  one;  there  is  nothing 
in  the  way  of  addition  or  change  which  indi¬ 
cates  that  the  seminal  fluid  of, the  male  has 
either  made  its  way  into  the  uterus,  or  come 
into  contact  with  the  egg.  Moreover,  although 
without  the  access  of  the  cock  all  eggs  laid  are 
winded  and  barren,  still  through  his  influence, 
and  long  after  intercourse,  fruitful  eggs  are  de¬ 
posited,  the  rudiments  or  matter  of  which  did 
not  exist  at  the  time  of  the  communication. 

With  a  view  to  explaining  how  the  spermat¬ 
ic  fluid  of  the  cock  renders  eggs  fecund,  Fab- 
ricius  says:  “Since  the  semen  does  not  appear 
in  the  egg,  and  yet  is  thrown  into  the  uterus 
by  the  cock,  it  may  be  asked  why  this  is  done 
if  the  fluid  does  not  enter  the  egg?  Further:  if 
not  present  in  the  egg,  how  is  that  egg  made 
fruitful  by  the  spermatic  fluid  of  the  cock 
which  it  yet  does  not  contain?  My  opinion  is 
that  the  semen  of  the  cock  thrown  into  the 
commencement  of  the  uterus,  produces  an  in¬ 
fluence  on  the  whole  of  the  uterus,  and  at  the 
same  time  renders  fruitful  the  whole  of  the 
yelks,  and  finally  of  the  perfect  eggs  which  fall 
into  it;  and  this  the  semen  effects  by  its  pecul¬ 
iar  property  or  irradiative  spirituous  sub¬ 
stance,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  see  other 
animals  rendered  fruitful  by  the  testicles  and 
semen.  For  if  anyone  will  but  bring  to  mind 
the  incredible  change  that  is  produced  by  cast¬ 
ration,  when  the  heat,  strength,  and  fecundity 
are  lost,  he  will  readily  admit  that  what  we 
have  proposed  may  happen  in  reference  to  the 
single  uterus  of  a  fowl.  But  that  it  is  in  all  re¬ 
spects  true,  and  that  the  faculty  of  impreg¬ 
nating  the  whole  of  the  ova,  and  also  the  ute¬ 
rus  itself,  proceeds  from  the  semen  of  the  cock, 
appears  from  the  custom  of  those  housewives 
who  keep  hens  at  home  but  no  cock,  that  they 
commit  their  hens  for  a  day  or  two  to  a  neigh¬ 
bour's  cock,  and  in  this  short  space  of  time 
the  whole  of  the  eggs  that  will  be  laid  for  a 
certain  season  are  rendered  prolific.  And  this 
fact  is  confirmed  by  Aristotle,^  who  will  have 
it  that,  among  birds,  one  intercourse  suffices 
to  render  almost  all  the  eggs  fruitful.  For  the 
fecundating  influence  of  the  seminal  fluid,  as  it 
cannot  exhale,  so  is  it  long  retained  in  the  uter¬ 
us,  to  which  it  imparts  the  whole  of  its  virtue; 
nature  herself  stores  it  up;  placing  it  in  a  cavity 
appended  to  the  uterus,  near  the  fundament, 
furnished  with  an  entrance  only,  so  that,  being 
there  laid  up,  its  virtue  is  the  better  preserved 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  in,  i. 


and  communicated  to  the  entire  uterus.**^ 

I,  however,  suspected  the  truth  of  the  above 
views,  all  the  more  when  I  saw  that  the  words 
of  the  philosopher  referred  to  were  not  accu¬ 
rately  quoted.  Aristotle  does  not  say  that 
“Birds  which  have  once  copulated  almost  all 
continue  to  lay  prolific  eggs,”  but  simply  “al¬ 
most  all  continue  to  lay  eggs”;  the  word  “pro¬ 
lific”  is  an  addition  by  Fabricius.  But  it  is  one 
thing  to  have  birds  conceiving  eggs  after  inter¬ 
course,  and  another  to  say  that  these  eggs  are 
fruitful  through  this  intercourse.  And  this  is 
the  more  obvious  from  Aristotle’s  previous 
words,  where  he  says,  “Nor  in  the  family  of 
birds  can  those  eggs  even  that  are  produced  by 
intercourse  acquire  their  full  size  unless  the 
intercourse  between  the  sexes  be  continued. 
And  the  reason  is  that  as  the  menstrual  excre¬ 
tion  in  women  is  attracted  by  the  intercourse 
of  their  husbands  (for  the  uterus,  being 
warmed,  draws  the  moisture,  and  the  passages 
are  opened),  so  in  birds  it  comes  to  pass  that, 
as  the  menstruous  discharge  takes  place  very 
gradually,  because  of  its  being  in  small  quan¬ 
tity,  it  cannot  make  its  way  externally,  but  is 
contained  superiorly  as  high  as  the  waist,  and 
only  distils  down  into  the  uterus  itself.  For 
the  egg  is  increased  by  this,  just  as  the  foetus  of 
oviparous  animals  is  nourished  by  that  which 
reaches  it  through  the  umbilicus.  For  when 
once  birds  have  copulated,  almost  all  continue 
to  lay  eggs,  but  of  small  size  and  imperfect”; 
and  therefore  unprolific,  for  the  perfection  of 
an  egg  is  its  being  fertile.  If,  therefore,  without 
continued  intercourse,  not  even  those  eggs 
that  were  conceived  in  consequence  of  inter¬ 
course  grow  to  their  proper  size,  or,  as  Fabri¬ 
cius  interprets  it,  are  “perfected,”  much  less 
are  those  eggs  prolific  which  fowls  continue  to 
lay  independently  of  intercourse  with  the 
male  bird. 

But  lest  any  one  should  think  that  these 
words,  “for  the  uterus  warmed,  draws,  and  the 
passages  are  opened,”  signify  that  the  uterus 
can  attract  the  semen  masculinum  into  its 
cavity,  let  him  be  aware  that  the  philosopher 
does  not  say  that  the  uterus  attracts  the  semen 
from  without  into  its  cavity,  but  that  in  fe¬ 
males,  from  the  veins  and  passages,  opened  by 
the  heat  of  intercourse,  the  menstruous  blood 
is  attracted  from  its  own  body;  so  in  birds  the 
blood  is  attracted  to  the  uterus,  warmed  by 
repeated  intercourse,  whereby  the  eggs  grow, 
as  the  foetus  of  oviparous  animals  grows 
through  the  umbilicus. 

2  Op.  cit.y  p.  37. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


But  what  Fabricius  adds  upon  that  cavity 
or  bursa,  in  which  he  thinks  the  semen  of  the 
cock  may  be  stored  up  for  a  whole  year,  has 
been  already  refuted  by  us,  where  we  have 
stated  that  it  contains  no  seminal  fluid,  and 
that  it  exists  in  the  cock  as  well  as  in  the  hen. 
Wherefore,  though  I  readily  believed  (if  by 
fecundity  we  are  to  understand  a  greater  num¬ 
ber  of  larger  eggs)  that  the  hens  of  poor  peo¬ 
ple,  indifferently  fed  in  all  probability,  will  lay 
both  fewer  and  smaller  eggs  unless  they  have 
the  company  of  a  cock;  agreeably  to  what  the 
philosopher  quoted  avers,  viz.:  “that  hens 
which  have  once  been  trodden  continue  to  lay 
larger,  better,  and  a  greater  number  of  eggs 
through  the  whole  of  the  year*^  (a  result  on 
which  the  abundance  and  the  good  quality  of 
the  food  has  unquestionably  a  great  influence); 
still  that  hens  should  continue  for  a  whole  year 
to  lay  prolific  eggs  after  a  few  addresses  of  the 
cock,  appeared  to  me  by  no  means  probable: 
for,  had  a  small  number  of  contacts  sufficed  for 
the  purposes  of  generation  during  so  long  a 
period,  nature,  which  does  nothing  in  vain, 
would  have  constituted  the  males  among  birds 
less  salacious  than  they  are;  nor  should  we  see 
the  cock  soliciting  his  hens  so  many  times  a 
day,  even  against  their  inclination. 

We  know  that  the  hen,  as  soon  as  she  quits 
the  nest  where  she  has  just  laid  an  egg,  cackles 
loudly,  and  seems  to  entice  the  cock,  who  on 
his  part  crowing  lustily,  singles  her  out  and 
straightway  treads  her,  which  surely  nature 
had  never  permitted  unless  for  purposes  of 
procreation. 

A  male  pheasant  kept  in  an  aviary  was  so  in¬ 
flamed  with  lust,  that  unless  he  had  the  com¬ 
pany  of  several  hen-birds,  six  at  the  least,  he- 
literally  maltreated  them,  though  his  repeated 
addresses  rather  interfered  with  their  breeding 
than  promoted  it.  I  have  seen  a  single  hen- 
pheasant  shut  up  with  a  cock-bird  (which  she 
could  in  no  way  escape)  so  worn  out,  and  her 
back  so  entirely  stript  of  feathers  through  his 
reiterated  assaults,  that  at  length  she  died  ex¬ 
hausted.  In  the  body  of  this  bird,  however,  I 
did  not  discover  even  the  rudiments  of  eggs. 

I  have  also  observed  a  male  duck,  having 
none  of  his  own  kind  with  him,  but  associating 
with  hens,  inflamed  with  such  desire  that  he 
would  follow  a  pullet  even  for  several  hours, 
would  seize  her  with  his  bill,  and  mounting  at 
length  upon  the  creature,  worn  out  with 
fatigue,  would  compel  her  to  submit  to  his 
pleasure. 

The  common  cock,  victorious  in  a  battle, 


not  only  satisfies  his  desires  upon  the  sultanas 
of  the  vanquished,  but  upon  the  body  of  his 
rival  himself. 

The  females  of  some  animals  are  likewise  so 
libidinous  that  they  excite  their  males  by 
pecking  or  biting  them  gently  about  the  head; 
they  seem  as  if  they  whispered  into  their  ears 
the  sweets  of  love;  and  then  they  mount  upon 
their  backs  and  invite  them  by  other  arts  to 
fruition:  among  the  number  may  be  men¬ 
tioned  pigeons  and  sparrows. 

It  did  not  therefore  appear  likely  that  a 
few  treads,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  should 
suffice  to  render  fertile  the  whole  of  the  eggs 
that  are  to  be  laid  in  its  course. 

Upon  one  occasion,  however,  in  the  spring 
season,  by  way  of  helping  out  Fabricius,  and 
that  I  might  have  some  certain  data  as  to 
the  time  during  which  the  fecundating  influ¬ 
ence  of  intercourse  would  continue,  and  the 
necessity  of  renewed  communication,  I  had  a 
couple  of  hens  separated  from  the  cock  for  four 
days,  each  of  which  laid  three  eggs,  all  of  which 
were  prolific.  Another  hen  was  secluded,  and 
the  egg  she  laid  on  the  tenth  day  afterwards 
was  fruitful.  The  egg  which  another  laid  on 
the  twentieth  day  of  her  seclusion  also  pro¬ 
duced  a  chick.  It  would  therefore  seem  that 
intercourse,  once  or  twice  repeated,  suffices  to 
impregnate  the  whole  bunch  of  yelks,  the 
whole  of  the  eggs  that  will  be  laid  during  a  cer¬ 
tain  season. 

I  shall  here  relate  another  observation  which 
I  made  at  this  time.  When  I  returned  two  of 
the  hens,  which  I  had  secluded  for  a  time,  to 
the  cock,  one  of  which  was  big  with  egg,  the 
other  having  but  just  laid,  the  cock  immedi¬ 
ately  ran  to  the  latter  and  trod  her  greedily 
three  or  four  times;  the  former  he  went  round 
and  round,  tripping  himself  with  his  wing  and 
seeming  to  salute  her,  and  wish  her  joy  of  her 
return;  but  he  soon  returned  to  the  other  and 
trod  her  again  and  again,  even  compelling  her 
to  submit;  the  one  big  with  egg,  however,  he 
always  speedily  forsook,  and  never  solicited 
her  to  his  pleasure.  I  wondered  with  myself  by 
what  signs  he  knew  that  intercourse  would  ad¬ 
vantage  one  of  these  hens  and  prove  unavail¬ 
ing  to  the  other.  But  indeed  it  is  not  easy  at 
any  time  to  understand  how  male  animals, 
even  from  a  distance,  know  which  females  are 
in  season  and  desirous  of  their  company; 
whether  it  be  by  sight,  or  hearing,  or  smell,  it 
is  difficult  to  say.  Some  on  merely  hearing  the 
voice  of  the  female,  or  smelling  at  the  place 
where  she  has  made  water,  or  even  the  ground 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


350 

over  which  she  has  passed^  are  straightway 
seized  with  desire  and  set  off  in  pursuit  to  grat¬ 
ify  it.  But  I  shall  have  more  to  say  on  this  sub¬ 
ject  in  my  treatise  on  the  Loves,  Lusts,  and 
Sexual  Acts  of  Animals.  I  return  to  the  matter 
we  have  in  hand. 

EXERCISE  7.  Of  the  abdomen  of  the  common  fowl 
and  of  other  birds 

From  the  external  orifice  proceeding  through 
the  vulva  we  come  to  the  uterus  of  the  fowl, 
in  which  the  egg  is  perfected,  surrounded  with 
the  white  and  covered  with  its  shell.  But  be¬ 
fore  speaking  of  the  situation  and  connexions 
of  this  part  it  seems  necessary  to  premise  a  few 
words  on  the  particular  anatomy  of  the  abdo¬ 
men  of  birds.  For  I  have  observed  that  the 
stomach,  intestines,  and  other  viscera  of  the 
feathered  kinds  were  otherwise  placed  in  the 
abdomen,  and  differently  constituted,  than 
thev  are  in  quadrupeds. 

Almost  all  birds  are  provided  with  a  double 
stomach;  one  of  which  is  the  crop,  the  other  the 
stomach,  properly  so  called.  In  the  former  the 
food  is  stored  and  undergoes  preparation,  in 
the  latter  it  is  dissolved  and  converted  into 
chyme.  The  familiar  names  of  the  two  stomachs 
of  birds  arc  the  crop  or  craw,  and  the  gizzard. 
In  the  crop  the  entire  grain,  &c.  that  is  swal¬ 
lowed  is  moistened,  macerated,  and  softened, 
and  then  it  is  sent  on  to  the  stomach  that  it  may 
there  be  crushed  and  comminuted.  For  this  end 
almost  all  the  feathered  tribes  swallow  sand, 
pebbles,  and  other  hard  substances,  which  they 
preserve  in  their  stomachs,  nothing  of  the  sort 
being  found  in  the  crop.  Now  the  stomach  in 
birds  consists  of  two  extremely  thick  and  pow¬ 
erful  muscles  (in  the  smaller  birds  they  appear 
both  fleshy  and  tendinous),  so  placed  that,  like 
a  pair  of  millstones  connected  by  means  of 
hinges,  they  may  grind  and  bruise  the  food;  the 
place  of  teeth,  which  birds  want,  being  supplied 
by  the  stones  which  they  swallow.  In  this  way 
is  the  food  reduced  and  turned  into  chyme;  and 
then  by  compression  (just  as  we  are  wont,  after 
having  bruised  an  herb  or  a  fruit,  to  squeeze 
out  the  juice  or  pulp)  the  softer  or  more  liquid 
part  is  forced  out,  comes  to  the  top,  and  is  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  commencement  of  the  intestinal 
canal;  which  in  birds  takes  its  rise  from  the  up¬ 
per  part  of  the  stomach  near  the  entrance  of 
the  oesophagus.  That  this  is  the  case  in  many 
genera  of  birds  is  obvious;  for  the  stones  and 
other  hard  and  rough  substances  which  they 
have  swallowed,  if  long  retained,  become  so 
smooth  and  polished  that  they  are  unfit  to  com¬ 


minute  the  food,  when  they  are  discharged. 
Hence  birds,  when  they  select  stones,  try  them 
with  their  tongue,  and,  unless  they  find  them 
rough,  reject  them.  In  the  stomach  of  both  the 
ostrich  and  cassowary  I  found  pieces  of  iron  and 
silver,  and  stones  much  worn  down  and  almost 
reduced  to  nothing;  and  this  is  the  reason  why 
the  vulgar  believe  that  these  creatures  digest 
iron  and  are  nourished  by  it. 

If  you  apply  the  body  of  a  hawk  or  an  eagle, 
or  other  bird  of  prey,  whilst  fasting,  to  your 
ear,  you  will  hear  a  distinct  noise,  occasioned  by 
the  rubbing,  one  against  another,  of  the  stones 
contained  in  the  stomach.  For  hawks  do  not 
swallow  pebbles  with  a  view  to  cool  their  stom¬ 
achs,  as  falconers  commonly  but  erroneously 
believe,  but  that  the  stones  may  serve  for  the 
comminution  of  their  food;  precisely  as  other 
birds,  which  have  muscular  stomachs,  swallow 
pebbles,  sand,  or  something  else  of  the  same 
nature,  to  crush  and  grind  the  seeds  upon  which 
they  live. 

The  stomach  of  birds,  then,  is  situated  with¬ 
in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  below  the  heart, 
lungs  and  liver:  the  crop,  however,  is  without 
the  body  in  some  sort,  being  situated  at  the 
lower  part  of  the  neck,  over  the  os  jugale  or 
merry-thought.  In  this  bag,  as  I  have  said,  the 
food  is  only  macerated  and  softened;  and  sev¬ 
eral  birds  regurgitate  and  give  it  to  their  young, 
in  some  measure  as  quadrupeds  feed  their  prog¬ 
eny  with  milk  from  their  breasts;  this  occurs  in 
the  whole  family  of  the  pigeons,  and  also  among 
rooks.  Bees,  too,  when  they  have  returned  to 
their  hives,  disgorge  the  honey  which  they  have 
collected  from  the  flowers  and  concocted  in 
their  stomachs,  and  store  it  in  their  waxen  cells; 
and  so  also  do  hornets  and  wasps  feed  their 
young.  The  bitch  has  likewise  been  seen  to  vom¬ 
it  the  food  which  she  had  eaten  some  time  be¬ 
fore,  in  a  half-digested  state,  and  give  it  to  her 
whelps:  it  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  greatly  won¬ 
dered  at,  if  we  see  the  poor  women,  who  beg 
from  door  to  door,  when  their  milk  fails,  feed¬ 
ing  their  infants  with  food  which  they  have 
chewed  and  reduced  to  a  pulp  in  their  own 
mouths. 

The  intestines  commence  in  birds,  as  has  been 
said,  from  the  upper  part  of  the  stomach,  and 
are  folded  up  and  down  in  the  line  of  the  longi¬ 
tudinal  direction  of  the  body,  not  transversely 
as  in  man.  Immediately  below  the  heart,  about 
the  waist,  and  where  the  diaphragm  is  situated 
in  quadrupeds,  for  birds  have  no  diaphragm, 
we  find  the  liver,  of  ample  size,  divided  into 
two  lobes  situated  one  on  either  side  (for  birds 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


have  no  spleen)  and  filling  the  hypochondria. 
The  stomach  lies  below  the  liver,  and  down- 
wards  from  the  stomach  comes  the  mass  of  in¬ 
testines,  with  numerous  delicate  membranes, 
full  of  air,  interposed;  the  trachea  opening  in 
birds,  as  already  stated,  by  several  gaping  ori¬ 
fices  into  membranous  abdominal  cells.  The 
kidneys,  which  are  of  large  size  in  birds,  are  of 
an  oblong  shape,  look  as  if  they  were  made  up 
of  fleshy  vesicles,  without  cavities,  and  lie  along 
the  spine  on  either  side,  with  the  descending 
aorta  and  vena  cava  abdominalis  adjacent;  they 
further  extend  into  and  seem  to  lie  buried  with¬ 
in  ample  cavities  of  the  ossa  ilia.  The  ureters 
proceed  from  the  anterior  aspects  of  the  kid¬ 
neys,  and  run  longitudinally  towards  the  cloaca 
and  podex,  in  which  they  terminate,  and  into 
which  they  pour  the  liquid  excretion  of  the  kid¬ 
neys.  This,  however,  is  not  in  any  great  quan¬ 
tity  in  birds,  because  they  drink  little,  and 
some  of  them,  the  eagle  for  example,  not  at  all. 
Nor  is  the  urine  discharged  separately  and  by 
itself,  as  in  other  animals;  but,  as  we  have  said, 
it  distils  from  the  ureters  into  the  common 
cloaca,  which  is  also  the  recipient  of  the  faeces, 
and  the  discharge  of  which  it  facilitates.  The 
urine  is  also  different  in  birds  from  what  it  is  in 
other  animals;  for,  as  the  urine  in  the  generality 
of  animals  consists  of  two  portions,  one  more 
serous  and  liquid,  another  thicker,  which,  in 
healthy  subjects  constitutes  the  hypostasis  or 
sediment,  and  subsides  when  the  urine  becomes 
cold;  so  is  it  in  birds,  but  the  sedimentary  por¬ 
tion  is  the  more  abundant,  and  is  distinguished 
from  the  liquid  by  its  white  or  silvery  colour; 
nor  is  this  sediment  met  with  only  in  the  cloaca 
(where  it  abounds,  indeed,  and  surrounds  the 
faeces),  but  in  the  whole  course  of  the  ureters, 
which  are  distinguished  from  the  coverings  of 
the  kidneys  by  their  white  colour.  Nor  is  it  only 
in  birds  that  this  abundant  thicker  renal  secre¬ 
tion  is  seen;  it  is  conspicuous  in  serpents  and 
other  ovipara,  particularly  in  those  whose  eggs 
are  covered  with  a  harder  or  firmer  membrane. 
And  here,  too,  is  the  thicker  in  larger  pro¬ 
portion  than  the  thinner  and  more  serous  por¬ 
tion;  its  consistency  being  midway  between 
thick  urine  and  stercoraceous  excrement:  so 
that,  in  its  passage  through  the  ureters,  it  re¬ 
sembles  coagulated  or  inspissated  milk;  once 
discharged  it  soon  concretes  into  a  friable 
mass. 

EXERCISE  8.  Of  the  situation  and  structure  of  the 
remaining  parts  of  the  fowl's  uterus 

Between  the  stomach  and  the  liver,  over  the 


spine,  and  where,  in  man  and  other  animals  the 
pancreas  is  situated;  between  the  trunk  of  the 
porta  and  the  descending  cava;  at  the  origin  of 
the  renal  and  spermatic  arteries,  and  where  the 
caeliac  artery  plunges  into  the  mesentery,  there, 
in  the  fowl  and  other  birds,  do  the  ovary  and 
the  cluster  of  yelks  present  themselves;  having 
in  their  front  the  trunk  of  the  porta,  the  gullet, 
and  the  orifice  of  the  stomach:  behind  them, 
the  vena  cava  and  the  aorta  descending  along 
the  spine;  above  the  liver,  and  beneath  the 
stomach,  lie  adjacent.  The  infundibulum,  there¬ 
fore,  which  is  a  most  delicate  membrane,  de¬ 
scends  from  the  ovary  longitudinally  with  the 
spine,  between  it  and  the  gizzard.  And  from 
the  infundibulum  (between  the  gizzard,  the 
intestines,  the  kidneys,  and  the  loins),  the 
processus  uteri  or  superior  portion  of  this  organ 
descends  with  a  great  many  turnings  and  cells 
(like  the  colon  and  rectum  in  man),  into  the 
uterus  itself.  Now  the  uterus,  which  is  continu¬ 
ous  with  this  process,  is  situated  below  the  giz¬ 
zard,  between  the  loins,  the  kidneys,  and  the 
rectum,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  close 
to  the  cloaca;  so  that  the  egg  surrounded  with 
its  white,  which  the  uterus  contains,  is  situated 
so  low  that,  with  the  fingers,  it  is  easy  to  ascer¬ 
tain  whether  it  be  soft  or  hard,  and  near  the 
laying. 

The  uterus  in  the  common  fowl  varies  both 
in  point  of  size  and  of  structure.  In  the  fowl 
that  is  with  egg,  or  that  has  lately  laid,  it  is  very 
different  from  what  it  is  in  the  pullet,  the  uterus 
of  which  is  fleshy  and  round,  like  an  empty 
purse,  and  its  cavity  so  insignificant  that  it 
would  scarcely  contain  a  bean;  smooth  exter¬ 
nally,  it  is  wrinkled  and  occupied  by  a  few 
longitudinal  plicae  internally:  at  first  sight  you 
might  very  well  mistake  it  either  for  a  large 
urinary  bladder  or  for  a  second  smaller  stom¬ 
ach.  In  the  gravid  state,  however,  and  in  the 
fowl  arrived  at  maturity  (a  fact  which  is  indi¬ 
cated  by  the  redder  colour  of  the  comb),  the 
uterus  is  of  much  larger  dimensions  and  far 
more  fleshy;  its  plicae  are  also  larger  and  thicker, 
it  in  general  approaches  the  size  which  we 
should  judge  necessary  to  receive  an  egg;  it  ex¬ 
tends  far  upwards  in  the  direction  of  the  spinal 
column,  and  consists  of  numerous  divisions  or 
cells,  formed  by  replications  of  the  extended 
uterus,  similar  to  those  of  the  colon  in  quad¬ 
rupeds  and  man.  The  inferior  portion  of  the 
uterus,  as  the  largest  and  thickest,  and  most 
fleshy  of  all,  is  strengthened  by  many  plicae  of 
large  size.  Its  configuration  internally  is  oval,  as 
if  it  were  the  mould  of  the  egg.  The  ascending 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


352 

or  produced  portion  of  the  uterus  I  designate 
the  processus  uteri:  this  part  Fabricius  calls  the 
uterus  secundiiSy  and  says  that  it  consists  of  three 
spiral  turns  or  flexures;  Ulyssus  Aldrovandus, 
again,  names  it  the  stomachum  uteri,  I  must  ad¬ 
mit  that  in  this  part  there  are  usually  three 
turns  to  be  observed;  they  are  not,  however,  by 
any  means  so  regular  but  that,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  cells  of  the  colon,  nature  sometimes  departs 
from  her  usual  procedure  here. 

The  uterus  as  it  ascends  higher,  so  does  it  be¬ 
come  ever  the  thinner  and  more  delicate,  con¬ 
taining  fewer  and  smaller  plicae,  until  at  length 
going  off  into  a  mere  membrane,  and  that  of  the 
most  flimsy  description,  it  constitutes  the  in¬ 
fundibulum;  which,  reaching  as  high  as  the 
waist  or  cincture  of  the  body,  embraces  the 
entire  ovary. 

On  this  account,  therefore,  Fabricius  de¬ 
scribes  the  uterus  as  consisting  of  three  por¬ 
tions;  viz.,  the  commencement,  the  middle, 
and  the  end.  “The  commencement,”  says  he, 
“degenerating  into  a  thin  and  most  delicate 
membrane,  forms  an  ample  orifice,  and  bears  a 
resemblance  to  an  open-mouthed  tube  or  fun¬ 
nel.  The  next  portion  (which  I  call  the  pro¬ 
cessus  uteri),  consisting  of  three  transverse  spi¬ 
ral  turns,  serves  for  the  supply  of  the  albumen, 
and  extends  dowmvards  to  the  most  inferior 
and  capacious  portion — the  termination  of  the 
uterus — in  which  the  chalazae,  the  two  mem¬ 
branes,  and  the  shell  are  formed.”^ 

The  whole  substance  of  the  uterus,  particu¬ 
larly  the  parts  about  the  plicae,  both  in  its  body 
and  in  its  process,  are  covered  with  numerous 
ramifications  of  blood-vessels,  the  majority  of 
which  are  arterial  rather  than  venous  branches. 

The  folds  wLich  appear  oblique  and  trans¬ 
verse  in  the  interior  of  the  uterus  are  fleshy 
substances;  they  have  a  fine  white  or  milky 
colour,  and  a  sluggish  fluid  oozes  from  them,  so 
that  the  whole  of  the  interior  of  the  uterus,  as 
well  the  body  as  the  process,  is  moistened  with 
an  abundance  of  thin  albumen,  wTereby  the 
vitellus  as  it  descends  is  increased,  and  the  albu¬ 
men  that  is  deposited  around  it  is  gradually 
perfected. 

The  uterus  of  the  fowl  is  rarely  found  other¬ 
wise  than  containing  an  egg,  either  sticking  in 
the  spiral  process  or  arrived  in  the  body  of  the 
organ.  If  you  inflate  this  process  when  it  is 
empty  it  then  presents  itself  as  an  oblique  and 
contorted  tube,  and  rises  like  a  turbinated  shell 
or  cone  into  a  point.  The  general  arrangement 
of  the  spirals  and  folds  composing  the  uterus,  is 

^  Op.  dt.j  p.  17. 


such  as  w'e  have  already  observ^ed  it  in  the  vulva : 
there  is  a  ready  enough  passage  for  the  descend- 
ing  egg,  but  scarce  any  return  even  for  air 
blown  in  towards  the  superior  parts. 

The  processus  uteri  wfith  its  spirals,  very  small 
in  the  young  pullet,  is  so  much  diminished  in 
the  hen  which  has  ceased  laying,  that  it  shrinks 
into  the  most  delicate  description  of  membrane, 
and  then  entirely  disappears,  so  that  no  trace 
of  it  remains,  any  more  than  of  the  ovary  or 
infundibulum:  nothing  but  a  certain  glandular- 
looking  and  spongy  mass  appears  in  the  place 
these  bodies  occupied,  which  in  a  boiled  fowfl 
tastes  sweet,  and  bears  some  affinity  to  the  pan¬ 
creas  and  thymus  of  young  mammiferous  ani¬ 
mals,  which,  in  the  vernacular  tongue,  are 
called  the  sweetbread. 

The  uterus  and  the  processus  uteri  are  con¬ 
nected  with  the  back  by  means  of  a  membra¬ 
nous  attachment,  which  Fabricius  designates  by 
the  name  of  “mesometrium;  because  the  second 
uterus,  together  with  this  vascular  and  mem¬ 
branous  body,  may  very  fairly  be  compared 
with  the  intestines  and  the  mesentery.”  For,  as 
the  intestine  is  bound  down  by  the  mesentery, 
so  is  this  portion  of  the  uterus  attached  to  the 
spinal  column  by  an  oblong  membranous  proc¬ 
ess;  lest  by  being  too  loose,  and  getting  twisted, 
the  passage  of  the  yelks  should  be  in  terfered  wi  th, 
instead  of  having  a  free  and  open  transit  af¬ 
forded  them  as  at  present.  The  mesometrium  al¬ 
so  transmits  numerous  blood-vessels,  surcharged 
with  blood,  to  each  of  the  folds  of  the  uterus. 
In  its  origin,  substance,  structure,  use,  and  of¬ 
fice,  this  part  is  therefore  analogous  to  the  mes¬ 
entery.  Moreover,  from  the  fundus  of  the  uterus 
lengthwise,  and  extending  even  to  the  infun¬ 
dibulum,  there  is  a  ligament  bearing  some  re¬ 
semblance  to  a  tape-worm,  similar  to  that  which 
we  notice  in  the  upper  part  of  the  colon.  It  is  as 
if  a  certain  portion  or  stripe  of  the  external 
tunic  had  been  condensed  and  shortened  in 
such  a  manner  that  the  rest  of  the  process  is 
thrown  into  folds  and  cells:  were  you  to  draw  a 
thread  through  a  piece  of  intestine  taken  out 
of  the  body,  and  to  tie  this  thread  firmly  on 
one  side,  you  would  cause  the  other  side 
of  the  bowel  to  pucker  up  into  wrinkles  and 
cells. 

This  then,  in  brief,  is  the  structure  of  the 
uterus  in  the  fowl  that  is  laying  eggs:  fleshy, 
large,  extensible  both  longitudinally  and  trans¬ 
versely,  tortuous  or  winding  in  spirals  and  con¬ 
volutions  from  the  cloaca  upwards,  in  the  line 
of  the  vertebral  column,  and  continued  into 
the  infundibulum. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


EXERCISE  9.  Of  the  extrusion  of  the  egg^  or 
parturition  of  the  fowly  in  getieral 

The  yelk,  although  only  a  minute  speck  in 
the  ovary ,  gaining  by  degrees  in  depth  of  colour 
and  increasing  in  size,  gradually  acquires  the 
dimensions  and  characters  that  distinguish  it  at 
last.  Cast  loose  from  the  cluster,  it  descends  by 
the  infundibulum,  and,  transmitted  through 
the  spirals  and  cells  of  the  processus  uteri,  it  be¬ 
comes  surrounded  with  albumen;  and  this, 
without  in  any  place  adhering  to  the  uterus  (as 
was  rightly  observed  by  Fabricius  in  opposition 
to  Aristotle),  or  growing  by  means  of  any  sys¬ 
tem  of  umbilical  vessels;  but  as  the  eggs  of  fishes 
and  frogs,  when  extruded  and  laid  in  the  water 
provide  and  surround  themselves  with  albu¬ 
men,  or  as  beans,  vetches,  and  other  seeds  and 
grains  swell  when  moistened,  and  thence  sup¬ 
ply  nourishment  to  the  germs  that  spring  from 
them,  so,  from  the  folds  of  the  uterus  that  have 
been  described,  as  from  an  udder,  or  uterine 
placenta,  an  albuminous  fluid  exudes,  which 
the  vitellus,  in  virtue  of  its  inherent  vegetative 
heat  and  faculty,  attracts  and  digests  into  the 
surrounding  white.  There  is,  indeed,  an  abun¬ 
dance  of  fluid  having  the  taste  of  albumen,  con¬ 
tained  in  the  cavity  of  the  uterus  and  entangled 
between  the  folds  that  cover  its  interior.  In  this 
way  does  the  yelk,  descending  by  degrees,  be¬ 
come  surrounded  with  albumen,  until  at  last, 
having  in  the  extreme  part  of  the  uterus  ac¬ 
quired  a  covering  of  firmer  membranes  and  a 
harder  shell,  it  is  perfected  and  rendered  fit  for 
extrusion. 

EXERCISE  10.  Of  the  increase  and  nutrition  of  the 

Let  us  hear  Fabricius  on  these  topics.  He 
says:  “As  the  action  of  the  stomach  is  to  pre¬ 
pare  the  chyle,  and  that  of  the  testes  to  secrete 
the  seminal  fluid  (because  in  the  stomach  chyle 
is  discovered,  and  in  the  testes  semen),  so  we 
declare  the  act  of  the  uterus  in  birds  to  be  the 
production  of  eggs,  because  eggs  are  found 
there.  But  this,  as  it  appears,  is  not  the  only  ac¬ 
tion  of  uteri;  to  it  must  be  added  the  increase 
of  the  egg,  which  succeeds  immediately  upon 
its  production,  and  which  proceeds  until  it  is 
perfected  and  attains  its  due  size.  For  a  fowl 
does  not  naturally  lay  an  egg  until  it  is  perfect 
and  has  attained  to  its  proper  dimensions.  The 
office  of  the  uterus  is,  therefore,  the  growth  as 
well  as  the  generation  of  the  egg;  but  growth 
implies  and  includes  the  idea  of  nutrition;  and, 
as  il  generation  is  the  act  of  two  principles,  one 


the  agent,  another  the  matter,  the  agent  in  the 
production  of  eggs  is  nothing  else  than  the  or¬ 
gans  or  instruments  indicated,  viz,,  the  com¬ 
pound  uterus;  and  the  matter  nothing  but  the 
blood.” 

We,  studious  of  brevity,  and  shunning  all 
controversy,  as  in  duty  bound,  as  we  readily  ad¬ 
mit  that  the  office  and  use  of  the  uterus  is  the 
procreation  of  the  egg,  so  do  we  maintain  the 
“adequate  efficient,”  as  it  has  been  called,  the 
immediate  agent  to  inhere  in  the  egg  itself;  and 
we  assert,  further,  that  the  egg  is  both  engen¬ 
dered  and  made  to  increase,  not  by  the  uterus, 
but  by  a  certain  natural  principle  peculiar  to 
itself;  and  that  this  principle  flows  from  the 
whole  fowl  into  the  rudiments  of  the  vitellus, 
and  whilst  it  was  yet  but  a  speck,  and  under  the 
influence  either  of  the  calidum  innatum  or  of 
nature,  causes  it  to  be  nourished  and  to  grow; 
just  as  there  is  a  certain  faculty  in  every  par¬ 
ticle  of  the  body  which  secures  its  nutrition 
and  growth. 

As  regards  the  manner  in  which  the  yelk  is 
surrounded  by  the  albumen,  Aristotle  appears 
to  have  believed^  that  in  the  sharp  end  of  the 
(where  he  placed  the  commencement  of 
the  egg),  whilst  it  was  yet  surrounded  by  soft 
membranes,  there  existed  an  umbilical  canal,  by 
which  it  was  nourished;  a  view  which  Fabri- 
cius^  challenges,  denying  that  there  is  any  such 
canal,  or  that  the  vitellus  has  any  kind  of  con¬ 
nexion  with  the  uterus.  He  further  lessens  the 
doubt  in  regard  to  the  albumen  of  the  extruded 
egg,  observing,  that  “the  egg  increases  in  a 
twofold  manner,  inasmuch  as  the  uterus  con¬ 
sists  of  two  portions,  one  superior,  another  in¬ 
ferior;  and  the  egg  itself  consists  of  two  mat¬ 
ters — the  yelk  and  the  white.  The  yelk  increases 
with  a  true  growth,  to  wit,  by  means  of  the 
blood,  which  is  sent  to  it  through  the  veins 
whilst  it  is  yet  connected  with  the  vitellarium. 
The  albumen,  however,  increases  and  grows 
otherwise  than  the  yelk;  viz.,  not  by  means  of 
the  veins,  nor  by  proper  nutrition  like  the  yelk, 
but,  by  juxtaposition,  adhering  to  the  vitellus 
as  it  is  passing  through  the  second  uterus.” 

But  my  opinion  is  that  the  egg  increases 
everywhere  in  the  same  manner  as  the  yelk 
does  in  the  cluster;  viz.,  by  an  inherent  con¬ 
cocting  principle;  with  this  single  difference, 
that  in  the  ovary  the  nourishment  is  brought 
to  it  by  means  of  vessels,  whilst  in  the  uterus  it 
finds  that  which  it  imbibes  already  prepared  for 
it.  Juxtaposition  of  parts  is  equally  necessary  in 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  in.  2. 

^  Op  cit.,  p.  II. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


354 

every*  kind  of  nutrition  and  growth,  and  so  also 
are  concoction  and  distribution  of  the  applied 
nutriment.  Nor  is  one  of  these  to  be  less  ac¬ 
counted  true  nutrition  than  the  other,  inasmuch 
as  in  both  there  is  accession  of  new  aliment,  ap¬ 
position,  agglutination,  and  transmutation  of 
particles.  Nor  can  vetches  or  beans,  when  they 
attract  moisture  from  the  earth  through  their 
skins,  imbibing  it  like  sponges,  be  said  with  less 
propriety  to  be  nourished  than  if  they  had  ob¬ 
tained  the  needful  moisture  through  the  mouths 
of  veins;  and  trees,  when  they  absorb  the  dew 
and  the  rain  through  their  bark,  are  as  truly 
nourished  as  when  they  pump  them  in  by  their 
roots.  With  reference  to  the  mode  in  which  nu¬ 
trition  is  effected,  we  have  set  down  much  in 
another  place.  It  is  another  difficulty  that  occu¬ 
pies  us  at  this  time,  viz.^  whether  the  yelk, 
whilst  it  is  acquiring  the  white,  does  not  make 
a  certain  separation  and  distinction  in  it; 
whether,  in  the  course  of  the  increase,  a  more 
earthy  portion  does  not  subside  into  the  yelk 
or  middle  of  the  egg  as  towards  the  centre, 
which  Aristotle  believed,  and  another  lighter 
portion  surrounds  this.  For  between  the  yelk 
which  is  still  in  the  cluster,  and  the  yelk  which 
is  found  in  the  middle  of  a  perfect  egg,  there  is 
this  principal  difference,  that  although  the  for¬ 
mer  be  of  a  yellow  colour,  still,  in  point  of  con¬ 
sistence,  it  rather  resembles  the  white;  and  by 
boiling,  it  is,  like  the  latter,  thickened,  com¬ 
pacted,  inspissated,  and  becomes  divisible  into 
layers;  whilst  the  yelk  of  the  perfect  egg  is 
rendered  friable  by  boiling,  and  is  rather  of  an 
earthy  consistency,  not  thick  and  gelatinous 
like  albumen. 

EXERCISE  11.  Of  the  covering  or  shell  of  the  egg 

It  will  now  be  proper,  having  spoken  of  the 
production  of  eggs,  to  treat  of  their  parts  and 
diversities.  “An  egg,”  says  Fabricius,  “con¬ 
sists  of  a  yelk,  the  albumen,  two  chalazae,  three 
membranes,  i72:.,  one  proper  to  the  vitellus,  two 
common  to  the  entire  egg,  and  a  shell.  To  these 
two  others  are  to  be  added,  which,  however, 
cannot  be  correctly  reckoned  among  the  parts 
of  an  egg;  one  of  these  is  a  small  cavity  in  the 
blunt  end  of  the  egg,  under  the  shell;  the  other 
is  a  very  small  white  spot,  a  kind  of  round  cica- 
tricula  connected  with  the  surface  of  the  yelk. 
The  history  of  each  of  these  parts  and  accidents 
must  now  be  given  more  particularly,  and  we 
shall  begin  from  without  and  proceed  inwards. 

“The  external  covering  of  the  egg,  called  by 
Pliny  the  cortex  and  putamen,  by  Quintus 
Serenus  the  testa  ovi,  is  a  hard  but  thin,  friable 


and  porous  covering,  of  different  colours  in  dif¬ 
ferent  cases— white,  light  green,  speckled,  &c. 
All  eggs  are  not  furnished  with  a  shell  on  their 
extrusion:  the  eggs  of  serpents  have  none;  and 
some  fowls  occasionally,  though  rarely,  lay 
eggs  that  are  without  shells.  The  shell,  though 
everywhere  hard,  is  not  of  uniform  hardness; 
it  is  hardest  towards  the  upper  end.”  From  this 
Fabricius^  opines  that  we  are  to  doubt  as  to  the 
matter  of  which,  and  the  season  at  which  the 
shells  of  eggs  are  produced.  Aristotle^and  Pliny^ 
affirm  that  the  shell  is  not  formed  within  the 
body  of  the  fowl,  but  when  the  egg  is  laid;  and 
that  as  it  issues  it  sets  by  coming  in  contact 
with  the  air,  the  internal  heat  driving  off 
moisture.  And  this,  says  Aristotle,^  is  so  ar¬ 
ranged  to  spare  the  animal  pain,  and  to  render 
the  process  of  parturition  more  easy.  An  egg 
softened  in  vinegar  is  said  to  be  easily  pushed 
into  a  vessel  with  a  narrow  mouth.” 

Fabricius  was  long  indisposed  to  this  opinion, 
“because  he  had  found  an  egg  within  the  body 
of  the  fowl  covered  with  a  hard  shell;  and 
housewives  are  in  the  daily  practice  of  tr\dng 
the  bellies  of  their  hens  with  their  fingers  in  or¬ 
der  that  they  may  know  by  the  hardness 
whether  the  creatures  are  likely  to  lay  that  day 
or  not.”  But  by  and  by,  when  “he  had  been  as¬ 
sured  by  women  worthy  of  confidence,  that  the 
shells  of  eggs  became  hardened  in  their  passage 
into  the  air,  which  dissipates  a  certain  moisture 
diffused  over  the  egg  on  its  exit,  fixing  it  in  the 
shell  not  yet  completely  hardened”;  and  having 
aftenvards  “confirmed  this  by  his  own  experi¬ 
ence,”  he  altered  his  opinion,  and  came  to  the 
conclusion,  “that  the  egg  surrounded  with  a 
shell,  and  having  a  consistency  betwixt  hard 
and  soft,  hardened  notably  at  the  moment  of 
its  extrusion,  in  consequence,  according  to 
Aristotle’s  views,  of  the  concretion  and  dissipa¬ 
tion  of  the  thinner  part  of  a  certain  viscid  and 
tenacious  humour,  bedewed  with  which  the  egg 
is  extruded;  sticking  to  the  recent  shell  this 
humour  is  dried  up  and  hardened,  the  cold  of 
the  ambient  air  contributing  somewhat  to  the 
effect.  Of  all  this,”  he  says,  “you  will  readily  be 
satisfied  if  you  have  a  fowl  in  the  house,  and 
dexterously  catch  the  egg  in  your  hand  as  it  is 
dropping.” 

1  was  myself  long  fettered  by  this  statement 
of  Aristotle,  indeed  until  certain  experience 

^  Loc.  cit.y  p.  13. 

2  History  of  Animals y  vi.  2;  On  the  Generation  of  Ani- 
mats,  I.  8. 

3  Hist,  nat.y  x.  52. 

*  On  the  Generation  of  Animalsy  in.  2. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


had  assured  me  of  its  erroneousness;  for  I  found 
the  egg  still  contained  in  the  uterus,  almost  al¬ 
ways  covered  with  a  hard  shell;  and  I  once  saw 
an  egg  taken  from  the  body  of  a  living  fowl, 
and  still  warm,  without  a  shell  but  covered  with 
a  tenacious  moisture;  this  egg,  however,  did 
not  acquire  any  hardness  through  the  concre¬ 
tion  or  evaporation  of  the  moisture  in  ques¬ 
tion,  as  Fabricius  would  have  us  believe,  nei¬ 
ther  was  it  in  any  way  changed  by  the  cold  of 
the  surrounding  air;  but  it  retained  the  same 
degree  of  softness  which  it  had  had  in  the 
uterus. 

I  have  also  seen  an  egg  just  laid  by  a  fowl, 
surrounded  by  a  complete  shell,  and  this  shell 
covered  externally  with  a  soft  and  membranous 
skin,  which  however  did  not  become  hard.  I 
have  further  seen  another  hen’s  egg  covered 
with  a  shell  everywhere  except  at  the  extremity 
of  the  sharp  end,  where  a  certain  small  and  soft 
projection  remained,  very  likely  such  as  was 
taken  by  Aristotle  for  the  remains  of  an  um¬ 
bilicus. 

Fabricius,  therefore,  appears  to  me  to  have 
wandered  from  the  truth;  nor  was  I  ever  so 
dexterous  as  to  catch  an  egg  in  its  exit,  and  dis¬ 
cover  it  in  the  state  between  soft  and  hard.  And 
this  I  confidently  assert,  that  the  shell  is  formed 
internally,  or  in  the  uterus,  and  not  otherwise 
than  all  the  other  parts  of  the  egg,  viz,,  by  the 
peculiar  plastic  power.  A  statement  which  I 
make  all  the  more  confidently  because  I  have 
seen  a  very  small  egg  covered  with  a  shell,  con¬ 
tained  within  another  larger  egg,  perfect  in  all 
respects,  and  completely  surrounded  with  a 
shell.  An  egg  of  this  kind  Fabricius  calls  an 
ovum  centeninum;  and  our  housewives  ascribe 
it  to  the  cock.  This  egg  I  showed  to  his  Serene 
Majesty  King  Charles,  my  most  gracious  mas¬ 
ter,  in  the  presence  of  many  persons.  And  the 
same  year,  in  cutting  up  a  large  lemon,  I  found 
another  perfect  but  very  small  lemon  included 
within  it,  having  a  yellow  rind  like  the  other; 
and  I  hear  that  the  same  thing  has  frequently 
been  seen  in  Italy. 

It  is  a  common  mistake  with  those  who  pur¬ 
sue  philosophical  studies  in  these  times,  to  seek 
for  the  cause  of  diversity  of  parts  in  diversity 
of  the  matter  whence  they  arise.  Thus  medical 
men  assert  that  the  several  parts  of  the  body 
are  both  engendered  and  nourished  by  diverse 
niatters,  either  the  blood  or  the  seminal  fluid; 
viz,,  the  softer  parts,  such  as  the  flesh,  by  the 
thinner  matter,  the  harder  and  more  earthy 
parts,  such  as  the  bones,  &c.  by  the  firmer  and 
thicker  matter.  But  we  have  elsewhere  refuted 


355 

this  too  prevalent  error.  Nor  do  they  err  less 
who,  with  Democritus,  compose  all  things  of 
atoms;  or  with  Empedocles,  of  elements.  As  if 
generation  were  nothing  more  than  a  separation, 
or  aggregation,  or  disposition  of  things.  It  is  not 
indeed  to  be  denied  that  when  one  thing  is  to 
be  produced  from  another,  all  these  are  nec¬ 
essary,  but  generation  itself  is  different  from 
them  all,  I  find  Aristotle  to  be  of  this  opinion; 
and  it  is  my  intention,  by  and  by,  to  teach  that 
out  of  the  same  albumen  (which  all  allow  to  be 
uniform,  not  composed  of  diverse  parts),  all 
the  parts  of  the  chick,  bones,  nails,  feathers, 
flesh,  &c.  are  produced  and  nourished.  More¬ 
over,  they  who  philosophize  in  this  way,  assign 
a  material  cause,  and  deduce  the  causes  of  nat¬ 
ural  things  either  from  the  elements  concurring 
spontaneously  or  accidentally,  or  from  atoms 
variously  arranged;  they  do  not  attain  to  that 
which  is  first  in  the  operations  of  nature  and  in 
the  generation  and  nutrition  of  animals;  viz., 
they  do  not  recognize  that  efficient  cause  and 
divinity  of  nature  which  works  at  all  times  with 
consummate  art,  and  providence,  and  wisdom, 
and  ever  fora  certain  purpose,  and  to  some  good 
end;  they  derogate  from  the  honour  of  the  Di¬ 
vine  Architect,  who  has  not  contrived  the  shell 
for  the  defence  of  the  egg  with  less  of  skill  and 
of  foresight  than  he  has  composed  all  the  other 
parts  of  the  egg  of  the  same  matter,  and  pro¬ 
duced  it  under  the  influence  of  the  same  form¬ 
ative  faculty. 

Although  what  has  already  been  said  be  the 
fact,  namely,  that  the  egg,  even  whilst  con¬ 
tained  in  the  uterus,  is  provided  with  a  hard 
shell,  still  the  authority  of  Aristotle  has  always 
such  weight  with  me  that  I  never  think  of  dif¬ 
fering  from  him  inconsiderately;  and  I  there¬ 
fore  believe,  and  my  observations  bear  me  out 
in  so  much,  that  the  shell  does  gain  somewhat 
in  solidity  from  the  ambient  air  upon  its  extru¬ 
sion;  that  the  sluggish  and  slippery  fluid  with 
which  it  is  moistened  when  laid,  immediately 
becomes  hardened  on  its  exposure  to  the  air. 
For  the  shell,  whilst  the  egg  is  in  the  uterus,  is 
much  thinner  and  more  transparent,  and 
smoother  on  the  surface;  when  laid,  however, 
the  shell  is  thicker,  less  translucid,  and  the  sur¬ 
face  is  rough — it  appears  as  if  it  were  powdered 
over  with  a  fine  white  dust  which  had  but  just 
adhered  to  it. 

Let  us,  as  we  are  upon  this  subject,  expatiate 
a  little: 

In  the  desert  islands  off  the  east  coast  of  Scot¬ 
land,  such  flights  of  almost  every  kind  of  sea- 
fowl  congregate,  that  were  I  to  state  what  I 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


356 

have  heard  from  parties  very  worthy  of  credit,  I 
fear  I  should  be  held  guilty  of  telling  greater 
stories  than  they  who  have  committed  them¬ 
selves  in  regard  to  the  Scottish  geese  produced, 
as  they  say,  from  the  fruits  of  certain  trees  that 
had  fallen  into  the  sea.  These  geese  the  narrators 
themselves  had  never  seen  so  produced;  but  I 
will  here  relate  that  which  I  have  myself  wit¬ 
nessed. 

There  is  a  small  island  which  the  Scots  call 
the  Bass  Island  (and  speaking  of  this  one  will 
suffice  for  all),  situated  in  the  open  ocean,  not 
far  from  the  shore,  of  the  most  abrupt  and  pre¬ 
cipitous  character,  so  that  it  rather  resembles 
one  huge  rock  or  stone  than  an  island,  and  in¬ 
deed  it  is  not  more  than  a  mile  in  circumfer¬ 
ence.  The  surface  of  this  island  in  the  months 
of  May  and  June  is  almost  completely  covered 
with  nests,  eggs,  and  young  birds,  so  that  you 
can  scarce  find  free  footing  anywhere;  and  then 
such  is  the  density  of  the  flight  of  the  old  birds 
above,  that  like  a  cloud  they  darken  the  sun 
and  the  sky;  and  such  the  screaming  and  din 
that  you  can  scarce  hear  the  voice  of  one  who 
addresses  you.  If  you  turn  your  eyes  below,  and 
from  your  lofty  stance  and  precipice  regard  the 
sea,  there  you  perceive  on  all  sides  around  an  in¬ 
finite  variety  of  different  kinds  of  sea-fowl 
swimming  about  in  pursuit  of  their  prey:  the 
face  of  the  ocean  is  very  like  that  of  a  pool  in 
the  spring  season,  when  it  appears  swarming 
with  frogs;  or  to  those  sunny  hills  and  cliffy 
mountains  looked  at  from  below,  that  are  cov¬ 
ered  with  numerous  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats. 
If  you  sail  round  the  island  and  look  up,  you 
see  on  every  ledge  and  shelf,  and  recess,  in¬ 
numerable  flocks  of  birds  of  almost  every  size 
and  order;  more  numerous  than  the  stars  that 
appear  in  the  unclouded  moonless  sky;  and  if 
you  regard  the  flights  that  incessantly  come 
and  go  you  may  imagine  that  it  is  a  mighty 
swarm  of  bees  you  have  before  you.  I  should 
scarcely  be  credited  did  I  name  the  revenue 
which  was  annually  derived  from  the  feathers, 
the  eggs,  and  the  old  nests,  which,  as  useful  for 
firing,  are  all  made  objects  of  trafiic  by  the  pro¬ 
prietor;  the  sum  he  mentioned  to  me  exceeds 
credibility.  There  was  this  particular  feature 
which,  as  it  refers  to  our  subject,  I  shall  men¬ 
tion,  and  also  as  it  bears  me  out  in  my  report  of 
the  multitudes  of  sea-fowl;  the  whole  island  ap¬ 
pears  of  a  brilliant  white  colour  to  those  who  ap¬ 
proach  it — all  the  cliffs  look  as  if  they  consisted 
of  the  whitest  chalk;  the  true  colour  of  the 
rock,  however,  is  dusky  and  black.  It  is  a  friable 
white  crust  that  is  spread  over  all,  which  gives 


the  island  its  whiteness  and  splendour,  a  crust, 
having  the  same  consistency,  colour,  and  nature 
as  an  egg-shell,  which  plasters  everything  with 
a  hard,  though  friable  and  testaceous  kind  of 
covering.  The  lower  part  of  the  rock,  laved  by 
the  ebbing  and  flowing  tide,  preserves  its  native 
colour,  and  clearly  shows  that  the  whiteness  of 
the  superior  parts  is  due  to  the  liquid  excre¬ 
ments  of  the  birds,  which  are  voided  along  with 
the  alvine  faeces;  which  liquid  excrements, 
white,  hard,  and  brittle  like  the  shell  of  the  egg, 
cover  the  rock,  and,  under  the  influence  of  the 
cold  of  the  air,  incrust  it.  Now  this  is  precisely 
the  way  in  which  Aristotle  and  Pliny  will  have 
it  that  the  shell  of  the  egg  is  formed.  None  of 
the  birds  are  permanent  occupants  of  the  island, 
but  visitors  for  purposes  of  procreation  only, 
staying  there  for  a  few  weeks,  in  lodgings,  as  it 
were,  and  until  their  young  ones  can  take  wing 
along  with  them.  The  white  crust  is  so  hard 
and  solid,  and  adheres  so  intimately  to  the  rock, 
that  it  might  readily  be  mistaken  for  the  natu¬ 
ral  soil  of  the  place. 

The  liquid,  white,  and  shining  excrement  is 
conveyed  from  the  kidneys  of  birds  by  the  ure¬ 
ters,  into  the  common  receptacle  or  cloaca; 
where  it  covers  over  the  alvine  faeces,  and  with 
them  is  discharged.  It  constitutes,  in  fact,  the 
thicker  portion  of  the  urine  of  these  creatures, 
and  corresponds  with  that  which,  in  our  urine, 
we  call  the  hypostase  or  sediment.  We  have  al¬ 
ready  said  something  above  on  this  topic,  and 
have  entered  into  it  still  more  fully  elsewhere. 
We  always  find  an  abundance  of  this  white  ex¬ 
crement  in  mews;  where  hawks  besmear  walls 
beside  their  perches,  they  cover  them  with  a 
kind  of  gypseous  crust,  or  make  them  look  as 
if  they  were  painted  with  white  lead. 

In  the  cloaca  of  a  dead  ostrich  I  found  as 
much  of  this  gypseous  cement  as  would  have 
filled  the  hand.  And  in  like  manner  the  same 
substance  abounds  in  tortoises  and  other  ovi¬ 
parous  animals;  discharged  from  the  body  it 
soon  concretes  either  into  a  friable  crust,  or  in¬ 
to  a  powder  which  greatly  resembles  pulverized 
egg-shells,  in  consequence  of  the  evaporation 
of  its  thinner  part. 

Among  the  many  different  kinds  of  birds 
which  seek  the  Bass  Island  for  the  sake  of  laying 
and  incubating  their  eggs,  and  which  have  such 
variety  of  nests,  one  bird  was  pointed  out  to  me 
which  lays  but  one  egg,  and  this  it  places  upon 
the  point  of  a  rock,  with  nothing  like  a  nest  or 
bed  beneath  it,  yet  so  firmly  that  the  mother 
can  go  and  return  without  injury  to  it;  but  if 
anyone  move  it  from  its  place,  by  no  art  can  it 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


be  fixed  or  balanced  again;  left  at  liberty,  it 
straightway  rolls  off  and  falls  into  the  sea.  The 
place,  as  I  have  said,  is  crusted  over  with  a 
white  cement,  and  the  egg,  when  laid,  is  be¬ 
dewed  with  a  thick  and  viscid  moisture,  which 
setting  speedily,  the  egg  is  soldered  as  it  were, 
or  agglutinated  to  the  subjacent  rock. 

An  instance  of  like  rapid  concretion  may  be 
seen  any  day  at  a  statuary’s,  when  he  uses  his 
cement  of  burnt  alabaster  or  gypsum  tempered 
with  water;  by  means  of  which  the  likeness  of 
one  dead,  or  the  cast  of  anything  else  may  be 
speedily  taken,  and  used  as  a  mould. 

There  is  also  in  like  manner  a  certain  earthy 
or  solid  something  in  almost  all  liquids,  as,  for 
example,  tartar  in  wine,  mud  or  sand  in  water, 
salt  in  lixivium,  which,  when  the  greater  por¬ 
tion  of  the  water  has  been  dissipated,  concretes 
and  subsides;  and  so  do  I  conceive  the  white 
sediment  of  birds  to  descend  along  with  the 
urine  from  the  kidneys  into  the  cloaca,  and 
there  to  cover  over  and  incrust  the  egg,  much 
as  the  pavement  of  a  mews  is  plastered  over  by 
falcons,  and  every  cliff  of  the  aforementioned 
island  by  the  birds  that  frequent  it;  much  also 
as  chamber  utensils,  and  places  where  many  per¬ 
sons  make  water,  become  covered  with  a  yellow 
incrustation;  that  substance,  in  fact,  concret¬ 
ing  externally,  of  which  calculi  in  the  kidneys, 
bladder,  and  other  parts  are  formed.  I  did 
formerly  believe  then,  as  I  have  said,  persuaded 
especially  by  the  authority  of  Aristotle  and 
Pliny,  that  the  shell  of  the  hen’s  egg  was 
formed  of  this  white  sediment,  which  abounds 
in  all  the  oviparous  animals  whose  eggs  are  laid 
with  a  hard  shell,  the  matter  concreting  through 
contact  with  the  air  when  the  egg  was  laid.  And 
so  many  additional  observations  have  since 
strengthened  this  conclusion  that  I  can  scarcely 
keep  from  believing  that  some  part  at  least  of 
the  shell  is  thus  produced. 

Nevertheless,  I  would  say  with  Fabricius: 
“Let  all  reasoning  be  silent  when  experience 
gainsays  its  conclusions.”  The  too  familiar  vice 
of  the  present' age  is  to  obtrude  as  manifest 
truths,  mere  fancies,  born  of  conjecture  and 
superficial  reasoning,  altogether  unsupported 
by  the  testimony  of  sense. 

For  I  have  very  certainly  discovered  that  the 
egg  still  contained  in  the  uterus,  in  these  coun¬ 
tries  at  least,  is  covered  with  its  shell;  although 
Aristotle  and  Pliny  assert  the  contrary,  and 
Fabricius  thinks  that  “it  is  not  to  be  too  ob¬ 
stinately  gainsaid.”  In  warmer  places,  perhaps, 
and  where  the  fowls  are  stronger,  the  eggs  may 
be  extruded  soft,  and  for  the  most  part  without 


shells.  With  us  this  very  rarely  happens.  When 
I  was  at  Venice  in  former  years,  Aromatarius,  a 
learned  physician,  showed  me  a  small  leaf  which 
had  grown  between  the  two  valves  of  a  peascod, 
whilst  with  us  there  is  nothing  more  apparent 
in  these  pods  than  a  small  point  where  the  germ 
is  about  to  be  produced.  So  much  do  a  milder 
climate,  a  brighter  sky,  and  a  softer  air,  con¬ 
duce  to  increase  and  rapidity  of  growth. 

EXERCISE  12.  O/*  the  remaining  parts  of  the  egg 

We  have  already  spoken  partially  of  the  place 
where,  the  time  when,  and  the  manner  how  the 
remaining  parts  of  the  egg  are  engendered,  and 
we  shall  have  something  more  to  add  when  we 
come  to  speak  of  their  several  uses. 

“The  albumen,”  says  Fabricius,  “is  the  om 
albus  liquor  of  Pliny,  the  ovi  candidum  of  Cel- 
sus,  the  ovi  albor  of  Palladius,  the  ovi  album  et 
albumentum  of  Apicius,  the  \evKdv  of  the 
Greeks,  the  cjov  XemcojjLa  of  Aristotle,  the 
opvidos  7aXa,  or  bird’s  milk,  of  Anaxagoras. 
This  is  the  cold,  sluggish,  white  fluid  of  the 
egg,  of  different  thickness  at  different  places 
(thinner  at  the  blunt  and  sharp  ends,  thicker  in 
other  situations)  and  also  in  variable  quantity 
(for  it  is  more  abundant  at  the  blunt  end,  less  so 
at  the  sharp  end,  and  still  less  so  in  the  other 
parts  of  the  egg),  covering  and  surrounding  the 
yelk  on  every  side.”^ 

In  the  hen’s  egg,  however,  I  have  observed 
that  there  are  not  only  differences  in  the  albu¬ 
men,  but  two  albumens,  each  surrounded  with 
its  proper  membrane.  One  of  these  is  thinner, 
more  liquid,  and  almost  of  the  same  consistence 
as  that  humour  which,  remaining  among  the 
folds  of  the  uterus,  we  have  called  the  matter 
and  nourishment  of  the  albumen;  the  other  is 
thicker,  more  viscid,  and  rather  whiter  in  its 
colour,  and  in  old  and  stale  eggs,  and  those  that 
have  been  sat  upon  for  some  days,  it  is  of  a  yel¬ 
lowish  cast.  As  this  second  albumen  every¬ 
where  surrounds  the  yelk,  so  is  it,  in  like  man¬ 
ner,  itself  surrounded  by  the  more  external 
fluid.  That  these  two  albumens  are  distinct  ap¬ 
pears  from  this,  that  if  after  having  removed 
the  shell  you  pierce  the  two  outermost  mem¬ 
branes,  you  wUl  perceive  the  external  albumin¬ 
ous  liquid  to  make  its  escape,  and  the  mem¬ 
branes  to  become  collapsed  and  to  sink  down  in 
the  dish;  the  internal  and  thicker  albumen, 
however,  all  the  while  retains  its  place  and  glob¬ 
ular  figure,  inasmuch  as  it  is  bounded  by  its 
proper  membrane,  although  this  is  of  such  ten¬ 
uity  that  it  entirely  escapes  detection  by  the 

^  LOC.  ciLi  p.  22. 


358  WILLIAM  HARVEY 


eye;  but  if  you  then  prick  it,  the  second  albu¬ 
men  will  forthwith  begin  to  flow  out,  and  the 
mass  will  lose  its  globular  shape;  just  as  the 
water  contained  in  a  bladder  escapes  when  it  is 
punctured;  in  like  manner  the  proper  investing 
membrane  of  the  vitellus  being  punctured,  the 
yellow  fluid  of  which  it  consists  escapes,  and 
the  original  globular  form  is  destroyed. 

“The  vitellus,”  says  Fabricius,  “is  so  called 
from  the  word  vita^  because  the  chick  lives  upon 
it;  from  its  colour  it  is  also  spoken  of  as  the  yel¬ 
low  of  the  egg,  having  been  called  by  the  Greeks 
generally,  by  Hippocrates 

and  by  Aristotle  d)Xpov  and  \eKvddv;  the  an¬ 
cients,  such  as  Suidas  in  Menander,  called  it 
veoTOVy  i.  e,y  the  chick,  because  they  believed 
the  chick  to  be  engendered  from  this  part.  It  is 
the  smoothest  portion  of  the  egg,  and  is  con¬ 
tained  within  a  most  delicate  membrane,  im¬ 
mediately  escaping  if  this  be  torn,  and  losing 
all  figure;  it  is  sustained  in  the  middle  of  the 
egg;  and  in  one  egg  is  of  a  yellow  colour,  in  an¬ 
other  of  a  tint  between  white  and  yellow;  it  is 
quite  round,  of  variable  size,  according  to  the 
size  of  the  bird  that  lays  the  egg,  and,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Aristotle,  of  a  deeper  yellow  in  water 
birds,  of  a  paler  hue  in  land  birds. The  same 
author-  also  maintains  that  “the  yellow  and  the 
white  of  an  egg  are  of  opposite  natures,  not 
only  in  colour  but  in  qualities;  for  the  yellow  is 
inspissated  by  cold,  which  the  white  is  not,  but 
is  rather  rendered  more  liquid;  and  the  white, 
on  the  contrary,  is  thickened  by  heat,  which 
the  yellow  is  not,  unless  it  be  burned  or  over¬ 
done,  and  it  is  more  hardened  and  dried  by 
boiling  than  by  roasting.”  As  in  the  macrocosm 
the  earth  is  placed  in  the  centre,  and  is  sur¬ 
rounded  by  the  water  and  the  air,  so  is  the  yelk, 
the  more  earthy  part  of  the  egg,  surrounded  by 
two  albuminous  layers,  one  thicker,  another 
thinner.  And,  indeed,  Aristotle  says  that  “if  we 
put  a  number  of  yelks  and  whites  together,  and 
mix  them  in  a  pan,  and  then  boil  them  with  a 
slow  and  gentle  fire,  the  whole  of  the  yelks 
will  set  into  a  globular  mass  in  the  middle, 
and  appear  surrounded  by  the  whites.”^  But 
many  physicians  have  been  of  opinion  that 
the  white  was  the  colder  portion  of  the 
egg.  Of  these  matters,  however,  more  by  and 
by. 

The  chalazae,  the  treads  or  treadles  {grallu' 
dura  in  Italian)  are  two  in  number  in  each  egg, 
one  in  the  blunt,  another  in  the  sharp  end. 

^  Op.  cii.y  p.  23. 

2  History  of  Animals^  vi.  2. 

3  Ibid.;  On  the  Generation  of  AnimalSy  in.  I. 


The  larger  portion  of  them  is  contained  in  the 
white;  but  they  are  most  intimately  connected 
with  the  yelk,  and  with  its  membrane.  They 
are  two  long-shaped  bodies,  firmer  than  the  al¬ 
bumen  and  whiter;  knotty,  not  without  a  cer¬ 
tain  transparency  like  hail,  whence  their  name; 
each  chalaza,  in  fact,  is  made  up  of  several  hail¬ 
stones,  as  it  seems,  connected  by  means  of  al¬ 
bumen.  One  of  them  is  larger  than  the  other, 
and  this  extends  from  the  yelk  towards  the 
blunt  end  of  the  egg;  the  other  and  smaller 
chalaza  stretches  from  the  yelk  towards  the 
sharp  end  of  the  egg.  The  larger  is  made  up  of 
two  or  three  knots  or  seeming  hailstones,  at  a 
trifling  distance  from  one  another,  and  of  sue 
cessively  smaller  size. 

The  chalazae  are  found  in  the  eggs  of  all 
birds,  and  in  wind  and  unprolific  as  well  as  in 
perfect  or  prolific  eggs,  duly  disposed  in  both 
theirextremities.  Whence  thesupposition  among 
housewives  that  the  chalazae  are  the  tread  or 
spermatic  fluid  of  the  cock,  and  that  the  chick 
is  generated  from  them  is  discovered  to  be  a 
vulgar  error.  But  Fabricius  himself,  although 
he  denies  that  they  consist  of  the  semen  of  the 
cock,  still  gives  various  reasons  for  maintaining 
that  “they  are  the  immediate  matter  which 
the  cock  fecundates,  and  from  which  the  chick 
is  produced”;  a  notion  which  he  seeks  to  prop 
by  this  feeble  statement:  “because  in  a  boiled 
egg,  the  chalazae  are  so  contracted  on  them¬ 
selves  that  they  present  the  figure  of  a  chick  al¬ 
ready  formed  and  hatched.”  But  it  is  not  likely 
that  several  rudiments  of  a  single  foetus  should 
be  wanted  in  one  egg,  neither  has  anyone  ever 
discovered  the  rudiments  of  the  future  chick 
save  in  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg.  Moreover  the 
chalazae  present  no  sensible  difference  in  eggs 
that  are  fecundated  by  the  intercourse  of  the 
two  sexes,  from  those  of  eggs  that  are  barren. 
Our  distinguished  author  is,  therefore,  mis¬ 
taken  in  regard  to  the  use  of  the  chalazae  in  the 
egg,  as  shall  further  be  made  to  appear  by  and 

In  the  eggs  of  even  the  smallest  birds  there  is 
a  slender  filament,  the  rudiments  of  the  chala¬ 
zae,  to  be  discovered;  and  in  those  of  the  ostrich 
and  cassowary  I  have  found,  in  either  end  of 
the  egg  very  thick  chalazae,  of  great  length,  and 
very  white  colour,  made  up  of  several  globules 
gradually  diminishing  in  size. 

A  small  cavity  is  observed  in  the  inside  of  an 
egg  under  the  shell,  at  the  blunt  end;  some¬ 
times  exactly  in  the  middle,  at  other  times 
more  to  one  side,  almost  exactly  corresponding 
to  the  chalaza  that  lies  below  it.  The  figure  of 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  359 


this  cavity  is  generally  circular,  though  in  the 
goose  and  duck  it  is  not  exactly  so.  It  is  seen  as 
a  dark  spot  if  you  hold  an  egg  opposite  a  candle 
in  a  dark  place,  and  apply  your  hand  edgevyays 
over  the  blunt  end.  In  the  egg  just  laid  it  is  of 
small  size— about  the  size  of  the  pupil  of  the 
human  eye;  but  it  grows  larger  daily  as  the  egg 
is  older,  and  the  air  is  warmer;  it  is  much  in¬ 
creased  after  the  first  day  of  incubation ;  as  if  by 
the  exhalation  of  some  of  the  more  external  and 
liquid  albumen  the  remainder  contracted,  and 
left  a  larger  cavity;  for  the  cavity  in  question  is 
produced  between  the  shell  and  the  membrane 
which  surrounds  the  whole  of  the  fluids  of  the 
egg.  It  is  met  with  in  all  eggs;  I  have  discovered 
it,  even  in  those  that  are  still  contained  in  the 
uterus,  as  soon  as  they  had  become  invested 
with  the  shell.  They  who  are  curious  in  such 
matters  say  that  if  this  cavity  be  in  the  point  or 
end  of  the  egg  it  will  produce  a  male,  if  towards 
the  side,  a  female.  This  much  is  certain:  if  the 
cavity  be  small  it  indicates  that  the  egg  is 
fresh-laid;  if  large,  that  it  is  stale.  But  we  shall 
have  occasion  anon  to  say  more  on  this  head. 

There  is  a  white  and  very  small  circle  appar¬ 
ent  in  the  investing  membrane  of  the  vitellus, 
which  looks  like  an  in  branded  cicatrice,  which 
Fabricius  therefore  calls  cicatricula;  but  he 
makes  little  of  this  spot,  and  looks  on  it  rather 
as  an  accident  or  blemish  than  as  any  essential 
part  of  the  egg.  The  cicatricula  in  question  is 
extremely  small;  not  larger  than  a  tiny  lentil,  or 
the  pupil  of  a  small  bird’s  eye;  white,  flat,  and 
circular.  This  part  is  also  found  in  every  egg, 
and  even  from  its  commencement  in  the  vitel- 
larium.  Fabricius,  therefore,  is  mistaken  when 
he  thinks  that  this  spot  is  nothing  more  than 
the  trace  or  cicatrice  of  the  severed  peduncle, 
by  which  the  egg  was  in  the  first  instance  con¬ 
nected  with  the  ovary.  For  the  peduncle,  as  he 
himself  admits,  is  hollow,  and  as  it  approaches 
the  vitellus  expands,  so  as  to  surround  or  em¬ 
brace,  and  inclose  the  yelk  in  a  kind  of  pouch: 
it  is  not  connected  with  the  yelk  in  the  same 
way  as  the  stalks  of  apples  and  other  fruits  are 
infixed,  and  so  as  to  leave  any  cicatrice  when 
the  yelk  is  cast  loose.  And  if  you  sometimes 
find  two  cicatriculae  in  a  large  yelk,  as  Fabricius 
states,  this  might,  perhaps,  lead  to  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  a  monster  and  double  foetus,  (as  shall  be 
afterwards  shown),  but  would  be  no  indication 
of  the  pre-existence  of  a  double  peduncle.  He  is, 
however,  immensely  mistaken  when  he  imag¬ 
ines  that  the  cicatricula  serves  no  purpose;  for 
it  is,  in  fact,  the  most  important  part  of  the 
whole  egg,  and  that  for  whose  sake  all  the 


others  exist;  it  is  that,  in  a  word,  from  which 
the  chick  takes  its  rise.  Parisanus,  too,  is  in 
error,  when  he  contends  that  this  is  the  semen 
of  the  cock. 

EXERCISE  13.  Of  the  diversities  of  eggs 

“The  word  ovum,  or  egg,  is  taken  in  a  two¬ 
fold  sense,  proper  and  improper.  An  ovum, 
properly  so  designated,  I  call  that  body  to 
which  the  definition  given  by  Aristotle^  ap¬ 
plies:  An  egg,  says  he,  is  that  from  part  of 
which  an  animal  is  engendered,  and  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  which  is  food  for  the  animal  so  pro¬ 
duced.  But  I  hold  that  body  to  be  improperly 
styled  an  egg  which  is  defined  by  Aristotle^  in 
the  same  place,  to  be  that  from  the  whole  of 
which  an  animal  is  engendered;  such  as  the  eggs 
of  ants,  flies,  spiders,  some  butterflies,  and 
others  of  the  tribe  of  extremely  small  eggs; 
which  Aristotle  almost  always  fears  to  commit 
himself  by  calling  eggs,  but  which  he  rather 
styles  vermictiUr  What  precedes  is  from  Fab¬ 
ricius;®  but  we,  whose  purpose  it  is  to  treat  es¬ 
pecially  of  the  generation  of  the  hen’s  egg,  have 
no  intention  to  speak  of  the  differences  of  all 
kinds  of  eggs;  we  shall  limit  ourselves  to  the 
diversities  among  hen’s  eggs. 

The  more  recently  laid  are  whiter  than  the 
staler,  because  by  age,  and  especially  by  incu¬ 
bation,  they  become  darker;  the  cavity  in  the 
blunt  end  of  a  stale  egg  is  also  larger  than  in  a 
recent  egg;  eggs  just  laid  are  also  somewhat 
rough  to  the  feel  from  a  quantity  of  white  pow¬ 
der  which  covers  the  shell,  but  which  is  soon 
rubbed  off,  when  the  egg  becomes  smoother  as 
well  as  darker.  New-laid  eggs,  unbroken,  if 
placed  near  a  fire  will  sweat,  and  are  much  more 
palatable  than  those  that  have  been  kept  for 
some  time— they  are,  indeed,  accounted  a  deli¬ 
cacy  by  some.  Eggs,  after  two  or  three  days’  in¬ 
cubation,  are  still  better  flavoured  than  stale 
eggs;  revived  by  the  gentle  warmth  of  the  hen, 
they  seem  to  return  to  the  quality  and  entire¬ 
ness  of  the  egg  just  laid.  Further,  I  have  boiled 
an  egg  to  hardness,  after  the  fourteenth  day  of 
incubation,  when  the  chick  had  already  begun 
to  get  its  feathers,  when  it  occupied  the  middle 
of  the  egg,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  the  yelk  re¬ 
mained,  in  order  that  I  might  better  distinguish 
the  position  of  the  chick:  I  found  it  lying,  as  it 
were,  within  a  mould  of  the  albumen,  and  the 
yelk  possessed  the  same  agreeable  flavour  and 
sweetness  as  that  of  the  new-laid  egg,  boiled  to 

^  History  of  Animals,  i.  5. 

2  Ibid.,  2. 

3  Op.  cit.,  p.  19. 


360  WILLIAM 

the  same  degree  of  hardness.  The  yelk  taken 
from  the  ovarium  of  a  live  fowl,  and  eaten  im¬ 
mediately,  tastes  much  sweeter  raw  than  boiled. 

Eggs  also  differ  from  one  another  in  shape; 
some  are  longer  and  more  pointed,  others  round¬ 
er  and  blunter.  According  to  Aristotle,^  the 
long-shaped  and  pointed  eggs  produce  females; 
the  blunt,  on  the  contrary,  yield  males.  Pliny,^ 
however,  maintains  the  opposite.  “The  round¬ 
er  eggs,”  he  says,  “produce  females,  the  others 
males”;  and  with  him  Columella^  agrees:  “He 
who  desires  to  have  the  greater  number  of  his 
brood  cocks,  let  him  select  the  longest  and 
sharpest  eggs  for  incubation;  and  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  when  he  would  have  the  greater  number 
females,  let  him  choose  the  roundest  eggs.” 
The  ground  of  Aristotle’s  opinion  was  this:  be¬ 
cause  the  rounder  eggs  are  the  hotter,  and  it  is 
the  property  of  heat  to  concentrate  and  deter¬ 
mine,  and  that  heat  can  do  most  which  is  most 
powerful.  From  the  stronger  and  more  perfect 
principle,  therefore,  proceeds  the  stronger  and 
more  perfect  animal.  Such  is  the  male  com¬ 
pared  with  the  female,  especially  in  the  case  of 
the  common  fowl.  On  the  contrary,  again,  the 
smaller  eggs  are  reckoned  among  the  imperfect 
ones,  and  the  smallest  of  all  are  regarded  as  en¬ 
tirely  unproductive.  It  was  on  this  account  too 
that  Aristotle,  to  secure  the  highest  quality  of 
eggs,  recommends  that  the  hens  be  frequently 
trodden.  Barren  and  adventitious  eggs,  he  as¬ 
serts,  are  smaller  and  less  savoury,  because  they 
are  humid  and  imperfect.  The  differences  in¬ 
dicated  are  to  be  understood  as  referring  to  the 
eggs  of  the  same  fowl ;  for  when  a  certain  hen 
goes  on  laying  eggs  of  a  certain  character,  they 
will  all  produce  either  males  or  females.  If  you 
understand  this  point  otherwise,  the  guess  as  to 
males  or  females,  from  the  indications  given, 
would  be  extremely  uncertain.  Because  dif¬ 
ferent  hens  lay  eggs  that  differ  much  in  respect 
of  size  and  figure:  some  habitually  lay  more 
oblong,  others,  rounder  eggs,  that  do  not  dif¬ 
fer  greatly  one  from  another;  and  although  I 
sometimes  found  diversities  in  the  eggs  of  the 
same  fowl,  these  were  still  so  trifling  in  amount 
that  they  would  have  escaped  any  other  than 
the  practised  eye.  For  as  all  the  eggs  of  the 
same  fowl  acquire  nearly  the  same  figure,  in  the 
same  womb  or  mould  in  which  the  shell  is  de¬ 
posited  (much  as  the  excrements  are  moulded 
into  scybala  in  the  cells  of  the  colon),  it  neces¬ 
sarily  falls  out  that  they  greatly  resemble  one 

^  History  of  Animals^  vi.  2. 

2  Hist,  nat.y  Book  x,  chap.  52;  Book  ix. 

*  Dc  rc  rust.^  5;  Scaliger,  in  he. 


HARVEY 

another;  so  that  I  myself,  without  much  ex¬ 
perience,  could  readily  tell  which  hen  in  a 
small  flock  had  laid  a  given  egg,  and  they  who 
have  given  much  attention  to  the  point,  of 
course  succeed  much  better.  But  that  which  we 
note  every  day  among  huntsmen  is  far  more  re¬ 
markable;  for  the  more  careful  keepers  who 
have  large  herds  of  stags  or  fallow  deer  under 
their  charge,  will  very  certainly  tell  to  which 
herd  the  horns  which  they  find  in  the  woods  or 
thickets  belonged.  A  stupid  and  uneducated 
shepherd,  having  the  charge  of  a  numerous 
flock  of  sheep,  has  been  known  to  become  so 
familiar  with  the  physiognomy  of  each,  that  if 
any  one  had  strayed  from  the  flock,  though  he 
could  not  count  them,  he  could  still  say  which 
one  it  was,  give  the  particulars  as  to  where  it 
had  been  bought,  or  whence  it  had  come.  The 
master  of  this  man,  for  the  sake  of  trying  him, 
once  selected  a  particular  lamb  from  among 
forty  others  in  the  same  pen,  and  desired  him 
to  carry  it  to  the  ewe  which  was  its  dam,  which 
he  did  forthwith.  We  have  known  huntsmen 
who,  having  only  once  seen  a  particular  stag,  or 
his  horns,  or  even  his  print  in  the  mud  (as  a  lion 
is  known  by  his  claws),  have  afterwards  been 
able  to  distinguish  him  by  the  same  marks  from 
every  other;  some,  too,  from  the  foot-prints  of 
deer,  seen  for  the  first  time,  will  draw  inferences 
as  to  the  size,  and  grease,  and  power  of  the  stag 
which  has  left  them;  saying  whether  he  were 
full  of  strength,  or  weary  from  having  been 
hunted;  and  further,  whether  the  prints  are 
those  of  a  buck  or  a  doe.  I  shall  say  thus  much 
more:  there  are  some  who,  in  hunting,  when 
there  are  some  forty  hounds  upon  the  trace  of 
the  game,  and  all  are  giving  tongue  together, 
will  nevertheless,  and  from  a  distance,  tell 
which  dog  is  at  the  head  of  the  pack,  which  at 
the  tail,  which  chases  on  the  hot  scent,  which  is 
running  off  at  fault;  whether  the  game  is  still 
running,  or  is  at  bay;  whether  the  stag  have  run 
far,  or  have  but  just  been  raised  from  his  lair. 
And  all  this  amid  the  din  of  dogs,  and  men,  and 
horns,  and  surrounded  by  an  unknown  and 
gloomy  wood.  We  should  not,  therefore,  be 
greatly  surprised  when  we  see  those  who  have 
experience  telling  by  what  hen  each  particular 
egg  in  a  number  has  been  laid.  I  wish  there 
were  some  equally  ready  way  from  the  child  of 
knowing  the  true  father. 

The  principal  difference  between  eggs,  how¬ 
ever,  is  their  fecundity  or  barrenness — the  dis¬ 
tinction  of  fruitful  eggs  from  hypenemic,  ad¬ 
ventitious,  or  wind  eggs.  Those  eggs  are  called 
hypenemic  (as  if  the  progeny  of  the  wind)  that 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  3^^ 


are  produced  without  the  concourse  of  the 
male,  and  are  unfit  for  setting;  although  Varro^ 
declares  that  the  mares,  in  Lusitania,  conceive 
by  the  wind.  For  zephyrus  was  held  a  fertilizing 
wind,  whence  its  name,  as  if  it  were  fa)??0€p6s, 
or  life- bringing.  So  that  Virgil  says: 

And  ZephyrtiSy  with  warming  breath  resolves 

The  bosom  of  the  ground,  and  melting  rains 

Are  poured  o'er  all,  and  every  field  brings 
forth. 

Hence  the  ancients,  when  with  this  wind  blow¬ 
ing  in  the  spring  season,  they  saw  their  hens  be¬ 
gin  laying,  without  the  concurrence  of  the  cock, 
conceived  that  zephyrus,  or  the  west  wind,  was 
the  author  of  their  fecundity.  There  are  also 
what  are  called  addle,  and  dog-day  eggs,  pro¬ 
duced  by  interrupted  incubation,  and  so  called 
because  eggs  often  rot  in  the  dog-days,  being 
deserted  by  the  hens  in  consequence  of  the  ex¬ 
cessive  heat;  and  also  because  at  this  season  oi 
the  year  thunder  is  frequent;  and  Aristotle^  as¬ 
serts  that  eggs  die  if  it  thunders  whilst  the  hen 
is  sitting. 

Those  eggs  are  regarded  as  prolific,  which,  no 
unfavorable  circumstances  intervening,  under 
the  influence  of  a  gentle  heat,  produce  chicks. 
And  this  they  will  do,  not  merely  through  the 
incubation  of  the  mother,  but  of  any  other 
bird,  if  it  be  but  of  sufficient  size  to  cherish 
and  cover  them,  or  by  a  gentle  temperature  ob¬ 
tained  in  any  way  whatever.  “Eggs  are  hatched 
with  the  same  celerity,”  says  Aristotle,  ‘‘spon¬ 
taneously  in  the  ground,  as  by  incubation. 
Wherefore  in  Egypt,  it  is  the  custom  to  bury 
them  in  dung,  covered  with  earth.  And  there 
was  a  tale  in  Syracuse,  of  a  drunken  fellow,  who 
was  accustomed  to  continue  his  potations  un¬ 
til  a  number  of  eggs,  placed  under  a  mat  be¬ 
strewed  with  earth,  were  hatched.”^  The  ern- 
press  Livia,  is  also  said  to  have  carried  an  egg  in 
her  bosom  until  a  chick  was  produced  from  it. 
And  in  Egypt,  and  other  countries,  at  the  pres¬ 
ent  time,  chickens  are  reared  from  eggs  placed 
in  ovens.  “The  egg,  therefore,”  as  Fabricius 
truly  says,  “is  not  only  the  uterus,  and  place 
where  the  generation  of  the  chick  proceeds, 
but  it  is  that  upon  which  its  whole  formation 
depends;  and  this  the  egg  accomplishes  as 
agent,  as  matter,  as  instrument,  as  place,  and  as 
all  else  that  concurs.”^ 

For  it  is  certain  that  the  chick  is  formed  by  a 

^  De  re  rust.,  ii.  i. 

^  History  of  Animals,  vi,  2;  Pliny,  Hist,  nat.,  x.  54. 

8  Ibid. 

4  Op.  cit.,  p.  19. 


principle  inherent  in  the  egg,  and  that  nothing 
accrues  to  a  perfect  egg  from  incubation,  be¬ 
yond  the  warmth  and  protection;  in  the  same 
way  as  to  the  chick  when  disclosed,  the  hen 
gives  nothing  more  than  her  warmth  and  her 
care,  by  which  she  defends  it  from  the  cold  and 
from  injury,  and  directs  it  to  its  proper  food. 
The  grand  desideratum,  therefore,  once  the 
chickens  are  hatched,  is  that  the  hen  lead  them 
about,  seek  for  and  supply  them  with  proper 
food,  and  cherish  them  under  her  wings.  And 
this  you  will  not  easily  supply  by  any  kind  of 
artifice. 

Capons,  and  hybrids  between  the  common 
fowl  and  the  pheasant,  produced  in  our  aviaries, 
will  incubate  and  hatch  a  set  of  eggs;  but  they 
never  know  how  to  take  care  of  the  brood — to 
lead  them  about  properly,  and  to  provide  with 
adequate  care  for  their  nurture. 

And  here  I  would  pause  for  a  moment  (for  I 
mean  to  treat  of  the  matter  more  fully  by  and 
by)  to  express  my  admiration  of  the  persever¬ 
ance  and  patience  with  which  the  females  of  al¬ 
most  every  species  of  bird  sit  upon  the  nest  for 
so  many  days  and  nights  incessantly,  macerat¬ 
ing  their  bodies,  and  almost  destroying  them¬ 
selves  from  want  of  food;  what  dangers  they 
will  face  in  defence  of  their  eggs,  and  when 
compelled  to  quit  them  for  ever  so  short  a 
time,  through  necessity,  with  what  eagerness 
and  haste  they  return  to  them  again,  and  brood 
over  them!  Ducks  and  geese,  when  they  quit 
the  nest  for  a  few  minutes,  cover  and  conceal  it 
with  straw.  With  what  true  magnanimity  do 
these  ill-furnished  mothers  defend  their  eggs! 
which,  after  all,  perhaps,  are  mere  wind  or 
addle  eggs,  or  not  their  own,  or  artificial  eggs  of 
chalk  or  ivory— it  is  still  the  same,  they  defend 
all  with  equal  courage.  It  is  truly  a  remarkable 
love  which  birds  display  for  inert  and  lifeless 
eggs;  and  their  solicitude  is  repaid  by  no  kind  of 
advantage  or  enjoyment.  Who  does  not  won¬ 
der  at  the  affection,  or  passion  rather,  of  the 
clucking  hen,  which  can  only  be  extinguished  by 
a  drenching  with  cold  water.  In  this  state  of  her 
feeling  she  neglects  everything,  her  wings  droop, 
her  feathers  are  unpruned  and  ruffled,  she  wan¬ 
ders  about  restless  and  dissatisfied,  disturbing 
other  hens  on  their  nests,  seeking  eggs  eve^- 
where,  which  she  commences  forthwith  to  in¬ 
cubate;  nor  will  she  be  at  peace  until  her  desire 
has  been  gratified,  until  she  has  a  brood  to  lead 
about  with  her,  upon  which  she  may  expend 
her  fervour,  which  she  may  cherish,  feed,  and 
defend.  How  pleasantly  are  we  moved  to  laugh¬ 
ter  when  we  see  the  poor  hen  following  to  the 


362  WILLIAM 

water  the  supposititious  brood  of  ducklings  she 
has  hatched,  wandering  restlessly  round  the  pool, 
attempting  to  wade  after  them  to  her  own  immi¬ 
nent  peril,  and  by  her  noises  and  various  artifices 
striving  to  entice  them  back  to  the  shore! 

According  to  Aristotle,^  barren  eggs  do  not 
produce  chicks  because  their  fluids  do  not 
thicken  under  incubation,  nor  is  the  yelk  or  the 
white  altered  from  its  original  constitution. 
But  we  shall  revert  to  this  subject  in  our  gen¬ 
eral  survey  of  generation. 

Our  housewives,  that  they  may  distinguish 
the  eggs  that  are  addled  from  those  that  will 
produce  chicks,  take  them  from  the  fourteenth 
to  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  incubation,  and 
drop  them  softly  into  tepid  water,  when  the 
spoilt  ones  sink,  whilst  the  fruitful  ones  swim.  If 
the  included  chick  be  well  forward,  and  moves 
about  with  alacrity,  the  egg  not  only  rolls  over 
but  even  dances  in  the  water.  And  if  you  apply 
the  egg  to  your  ear  for  several  days  before  the 
hatching,  you  may  hear  the  chick  within  kick¬ 
ing,  scratching,  and  even  chirping.  When  the 
hen  that  is  sitting  hears  these  noises,  she  turns 
the  eggs  and  lays  them  otherwise  than  they 
were,  until  the  chicks,  getting  into  a  comfort¬ 
able  position,  become  quiet;  even  as  watchful 
mothers  are  wont  to  treat  their  infants  when 
they  are  restless  and  cry  in  their  cradles. 

Hens  lay  eggs  in  variable  numbers:  “Some 
hens,”  says  the  philosopher,  “except  the  two 
winter  months,  lay  through  the  whole  year; 
some  of  the  better  breeds  will  lay  as  many  as 
sixty  eggs  before  they  show  a  disposition  to  sit; 
though  these  eggs  are  not  so  prolific  as  those  of 
the  commoner  kinds.  The  Adrianic  hens  are 
small,  and  lay  every  day,  but  they  are  ill-tem¬ 
pered,  and  often  kill  their  young  ones;  they  are 
particoloured  in  their  plumage.  Some  domestic 
fowls  will  even  lay  twice  a  day;  and  some,  by 
reason  of  their  great  fecundity,  die  young. 

In  England  some  of  the  hens  lay  every  day; 
but  the  more  prolific  commonly  lay  two  days 
continuously  and  then  miss  a  day:  the  first  day 
the  egg  is  laid  in  the  morning,  next  day  in  the 
afternoon,  and  the  third  day  there  is  a  pause. 
Some  hens  have  a  habit  of  breaking  their  eggs 
and  deserting  their  nests;  whether  this  be  from 
disease  or  vice  is  not  known. 

Certain  differences  may  also  be  observed  in 
the  incubation:  some  fowls  only  sit  once,  others 
twice,  or  thrice,  or  repeatedly.  Florentius  says 
that  in  Alexandria,  in  Egypt,  there  are  fowls 
called  monosires,  from  which  the  fighting  cocks 

^  History  of  Animals^  vi.  2. 

*  Jbid.y  VI.  I 


HARVEY 

are  descended,  which  go  on  sitting  for  two  or 
three  periods,  each  successive  brood  being  re¬ 
moved  as  it  is  hatched,  and  brought  up  apart. 
In  this  way  the  same  hen  will  hatch  forty,  sixty, 
and  even  a  greater  number  of  chickens,  at  a 
single  sitting. 

Some  eggs  too,  are  larger,  others  smaller;  a 
few  extremely  small;  these,  in  Italy,  are  com¬ 
monly  called  centenina;  and  our  country  folks 
still  believe  that  such  eggs  are  laid  by  the  cock, 
and  that  were  they  set  they  would  produce 
basilisks.  “The  vulgar,”  says  Fabricius,  “think 
that  this  small  egg  is  the  last  that  will  be  laid, 
and  that  it  comes  as  the  hundredth  in  number, 
whence  the  name;  that  it  has  no  yelk,  though 
all  the  other  parts  are  present — the  chalazse,  the 
albumen,  the  membranes,  and  the  shell.  And  it 
seems  probable  that  it  is  produced  when  all  the 
other  yelks  have  been  fashioned  into  eggs,  and 
no  more  remain  in  the  vitellary;  on  the  other 
hand,  however,  a  modicum  of  albumen  remains, 
and  out  of  this,  it  may  be  inferred,  is  the  small 
egg  in  question  produced.”^  To  me,  neverthe¬ 
less,  this  does  not  appear  likely;  because  it  is 
certain  that  the  whole  ovary  being  removed, 
the  uterus  secundus  also  diminishes  in  size  in 
the  same  proportion,  and  shrinks  into  a  mere 
membrane,  which  contains  neither  any  fluid 
nor  any  albumen.  Fabricius  proceeds:  “The  ova 
centenina  are  met  with  of  two  kinds:  one  of 
them  being  without  a  yelk,  and  this  is  the  true 
centenine  egg,  because  it  is  the  last  which  the 
hen  will  lay  at  that  particular  season — she  will 
now  cease  from  laying  for  a  time.  The  other  is 
also  a  small  egg,  but  it  has  a  yelk,  and  will  not 
prove  the  last  which  the  hen  will  then  lay,  but 
is  intermediate  between  those  of  the  usual  size 
that  have  preceded,  and  others  that  will  follow. 
It  is  of  small  size  because  there  has  been  a  failure 
of  the  vegetative  function,  as  happens  to  the 
peach,  and  other  fruit,  of  which  we  see  many  of 
adequate  size,  but  a  few  that  are  very  diminu¬ 
tive.”  This  may  be  in  consequence  of  the  in¬ 
clemency  of  the  weather,  or  the  want  of  sun,  or 
from  defective  nutriment  in  point  either  of 
quantity  or  quality.  I  should  not  readily  allow, 
however,  that  the  eggs  last  laid  are  always  small. 

Monstrous  eggs  are  not  wanting;  “for  the 
augurs,”  says  Aristotle,  “held  it  portentous 
when  eggs  were  laid  that  were  all  yellow;  or 
when,  on  a  fowl  being  laid  open,  eggs  were 
found  under  the  septum  transversum,  where 
the  rudimentary  eggs  of  the  female  usually  ap¬ 
pear,  of  the  magnitude  of  perfect  eggs.”^ 

3  Op.  cit.,  p.  10. 

^  Aidrovandiis,  Ornithoh^icay  xiv,  p.  260. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  363 


To  this  head  may  be  referred  those  eggs  that 
produce  twins,  that  have  two  yelks.  Such  an 
egg  I  lately  found  in  the  uterus  of  a  fowl,  per- 
feet  in  all  respects,  and  covered  with  a  shell; 
the  yelks,  cicatriculae,  and  thicker  albuminous 
portions  being  all  double,  and  the  chalazae  pres¬ 
ent  in  two  pairs:  a  single  thinner  albumen,  how¬ 
ever,  surrounded  all  these,  and  this  in  its  turn 
was  included  within  the  usual  double  common 
membrane,  and  single  shell.  For,  indeed,  al¬ 
though  Aristotle  says  that  fowls  always  lay 
some  eggs  of  this  kind,  I  shall  hardly  be  induced 
to  believe  that  this  does  not  occur  against  the 
ordinary  course  of  nature.  And  although  twin 
chicks  are  produced  from  such  eggs  as  I  have  as¬ 
certained  in  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  Fab- 
ricius,  who  says  that  they  produce  chicks  hav¬ 
ing  four  legs,  or  four  wings  and  two  heads, 
which,  however,  are  not  capable  of  living,  but 
for  the  most  part  speedily  die,  either  by  reason 
of  w  ant  of  room  or  of  air  in  the  shell,  or  because 
the  one  proves  a  hinderance  to  the  other  and 
blights  it;  nor  can  it  happen  that  both  should  be 
equally  prepared  for  exclusion — that  one  should 
not  prove  an  abortion. 

Briefly  and  summarily  the  differences  among 
eggs  are  principally  of  three  kinds:  some  are 
prolific,  some  unprolific;  some  will  produce 
males  and  some  females;  some  are  the  produce 
of  the  two  sexes  of  the  same  species,  others  of 
allied  species  and  will  produce  hybrids,  such  as 
we  see  between  the  common  hen  and  the  pheas¬ 
ant,  the  progeny  being  referrible  either  to  the 
first  or  to  the  last  male  that  had  connexion 
with  the  hen.  Because,  according  to  Aristotle, 
“the  egg,  which  receives  its  constitution  by  in¬ 
tercourse,  passes  from  its  own  into  another 
genus,  if  the  hen  be  trodden  when  she  carries 
either  an  adventitious  egg  or  one  that  was  con¬ 
ceived  under  the  influence  of  another  male,  and 
this  renewed  intercourse  take  place  before  the 
yellow  is  changed  into  the  white.  So  that  hy- 
penemic  or  wind  eggs  are  made  fruitful,  and 
fruitful  eggs  receive  the  form  of  the  male  which 
has  connexion  last.  But  if  the  change  has  taken 
place  into  the  white,  it  cannot  happen  either 
that  the  wind  ogg  is  turned  into  a  fertile  one,  or 
that  the  egg  which  is  contained  in  the  uterus  in 
virtue  of  a  previous  intercourse,  shall  be  altered 
into  the  genus  of  the  male  which  has  the  second 
communication.”^  For  the  seminal  fluid  of  the 
cock,  as  Scaliger  wittily  remarks,  is  like  a  testa¬ 
ment,  the  last  will  or  disposition  in  w  hich  is  that 
W'hich  stands  in  force. 

To  these  particulars  it  might  perhaps  be  add- 

^  History  of  Animals  y  vi,  2i. 


ed,  that  some  eggs  are  more  strong  and  lusty 
than  others,  more  full  of  life,  if  the  expression 
may  be  used ;  though  as  there  is  a  vital  principle 
in  the  egg,  so  must  there  inhere  the  correspond¬ 
ing  virtue  that  flows  from  it.  For,  as  in  other 
kinds  of  animals,  some  of  the  females  are  so  re¬ 
plete  with  desire,  so  full  of  Venus,  that  they 
conceive  from  any  and  every  intercourse,  even 
once  submitted  to,  and  from  a  weakly  male, 
•and  produce  several  young  from  the  same  em¬ 
brace;  others,  on  the  contrary,  are  so  torpid  and 
sluggish,  that  unless  they  are  assailed  by  a  vig¬ 
orous  male,  under  the  influence  of  strong  desire, 
and  that  not  once,  but  repeatedly,  and  for 
a  certain  time,  they  continue  barren.  This  is 
also  the  case  with  eggs,  some  of  which,  though 
they  may  have  been  conceived  in  consequence 
of  intercourse,  still  remain  unprolific  unless  per¬ 
fected  by  repeated  and  continued  connexions. 
Whence  it  happens  that  some  eggs  are  more 
speedily  changed  by  incubation  than  others, 
exhibiting  traces  of  the  foetus  from  the  third 
day;  others  again,  either  become  spoiled,  or  suf¬ 
fer  transformation  into  the  foetus  more  slowly, 
exhibiting  no  indications  of  the  future  chick 
even  up  to  the  seventh  day,  as  shall  be  made  to 
appear  by  and  by,  in  speaking  of  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  the  chick  from  the  egg. 

Thus  far  have  we  discoursed  of  the  uterus  of 
the  fowl,  and  its  function;  of  the  production  of 
the  hen’s  egg,  and  of  its  differences  and  peculi¬ 
arities,  from  immediate  observation;  and  from 
the  instances  quoted,  conclusions  may  be  drawn 
with  reference  to  other  oviparous  animals. 

We  have  now  to  pursue  the  history  of  the 
generation  and  formation  of  the  foetus  from  the 
egg.  For  indeed,  as  I  have  said  above,  the  en¬ 
tire  contemplation  of  the  family  of  birds  is 
comprehended  in  these  two  propositions:  how 
is  an  egg  engendered  of  a  male  and  female;  and 
by  what  process  do  males  and  females  proceed 
from  eggs.? — the  circle  by  which,  under  favour 
of  nature,  their  kinds  are  continued  to  eternity. 

EXERCISE  14.  O/*  the  production  of  the  chic\from 
the  egg  of  the  hen 

Of  the  growth  and  generation  of  the  hen’s 
egg  enough  has  already  been  said ;  and  we  have 
now  to  lay  before  the  reader  our  observations 
on  the  procreation  of  the  chick  from  the  egg— a 
duty  which  is  equally  difficult,  and  profitable, 
and  pleasant.  For  in  general  the  first  processes 
of  nature  lie  hid,  as  it  were,  in  the  depths  of 
night,  and  by  reason  of  their  subtlety  escape 
the  keenest  reason  no  less  than  the  most  pierc¬ 
ing  eye. 


364  WILLIAM 

Nor  in  truth  is  it  a  much  less  arduous  busi¬ 
ness  to  investigate  the  intimate  mysteries  and 
obscure  beginnings  of  generation  than  to  seek 
to  discover  the  frame  of  the  world  at  large,  and 
the  manner  of  its  creation.  The  eternity  of 
things  is  connected  with  the  reciprocal  inter¬ 
change  of  generation  and  decay;  and  as  the  sun, 
now  in  the  east  and  then  in  the  west,  completes 
the  measure  of  time  by  his  ceaseless  revolu¬ 
tions,  so  are  the  fleeting  things  of  mortal  exis¬ 
tence  made  eternal  through  incessant  change, 
and  kinds  and  species  are  perpetuated  though 
individuals  die. 

The  writers  who  have  treated  of  this  subject 
have  almost  all  taken  different  paths;  but  hav¬ 
ing  their  minds  preoccupied,  they  have  hither¬ 
to  gone  to  work  to  frame  conclusions  in  con¬ 
sonance  with  the  particular  views  they  had 
adopted. 

Aristotle,^  among  the  ancients,  and 
Hieronymus  Fabricius  of  Aquapendente, 
among  the  moderns,  have  written  with  so  much 
accuracy  on  the  generation  and  formation  of 
the  chick  from  the  egg  that  little  seems  left  for 
others  to  do.  Ulyssus  Aldrovandus,^  neverthe¬ 
less,  described  the  formation  of  the  chick  in  ovo; 
but  he  appears  rather  to  have  gone  by  the 
guidance  of  Aristotle  than  to  have  relied  on  his 
own  experience.  For:Volcherus  Goiter,  living 
at  this  time  in  Bologna,  and  encouraged,  as  he 
tells  us,  by  Aldrovandus,  his  master,  opened  in¬ 
cubated  eggs  every  day,  and  illustrated  many 
points  besides  those  noted  by  Aldrovandus;^ 
these  discoveries,  however,  could  scarcely  have' 
remained  unknown  to  Aldrovandus.  yFmilius 
Parisanus,  a  Venetian  physician,  having  dis¬ 
carded  the  opinions  of  others,  has  also  given  a 
new  account  of  the  formation  of  the  chick  from 
the  egg. 

But  since  our  observations  lead  us  to  con¬ 
clude  that  many  things  of  great  consequence 
are  very  different  from  what  they  have  hither¬ 
to  been  held  to  be,  I  shall  myself  give  an  ac¬ 
count  of  what  goes  on  in  the  egg  from  day  to 
day,  and  what  parts  are  there  transmuted,  di¬ 
recting  my  attention  to  the  first  days  espe¬ 
cially,  when  all  is  most  obscure  and  confused, 
and  difficult  of  observation,  and  in  reference  to 
which  writers  have  more  particularly  drawn 
the  sword  against  one  another  in  defence  of 
their  several  discordant  observations,  which,  in 
sooth,  they  accommodate  rather  to  their  pre¬ 
conceived  opinions  respecting  the  material  and 

^  History  of  Animals^  vi.  2,  3. 

^  Omithol.y  XIV. 

3  Nobil.  exercit.y  vi. 


HARVEY 

efficient  cause  of  animal  generation  than  to 
simple  truth. 

What  Aristotle  says  on  the  subject  of  the  re¬ 
production  of  the  chick  in  ovo  is  perfectly  cor¬ 
rect.  Nevertheless,  as  if  he  had  not  himself  seen 
the  things  he  describes,  but  received  them  at 
second  hand  from  another  expert  observer,  he 
does  not  give  the  periods  rightly;  and  then  he  is 
grievously  mistaken  in  respect  of  the  place  in 
which  the  first  rudiments  of  the  egg  are  fash¬ 
ioned,  stating  this  to  be  the  sharp  end,  for 
which  he  is  fairly  challenged  by  Fabricius.  Nei¬ 
ther  does  he  appear  to  have  observed  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  chick  in  the  egg;  nor  could 
he  have  found  the  things  which  he  says  are  nec¬ 
essary  to  all  generation  in  the  place  which  he 
assigns  them.  He  will,  for  instance,  have  it  that 
the  white  is  the  constituent  matter  (since  noth¬ 
ing  naturally  can  by  possibility  be  produced 
from  nothing).  And  he  did  not  sufficiently  un¬ 
derstand  how  the  efficient  cause  (the  seminal 
fluid  of  the  cock)  acted  without  contact;  nor 
how  the  egg  could,  of  its  own  accord,  without 
any  inherent  generative  matter  of  the  male, 
produce  a  chick. 

Aldrovandus,  adopting  an  error  akin  to  that 
of  Aristotle,  says  besides,  that  the  yelk  rises  dur¬ 
ing  the  first  days  of  the  incubation  into  the 
sharp  end  of  the  egg,  a  proposition  which  no 
eyes  but  those  of  the  blind  would  assent  to;  he 
thinks  also  that  the  chalazae  are  the  semen  of 
the  cock,  and  that  the  chick  arises  from  them, 
though  it  is  nourished  both  by  the  yelk  and  the 
white.  In  this  he  is  obviously  in  opposition  to 
Aristotle,  who  held  that  the  chalazse  con^ 
tributed  nothing  to  the  reproductive  powers 
of  the  egg. 

Volcherus  Goiter  is,  on  the  whole,  much 
more  correct;  and  his  statements  are  far  more 
consonant  with  what  the  eye  perceives.  But  his 
tale  of  the  three  globules  is  a  fable.  Neither  did 
he  rightly  perceive  the  true  commencement  of 
the  chick  in  ovo, 

Hieronymus  Fabricius  contends  that  the 
chalazse  are  not  the  sperma  of  the  cock;  but 
then  he  will  have  it  that  “from  these,  fecundat¬ 
ed  by  the  seminal  fluid  of  the  cock,  as  from  the 
appropriate  matter,  the  chick  is  incorporated.” 
Fabricius  observed  the  point  of  origin  of  the 
chick,  the  spot  or  cicatricula,  namely,  which 
presents  itself  upon  the  tunica  propria  of  the 
yelk;  but  he  regarded  it  as  a  cicatrice  or  scar 
left  on  the  place  where  the  peduncle  had  been 
attached;  he  viewed  it  as  a  blemish  in  the  egg,’ 
not  as  any  important  part. 

Parisanus  completely  refutes  Fabricius’ 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  365 


ideas  of  the  chalazae;  but  he  himself  obviously 
raves  when  he  speaks  of  certain  circles,  and 
principal  parts  of  the  foetus,  viz,^  the  liver  and 
heart.  He  appears  to  have  observed  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  foetus  in  ovo;  but  what  it  was 
he  obviously  did  not  know,  when  he  says, 
“that  the  white  point  in  the  middle  of  the  cir¬ 
cles  is  the  semen  of  the  cock,  from  which  the 
chick  is  produced.” 

Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  everyone,  in  ad¬ 
ducing  reasons  for  the  formation  of  the  chick 
in  ovo^  in  accordance  with  preconceived  opin¬ 
ions,  has  wandered  from  the  truth.  Some  will 
have  it  that  the  semen  or  the  blood  is  the  mat¬ 
ter  whence  the  chick  is  engendered;  others, 
that  the  semen  is  the  agent  or  efficient  cause  of 
its  formation.  Yet  to  him  who  dispassionately 
views  the  question  is  it  quite  certain  that  there 
is  no  prepared  matter  present,  nor  any  menstru- 
ous  blood  to  be  coagulated  at  the  time  of  inter¬ 
course  by  the  semen  masculinum,  as  Aristotle 
will  have  it;  neither  does  the  chick  originate  in 
the  egg  from  the  seed  of  the  male,  nor  from  that 
of  the  female,  nor  from  the  two  commingled. 

EXERCISE  15.  The  first  examination  of  the  egg; 

or  of  the  effect  of  the  first  day's  incubation  upon 

the  egg 

That  we  may  be  the  more  clearly  informed 
of  the  effect  which  the  first  day’s  incubation 
produces  upon  the  egg,  we  must  set  out  by  as¬ 
certaining  what  changes  take  place  in  an  egg 
spontaneously,  changes  that  distinguish  a  stale 
egg  from  one  that  is  new-laid,  when  what  is  due 
to  the  incubation  per  se  will  first  be  clearly 
apprehended. 

The  space  or  cavity  in  the  blunt  end  is  pres¬ 
ent,  as  we  have  said,  in  every  egg;  but  the 
staler  the  egg  the  larger  does  this  hollow  con¬ 
tinually  grow;  and  this  is  more  especially  the 
case  when  eggs  are  kept  in  a  warm  place,  or 
when  the  weather  is  hot;  the  effect  being  due 
to  the  exhalation  of  a  certain  portion  of  the 
thinner  albumen,  as  has  been  stated  in  the  his¬ 
tory  of  the  egg.  This  cavity,  as  it  increases,  ex¬ 
tends  rather  in  the  line  of  the  length  than  of 
the  breadth  of  the  egg,  and  comes  finally  to  be 
no  longer  orbicular. 

The  shell,  already  less  transparent,  becomes 
dingy. 

The  albumen  grows  thicker  and  more  viscid, 
and  acquires  a  straw  or  yellow  colour. 

The  tunica  propria  of  the  vitellus  becomes 
more  lax,  and  appears  wrinkled,  for  it  seems 
that  some  even  of  this  fluid  is  dissipated  in  the 
course  of  time. 


The  chalazae  are  found  in  either  end  of  every 
egg,  in  the  same  situation,  and  having  the  same 
consistence — whether  the  egg  be  recent  or  stale, 
fruitful  or  barren,  it  does  not  signify;  by  their 
means  a  firm  connexion  is  established  between 
the  yelk  and  the  white,  and  the  two  fluids  pre¬ 
serve  their  relative  positions.  The  chalazae,  in¬ 
deed,  are  two  mutually  opposed  supports  or 
poles,  and  hinges  of  this  microcosm;  and  are 
constructed  as  if  made  up  of  numerous  coats  of 
the  albumen,  twisted  togetherat  eitherend  into 
a  knotted  rope,  by  which  they  are  attached  to 
the  vitellus.  And  hence  it  happens  that  the 
yelk  is  separated  from  the  white  with  difficulty, 
unless  the  chalazae  are  either  first  divided  with 
a  knife  or  torn  with  the  fingers;  this  done,  the 
white  immediately  falls  away  from  the  yelk.  It 
is  by  means  of  these  hinges  that  the  vitellus  is 
both  retained  in  the  centre  of  the  egg  and  pre¬ 
served  of  its  proper  consistence.  And  they  are 
so  connected  that  the  principal  part,  the  cicatri- 
cula,  to  wit,  always  regards  the  same  region  of 
the  egg,  or  its  upper  part,  and  is  preserved  equi¬ 
distant  from  either  end.  For  this  spot  or  cica- 
tricula  is  observed  to  be  of  the  same  consistence, 
dimensions,  and  colour,  and  in  the  same  situa¬ 
tion  in  the  stale  as  in  the  new-laid  egg.  But  as 
soon  as  the  egg,  under  the  influence  of  the  gen¬ 
tle  warmth  of  the  incubating  hen,  or  of  warmth 
derived  from  another  source,  begins  topullulate, 
this  spot  forthwith  dilates,  and  expands  like  the 
pupil  of  the  eye,  and  from  thence,  as  the  grand 
centre  of  the  egg,  the  latent  plastic  force  breaks 
forth  and  germinates.  This  first  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  chick,  however,  so  far  as  I  am 
aware,  has  not  yet  been  observed  by  any  one. 

On  the  second  day  of  the  incubation,  after 
the  egg  has  been  exposed  to  warmth  for  twen¬ 
ty-four  hours,  under  the  hen,  as  the  cavity  in 
the  blunt  end  has  enlarged  greatly  and  de¬ 
scended,  so  has  the  internal  constitution  of  the 
egg  also  begun  to  be  changed.  The  yelk,  which 
had  hitherto  lain  in  the  middle  of  the  albumen, 
rises  towards  the  blunt  end,  and  its  middle, 
where  the  cicatricula  is  situated,  is  lifted  up 
and  applied  to  the  membrane  that  bounds  the 
empty  space,  so  that  the  yelk  now  appears  to 
be  connected  with  the  cavity  by  means  of  the 
cicatricula;  and  in  the  same  measure  as  the  yelk 
rises  does  the  thicker  portion  of  the  albumen 
sink  into  the  sharp  or  lower  end  of  the  egg. 
Whence  it  appears,  as  Fabricius  rightly  re¬ 
marks,  that  Aristotle^  was  either  in  error,  or 
that  there  is  a  mistake  in  the  codex,  when  it  is 
said,  “In  this  time”  {viz,,  between  three  and 

^  History  of  Animals,  vi.  3. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


366 

four  days,  and  as  many  nights),  “the  yelk  is 
brought  to  the  summit,  where  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  egg  is,  and  the  egg  is  exposed  in  this 
part,”  /.  e.y  under  the  enlarged  empty  space. 
Now  Aristotle*  calls  the  principium  ovi,  or 
commencement  of  the  egg,  its  smaller  end, 
which  is  last  extruded.  But  it  is  certain  that  the 
yelk  ascends  towards  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg, 
and  that  the  cavity  there  enlarges.  And  Aldro- 
vandus  is  undoubtedly  in  error  when  he  speaks 
as  if  he  had  experience  of  the  fact,  and  says  that 
the  yelk  rises  to  the  sharp  end.  I  will  confess, 
nevertheless,  that  on  the  second  or  third  day  I 
have  occasionally  observed  the  cicatricula  ex¬ 
panded  and  the  beginning  of  the  chick  already 
laid,  the  yelk  not  having  yet  risen;  this,  how¬ 
ever,  happens  rarely,  and  I  am  inclined  to  as¬ 
cribe  it  to  some  weakness  in  the  egg. 

On  the  second  day  of  the  incubation,  or  first 
day  of  inspection,  the  cicatricula  in  question  is 
found  to  have  enlarged  to  the  dimensions 
of  a  pea  or  lentil,  and  is  divided  into  circles, 
such  as  might  be  drawn  with  a  pair  of  com¬ 
passes,  having  an  extremely  minute  point  for 
their  centre.  It  is  very  probable  that  Aldrovan- 
dus  observed  this  spot,  for  he  says:  “In  the 
midst  of  the  yellow  a  certain  whitish  something 
makes  its  appearance,  which  was  not  noticed  by 
Aristotle”;  and  also  by  Goiter,  when  he  ex¬ 
presses  himself  thus:  “On  the  second  day  there 
is  in  the  middle  of  the  yelk  a  part  whiter  than 
the  rest”;  Parisanus,  too,  may  have  seen  it;  he 
observes:  “In  the  course  of  the  second  day  I  ob¬ 
serve  a  white  body  of  the  size  and  form  of  a 
middling  lentil;  and  this  is  the  semen  of  the 
cock  covered  over  with  a  white  and  most  deli¬ 
cate  tunic,  which  underlies  the  two  common 
membranes  of  the  entire  egg,  but  overlies  the 
tunica  propria  of  the  yelk.”  I  believe,  however, 
that  no  one  has  yet  said  that  this  cicatricula 
occurs  in  every  egg,  or  has  acknowledged  it  to 
be  the  origin  of  the  chick. 

Meantime  the  chalazae  or  treadles  will  be  seen 
to  decline  from  either  end  of  the  egg  towards 
its  sides,  this  being  occasioned  by  that  altera¬ 
tion  which  we  have  noticed  in  the  relative  sit¬ 
uations  of  the  two  fluids.  The  treadle  from  the 
blunt  end  descends  somewhat;  the  one  from  the 
sharp  end  rises  in  the  same  proportion:  as  in  a 
globe  whose  axis  is  set  obliquely,  one  pole  is  as 
much  depressed  below  the  horizon  as  the  other 
is  raised  above  it. 

The  vitellus,  too,  particularly  in  the  situa¬ 
tion  of  the  cicatricula,  begins  to  grow  a  little 
more  diffluent  than  it  was,  and  raises  its  tunica 

^  Ibid.y  111.  2. 


propria  (which  we  have  found  in  stale  eggs 
before  incubation  to  be  somewhat  lax  and 
wrinkled)  into  a  tumour;  and  it  now  appears 
to  have  recovered  the  same  colour,  consist¬ 
ency,  and  sweetness  of  taste  that  it  had  in  the 
egg  just  laid. 

Such  is  the  process  in  the  course  of  the  first 
day  that  leads  to  the  production  of  a  new  be¬ 
ing,  such  the  earliest  trace  of  the  future  chick. 
Aldrovandus  adds:  “the  albumen  suffers  no 
change,”  which  is  correct;  but  when  he  asserts 
that  “the  semen  of  the  cock  can  be  seen  in  it,” 
he  as  manifestly  errs.  Resting  on  a  most  insuf¬ 
ficient  reason,  he  thought  that  the  chalazae 
were  the  semen  of  the  cock,  “because,”  for¬ 
sooth,  “the  eggs  that  are  without  chalazae  are 
unfruitful.”  This  I  can  very  well  believe;  for 
these  were  then  no  proper  eggs;  for  all  eggs, 
wind  eggs  as  well  as  those  that  are  prolific,  have 
chalazae.  But  he,  misled  perhaps  by  the  coun¬ 
try  women,  who  in  Italian  call  the  chalazae 
galladura,  fell  into  the  vulgar  error.  Nor  is  Hier¬ 
onymus  Fabricius  guilty  of  a  less  grave  mistake 
when  he  exhibits  the  formation  of  the  chick  in 
a  series  of  engravings,  and  contends  that  it  is 
produced  from  the  chalazae;  overlooking  the 
fact  that  the  chalazae  are  present  the  whole  of 
the  time,  and  unchanged,  though  they  have 
shifted  their  places;  and  that  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  chick  is  to  be  sought  for  at  a 
distance  from  them. 

EXERCISE  16.  Second  inspection  of  the  egg 

The  second  day  gone  by,  the  circles  of  the 
cicatricula  that  have  been  mentioned,  have  be¬ 
come  larger  and  more  conspicuous,  and  may 
now  be  of  the  size  of  the  nail  of  the  ring-finger, 
sometimes  even  of  that  of  the  middle  finger.  By 
these  rings  the  whole  cicatricula  is  indistinctly 
divided  into  two,  occasionally  into  three  re¬ 
gions,  which  are  frequently  of  different  colours, 
and  bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  cornea  of 
the  eye,  both  as  respects  dimensions,  a  certain 
degree  of  prominence,  and  the  presence  of  a 
transparent  and  limpid  fluid  included  within  it. 
The  centre  of  the  cicatricula  here  stands  for 
the  pupil;  but  it  is  occupied  with  a  certain 
white  speck,  and  appears  like  the  pupil  of  some 
small  bird’s  eye  obscured  by  a  suffusion  or  cat¬ 
aract,  as  it  is  called.  On  this  account  we  have 
called  the  entire  object  the  oculiim  ovi,  the  eye 
of  the  egg. 

Within  the  circles  of  the  cicatricula,  I  say, 
there  is  contained  a  quantity  of  perfectly  bright 
and  transparent  fluid,  even  purer  than  any  crys¬ 
talline  humour;  which,  if  it  be  viewed  trans- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  367 


versely  and  against  the  light,  the  whole  spot 
will  rather  appear  to  be  situated  in  the  albumen 
than  sunk  into  the  membrane  of  the  yelk,  as 
before:  it  presents  itself  as  a  portion  of  the  al¬ 
bumen  dissolved  and  clarified,  and  included 
within  a  most  delicate  tunica  propria.  Hence  I 
entitle  this  fluid  the  oculum  seu  colliquamentum 
album;  it  is  as  if  a  portion  of  the  albumen,  lique¬ 
fied  by  the  heat,  shone  apart  (which  it  does, 
unless  disturbed  by  being  shaken)  and  formed 
a  more  spirituous  and  better  digested  fluid,  sep¬ 
arated  from  the  rest  of  the  albumen  by  a  tunica 
propria,  and  situated  between  the  two  masses  of 
liquid,  the  yelk  and  the  albumen.  It  differs 
from  the  rest  of  the  albumen  by  its  clearness 
and  transparency,  as  the  water  of  a  pellucid 
spring  differs  from  that  of  a  stagnant  pool.  The 
tunic  which  surrounds  this  fluid  is  so  fragile  and 
delicate  that,  unless  the  egg  be  handled  with 
great  care,  it  is  apt  to  give  way,  when  the  pure 
spring  is  rendered  turbid  by  a  mixture  of  fluids. 

I  was  long  in  doubt  what  I  should  conclude  as 
to  this  clear  diffluent  fluid,  whether  I  should  re¬ 
gard  it  as  the  innate  heat,  or  radical  moisture; 
as  a  matter  prepared  for  the  future  foetus,  or  a 
perfectly-concocted  nourishment,  such  as  dew 
is  held  to  be  among  the  secondary  humours. 
For  it  is  certain,  as  shall  be  afterwards  shown, 
that  the  earliest  rudiments  of  the  foetus  are  cast 
in  its  middle,  that  from  this  the  chick  derives 
its  first  nutriment,  and  even  when  of  larger  size 
continues  to  live  amidst  it. 

This  solution,  therefore,  increases  rapidly  in 
quantity,  particularly  in  its  internal  region, 
which,  as  it  expands,  forces  out  and  obliterates 
the  external  regions.  This  change  is  effected  in 
the  course  of  a  single  day,  as  is  shown  in  the 
second  figure  of  Fabricius.  It  is  very  much  as  it 
is  with  the  eyes  of  those  animals  which  have  a 
very  ample  pupil,  and  see  better  by  night  than 
by  day,  such  as  owls,  cats,  and  others,  whose 
pupils  expand  very  much  in  the  dusk  and  dark, 
and,  on  the  contrary,  contract  excessively  in  a 
brilliant  light:  one  of  these  animals  being  taken 
quickly  from  a  light  into  a  shady  place,  the  pu¬ 
pil  is  seen  to  enlarge  in  such  wise  that  the  col¬ 
oured  ring,  called  the  iris,  is  very  much  dimin¬ 
ished  in  size,  and  indeed  almost  entirely  dis¬ 
appears. 

Parisanus,  falling  upon  these  regions,  is  gross¬ 
ly  mistaken  when  he  speaks  of  “a  honey-col¬ 
oured,  a  white,  a  gray,  and  another  white  cir¬ 
cle”;  and  says  that  “the  foetus  is  formed  from 
the  white  middle  point”  (which,  indeed,  ap¬ 
pears  in  these  regions),  and  that  “this  is  the  se¬ 
men  of  the  cock.”  That  he  may  exalt  himself  on 


a  more  notable  subtlety  he  continues:  “Before 
any  redness  is  apparent  in  the  body  of  the  foe¬ 
tus,  two  minute  vesicles  present  themselves  in 
it;  in  the  beginning,  however,  neither  of  them 
is  tinged  with  red”;  one  of  these  he  would  have 
us  receive  as  the  heart,  the  other  as  the  liver. 
But  in  truth  there  is  neither  any  vesicle  pres¬ 
ent  sooner  than  the  redness  of  the  blood  is  dis¬ 
closed;  nor  does  the  embryo  ever  suddenly  be¬ 
come  red  in  the  course  of  the  first  days  of  its 
existence;  nor  yet  does  any  of  these  vesicles 
present  us  with  a  trace  of  the  liver.  Both  of 
them  belong,  in  fact,  to  the  heart,  prefiguring 
its  ventricles  and  auricles,  and  palpitating,  as 
we  shall  afterwards  show,  they  respond  recip¬ 
rocally  by  their  systoles  and  diastoles. 

Aristotle  appears  to  have  known  this  dis¬ 
solved  fluid,  when  he  says:  “A  membrane,  too, 
marked  with  sanguineous  fibres,  surrounds  the 
white  fluid  at  this  time  (the  third  day),  arising 
from  those  orifices  of  the  veins.  Now  the 
philosopher  can  neither  be  supposed  by  the 
words  “white  fluid,”  to  refer  to  the  albumen  at 
large,  because  at  this  period  the  membrane  of 
the  white  is  not  yet  covered  with  veins;  it  is 
only  the  membrane  of  the  dissolved  fluid  which 
appears  with  a  few  branches  of  veins  distributed 
over  it  here  and  there.  And  because  he  says: 
“this  membrane,  too,”  as  if  he  understood  an¬ 
other  than  those  which  he  had  spoken  of  as  in¬ 
vesting  the  albumen  and  the  yelk  before  incu¬ 
bation,  and  designated  this  one  as  first  arising 
after  the  third  day,  and  from  the  orifices  of  the 
veins. 

Goiter  seems  also  to  have  known  of  this  dis¬ 
solved  fluid;  he  says:  “A  certain  portion  of  the 
albumen  acquiring  a  white  colour,  another  be¬ 
coming  thicker.”  The  fluid  in  question  is  sur¬ 
rounded  with  its  proper  membrane,  and  is  dis¬ 
tinct  and  separate  from  the  rest  of  the  albumen 
before  there  is  any  appearance  of  blood.  We 
shall  have  occasion,  by  and  by,  to  speak  of  the 
singular  importance  of  this  fluid  to  the  foetuses 
of  every  animal.  Whilst  they  float  in  it  they  are 
safe  from  succussion  and  contusion,  and  other 
external  injury  of  every  kind;  and  they,  more¬ 
over,  are  nourished  by  it.  I  once  showed  to  their 
Serene  Majesties  the  King  and  Queen,  an  em¬ 
bryo,  the  size  of  a  French- bean,  which  had  been 
taken  from  the  uterus  of  a  doe;  all  its  mem¬ 
branes  were  entire,  and  from  its  genital  organs 
we  could  readily  tell  that  it  was  a  male.  It  was, 
in  truth,  a  most  agreeable  natural  spectacle; 
the  embryo  perfect  and  elegant,  floating  in  this 
pure,  transparent,  and  crystalline  fluid,  in- 

*  History  of  Animals^  vi.  3. 


368  WILLIAM 

vested  with  its  pellucid  tunica  propria,  as  if  in  a 
glass  vessel  of  the  greatest  purity,  of  the  size  of 
a  pigeon’s  egg. 

EXERCISE  17,  The  third  inspection  of  the  egg 

Having  seen  the  second  process  or  prepara¬ 
tion  of  the  egg,  towards  the  production  of  the 
embryo  which  presents  itself  in  the  course  of 
the  third  day,  we  proceed  to  the  third  stage, 
which  falls  to  be  considered  after  the  lapse  of 
three  days  and  as  many  nights.  Aristotle  says: 
“Traces  of  generation  commence  in  the  egg 
of  the  hen  after  three  days  and  three  nights”;^ 
for  example,  on  Monday  morning,  if  in  the 
morning  of  the  preceding  Friday  the  egg  has 
been  put  under  the  hen.  This  stage  forms  the 
subject  of  the.  third  figure  in  Fabricius. 

If  the  inspection  of  the  egg  be  made  on  the 
fourth  day,  the  metamorphosis  is  still  greater, 
and  the  change  likewise  more  wonderful  and 
manifest  with  every  hour  in  the  course  of  the 
day.  It  is  in  this  interval  that  the  transition  is 
made  in  the  egg  from  the  life  of  the  plant  to 
the  life  of  the  animal.  For  now  the  margin  of 
the  diffluent  fluid  looks  red,  and  is  purpures- 
cent  with  a  sanguineous  line,  and  nearly  in  its 
centre  there  appears  a  leaping  point,  of  the 
colour  of  blood,  so  small  that  at  one  moment, 
when  it  contracts,  it  almost  entirely  escapes  the 
eye,  and  again,  when  it  dilates,  it  shows  like  the 
smallest  spark  of  fire.  Such  at  the  outset  is  ani¬ 
mal  life,  which  the  plastic  force  of  nature  puts 
in  motion  from  the  most  insignificant  begin-, 
nings! 

The  above  particulars  you  may  perceive  to¬ 
wards  the  close  of  the  third  day,  with  very 
great  attention,  and  under  favour  of  a  bright 
light  (as  of  the  sun),  or  with  the  assistance  of  a 
magnifying  glass.  Without  these  aids  you  would 
strain  your  eyes  in  vain,  so  slender  is  the  pur¬ 
ple  line,  so  slight  is  the  motion  of  the  palpitat¬ 
ing  point.  But  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourth 
day  you  may  readily,  and  at  its  close  most 
readily,  perceive  the  “palpitating  bloody  point, 
which  already  moves,”  says  Aristotle,  “like  an 
animal,  in  the  transparent  liquid  (which  I  call 
colliquamentum)\  and  from  this  point  two  vas¬ 
cular  branches  proceed,  full  of  blood,  in  a  wind¬ 
ing  course”  into  the  purpurescent  circle  and  the 
investing  membrane  of  the  resolved  liquid;  dis¬ 
tributing  in  their  progress  numerous  fibrous 
offshoots,  which  all  proceed  from  one  original, 
like  the  branches  and  twigs  of  a  tree  from  the 
same  stem.  Within  the  entering  angle  of  this 
root,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  resolved  liquid, 

1  Ibid, 


HARVEY 

is  placed  the  red  palpitating  point,  which  keeps 
order  and  rhythm  in  its  pulsations,  composed  of 
systoles  and  diastoles.  In  the  diastole,  when  it 
has  imbibed  a  larger  quantity  of  blood,  it  be¬ 
comes  enlarged,  and  starts  into  view;  in  the 
systole,  however,  subsiding  instantaneously  as 
if  convulsed  by  the  stroke,  and  expelling  the 
blood,  it  vanishes  from  view. 

Fabricius  depicts  this  palpitating  point  in  his 
third  figure;  and  mistakes  it — a  thing  which  is 
extraordinary — for  the  body  of  the  embryo;  as 
if  he  had  never  seen  it  leaping  or  pulsating,  or 
had  not  understood,  or  had  entirely  forgotten 
the  passage  in  Aristotle.  A  still  greater  subject 
of  amazement,  however,  is  his  total  want  of  so¬ 
licitude  about  his  chalazse  all  this  while,  al¬ 
though  he  had  declared  the  rudiments  of  the 
embryo  to  be  derived  from  them. 

Ulyssus  Aldrovandus,  writing  from  Bologna 
nearly  at  the  same  time,  says:  “There  appears 
in  the  albumen,  as  it  were,  a  minute  palpitating 
point,  which  The  Philosopher  declares  to  be  the 
heart.  And  I  have  unquestionably  seen  a  venous 
trunk  arising  from  this,  from  which  two  other 
branches  proceeded;  these  are  the  blood-ves¬ 
sels,  which  he  says  extend  to  either  investing 
membrane  of  the  yelk  and  white.  And  I  am 
myself  entirely  of  his  opinion,  and  believe  these 
to  be  veins,  and  pulsatile,  and  to  contain  a  purer 
kind  of  blood,  adapted  to  the  production  of  the 
principal  parts  of  the  body,  the  liver,  to  wit, 
the  lungs,  and  others  of  the  same  description. 
Both  of  the  vessels  in  question,  however,  are 
not  veins,  neither  do  they  both  pulsate;  but 
one  of  them  is  an  artery,  another  a  vein,  as  we 
shall  see  by  and  by,  when  we  shall  further  show 
that  these  passages  constitute  the  umbilical 
vessels  of  the  embryo. 

Volcher  Goiter  has  these  words:  “The  san¬ 
guineous  point  or  globule,  which  was  formerly 
found  in  the  yelk,  is  now  observed  more  in  the 
albumen,  and  pulsates  distinctly.”  He  says,  er¬ 
roneously,  “formerly  found  in  the  yelk”;  for 
the  point  discovered  in  the  vitellus  is  white, 
and  does  not  pulsate;  nor  does  the  sanguineous 
point  or  globe  appear  to  pulsate  at  the  end  of 
the  second  day  of  incubation.  But  the  point 
which  we  have  indicated  in  the  middle  of  the 
circle,  and  as  constituting  its  centre  in  connex¬ 
ion  with  the  vitellus,  disappears  before  that 
point  which  is  characterized  by  Aristotle  as  pal¬ 
pitating,  can  be  discerned;  or,  as  I  conceive, 
having  turned  red,  begins  to  pulsate.  For  both 
points  are  situated  in  the  centre  of  the  resolved 
fluid,  and  near  the  root  of  the  veins  which 

2  Ornithologia,  xiv,  p.  217. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


thence  arise;  but  they  are  never  seen  simultan¬ 
eously:  in  the  place  of  the  white  point  there  ap¬ 
pears  a  red  and  palpitating  point. 

That  portion  of  Goiter’s  sentence,  however, 
where  he  says:  “the  punctus  saliens  is  now  seen 
in  the  albumen  rather  than  in  the  yelk,”  is  per¬ 
fectly  accurate.  And,  indeed,  moved  by  these 
words,  I  have  inquired  whether  the  white  point 
in  question  is  turned  into  the  blood-red  point, 
inasmuch  as  both  are  nearly  of  the  same  size, 
and  both  make  their  appearance  in  the  same 
situation.  And  I  have,  indeed,  occasionally 
found  an  extremely  delicate  bright  purple  cir¬ 
cle  ending  near  the  ruddy  horizon  surrounding 
the  resolved  liquid,  in  the  centre  of  which  there 
was  the  white  point,  but  not  the  red  and  pul¬ 
sating  point  apparent;  for  I  have  never  ob¬ 
served  these  two  points  at  one  and  the  same 
time.  It  were  certainly  of  great  moment  to  de¬ 
termine:  whether  or  not  the  blood  was  extant 
before  the  pulse  and  whether  the  pulsating 
point  arose  from  the  veins,  or  the  veins  from 
the  pulsating  point  ? 

So  far  as  my  observations  enable  me  to  con¬ 
clude,  the  blood  has  seemed  to  go  before  the 
pulse.  This  conclusion  is  supported  by  the 
following  instance:  on  Wednesday  evening  I  set 
three  hen’s  eggs,  and  on  Saturday  evening, 
somewhat  before  the  same  hour,  I  found  these 
eggs  cold,  as  if  forsaken  by  the  hen:  having 
opened  one  of  them,  notwithstanding,  I  found 
the  rudiments  of  an  embryo,  viz.,  a  red  and 
sanguinolent  line  in  the  circumference;  and  in 
the  centre,  instead  of  a  pulsating  point,  a  white 
and  bloodless  point.  By  this  indication  I  saw 
that  the  hen  had  left  her  nest  no  long  time  be¬ 
fore;  wherefore,  catching  her,  and  shutting  her 
up  in  a  box,  I  kept  her  upon  the  two  remaining 
eggs,  and  several  others,  through  the  ensuing 
night.  Next  morning,  very  early,  both  of  the 
eggs  with  which  the  experiment  was  begun,  had 
revived,  and  in  the  centre  there  was  the  pul¬ 
sating  point,  much  smaller  than  the  white 
point,  from  which,  like  a  spark  darting  from  a 
cloud,  it  made  its  appearance  in  the  diastole;  it 
seemed  to  me,  therefore,  that  the  red  point 
emanated  from  the  white  point;  that  the  punc- 
tum  saliens  was  in  some  way  engendered  in  that 
white  point;  that  the  punctum  saliens,  the 
blood  being  already  extant,  was  either  origin¬ 
ally  there  produced,  or  there  began  to  move.  I 
have,  indeed,  repeatedly  seen  the  punctum  sa¬ 
liens  when  all  but  dead,  and  no  longer  giving 
any  signs  of  motion,  recover  its  pulsatile  move¬ 
ments  under  the  influence  of  renewed  warmth. 
In  the  order  of  generation,  then,  I  conceive  that 


369 

the  punctum  and  the  blood  first  exist,  and  that 
pulsation  only  occurs  subsequently. 

This  at  all  events  is  certain,  that  nothing 
whatever  of  the  future  foetus  is  apparent  on  this 
day,  save  and  except  certain  sanguineous  lines, 
the  punctum  saliens,  and  those  veins  that  all  pre¬ 
sent  themselves  as  emanating  from  a  single  trunk 
(as  this  itself  proceeds  from  the  punctum  sa¬ 
liens),  and  are  distributed  in  numerous  branches 
over  the  whole  of  the  colliquament  or  dissolved 
fluid.  These  vessels  afterwards  constitute  the 
umbilical  vessels,  by  means  of  which,  distri¬ 
buted  ^r  and  wide,  the  foetus  as  it  grows  ob¬ 
tains  its  nourishment  from  the  albumen  and 
vitellus.  You  have  a  striking  example  of  similar 
vessels  and  their  branchings  in  the  leaves  of 
trees,  the  whole  of  the  veins  of  which  arise  from 
the  peduncle  or  foot-stalk,  and  from  a  single 
trunk  are  distributed  to  the  rest  of  the  leaf. 

The  entire  including  membrane  of  the  colli¬ 
quament  traversed  by  blood-vessels,  corres¬ 
ponds  in  form  and  dimensions  with  the  two 
wings  of  a  moth;  and  this,  in  fact,  is  the  mem¬ 
brane  which  Aristotle  describes  as  “possessing 
sanguineous  fibres,  and  at  the  same  time  con¬ 
taining  a  limpid  fluid,  proceeding  from  those 
mouths  of  the  veins. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  fourth  day,  and  the 
beginning  of  the  fifth,  the  blood-red  point,  in¬ 
creased  into  a  small  and  most  delicate  vesicle,  is 
perceived  to  contain  blood  in  its  interior,  which 
it  propels  by  its  contractions,  and  receives  anew 
during  its  diastoles. 

Up  to  this  point  I  have  not  been  able  to  per¬ 
ceive  any  difference  in  the  vessels:  the  arteries 
are  not  distinguished  from  the  veins,  either  by 
their  coats  or  their  pulsations.  I  am  therefore  of 
opinion  that  all  the  vessels  may  be  spoken  of 
indifferently  under  the  name  of  veins,  or,  adopt¬ 
ing  Aristotle’s^  term,  of  venous  canals. 

“The  punctum  saliens,”  says  Aristotle,  “is 
already  possessed  of  spontaneous  motion,  like 
an  animal.”  Because  an  animal  is  distinguished 
from  that  which  is  none,  by  the  possession  of 
sense  and  motion.  When  this  point  begins  to 
move  for  the  first  time,  consequently,  we  say 
well  that  it  has  assumed  an  animal  nature;  the 
egg,  originally  imbued  with  a  vegetative  soul, 
now  becomes  endowed  in  addition  with  a  mo¬ 
tive  and  sensitive  force;  from  the  vegetable  it 
passes  into  the  animal;  and  at  the  same  time  the 
living  principle,  which  fashions  the  chick  from 
the  egg,  and  afterwards  gives  it  the  measure  of 
intelligence  it  manifests,  enters  into  the  em¬ 
bryo.  For,  from  the  actions  or  manifestations, 

^  Loc.  supra  ciu  ^  Ibid. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


370 

The  Philosopher^  concludes  demonstratively, 
that  the  faculties  or  powers  of  acting  are  inher¬ 
ent,  and  through  these  the  cause  and  principle 
of  life,  the  soul,  to  wit,  and  the  actions,  inas¬ 
much  as  manifestation  is  action. 

I  am  myself  further  satisfied  from  numerous 
experiments,  that  not  only  is  motion  inherent 
in  the  punctum  saliens,  which  indeed  no  one 
denies,  but  sensation  also.  For  on  any  the 
slightest  touch,  you  may  see  the  point  variously 
commoved,  and,  as  it  were,  irritated;  just  as 
sensitive  bodies  generally  give  indications  of 
their  proper  sensations  by  their  motions;  and, 
the  injury  being  repeated,  the  punctum  be¬ 
comes  excited  and  disturbed  in  the  rhythm  and 
order  of  its  pulsations.  Thus  do  we  conclude  that 
in  the  sensitive-plant,  and  in  zoophytes,  there  is 
inherent  sensibility,  because  when  touched  they 
contract,  as  if  they  felt  uncomfortable. 

I  have  seen,  I  repeat,  very  frequently,  and 
those  who  have  been  with  me  have  seen  this 
punctum,  when  touched  with  a  needle,  a  probe, 
or  a  finger,  and  even  when  exposed  to  a  higher 
temperature,  or  a  severer  cold,  or  subjected  to 
any  other  molesting  circumstance  or  thing, 
give  various  indications  of  sensibility,  in  the 
variety,  force,  and  frequency  of  its  pulsations. 
It  is  not  to  be  questioned,  therefore,  that  this 
punctum  lives,  moves,  and  feels  like  an  animal. 

An  egg,  moreover,  too  long  exposed  to  the 
colder  air,  the  punctum  saliens  beats  more 
slowly  and  languidly;  by  the  finger,  or  some 
other  warmth  being  applied,  it  forthwith  re¬ 
covers  its  powers.  And  further,  after  the  punc¬ 
tum  has  gradually  languished,  and,  replete  with 
blood,  has  even  ceased  from  all  kind  of  motion, 
or  other  indication  of  life,  still,  on  applying  my 
warm  finger,  in  no  longer  a  time  than  is  meas¬ 
ured  by  twenty  beats  of  my  pulse,  lo!  the  little 
heart  is  revivified,  erects  itself  anew,  and,  re¬ 
turning  from  Hades  as  it  were,  is  restored  to  its 
former  pulsations.  The  same  thing  happens 
through  heat  applied  in  any  other  way — that  of 
the  fire,  or  of  hot  water — as  has  been  proved  by 
myself  and  others  again  and  again;  so  that  it 
seemed  as  if  it  lay  in  our  power  to  deliver  the 
poor  heart  over  to  death,  or  to  recall  it  to  life 
at  our  will  and  pleasure. 

What  has  now  been  stated,  for  the  most  part 
comes  to  pass  on  the  fourth  day  from  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  incubation— I  say,  for  the 
most  part,  because  it  is  not  invariably  so,  inas¬ 
much  as  there  is  great  diversity  in  the  maturity 
of  eggs,  and  some  are  more  speedily  perfected 
than  others.  As  in  trees  laden  with  fruit,  some, 

^  On  the  Soul. 


more  forward  and  precocious,  falls  from  the 
branches,  and  some,  more  crude  and  immature, 
still  hangs  firmly  on  the  bough;  so  are  some  eggs 
less  forward  on  the  fifth  day  than  others  in  the 
course  of  the  third.  This,  that  I  might  give  it 
forth  as  a  thing  attested  and  certain,  I  have  re¬ 
peatedly  ascertained  in  numerous  eggs,  incu¬ 
bated  for  the  same  length  of  time,  and  opened 
on  the  same  day.  Nor  can  I  ascribe  it  to  any  dif¬ 
ference  of  sex,  or  inclemency  of  weather,  or 
neglect  of  incubation,  or  to  any  other  cause  but 
an  inherent  weakness  of  the  egg  itself,  or  some 
deficiency  of  the  native  heat. 

Hypenemic  or  unfruitful  eggs,  begin  to  change 
at  this  time,  as  the  critical  day  when  they  must 
show  their  disposition.  As  fertile  eggs  are 
changed  by  the  inherent  plastic  force  into  col- 
liquament  (which  afterwards  passes  into  blood), 
so  do  wind-eggs  now  begin  to  change  and  to 
putrefy.  I  have,  nevertheless,  occasionally  ob¬ 
served  the  spot  or  cicatricula  to  expand  consid¬ 
erably  even  in  hypenemic  eggs,  but  never  to 
rise  into  a  cumulus,  nor  to  become  circum¬ 
scribed  by  regularly  disposed  concentric  circles. 
Sometimes  I  have  even  observed  the  vitellus  to 
get  somewhat  clearer,  and  to  become  liquefied; 
but  this  was  unequally;  there  were  flocks,  as  if 
formed  by  sudden  coagulation,  swimming  dis¬ 
persed  through  it  like  clouds.  And  although 
such  eggs  could  not  yet  be  called  putrid,  nor 
were  they  offensive,  still  were  they  disposed  to 
putrefaction;  and,  if  continued  under  the  hen, 
they  soon  arrived  at  this  state,  the  rottenness 
commencing  at  the  very  spot  where  in  fruitful 
eggs  the  reproductive  germ  appears. 

The  more  perfect  or  forward  eggs  then, 
about  the  end  of  the  fourth  day,  contain  a  dou¬ 
ble  or  bipartite  pulsating  vesicle,  each  portion 
reciprocating  the  other’s  motion,  in  such  order 
and  manner  that  whilst  one  is  contracting,  the 
other  is  distended  with  blood  and  ruddy  in  col¬ 
our;  but  this  last  contracting  anon  forces  out  its 
charge  of  blood,  and,  an  instant  being  inter¬ 
posed,  the  former  rises  again  and  repeats  its 
pulse.  And  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  the  action 
of  these  vesicles  is  contraction,  by  which  the 
blood  is  moved  and  propelled  into  the  vessels. 

“On  the  fourth  day,”  says  Aldrovandus,^ 
“two  puncta  are  perceived,  both  of  which  are  in 
motion;  these,  undoubtedly,  are  the  heart  and 
the  liver,  viscera  which  Aristotle  allowed  to 
eggs  incubated  for  three  days.” 

The  Philosopher,^  however,  nowhere  says 
anything  of  the  kind;  neither,  for  the  most 

*  Op.  cit.^  p.  217. 

*  On  the  Generation  of  Animals.,  in.  4. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  371 


part,  are  the  viscera  mentioned  conspicuous  be¬ 
fore  the  tenth  day.  And  I  am  indeed  surprised 
that  Aldrovandus  should  have  taken  one  of 
these  pulsating  points  for  the  liver,  as  if  this 
viscus  were  ever  moved  in  any  such  manner!  It 
seems  much  better  to  believe  that  with  the 
growth  of  the  embryo  one  of  the  pulsating 
points  is  changed  into  the  auricles,  the  other  into 
the  ventricles  of  the  heart.  For  in  the  adult,  the 
ventricles  are  filled  in  the  same  manner  by  the 
auricles,  and  by  their  contraction  they  are 
straightway  emptied  again,  as  we  have  shown  in 
our  treatise  On  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood, 

In  more  forward  eggs,  towards  the  end  of  the 
fourth  day,  I  have  occasionally  found  I  know 
not  what  cause  of  obscurity  intervening  and 
preventing  me  from  seeing  these  pulsating  vesi¬ 
cles  with  the  same  distinctness  as  before;  it  was 
as  if  there  had  been  a  haze  interposed  between 
them  and  the  eye.  In  a  clearer  light,  neverthe¬ 
less,  and  with  the  use  of  magnifying  glasses,  the 
observations  of  one  day  being  further  collated 
with  those  of  the  next  succeeding  day,  it  was 
discovered  that  the  indistinctness  was  caused 
by  the  rudiments  of  the  body — a  nebula  con¬ 
cocted  from  part  of  the  colliquament,  or  an 
effluvium  concreting  around  the  commence¬ 
ments  of  the  veins. 

Aldrovandus  appears  to  have  observed  this: 
“On  the  fifth  day,”  says  he,  “the  punctum, 
which  we  have  stated  to  be  the  heart,  is  no 
longer  seen  to  move  externally,  but  to  be  cov¬ 
ered  over  and  concealed;  still  its  two  meatus 
venosi  are  perceived  more  distinctly  than  be¬ 
fore,  one  of  them  being,  further,  larger  than 
the  other.”  But  our  learned  author  was  mis¬ 
taken  here;  for  this  familiar  divinity,  the  heart, 
enters  into  his  mansion  and  shuts  himself  up  in 
its  inmost  recesses  a  long  time  afterwards,  and 
when  the  house  is  almost  completely  built.  Al¬ 
drovandus  also  errs  when  he  says,  “by  the  vis 
insita  of  the  veins,  the  remaining  portion  of  the 
albumen  acquires  a  straw  colour,”  for  this  col¬ 
our  is  observed  in  the  thicker  albumen  of  every 
spoilt  egg,  and  it  goes  on  increasing  in  depth 
from  day  to  day  as  the  egg  grows  staler,  and 
this  without  any  influence  of  the  veins,  the 
thinner  portion  only  being  dissipated. 

But  the  embryo  enlarging,  as  we  say  below, 
and  the  ramifications  of  the  meatus  venosi  ex¬ 
tending  far  and  wide  to  the  albumen  and  vitel- 
lus,  portions  of  both  of  these  fluids  become  liq¬ 
uefied,  not  indeed  in  the  way  Aldrovandus  will 
have  it,  from  some  vis  insita  in  the  vessels,  but 
from  the  heat  of  the  blood  which  they  contain. 
For  into  whatsoever  part  of  either  fluid  the  ves¬ 


sels  in  question  extend,  straightway  liquefac¬ 
tion  appears  in  their  vicinity;  and  it  is  on  this 
account  that  the  yelk  about  this  epoch  appears 
double:  its  superior  portion,  which  is  in  juxta¬ 
position  with  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg,  has  al¬ 
ready  become  more  diffluent  than  the  rest,  and 
appears  like  melted  yellow  wax  in  contrast  with 
the  other  colder  firmer  portion;  like  bodies  in 
general  in  a  state  of  fusion,  it  also  occupies  a 
larger  space.  Now  this  superior  portion,  lique¬ 
fied  by  the  genial  heat,  is  separated  from  the 
other  liquids  of  the  egg,  but  particularly  the  al¬ 
bumen,  by  a  tunica  propria  of  extreme  tenuity. 
It  therefore  happens  that  if  this  most  delicate, 
fragile,  and  invisible  membrane  be  torn,  im¬ 
mediately  there  ensues  an  admixture  and  con¬ 
fusion  of  the  albumen  and  vitellus,  by  which 
everything  is  obscured.  And  such  an  accident 
is  a  frequent  cause  of  failure  in  the  reproduc¬ 
tive  power  (for  the  different  fluids  in  question 
are  possessed  of  opposite  natures),  according  to 
Aristotle,^  in  the  place  already  so  frequently  re¬ 
ferred  to:  “Eggs  are  spoiled  and  become  addled 
in  warm  weather  especially,  and  with  good  rea¬ 
son;  for  as  wine  grows  sour  in  hot  weather,  the 
lees  becoming  diffused  through  it  (which  is  the 
cause  of  its  spoiling),  so  do  eggs  perish  when  the 
yelk  spoils,  for  the  lees  and  the  yelk  are  the 
more  earthy  portion  in  each.  Wherefore  wine 
is  destroyed  by  an  admixture  with  its  dregs, 
and  an  egg  by  the  diffusion  of  its  yelk.”^  And 
here,  too,  we  may  not  improperly  refer  to  that 
passage  where  he  says:  “When  it  thunders,  the 
eggs  that  are  under  incubation  are  spoiled”^; 
for  it  must  be  a  likely  matter  that  a  membrane 
so  delicate  should  give  way  amidst  a  conflict  of 
the  elements.  And  perhaps  it  is  because  thunder 
is  frequent  about  the  dog-days  that  eggs  which 
are  rotten  have  been  called  cynosiira;  so  that 
Columella  rightly  informs  us  that  “the  summer 
solstice,  in  the  opinion  of  many,  is  not  a  good 
season  for  breeding  chickens.” 

This  at  all  events  is  certain,  that  eggs  are  very 
readily  shaken  and  injured  when  the  fowls  are 
disturbed  during  incubation,  at  which  time  the 
fluids  are  liquefied  and  expanded,  and  their 
containing  membranes  are  distended  and  ex¬ 
tremely  tender. 

EXERCISE  18.  The  fourth  inspection  of  the  egg 

“In  the  course  of  the  fifth  day  of  incuba¬ 
tion,”  says  Aristotle,^  “the  body  of  the  chick 
is  first  distinguished,  of  very  small  dimensions 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  iii.  2, 

^  History  of  Animalsy  vi.  2. 

3  VIII.  5.  ^  Ibid.y  VI.  3. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


372 

indeed,  and  white;  but  the  head  conspicuous 
and  the  eyes  extremely  prominent,  a  state  in 
which  they  afterwards  continue  long;  for  they 
only  grow  smaller  and  shrink  at  a  later  period. 
In  the  lower  portion  of  the  body  there  is  no 
rudimentary  member  corresponding  with  what 
is  seen  in  the  upper  part.  But  of  the  channels 
which  proceed  from  the  heart,  one  now  tends 
to  the  investing  membrane,  the  other  to  the 
yelk;  together  they  supply  the  office  of  an  um¬ 
bilical  cord.  The  chick,  therefore,  derives  its 
origin  from  the  albumen,  but  it  is  afterwards 
nourished  by  the  yelk,  through  the  umbilicus.” 

These  words  of  Aristotle  appear  to  subdivide 
the  entire  generation  of  the  chick  into  three 
stages  or  periods,  viz. :  from  the  first  day  of  the 
incubation  to  the  fifth;  from  thence  on  to  the 
tenth  or  fourteenth:  and  from  this  or  that  to 
the  twentieth.  It  seems  as  if  he  had  only  given 
an  account  in  his  history  of  the  circumstances 
he  observed  at  these  three  epochs;  and  it  is  then 
indeed  that  the  greatest  changes  take  place  in 
the  egg;  as  if  these  three  critical  seasons,  or 
these  three  degrees  in  the  process  which  leads 
from  the  perfect  egg  to  the  evolution  of  the 
chicken,  were  especially  to  be  distinguished. 
On  the  fourth  day  the  first  particle  of  the  em¬ 
bryo  appears,  viz. :  the  punctum  saliens  and  the 
blood;  and  then  the  new  being  is  incorporated. 
On  the  seventh  day  the  chick  is  distinguished 
by  its  extremities,  and  begins  to  move.  On  the 
tenth  it  is  feathered.  About  the  twentieth  it 
breathes,  chirps,  and  endeavours  to  escape.  The 
life  of  the  egg,  up  to  the  fourth  day,  seems  iden¬ 
tical  with  that  of  plants,  and  can  only  be  ac¬ 
counted  as  of  a  vegetative  nature.  From  this 
onwards  to  the  tenth  day,  however,  like  an  ani¬ 
mal,  it  is  possessed  by  a  sensitive  and  motive 
principle,  with  which  it  continues  to  increase, 
and  is  afterwards  gradually  perfected,  becom¬ 
ing  covered  with  feathers,  furnished  with  a 
beak,  nails,  and  all  else  that  is  necessary  to  its 
escape  from  the  shell;  emancipated  from  which, 
it  enters  at  length  on  its  own  independent  exist¬ 
ence. 

Of  the  incidents  that  happen  after  the  fourth 
day,  Aristotle  enumerates  three  particularly, 
viz.:  the  construction  of  the  body;  the  distribu¬ 
tion  of  the  veins,  which  have  already  the  office 
and  nature  of  the  umbilicus;  and  the  matter 
whence  the  embryo  first  arises,  and  is  con¬ 
stituted  and  nourished. 

In  reference  to  the  structure  of  the  body,  he 
speaks  of  its  size  and  colour,  of  the  parts  which 
are  most  conspicuous  in  it  (the  head  and  eyes), 
and  of  the  distinction  of  its  extremities. 


The  body  is  indeed  extremely  minute,  and  of 
the  form  of  the  common  maggot  that  gives 
birth  to  the  fly;  it  is  of  a  white  colour,  too,  like 
the  maggot  of  the  flesh-fly  which  we  see  cher¬ 
ished  and  nourished  in  putrid  meat.  He  hap¬ 
pily  adds,  “it  is  most  remarkable  for  its  head 
and  eyes.”  For  what  first  appears  is  homogen¬ 
eous  and  indistinct,  a  kind  of  concretion  or 
coagulation  of  the  colliquament,  like  the  jelly 
prepared  from  hartshorn;  it  is  a  mere  trans¬ 
parent  cloud,  and  scarcely  recognizable,  save  as 
it  appears,  divided,  seemingly,  into  two  parts, 
one  of  which  is  globular  and  much  larger  than 
the  other;  this  is  the  rudiment  of  the  head, 
which  first  becomes  visible  on  the  fifth  day, 
very  soon  after  which  the  eyes  are  distinguish¬ 
able,  being  from  the  first  of  large  size  and  prom¬ 
inent,  and  marked  off  from  the  rest  of  the  head 
and  body  by  a  certain  circumfusion  of  black 
matter.  Either  of  the  eyes  is  larger  than  the 
whole  of  the  rest  of  the  head,  in  the  same  way 
as  the  head  surpasses  the  remainder  of  the  body 
in  dimensions.  The  whiteness  of  the  body,  and 
prominence  of  the  eyes  (which,  as  well  as  the 
brain,  are  filled  internally  with  perfectly  pel¬ 
lucid  water,  but  externally  are  of  a  dark  colour) 
continue  for  some  time — up  to  the  tenth  day, 
and  even  longer;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  Aristotle 
says  that  “the  eyes  decrease  at  a  late  period, 
and  contract  to  the  proper  proportion.”  But 
for  my  own  part,  I  do  not  think  that  the  eyes  of 
birds  ever  contract  in  the  same  ratio  which  we 
observe  between  the  head  and  eyes  of  a  vivi¬ 
parous  animal.  For  if  you  strip  off  the  integu¬ 
ments  from  the  head  and  eyes  of  a  fowl  or  an¬ 
other  bird,  you  will  perceive  one  of  the  eyes  to 
equal  the  entire  brain  in  dimensions;  in  the 
woodcock  and  others,  one  of  the  eyes  indeed  is 
as  large  as  the  whole  head,  if  you  make  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  the  bill.  But  this  is  common  to  all  birds 
that  the  orbit  or  cavity  which  surrounds  the 
eye  is  larger  than  the  brain,  a  fact  that  is  ap¬ 
parent  in  the  cranium  of  every  bird.  Their 
eyes,  however,  are  made  to  look  smaller,  be¬ 
cause  every  part,  except  the  pupil,  is  covered 
with  skin  and  feathers;  neither  are  they  pos¬ 
sessed  of  such  a  globular  form  as  would  cause 
them  to  project;  they  are  of  a  flatter  configura¬ 
tion,  as  in  fishes. 

“In  the  lower  part  of  the  body,”  says  the 
Philosopher,  “we  perceive  the  rudiments  of  no 
member  corresponding  with  the  superior  mem¬ 
bers.”  And  the  thing  is  so  in  fact;  for  as  the 
body  at  first  appears  to  consist  of  little  but  head 
and  eyes,  so  inferiorly  there  is  neither  any  ex¬ 
tremity — wings,  legs,  sternum,  rump — nor  any 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  373 


viscus  apparent;  the  body  indeed  is  still  with¬ 
out  any  kind  of  proper  form;  in  so  far  as  I  am 
able  to  perceive,  it  consists  of  a  small  mass  ad¬ 
jacent  to  the  vein,  like  the  bent  keel  of  a  boat, 
like  a  maggot  or  an  ant,  without  a  vestige  of 
ribs,  wings,  or  feet,  to  which  a  globular  and 
much  more  conspicuous  mass  is  appended,  the 
rudiment  of  the  head,  to  wit,  divided,  as  it 
seems,  into  three  vesicles  when  regarded  from 
either  side,  but  in  fact  consisting  of  four  cells, 
two  of  which,  of  great  size  and  a  black  colour, 
are  the  rudiments  of  the  eyes;  of  the  remaining 
two  one  being  the  brain,  the  other  the  cerebel¬ 
lum.  All  of  these  are  full  of  perfectly  limpid 
water.  In  the  middle  of  the  blackness  of  the 
eye,  the  pupil  is  perceived  shining  like  a  trans¬ 
parent  central  spark  or  crystal.  I  imagine  that 
three  of  these  vesicles  being  particularly  con¬ 
spicuous,  has  been  the  cause  of  indifferent  ob¬ 
servers  falling  into  error.  For  as  they  had 
learned  from  the  schoolmen  that  there  was  a 
triple  dominion  in  the  animal  body,  and  they 
believed  that  these  principal  parts,  the  brain, 
the  heart,  and  the  liver,  performed  the  highest 
functions  in  the  economy,  they  easily  per¬ 
suaded  themselves  that  these  three  vesicles 
were  the  rudiments  and  commencements  of 
these  parts.  Goiter,  however,  as  becomes  an  ex¬ 
perienced  anatomist,  affirms  more  truly  that 
whilst  he  had  observed  the  beak  and  eyes  from 
the  seventh  day  of  incubation,  he  could  yet  dis¬ 
cover  nothing  of  the  viscera. 

But  let  us  hear  the  Philosopher  further:  “Of 
the  conduits  which  lead  from  the  heart,  one 
tends  to  the  investing  membrane,  another  to 
the  yelk,  in  order  to  perform  the  office  of  um¬ 
bilicus.”  The  embryo  having  now  taken  shape, 
these  veins  do  indeed  perform  the  function  of 
the  umbilical  cord,  the  ramifications  of  one  of 
them  proceeding  to  be  distributed  to  the  outer 
tunic  which  invests  the  albumen,  those  of  the 
other  running  for  distribution  to  the  vitellary 
membrane  and  its  included  fluid.  Whence  it 
clearly  appears  that  both  of  these  fluids  are 
alike  intended  for  the  nourishment  of  the  em¬ 
bryo.  And  although  Aristotle  says  that  “the 
chick  has  its  commencement  in  the  albumen, 
and  is  nourished  through  the  umbilicus  by  the 
yelk,”  he  still  does  not  say  that  the  chick  is 
formed  from  the  albumen.  The  embryo,  in 
fact,  is  formed  from  that  clear  liquid  which  we 
have  spoken  of  under  the  name  of  the  colliqua- 
ment,  and  the  whole  of  what  we  have  called 
the  eye  of  the  egg  is  contained  or  included 
within  the  albumen.  Neither  does  our  author 
say  that  the  whole  and  sole  nutriment  of  the 


embryo  reaches  it  through  the  umbilicus.  My 
own  observations  lead  me  to  interpret  his 
words  in  this  way:  although  the  embryo  of  the 
fowl  begins  to  be  formed  in  the  albumen,  never¬ 
theless  it  is  not  nourished  solely  by  that,  but  also 
by  the  yelk,  to  which  one  of  the  two  umbilical 
conduits  pertains,  and  from  whence  it  derives 
nourishment  in  a  more  especial  manner;  for  the 
albumen,  according  to  Aristotle’s  opinion,  is 
the  more  concoct  and  purer  liquid,  the  yelk  the 
more  earthy  and  solid  one,  and,  therefore,  more 
apt  to  sustain  the  chick  when  it  has  once  at¬ 
tained  to  greater  consistency  and  strength;  and 
further  because,  as  shall  be  explained  below, 
the  yelk  supplies  the  place  of  milk,  and  is  the 
last  part  that  is  consumed,  a  residuary  portion, 
even  after  the  chick  is  born,  and  when  it  is  fol¬ 
lowing  its  mother,  being  still  contained  in  its 
abdomen. 

What  has  now  been  stated  takes  place  from 
the  fourth  to  the  tenth  day.  I  have  yet  to  speak 
of  the  order  and  manner  in  which  each  of  the 
particulars  indicated  transpires. 

In  the  inspection  made  on  the  fifth  day,  we 
observed  around  the  short  vein  which  proceeds 
from  the  angle  where  the  two  alternately  pul¬ 
sating  points  are  situated,  something  whiter 
and  thicker,  like  a  cloud,  although  still  trans¬ 
parent,  through  which  the  vein  just  mentioned 
is  seen  obscurely,  and,  as  it  were,  through  a 
haze.  The  same  thing  I  have  occasionally  seen 
in  the  more  forward  eggs  in  the  course  of  the 
fourth  day.  Now  this  is  the  rudiment  of  the 
body,  and  from  hour  to  hour  it  goes  on  increas¬ 
ing  in  compactness  and  solidity;  both  surround¬ 
ing  the  afore-named  vein,  and  being  appended 
to  it  in  the  guise  of  a  kind  of  globule.  This  glob¬ 
ular  rudiment  far  exceeds  the  coronal  portion, 
as  I  shall  call  it,  of  the  vermicular  body;  it  is 
triangular  in  figure,  being  obscurely  divided 
into  three  parts,  like  so  many  swelling  buds  of  a 
tree.  One  of  these  is  orbicular  and  larger  than 
either  of  the  other  two;  and  it  is  darkened  by 
most  delicate  filaments  proceeding  from  the 
circumference  to  the  centre;  this  appears  to  be 
the  commencement  of  the  ciliary  body,  and 
therefore  proclaims  that  this  is  the  part  which 
is  to  undergo  transformation  into  the  eye.  In 
its  middle  the  minute  pupil,  shining  like  a 
bright  point,  as  already  stated,  is  conspicuous; 
and  it  was  from  this  indication  especially  that  I 
ventured  to  conjecture  that  the  whole  of  the 
globular  mass  was  the  rudiment  of  the  future 
head,  and  this  black  circle  one  of  the  eyes,  hav¬ 
ing  the  other  over  against  it;  for  the  two  are  so 
situated  that  they  can  by  no  means  be  seen  at 


\VILLIA^^  HARVEY 


374 

once  and  together,  one  always  lying  over  and 
concealing  the  other. 

The  first  rudiment  of  the  future  body,  which 
we  have  stated  to  sprout  around  the  vein,  ac¬ 
quires  an  oblong  and  somewhat  bent  figure, 
like  the  keel  of  a  boat.  It  is  of  a  mucaginous  con¬ 
sistence,  like  the  white  mould  that  grows  upon 
damp  things  excluded  from  the  air.  The  vein  to 
which  this  mucor  attaches,  as  I  have  said,  is  the 
vena  cava,  descending  along  the  spinal  column, 
as  my  subsequent  observations  have  satisfied 
me.  And  if  you  carefully  note  the  order  of  con¬ 
traction  in  the  pulsating  vesicles,  you  may  see 
the  one  which  contracts  last  impelling  its  blood 
into  the  root  of  this  vein  and  distending  it. 

Thus  there  are  two  manifest  contractions 
and  two  similar  dilatations  in  the  two  vesicles 
which  are  seen  moving  and  pulsating  alternate¬ 
ly;  and  the  contraction  of  the  one  which  pre¬ 
cedes  causes  the  distension  or  dilatation  of  the 
other;  for  the  blood  escapes  from  the  cavity  of 
the  former  vesicle,  when  it  contracts,  into  that 
of  the  latter,  which  it  fills,  distends,  and  causes 
to  pulsate;  but  this  second  vesicle,  contracting 
in  its  turn,  throws  the  blood,  which  it  had  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  former  vesicle,  into  the  root  of 
the  vein  aforesaid,  and  at  the  same  time  dis¬ 
tends  it.  I  go  on  speaking  of  this  vessel  as  a  vein, 
though  from  its  pulsation  I  hold  it  to  be  the 
aorta,  because  the  veins  are  not  yet  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  arteries  by  any  difference  in 
the  thickness  of  their  respective  coats. 

After  having  contemplated  these  points  with 
great  care,  and  in  many  eggs,  I  remained  for 
some  time  in  suspense  as  to  the  opinion  I  should 
adopt;  whether  I  should  conclude  that  the  con¬ 
crete  appended  globular  mass  proceeded  from 
the  colliquament  in  which  it  swam,  becoming  a 
compacted  and  coagulated  matter  in  the  way 
that  clouds  are  formed  from  invisible  vapour 
condensed  in  the  upper  regions  of  the  air;  or 
believe  that  it  took  its  rise  from  a  certain  efflu¬ 
vium  exhaled  from  the  sanguineous  conduit 
mentioned,  originating  by  diapedesis  or  trans¬ 
udation,  and  by  deriving  nourishment  from 
thence,  was  enabled  to  increase.  For  the  be¬ 
ginnings  of  even  the  greatest  things  are  often 
extremely  small,  and,  by  reason  of  this  minute¬ 
ness,  sufficiently  obscure. 

This  much  I  think  I  have  sufficiently  deter¬ 
mined  at  all  events,  viz.^  that  the  puncta  salien- 
tia  and  meatus  venosi,  and  the  vena  cava  itself, 
are  the  parts  that  first  exist;  and  that  the  globu¬ 
lar  mass  mentioned  afterwards  grows  to  them. 
I  am  further  certain  that  the  blood  is  thrown 
from  the  punctum  saliens  into  the  vein,  and 


that  from  this  does  the  corpuscle  in  question 
grow,  and  by  this  is  it  nourished.  I'he  fungus  or 
mucor  first  originates  from  an  effluvium  of  the 
vein  on  which  it  appears,  and  it  is  thence  nour¬ 
ished  and  made  to  increase;  in  the  same  way  as 
mouldincss  grows  in  moist  places,  in  the  dark 
corners  of  houses  which  long  escape  cleansing; 
or,  like  camphor  upon  cedar  wood  tables,  and 
moss  upon  rocks  and  the  bark  of  trees;  lastly,  as 
a  kind  of  delicate  down  grows  upon  certain 
grubs. 

Upon  the  same  occasion  I  also  debated  with 
myself  whether  or  not  I  should  conclude,  that 
with  the  coagulation  of  the  colliquament  ac¬ 
complished,  the  rudiments  of  the  head  and 
body  existed  simultaneously  with  the  punctum 
saliens  and  the  blood,  but  in  a  pellucid  state, 
and  so  delicate  that  they  almost  escaped  the 
eye,  until  becoming  inspissated  into  a  fungus  or 
mucor,  they  acquired  a  more  opaque  white 
colour,  and  then  came  into  view;  the  blood 
meantime  from  its  greater  spissitude  and  pur¬ 
ple  colour  being  readily  perceptible  in  the  dia¬ 
phanous  colliquament.  But  now  when  I  look  at 
the  thing  more  narrowly,  I  am  of  opinion  that 
the  blood  exists  before  any  particle  of  the  body 
appears;  that  it  is  the  first-born  of  all  the  parts 
of  the  embryo;  that  from  it  both  the  matter 
out  of  which  the  foetus  is  embodied,  and  the 
nutriment  by  which  it  grows  are  derived;  that 
it  is  in  fine,  if  such  thing  there  be,  the  primary 
generative  particle.  But  wherefore  I  am  led  to 
adopt  this  idea  shall  afterwards  be  shown  more 
at  length  when  I  come  to  treat  of  the  primary 
genital  part,  of  the  innate  heat,  and  the  radical 
moisture;  and,  at  the  same  time,  conclude  as  to 
what  we  are  to  think  of  the  vital  principle 
(animd)y  from  a  great  number  of  observations 
compared  with  one  another. 

About  this  period  almost  every  hour  makes 
a  difference;  every  thing  grows  larger,  more  def¬ 
inite  and  distinct;  the  rate  of  change  in  the 
egg  is  rapid,  and  one  change  succeeds  immedi¬ 
ately  upon  the  back  of  another.  The  cavity  in 
the  egg  is  now  much  larger,  and  the  whole  of  its 
upper  portion  is  empty;  it  is  as  if  a  fifth  part  of 
the  egg  had  been  removed. 

The  ramifications  of  the  veins  extend  more 
widely,  and  are  more  numerous,  not  only  in  the 
colliquament  as  before,  but  they  spread  on  one 
hand  into  the  albumen,  and  on  the  other  into 
the  yelk,  so  that  both  of  these  fluids  are  every¬ 
where  covered  over  with  blood-vessels.  The  up¬ 
per  portion  of  the  yelk  has  now  become  much 
dissolved,  so  that  it  very  obviously  differs  from 
the  lower  portion;  there  are  now,  as  it  were, 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


two  yelks,  or  two  kinds  of  yelk;  whilst  the 
superior,  like  melted  wax,  is  expanded  and 
looks  pellucid,  the  inferior  has  become  more 
dense,  and  with  the  thicker  portion  of  the  al¬ 
bumen  has  subsided  to  the  sharp  end  of  the  egg. 
The  tunica  propria  of  the  upper  portion  of  the 
yelk  is  so  thin  that  it  gives  way  on  the  slightest 
succussion,  when  there  ensues  admixture  of  the 
fluids,  and,  as  we  have  said,  interruption  to  the 
further  progress  of  the  process  of  generation. 

And  now  it  is  that  the  rudiments  of  the  em¬ 
bryo  first  become  conspicuous,  as  may  be  seen 
in  the  fifth  and  sixth  figure  of  Fabricius;  the 
egg  being  put  into  fair  water  it  will  be  easy  to 
perceive  what  parts  of  the  body  are  formed, 
what  are  still  wanting.  The  embryo  now  pre¬ 
sents  itself  in  the  form  of  a  small  worm  or  mag¬ 
got,  such  as  we  encounter  on  the  leaves  of  trees, 
in  spots  of  their  bark,  in  fruit,  flowers,  and  else¬ 
where;  but  especially  in  the  apples  of  the  oak, 
in  the  centre  of  which,  surrounded  with  a  case, 
a  limpid  fluid  is  contained,  which,  gradually  in¬ 
spissated  and  congealed,  acquires  a  most  delicate 
outline,  and  finally  assumes  the  form  of  a  maggot ; 
for  some  time,  however,  it  remains  motionless; 
but  by  and  by,  endowed  with  motion  and  sen¬ 
sation  it  becomes  an  animal,  and  subsequently  it 
breaks  forth  and  takes  its  flight  as  a  fly, 

Aristotle  ascribes  a  similar  mode  of  produc¬ 
tion  to  those  creatures  that  are  spontaneously 
engendered.  “Some  are  engendered  of  the 
dew,”  he  says,  “which  falls  upon  the  leaves.” 
And  by  and  by  he  adds,  “butterflies  are  engen¬ 
dered  from  caterpillars,  but  these,  in  their  turn, 
spring  from  green  leaves,  particularly  that 
species  of  raphanus  which  is  called  cabbage. 
They  are  smaller  than  millet  seeds  at  first,  and 
then  they  grow  into  little  worms;  next,  in  the 
course  of  three  days  into  caterpillars;  after 
which  they  cease  from  motion,  change  their 
shape,  and  pass  into  chrysalides,  when  they  are 
inclosed  in  a  hard  shell;  although,  if  touched, 
they  will  still  move.  The  shell  after  a  long  time 
cracks  and  gives  way,  and  the  winged  animal, 
which  we  call  a  butterfly,  emerges.”^ 

But  our  doctrine — and  we  shall  prove  it  by 
and  by — is,  that  all  animal  generation  is  ef¬ 
fected  in  the  same  way;  that  all  animals,  even 
the  most  perfect,  are  produced  from  worms;  a 
fact  which  Aristotle  himself  seems  to  have 
noted  when  he  says:  “In  all,  nevertheless,  even 
those  that  lay  perfect  eggs,  the  first  conception 
grows  whilst  it  is  yet  invisible;  and  this,  too,  is 
the  nature  of  the  worm. For  there  is  this  dif- 

^  History  of  Animals^  v.  19. 

2  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  m.  9. 


ference  between  the  generation  of  w^orms  and  of 
other  animals,  that  the  former  acquire  dimen¬ 
sions  before  they  have  any  definite  form  or  are 
distinguished  into  parts,  in  conformity  with 
what  the  philosopher  says  in  the  following  sen¬ 
tence:  “An  animal  is  fashioned  from  an  entire 
worm,  not  from  any  one  particular  part,  as  in 
the  case  of  an  egg,  but  the  whole  increases  and 
becomes  an  articulated  animal,”^  /.  e.y  in  its 
growth  it  separates  into  parts. 

It  is  indeed  matter  worthy  of  admiration 
that  the  rudiments  of  all  animals,  particularly 
those  possessed  of  red  blood,  such  as  the  dog, 
horse,  deer,  ox,  common  fowl,  snake,  and  even 
man  himself,  should  so  signally  resemble  a  mag¬ 
got  in  figure  and  consistence,  that  with  the  eye 
you  can  perceive  no  difference  between  them. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  fifth  day  or  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  sixth,  the  head  is  divided  into 
three  vesicles:  the  first  of  these,  which  is  also 
the  largest,  is  rounded  and  black;  this  is  the 
eye,  in  the  centre  of  which  the  pupil  can  be  dis¬ 
tinguished  like  a  crystalline  point.  Under  this 
there  lies  a  smaller  vesicle,  concealed  in  part, 
which  represents  the  brain;  and  over  this  lies 
the  third  vesicle,  like  an  added  crest  or  rounded 
summit  crowning  the  whole,  from  which  the 
cerebellum  is  at  length  produced.  In  the  whole 
of  these  there  is  nothing  to  be  discovered  but  a 
little  perfectly  limpid  water. 

And  now  the  rudiment  of  the  body,  which 
we  have  called  the  carina,  distinctly  proclaims 
itself  to  be  the  spinal  column,  to  which  sides 
soon  begin  to  be  added,  and  the  wings  and  the 
lower  extremities  present  themselves,  project¬ 
ing  slightly  from  the  body  of  the  maggot.  The 
venous  conduits  are,  further,  now  clearly  refer- 
rible  to  the  umbilical  vessels. 

EXERCISE  19.  The  fifth  inspection  of  the  egg 

On  the  sixth  day  the  three  cells  of  the  head 
present  themselves  more  distinctly,  and  the 
coats  of  the  eyes  are  now  apparent;  the  legs  and 
the  wings  also  bud  forth,  much  in  the  way  in 
which,  towards  the  end  of  June,  we  see  tadpoles 
getting  their  extremities,  when  they  quit  the 
water,  and  losing  their  tails  assume  the  form  of 
frogs. 

In  the  chick,  the  rump  has  still  no  other  form 
than  is  conspicuous  in  animals  at  large,  even  in 
serpents;  it  is  a  round  and  slender  tail.  The  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  heart  now  grows  upon  the  pulsat¬ 
ing  vesicle;  and  shortly  afterwards  the  rudi¬ 
ments  of  the  liver  and  lungs  are  distinguished; 
the  bill,  too,  makes  its  appearance  at  the  same 

3  History  of  Animals^  v.  19. 


376  WILLIAM 

time.  Ev’ery  thing  is  of  a  pure  white  colour,  es¬ 
pecially  the  bill.  About  the  same  epoch  all  the 
viscera  and  the  intestines  are  conspicuous.  But 
the  heart  takes  precedence  of  all  the  parts;  and 
the  lungs  are  visible  before  the  liver  or  brain. 
The  eyes,  however,  are  seen  first  of  all,  by  rea¬ 
son  of  their  large  size  and  black  colour. 

And  now,  too,  the  embryo  has  a  power  of 
motion,  and  raises  its  head  and  slightly  twists  it¬ 
self,  although  there  is  still  nothing  of  the  brain 
to  be  seen,  but  only  a  little  limpid  fluid  inclosed 
in  a  vesicle.  It  is  at  length  a  perfect  maggot, 
only  differing  from  a  caterpillar  in  this,  that 
when  worms  are  set  free  from  their  cells  they 
creep  about  hither  and  thither  and  seek  their 
food,  whilst  the  worm  in  the  egg  is  stationary, 
and,  surrounded  with  its  proper  food,  is  fur¬ 
nished  with  aliment  through  the  umbilicus. 

The  viscera  and  intestines  being  now  formed, 
and  the  foetus  able  to  execute  motions,  the  an¬ 
terior  portion  of  the  body,  without  either 
thorax  or  abdomen,  is  perceived  to  be  com¬ 
pletely  open;  so  that  the  heart  itself,  the  liver 
and  the  intestines,  are  seen  to  hang  pendulous 
externally. 

Towards  the  end  of  this  day  and  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  seventh,  the  toes  are  distinguished, 
and  the  embryo  already  presents  the  outlines 
of  the  chick,  and  opens  its  beak,  and  kicks 
with  its  feet;  in  short,  all  the  parts  are  sketched 
out,  but  the  eyes,  above  all,  are  conspicuous. 
The  viscera,  on  the  contrary,  are  so  indistinct, 
that  Goiter  affirms,  that  whilst  he  plainly  saw 
the  eyes  and  beak  he  could  discover  no  viscus, 
even  obscurely  and  confusedly  shadowed  forth. 

The  changes  that  take  place  from  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  sixth  to  the  end  of  the  seventh  day, 
occur  for  the  major  part  in  some  eggs  more 
quickly,  in  others  a  little  more  tardily.  The 
coats  of  the  eyes  are  now  visible,  but  they  only 
include  a  colourless  and  limpid  fluid  in  their  in¬ 
terior.  The  eyes  themselves  project  somewhat 
beyond  their  orbits,  and  each  of  them  does  not 
less  exceed  the  brain  in  size,  than  the  head  with 
which  they  are  connected  exceeds  the  whole  of 
the  rest  of  the  body. 

The  vesicle,  which  like  a  ridge  or  crest  ex¬ 
pands  beyond  the  confines  of  the  brain,  occu¬ 
pies  the  place  of  the  cerebellum;  and,  like  the 
other  vesicles,  is  filled  with  a  transparent  fluid. 

The  brain  is  perceived  to  be  obscurely  bipar¬ 
tite,  and  refracts  the  light  less  than  the  cerebel¬ 
lum,  though  it  is  of  a  whiter  colour.  And  as  the 
heart  is  seen  lying  without  the  confines  of  the 
thorax,  so  likewise  does  the  cerebellum  pro¬ 
trude  beyond  the  limits  of  the  head. 


HARVEY 

If  the  head  be  removed,  the  vessels  ascending 
to  the  brain  may  be  observed  as  bloody  points, 
with  the  use  of  a  magnifying  glass.  And  now, 
too,  the  rudiments  of  the  spine  begin  to  be  first 
perceived  distinct  from  the  rest  of  the  pulp,  of  a 
milky  colour,  but  firmer  consistence.  So  in  the 
same  way,  and  like  flimsy  threads  of  a  spider’s 
web,  the  ribs  and  other  bones  make  their  ap¬ 
pearance  in  the  guise  of  milky  lines,  amidst  the 
pulp  of  the  body;  and  the  same  thing  appears 
more  clearly  in  the  formation  of  the  larger  ovi¬ 
parous  animals.  The  heart,  lungs,  liver,  and  by 
way  of  intestines  certain  most  delicate  fila¬ 
ments,  all  present  themselves  of  a  white  colour. 
The  parenchyma  of  the  liver  is  developed  upon 
delicate  fibrous  stamens  over  the  umbilical  vein 
at  the  part  where  it  enters,  almost  in  the  same 
manner  as  we  have  said  that  the  rudiments  of 
the  body  grow  to  the  vein  descending  from  the 
heart,  or  the  vesicula  pulsans.  For  in  the  same 
way  as  grapes  grow  upon  the  stalk  of  the  bunch, 
buds  upon  twigs,  and  the  ear  upon  the  straw, 
does  the  liver  adhere  to  the  umbilical  vein,  and 
arise  from  it,  even  as  fungi  do  from  trees  and 
excessive  granulations  from  ulcers,  or  as  sarcoses 
or  morbid  growths  spring  around  the  minute 
branches  of  conterminous  arteries  by  which 
they  are  nourished,  and  occasionally  attain  to 
an  excessive  size. 

Looking  back  upon  this  office  of  the  arteries, 
or  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  I  have  occasion¬ 
ally  and  against  all  expectation  completely 
cured  enormous  sarcoceles,  by  the  simple  means 
of  dividing  or  tying  the  little  artery  that  sup¬ 
plied  them,  and  so  preventing  all  access  of 
nourishment  or  spirit  to  the  part  affected;  by 
which  it  came  to  pass  that  the  tumour,  on  the 
verge  of  mortification,  was  aftei^vards  easily 
extirpated  with  the  knife,  or  the  searing  iron. 
One  man  in  particular  (and  this  case  I  can  con¬ 
firm  by  the  testimony  of  many  respectable 
persons)  had  an  enormous  hernia  carnosa,  or 
sarcocosis  of  the  scrotum,  larger  than  a  human 
head,  and  hanging  as  low  as  the  knee;  from  its 
upper  part  a  fleshy  mass,  of  the  thickness  of  the 
wrist,  or  such  a  rope  as  is  used  on  ship-board, 
extended  into  the  abdomen;  and  the  evil  had 
attained  to  such  a  height,  that  no  one  durst  at¬ 
tempt  the  cure,  either  with  the  knife  or  any 
other  means.  Nevertheless,  by  the  procedure 
above  indicated,  I  succeeded  in  completely  re¬ 
moving  this  huge  excrescence  which  distended 
the  scrotum,  and  involved  the  testicle  in  its 
middle;  this  latter  organ,  with  its  vas  praepar- 
ans  and  vas  deferens,  and  other  parts  which 
descend  in  the  tunica  vaginalis,  being  left  all 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  377 


the  while  safe  and  uninjured.  But  this  cure,  as 
well  as  various  others,  accomplished  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  vulgar  opinion  and  by  unusual  proced¬ 
ures,  I  shall  relate  at  greater  length  in  my  Medi¬ 
cal  ObservationSy  if  God  grant  me  longer  life. 

I  mention  such  cases  with  a  view  of  more 
clearly  showing  that  the  liver  grows  upon  the 
vessels,  and  is  only  developed  some  time  after 
the  appearance  of  the  blood;  that  its  parenchy¬ 
ma  is  derived  from  the  arteries  whence  the  mat¬ 
ter  is  effused,  and  that  for  a  while  it  remains 
white  and  bloodless,  like  various  other  parts  of 
the  body.  Now  in  the  same  manner  and  order 
precisely  as  the  chick  is  developed  from  the 
egg,  is  the  generation  of  man  and  other  animals 
accomplished. 

Whence  it  appears  that  the  doctrine  which 
makes  the  liver  the  author  and  fashioner  of  the 
blood,  is  altogether  groundless,  although  both 
formerly  and  at  the  present  time  this  view  ob¬ 
tained  universal  assent;  this  was  the  reason 
wherefore  the  liver  was  reckoned  as  among  the 
principal  and  first-formed  organs  of  the  body. 
This  viscus  indeed  was  so  highly  dignified  that 
it  was  thought  to  be  produced  in  the  very  begin¬ 
ning,  and  simultaneously  with  the  heart,  from 
the  seminal  fluid  of  the  mother;  and  the  medi¬ 
cal  fable  of  the  three  vesicles  or  three  kids,  as 
they  were  called,  was  eagerly  defended.  Among 
the  number  of  modern  abettors  of  such  views, 
Parisanus  has  of  late  with  confidence  enough, 
but  little  skill,  been  singing  to  the  old  measure. 
These  good  people  do  not  consider  that  the  ves¬ 
icles  are  in  motion  in  the  egg,  that  the  heart  is 
palpitating  and  the  blood  present  and  perfectly 
concocted,  before  any  sign  or  vestige  of  the 
liver  appears.  The  blood  is  much  rather  to  be 
accounted  the  efficient  cause  of  the  liver,  than 
this  the  author  of  the  blood:  for  the  liver  is  en¬ 
gendered  after  the  blood,  and  from  it,  being 
adnate  to  the  vessels  that  contain  it. 

But  neither  can  I  agree  with  the  Aristotel¬ 
ians,  who  maintain  that  the  heart  is  the  author 
of  the  blood;  for  its  parenchyma  or  proper  sub¬ 
stance  arises  some  little  time  after  the  blood, 
and  is  superadded  to  the  pulsating  vesicles.  I 
am,  however,  in  much  doubt  as  to  whether  the 
pulsating  vesicle  or  point,  or  the  blood  itself 
be  the  older;  whether  it  be  the  fluid  contained, 
or  the  containing  sacs.  It  is  obvious,  neverthe¬ 
less,  that  that  which  contains  is  formed  for  the 
sake  of  that  which  is  contained,  and  is,  there¬ 
fore,  made  later.  And  this  much,  upon  the 
faithful  testimony  of  our  eyes,  is  certain,  that 
the  first  particle  and  prime  basis  of  the  body  are 
the  veins,  to  which  all  the  other  parts  are  post¬ 


humous  and  superadded.  But  upon  this  point 
we  shall  say  more  by  and  by. 

Meantime  we  may  be  permitted  to  smile  at 
that  factitious  division  of  the  parts  into  sperm¬ 
atic  and  sanguineous;  as  if  any  part  were  pro¬ 
duced  immediately  from  the  seminal  fluid,  and 
all  did  not  spring  from  the  same  source! 

I  return  to  our  subject.  The  colliquament 
now  extends  over  more  than  half  the  egg.  The 
heart,  hanging  outwards,  is  at  some  short  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  body.  And  if  you  look  atten¬ 
tively  you  may  perceive  some  of  the  umbilical 
vessels  pulsating. 

EXERCISE  20.  The  sixth  inspection 

Everything  is  still  more  distinct  upon  the 
seventh  day,  and  the  rudiments  of  several  of 
the  particular  parts  are  now  conspicuous,  viz.y 
the  wings,  legs,  genital  organs,  divisions  for  the 
toes,  thighs,  ilia,  &c.  The  embryo  now  moves 
and  kicks,  and  the  form  of  the  perfect  chick  is 
recognizable;  from  this  time  forward,  indeed, 
nothing  is  superadded;  the  very  delicate  parts 
only  increase  in  size.  The  more  the  parts  grow 
the  more  is  the  albumen  consumed,  and  the  ex¬ 
ternal  membranes  united  come  to  be  of  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  secundines,  and  ever  more  and  more 
closely  represent  the  umbilical  cord.  Wherefore 
I  conceive  that,  from  the  seventh,  we  may  at 
once  pass  on  to  the  tenth  day,  nothing  of  any 
moment  occurring  in  this  interval  which  is  not 
particularly  noted  by  other  writers,  especially 
by  Aristotle. 

It  happens,  nevertheless,  that  when  a  num¬ 
ber  of  eggs  are  examined  together,  some  are 
found  more  precocious  and  forward,  having 
everything  more  distinct;  others,  again,  are 
more  sluggish,  and  these  have  the  parts  less  ap¬ 
parent.  The  season  of  the  year,  the  place  where 
the  incubation  is  carried  on,  the  sedulousness 
with  which  it  is  performed,  and  other  accidents, 
have  undoubtedly  great  influence  on  this  di¬ 
versity  of  result.  I  remember  on  one  occasion, 
on  the  seventh  day  to  have  seen  the  cavity  in 
the  blunt  end  enlarged  in  a  sluggish  egg,  the 
colliquament  covered  with  veins,  the  vermicu¬ 
lar  embryo  in  its  middle,  the  rudiments  of  the 
eyes,  and  all  the  rest  as  it  is  met  with  in  the  gen¬ 
erality  of  eggs  on  the  fifth  day;  but  the  pulsa¬ 
tory  vesicles  were  not  yet  apparent,  nor  was  the 
trunk  or  root  of  the  veins  from  which  we  have 
said  that  they  originate,  yet  to  be  discovered.  I, 
therefore,  regarded  this  egg  as  of  a  feeble  na¬ 
ture  and  left  behind,  as  possessed  of  an  inade¬ 
quate  reproductive  faculty,  and  near  to  its 
death;  all  the  more  when  I  observed  its  colliq- 


378  WILLIAM 

iiament  less  pellucid  and  refractive  than  usual, 
and  the  vessels  not  of  such  a  bright  red  colour  as 
wont.  When  the  vital  spirit  is  about  to  escape, 
that  part  which  is  first  influenced  in  generation 
and  earliest  attracts  attention  is  also  the  first 
that  fails  and  disappears. 

EXERCISE  21.  The  inspection  after  the  tenth  day 

All  that  presents  itself  on  the  tenth  day  is  so 
accurately  described  by  Aristotle  that  scarcely 
anything  remains  for  us  to  add.  Now  his  opin¬ 
ion,  according  to  my  interpretation  of  it,  is  this, 
viz.,  that  “on  the  tenth  day  the  entire  chick  is 
conspicuous,”^  being  pellucid  and  white  in 
every  part  except  the  eyes  and  the  venous  ram¬ 
ifications.  “The  head  at  this  time  is  larger  than 
the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  body;  and  eyes 
larger  than  the  head  are  connected  with  it,” 
(adhering,  and  being  in  some  sort  appended  to 
the  head),  “but  having  as  yet  no  pupils”  (per¬ 
fectly  formed  pupils  must  here  be  understood, 
for  it  is  not  difficult  to  make  out  the  distinct 
tunics  of  the  eye  at  this  epoch);  “the  eyes,  if 
removed  at  this  time,  will  be  found  as  large  as 
beans  and  black,  and  if  they  be  incised,  a  clear 
humour  flows  out,  cold,  and  refracting  the  light 
powerfully,  but  nothing  else,”  /.  e.,  in  the 
whole  head  there  is  nothing  but  the  limpid 
water  which  has  been  mentioned.  Such  is  the 
state  of  matters  from  the  seventh  to  the  tenth 
day,  as  we  have  said  above.  “At  the  same  time,” 
he  continues,  “the  viscera  also  appear,  and  all 
that  appertains  to  the  abdomen  and  intestines,” 
viz.,  the  substance  of  the  heart,  the  lungs,  liver, 
&c.,  all  of  a  white  colour,  mucilaginous,  pulpy, 
without  any  kind  of  consistency.  “The  veins, 
too,  that  issue  from  the  heart  are  already  in 
connexion  with  the  umbilicus,  from  which  one 
vein  extends  to  the  membrane  that  includes 
the  vitellus,  which  has  now  become  more  liquid 
and  diffluent  than  it  was  originally;  another  to 
the  membrane  which  surrounds  everything” 
(/.  e.,  the  tunica  colliqiiamenti)  “and  embraces 
the  foetus,  the  vitellus  and  the  interjacent 
fluid.  For  the  embryo  increasing  somewhat,  one 
portion  of  the  vitellus  is  superior,  another  in¬ 
ferior;  but  the  albumen  in  the  middle  is  liquid, 
and  still  extends  under  the  inferior  portion  of 
the  vitellus,  as  it  did  previously.”  Thus  far 
Aristotle. 

And  now  the  arteries  are  seen  distinctly  ac¬ 
companying  the  veins,  both  those  that  proceed 
to  the  albumen  and  those  that  are  distributed 
to  the  vitellus.  The  vitellus  also  at  this  time 
liquefies  still  more  and  becomes  more  diffluent, 

^  History  of  Animals,  vi.  3. 


HARVEY 

not  entirely,  indeed,  but,  as  already  said,  that 
portion  of  it  which  is  uppermost;  neither  do 
the  branches  of  the  veins  proceed  to  every  part 
of  the  vitellus  alike,  but  only  to  that  part 
which  we  have  spoken  of  as  resembling  melted 
wax.  The  veins  that  are  distributed  to  the  al¬ 
bumen  have,  in  like  manner,  arteries  accom¬ 
panying  them.  The  larger  portion  of  the  albu¬ 
men  now  dissolves  into  a  clear  fluid,  the  colliq- 
uament,  which  surrounds  the  embryo  that 
swims  in  its  middle,  and  comes  between  the  two 
portions  of  the  vitellus,  viz.,  the  superior  and 
the  inferior;  underneath  all  (in  the  sharp  end 
of  the  egg),  the  thicker  and  more  viscid  portion 
of  the  albumen  is  contained.  The  superior  por¬ 
tion  of  the  yelk  already  appears  more  liquid 
and  diffluent  than  the  inferior;  and  wherever 
the  branches  of  the  veins  extend,  there  the 
matter  seems  suddenly  to  swell  and  become 
more  diffluent. 

“On  the  tenth  day,”  continues  our  author, 
“the  albumen  subsides,  having  now  become  a 
small  tenacious,  viscid,  and  yellowish  mass” — 
so  much  of  it,  that  is  to  say,  as  has  not  passed 
into  the  state  of  colliquament. 

For  already  the  larger  portion  of  the  white 
has  become  dissolved,  and  has  even  passed  into 
the  body  of  the  embryo,  viz.,  the  whole  of  the 
thinner  albumen,  and  the  greater  portion  of 
the  thicker.  The  yelk,  on  the  contrary,  rather 
looks  larger  than  it  did  in  the  beginning.  Whence 
it  clearly  appears  that  the  yelk  has  not  as  yet 
served  for  the  nutrition  of  the  embryo,  but  is 
reserved  to  perform  this  office  by  and  by.  In  so 
far  as  we  can  conjecture  from  the  course  and 
distribution  of  the  veins,  the  embryo  from  the 
commencement  is  nourished  by  the  colliqua¬ 
ment;  upon  this  blood-vessels  are  first  distrib¬ 
uted,  and  then  they  spread  over  the  mem¬ 
brane  of  the  thinner  albumen,  next  over  the 
thicker  albumen,  and  finally  over  the  vitellus. 
The  thicker  albumen  serves  for  nutriment 
after  the  thinner;  the  vitellus  is  drawn  upon 
last  of  all. 

The  delicate  embryo,  consequently,  whilst  it 
is  yet  in  the  vermicular  state,  is  nourished  with 
the  thinnest  and  best  concocted  aliment,  the 
colliquament  and  thinner  albumen;  but  when 
it  is  older  it  has  food  supplied  to  it  more  in  har¬ 
mony  with  its  age  and  strength. 

Aristotle  describes  the  relative  situation  of 
the  several  parts  in  the  following  words:  “In  the 
anterior  and  posterior  part,  the  membrane  of 
the  egg  lies  under  the  shell — I  do  not  mean  the 
membrane  of  the  shell  itself,  but  one  under 
this,  in  which  there  is  contained  a  clear  fluid” — 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  379 


the  colliquament;  “then  the  chick  and  the 
membrane  including  it,  which  keeps  it  distinct 
from  the  fluid  around  it.”  But  here  I  suspect 
that  there  is  an  error  in  the  text;  for  as  the  au¬ 
thor  himself  indicates  the  thing,  it  ought  rather 
to  stand  thus:  “then  the  chick,  enveloped  in  a 
membrane,  continues  or  swims  in  the  clear 
fluid”;  which  membrane  is  not  exterior  to  the 
one  that  immediately  lines  the  shell,  but  an¬ 
other  lying  under  this;  which,  when  the  first  or 
external  albumen  is  consumed,  and  the  re¬ 
mainder  of  the  thicker  albumen  is  depressed 
into  the  sharp  end  of  the  egg,  of  two  mem¬ 
branes  forms  a  single  tunic  that  now  begins  to 
present  itself  like  the  secundine  called  the 
chorion.  And  Aristotle  says  well,  “there  is  a 
clear  fluid  contained  in  it,”  by  which  words  he 
does  not  mean  the  albumen,  but  the  colliqua¬ 
ment  derived  from  the  albumen,  and  in  which 
the  embryo  swims;  for  the  albumen  that  re¬ 
mains  subsides  into  the  small  end  of  the  egg. 

EXERCISE  22.  The  inspection  after  the  fourteenth 
day 

From  the  seventh  to  the  fourteenth  day 
everything  has  grown  and  become  more  con¬ 
spicuous.  The  heart  and  all  the  other  viscera 
have  now  become  concealed  within  the  abdo¬ 
men  of  the  embryo,  and  the  parts  that  formerly 
were  seen  naked  and  projecting  externally,  can 
now  only  be  perceived  when  the  thorax  and  ab¬ 
domen  are  laid  open.  The  chick  too  now  begins 
to  be  covered  with  feathers,  the  roots  of  which 
are  first  perceived  as  black  points.  The  pupils  of 
the  eyes  are  distinguished;  the  eyelids  appear, 
as  does  also  the  membrana  nictitans  in  the 
greater  canthus  of  the  eye,  a  membrane  which 
is  proper  to  birds,  and  which  they  use  for 
cleansing  the  eyeball.  The  convolutions  of  the 
brain  further  make  their  appearance;  the  cere¬ 
bellum  is  included  within  the  skull;  and  the 
tail  acquires  the  characteristic  shape  of  the 
bird’s  rump. 

After  the  fourteenth  day  the  viscera,  which 
up  to  this  time  have  been  white,  gradually  be¬ 
gin  to  assume  a  flesh  or  reddish  colour.  The 
heart,  having  now  entered  the  penetralia  of  the 
thorax  and  been  covered  with  the  sternum,  in¬ 
habits  the  dwelling  place  which  itself  had 
formed.  The  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  acquire 
solidity  under  the  dome  of  the  skull;  the  stom¬ 
ach  and  intestines,  however,  are  not  yet  in¬ 
cluded  within  the  abdomen,  but,  connected 
with  the  parts  within,  hang  pendulous  exter¬ 
nally. 

Of  the  two  vessels  that  proceed  from  the  ab¬ 


domen  to  the  umbilicus,  near  the  anus,  one  is 
an  artery,  as  its  pulse  proclaims,  and  arises  from 
the  arteria  magna  or  aorta,  the  other  is  a  vein, 
and  extends  from  the  vitellus  by  the  side  of  the 
intestines  to  the  vena  portae,  situated  in  the 
concave  part  of  the  liver.  The  other  trunk  of 
the  umbilical  vessels,  collecting  its  branches 
from  the  albumen,  passes  the  convexity  of  the 
liver,  and  enters  the  vena  cava  near  the  base  of 
the  heart. 

As  all  these  things  go  on  becoming  clearer 
from  day  to  day,  so  the  greater  portion  of  the 
albumen  is  also  gradually  consumed;  this,  how¬ 
ever,  is  nowise  the  case  with  the  vitellus,  which 
remains  almost  entire  up  to  this  time,  and  in¬ 
deed  is  seen  of  the  same  size  as  it  was  the  first 
day. 

In  the  course  of  the  following  days  five  um¬ 
bilical  vessels  are  conspicuous;  one  of  these  is 
the  great  vein,  arising  from  the  cava  above  the 
liver,  and  distributing  its  branches  to  the  albu¬ 
men;  two  other  veins  proceed  from  the  porta, 
both  having  the  same  origin,  and  run  to  the 
two  portions  of  the  vitellus,  which  we  have  but 
just  described;  and  these  are  accompanied  by 
two  arteries  arising  one  on  either  side  from  the 
lumbars. 

The  chick  now  occupies  a  larger  space  in  the 
egg  than  all  the  rest  of  the  matter  included  in 
it,  and  begins  to  be  covered  with  feathers;  the 
larger  the  embryo  grows,  the  smaller  is  the 
quantity  of  albumen  that  is  present.  It  is  also 
worthy  of  observation,  that  the  membrane  of 
the  colliquament  which  we  have  said  unites 
with  the  external  investing  membrane,  and 
constitutes  the  secundine  or  chorion,  now  in¬ 
cludes  the  whole  of  the  vitellus  in  one,  and  be¬ 
coming  contracted,  draws  the  vitellus  along 
with  the  intestines  towards  the  chick,  conjoins 
them  with  its  body,  and  incloses  them,  as  it 
were,  in  a  thick  sac.  Everything  that  was  pre¬ 
viously  extremely  delicate  and  transparent,  be¬ 
comes  more  opaque  and  fleshy  as  the  sac  con¬ 
tracts,  which  at  length,  like  a  hernial  tumour  of 
the  scrotum,  includes  and  supports  both  the 
intestines  and  the  yelk;  contracting  every  day 
in  a  greater  and  greater  degree,  it  comes  finally, 
to  constitute  the  abdomen  of  the  chick.  You 
will  find  the  yelk,  about  the  eighteenth  day, 
lying  among  the  intestines,  the  belly  at  large 
being  lax;  yet  are  the  parts  not  so  firmly  fixed 
but  that  the  intestines  (as  in  the  case  of  a  scrotal 
hernia),  along  with  the  vitellus,  can  be  pushed 
up  into  the  belly,  or  forced  out  of  it  as  it  were 
into  a  pouch.  I  have  occasionally  seen  the 
vitellus  prolapsed  in  this  way  from  the  ab' 


380  WILLIAM 

dominal  cavity  of  a  pigeon,  which  had  been 
prematurely  excluded  from  the  shell  in  the 
summer  season. 

The  chick  at  this  epoch  looks  big-bellied  and 
as  if  it  were  affected  with  a  hernia,  as  I  have 
said.  And  now  the  colliquament,  which  was  at 
first  in  large  quantity,  gradually  grows  turbid, 
suffers  change,  and  is  consumed,  so  that  the 
chick  comes  to  lie  bent  over  the  vitellus.  At 
the  same  period,  before  the  liver  assumes  its 
sanguineous  colour,  and  performs  the  business 
of  what  is  called  the  second  concoction,  the 
bile,  which  is  commonly  believed  to  be  sepa¬ 
rated  as  an  excretion  by  the  power  of  the  liver, 
is  seen  of  a  green  colour  between  the  lobes  of 
that  organ.  In  the  cavity  of  the  stomach  there  is 
a  limpid  fluid  contained,  obviously  of  the  same 
appearance  and  taste  as  the  colliquament  in 
which  the  foetus  swims;  this  passing  on  by  the 
intestines,  gradually  changes  its  colour,  and  is 
converted  into  chyle;  and  finally  in  the  lower 
portion  of  the  bowels  an  excrementitious  mat¬ 
ter  is  encountered,  of  the  same  character  as 
that  which  is  met  with  in  the  lower  intestines 
of  chicks  already  excluded  from  the  egg.  When 
the  chick  is  further  advanced  you  may  even 
see  this  fluid  concocted  and  coagulated;  just  as  in 
those  animals  that  feed  on  milk,  a  coagulum  is 
formed,  which  afterwards  separates  into  serum 
and  firmer  curd. 

When  the  albumen  is  almost  all  removed, 
and  only  a  very  small  quantity  of  the  colliqua¬ 
ment  is  left,  for  several  days  before  the  exclu¬ 
sion,  the  chick  no  longer  swims,  but,  as  I  have 
said,  bends  over  the  vitellus;  and  rolled  up  into 
a  round  ball,  with  the  head  for  the  most  part 
placed  between  the  right  thigh  and  wing,  it  is 
seen  with  its  beak,  nails,  feathers,  and  all  other 
parts  complete.  Sometimes  it  sleeps,  and  some¬ 
times  it  wakes,  and  moving  about  it  breathes 
and  chirps.  If  you  apply  the  egg  to  your  ear, 
you  will  hear  the  chick  within  making  a  noise, 
kicking,  and  unquestionably  chirping;  accord¬ 
ing  to  Aristotle,  he  now  also  uses  his  eyes.  If 
you  cautiously  drop  the  egg  into  warm  water, 
it  will  swim,  and  the  chick  within,  aroused  by 
the  warmth,  will  leap,  and,  as  I  have  already 
said,  cause  the  egg  to  tumble  about.  And  it  is  by 
this  means  that  our  country  folks  distinguish 
prolific  from  unproductive  eggs  which  sink 
when  put  into  water. 

When  the  albumen  is  entirely  gone,  just  be¬ 
fore  the  exclusion,  the  umbilical  vessel,  which  we 
have  described  as  distributed  to  the  albumen, 
is  obliterated;  or  as  Aristotle  says,  “that  um¬ 
bilicus  which  proceeds  to  the  external  secun- 


HARVEY 

dines  is  detached  from  the  animal  and  dies;  but 
the  one  which  leads  to  the  vitellus  becomes  con¬ 
nected  with  the  small  intestine  of  the  chick.”^ 

The  excrement  that  is  first  formed  in  the  in¬ 
testines  is  white  and  turbid,  like  softened  egg¬ 
shell;  and  some  of  the  same  matter  may  be 
found  contained  in  the  secundines.  The  philos¬ 
opher  admits  this  when  he  says:  “At  the  same 
time,  too,  the  chick  discharges  a  large  quantity 
of  excrement  into  the  outer  membrane;  and 
there  are  white  excrements  within  the  abdo¬ 
men,  as  well  as  those  that  have  been  evacuated.” 

Time  running  on,  very  shortly  before  the  ex¬ 
clusion,  light  green  faeces  are  formed,  similar  to 
those  which  the  chick  discharges  when  excluded 
from  the  egg.  In  the  crop,  too,  we  can  discover 
a  portion  of  the  colliquament  which  has  been 
swallowed;  and  in  the  stomach  some  curd  or 
coagulum. 

Up  to  this  time  the  liver  has  not  yet  acquired 
its  purple  or  blood-red  colour,  but  has  a  tint 
verging  from  white  into  yellow,  such  as  the 
liver  of  fishes  presents.  The  lungs,  however,  are 
of  a  florid  red. 

The  yelk  is  now  contained  in  the  abdomen 
among  the  intestines:  and  this  is  the  case  not 
merely  whilst  the  chick  is  in  the  egg,  but  even 
after  its  exclusion,  and  when  it  is  running  about 
following  its  mother  in  search  of  food.  So  that 
what  Aristotle  frequently  asserts  appears  to  be 
absolutely  true,  viz.^  that  the  yelk  is  destined 
for  the  food  of  the  chick;  and  the  chick  does 
certainly  use  it  for  food,  included  in  his  in¬ 
terior  as  it  is,  during  the  few  first  days  after  his 
exclusion,  and  until  such  time  as  his  bill  gains 
the  hardness  requisite  to  break  and  prepare  his 
food,  and  his  stomach  the  strength  necessary  to 
digest  it.  And,  indeed,  the  yelk  of  the  egg  is 
very  analogous  to  milk.  Aristotle  gives  us  his 
support  in  this  opinion  in  the  place  already  so 
frequently  referred  to:  “The  chick  now  lies 
over  much  of  the  yellow,  which  at  last  dimin¬ 
ishes,  and,  in  process  of  time,  disappears  en¬ 
tirely,  being  all  taken  into  the  body  of  the 
bird,  where  it  is  stored,  so  that  on  the  tenth 
day  after  the  exclusion  of  the  chick,  if  the  belly 
be  laid  open,  you  will  still  find  a  little  of  the 
yelk  upon  the  intestines.”^  I  have  myself  found 
certain  remains  of  the  yelk  even  upon  the  thir¬ 
teenth  day;  and  if  the  argument  derivable  from 
the  duct  of  the  umbilical  veins  which  we  have 
described  as  terminating  in  the  porta  of  the 
liver  by  one  or  another  trunk  be  of  any  avail, 
the  chick  is  already  nourished  almost  in  the 

^  History  of  Animals^  vi.  3. 

2  Ibid, 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  381 


same  manner  as  it  is  subsequently,  the  sus¬ 
tenance  being  attracted  from  the  yelk  by  the 
umbilical  vessels,  in  the  same  way  as  chyle  is  by 
and  by  transmitted  by  the  mesenteric  veins 
from  the  intestines.  For  the  vessels  terminate  in 
either  case  in  the  porta  of  the  liver,  to  which 
the  nourishment  attracted  in  the  same  way  is 
in  like  manner  transmitted.  It  is  not  necessary, 
therefore,  to  have  recourse  to  any  lacteal  ves¬ 
sels  of  the  mesentery,  which,  in  the  feathered 
tribes,  are  nowhere  to  be  distinguished. 

Let  me  be  permitted  here  to  add  what  I  have 
frequently  found:  with  a  view  to  discovering 
more  distinctly  the  relative  situations  of  the 
embryo  and  the  fluids,  I  have  boiled  an  egg 
hard,  from  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  incuba¬ 
tion  up  to  the  day  when  the  exclusion  would 
have  taken  place,  the  major  part  of  the  albumen 
being  already  consumed,  and  the  vitellus  divid¬ 
ed.  Breaking  the  shell,  and  regarding  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  chick,  I  found  both  the  remains  of 
the  albumen  and  the  two  portions  of  the  vitellus 
(which  we  have  said  are  divided  by  the  colli- 
quation  induced  by  the  gentle  heat)  possessing 
the  consistency,  colour,  taste,  and  other  quali¬ 
ties  which  distinguish  the  yelks  of  unincubated 
eggs  similarly  boiled.  I  have,  therefore,  fre¬ 
quently  asked  myself  how  it  came  to  pass  that 
unprolific  eggs  set  under  a  hen  are  made  to 
putrefy  and  become  offensive  by  the  same  ex¬ 
traneous  heat  which  produces  no  such  effect 
upon  prolific  eggs,  both  of  the  fluids  of  which  re¬ 
main  sweet  and  unchanged,  although  they  have 
an  embryo  in  the  midst  of  them  (and  this  even 
containing  some  small  quantity  of  excrementi- 
tious  matter  within  it),  so  that  did  any  one  eat 
the  yelk  of  such  an  egg  in  the  dark,  he  would 
not  distinguish  it  from  that  of  a  fresh  egg 
which  had  never  been  sat  upon. 

EXERCISE  23.  Of  the  exclusion  of  the  chicly,  or  the 
birth  from  the  egg 

The  egg  is,  as  we  have  said,  a  kind  of  exposed 
uterus,  and  place  in  which  the  embryo  is 
fashioned:  for  it  performs  the  office  of  the 
uterus  and  enfolds  the  chick  until  the  due  time 
of  its  exclusion  arrives,  when  the  creature  is 
born  perfect.  Oviparous  animals  consequently 
are  not  distinguished  from  viviparous  by  the 
circumstance  of  the  one  bringing  forth  their 
young  alive,  and  the  other  not  doing  so;  for  the 
chick  not  only  lives  and  moves  within  the  egg, 
but  even  breathes  and  chirps  whilst  there;  and, 
when  it  escapes  from  the  shell,  enjoys  a  more 
perfect  existence  than  the  foetus  of  animals  in 
general.  Oviparous  and  viviparous  animals  ra¬ 


ther  differ  in  their  modes  of  bringing  forth;  the 
uterus  or  place  in  which  the  embryo  is  formed 
being  within  the  animal  in  viviparous  tribes, 
where  it  is  cherished  and  brought  to  maturity, 
whilst  in  oviparous  tribes  the  uterus,  or  egg,  is 
exposed  or  without  the  animal,  which,  never¬ 
theless,  by  sitting  on  it  does  not  cherish  it  less 
truly  than  if  it  were  still  contained  within  the 
body.  » 

For  though  the  mother  occasionally  quits  her 
eggs  on  various  errands,  it  is  only  for  a  short 
season;  she  still  has  such  affection  for  them  that 
she  speedily  returns,  covers  them  over,  cherish¬ 
es  them  beneath  her  breast  and  carefully  de¬ 
fends  them;  and  this  on  to  the  twenty-first  or 
twenty-second  day,  when  the  chicks,  in  search 
of  freer  air,  break  the  shell  and  emerge  into  the 
light. 

Now  we  must  not  overlook  a  mistake  of 
Fabricius,  and  almost  every  one  else  in  regard 
to  this  exclusion  or  birth  of  the  chick.  Let  us 
hear  Fabricius. 

“The  chick  wants  air  sooner  than  food,  for  it 
has  still  some  store  of  nourishment  within  it;  in 
which  case  the  chick,  by  his  chirping,  gives  a 
sign  to  his  mother  of  the  necessity  of  breaking 
the  shell,  which  he  himself  cannot  accomplish 
by  reason  of  the  hardness  of  the  shell  and  the 
softness  of  his  beak,  to  say  nothing  of  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  shell  from  the  beak,  and  of  the 
position  of  the  head  under  the  wing.  The  chick, 
nevertheless,  is  already  so  strong,  and  the  cav¬ 
ity  in  the  egg  is  so  ample,  and  the  air  contained 
within  it  so  abundant,  that  the  breathing  be¬ 
comes  free  and  the  creature  can  emit  the  sounds 
that  are  proper  to  it;  these  can  be  readily  heard 
by  a  bystander,  and  were  recognized  both  by 
Pliny  and  Aristotle,^  and  perchance  have  some¬ 
thing  of  the  nature  of  a  petition  in  their  tone. 
For  the  hen  hearing  the  chirping  of  the  chick 
within,  and  knowing  thereby  the  necessity  of 
now  breaking  the  shell  in  order  that  the  chick 
may  enjoy  the  air  which  has  become  needful  to 
it,  or  if  you  will,  you  may  say,  that  desiring  to 
see  her  dear  offspring,  she  breaks  the  shell  with 
her  beak,  which  is  not  hard  to  do,  for  the  part 
over  the  hollow,  long  deprived  of  moisture,  and 
exposed  to  the  heat  of  incubation,  has  become 
dry  and  brittle.  The  chirping  of  the  chick  is 
consequently  the  first  and  principal  indication 
of  the  creature  desiring  to  make  its  escape,  and 
of  its  requiring  air.  This  the  hen  perceives  so 
nicely,  that  if  she  hears  the  chirping  to  be  low 
and  internal,  she  straightway  turns  the  egg 
over  with  her  feet,  that  she  may  break  the  shell 

^  Pliny,  X.  53;  Aristotle,  History  of  Animals^  vi.  3, 


382  WILLIAM 

at  the  place  whence  the  voice  proceeds  without 
detriment  to  the  chick. Hippocrates  adds, 
“Another  indication  or  reason  of  the  chick’s 
desiring  to  escape  from  the  shell,  is  that  when  it 
wants  food  it  moves  vigorously,  in  search  of  a 
larger  supply,  by  which  the  membrane  around 
it  is  torn,  and  the  mother  breaking  the  shell  at 
the  place  where  she  hears  the  chick  moving 
most  lustily,  permits  it  to  escape.”^ 

All  this  is  stated  pleasantly  and  well  by  Fab- 
ricius;  but  there  is  nothing  of  solid  reason  in  the 
tale.  For  I  have  found  by  experience  that  it  is 
the  chick  himself  and  not  the  hen  that  breaks 
open  the  shell,  and  this  fact  is  every  way  in  con¬ 
formity  with  reason.  For  how  else  should  the 
eggs  that  are  hatched  in  dunghills  and  ovens,  as 
in  Egypt  and  other  countries,  be  broken  in  due 
season,  where  there  is  no  mother  present  to  at¬ 
tend  to  the  voice  of  the  supplicating  chick,  and 
to  bring  assistance  to  the  petitioner.?*  And  how 
again  are  the  eggs  of  sea  and  land  tortoises,  of 
hshes,  silkworms,  serpents,  and  even  ostriches 
to  be  chipped.?*  The  embryos  in  these  have 
either  no  voice  with  which  they  can  notify 
their  desire  for  deliverance,  or  the  eggs  are 
buried  in  the  sand  or  slime  where  no  chirping 
or  noise  could  be  heard.  The  chick  therefore  is 
born  spontaneously,  and  makes  its  escape  from 
the  eggshell  through  its  own  efforts.  That  this 
is  the  case  appears  from  unquestionable  argu¬ 
ments:  when  the  shell  is  first  chipped,  the  open¬ 
ing  is  much  smaller  than  accords  with  the  beak 
of  the  mother;  but  it  corresponds  exactly  to 
the  size  of  the  bill  of  the  chick,  and  you  may 
always  see  the  shell  chipped  at  the  same  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  extremity  of  the  egg,  and  the 
broken  pieces,  especially  those  that  yield  to  the 
first  blows,  projecting  regularly  outwards  in  the 
form  of  a  circlet.  But  as  anyone  on  looking  at  a 
broken  pane  of  glass  can  readily  determine 
whether  the  force  came  from  without  or  from 
within,  by  the  direction  of  the  fragments  that 
still  adhere,  so  in  the  chipped  egg  it  is  easy  to 
perceive,  by  the  projection  of  the  pieces  around 
the  entire  circlet,  that  the  breaking  force  comes 
from  within.  And  I  myself  and  many  others 
with  me  besides,  hearing  the  chick  scraping 
against  the  shell  with  its  feet,  have  actually 
seen  it  perforate  this  part  with  its  beak,  and  ex¬ 
tend  the  fracture  in  a  circle  like  a  coronet.  I 
have  further  seen  the  chick  raise  up  the  top  of 
the  shell  upon  its  head  and  remove  it. 

We  have  gone  at  length  into  some  of  these 
matters,  as  thinking  that  they  were  not  with- 

*  Op.  cit.,  p.  59. 

“  In  the  book  De  nat.  pucri. 


HARVEY 

out  all  speculative  interest,  as  we  shall  show  by 
and  by.  The  arguments  of  Fabricius  are  easily 
answered.  For  I  admit  that  the  chick  in  ovo 
produces  sounds,  and  these  perchance  may  even 
have  something  of  the  implorative  in  their  na¬ 
ture;  but  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  the 
shell  is  broken  by  the  mother.  Neither  is  the 
bill  of  the  chick  so  soft,  nor  yet  so  far  from  the 
shell,  that  it  cannot  pierce  through  its  prison 
walls,  particularly  when  we  see  that  the  shell, 
for  the  reasons  assigned,  is  extremely  brittle. 
Neither  does  the  chick  always  keep  its  head 
under  its  wing,  so  as  to  be  thereby  prevented 
from  breaking  the  shell,  but  only  when  it  sleeps 
or  has  died.  For  the  creature  wakes  at  intervals 
and  scrapes  and  kicks,  and  struggles,  pressing 
against  the  shell,  tearing  the  investing  mem¬ 
branes,  and  chirps  (and  that  this  is  done  whilst 
petitioning  for  assistance  I  willingly  concede), 
all  of  which  things  may  readily  be  heard  by  any 
one  who  will  use  his  ears.  And  the  hen  listening 
attentively  when  she  hears  the  chirping  deep 
within  the  egg  does  not  break  the  shell,  but 
she  turns  the  egg  with  her  feet  and  gives  the 
chick  within  another  and  a  more  commodious 
position.  But  there  is  no  occasion  to  suppose 
that  the  chick  by  his  chirping  informs  his 
mother  of  the  propriety  of  breaking  the  shell, 
or  seeks  deliverance  from  it.  For  very  frequent¬ 
ly  for  two  days  before  the  exclusion  you  may 
hear  the  chick  chirping  within  the  shell. 
Neither  is  the  mother,  when  she  turns  the  egg, 
looking  for  the  proper  place  to  break  it;  but  as 
the  child  when  uncomfortably  laid  in  his  cradle 
is  restless  and  whimpers  and  cries,  and  his  fond 
mother  turns  him  this  way  and  that,  and  rocks 
him  till  he  is  composed  again,  so  does  the  hen 
when  she  hears  the  chick  restless  and  chirping 
within  the  egg,  and  feels  it,  when  hatched, 
moving  uneasily  about  in  the  nest,  immedi¬ 
ately  raise  herself  and  observe  that  she  is  not 
pressing  on  it  with  her  weight,  or  keeping  it  too 
warm,  or  the  like,  and  then  with  her  bill  and 
her  feet  she  moves  and  turns  the  egg  until  the 
chick  within  is  again  at  its  ease  and  quiet. 

EXERCISE  24.  Of  twin-hearing  eggs 

Twin-bearing  eggs  are  such  as  produce  twin 
chickens,  and  according  to  Aristotle,  “are  pos¬ 
sessed  of  two  yelks,  which,  in  some  are  sepa¬ 
rated  by  a  layer  of  thin  albumen,  that  they 
may  less  encroach  on  one  another;  in  others, 
however,  there  is  nothing  of  the  sort,  and  then 
the  two  yelks  are  in  contact.”^ 

I  have  frequently  seen  twin  eggs,  each  of  the 

®  History  of  Animals^  vi.  3. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  383 


yelks  in  which  was  surrounded  by  an  albumen, 
with  common  and  proper  membranes  sur¬ 
rounding  them.  I  have  also  met  with  eggs  hav¬ 
ing  two  yelks  connate,  as  it  were,  both  of  which 
were  embraced  by  a  single  and  common  albu¬ 
men. 

“Some  fowls”  says  Aristotle, ‘  “always  pro¬ 
duce  twins,  in  which  the  particulars  relating  to 
the  yelk  that  have  been  stated  are  clearly  per¬ 
ceived.  A  certain  fowl  laid  within  two  of  twen¬ 
ty  eggs,  all  of  which,  except  those  that  were  un- 
prolific,  produced  twins.  Of  the  twins,  how¬ 
ever,  one  was  always  larger,  the  other  smaller, 
and  the  smaller  chick  was  frequently  deformed 
in  addition.” 

With  us  twin  eggs  are  occasionally  produced, 
and  twin  chicks  too,  although  very  rarely,  are 
engendered.  I  have  never  myself,  however,  seen 
both  of  these  chicks  live  and  thrive;  one  of 
them  either  died  within  the  egg  or  at  the  time 
of  the  exclusion.  And  this  the  words  of  Aristotle 
prepare  us  to  expect,  when  he  says  “one  of  the 
two  is  larger,  the  other  smaller”;  this  is  as  much 
as  to  say  that  one  of  them  is  stronger  and  of 
greater  age,  the  other  weaker  and  less  prepared 
for  quitting  the  shell:  my  own  opinion,  there¬ 
fore,  is  that  the  two  yelks  are  of  different  ori¬ 
gins  and  maturity.  It  is  therefore  scarcely  pos¬ 
sible  but  that  the  stronger  and  more  advanced 
chick,  if  the  egg  be  broken  and  it  emerge  into 
the  light,  will  cause  the  blight  and  abortion  of 
the  other.  But  if  the  stronger  bird  do  not  chip 
the  shell,  he  himself  is  threatened  with  a  pres¬ 
ent  danger,  viz.^  want  of  air.  At  the  exclusion 
from  the  shell,  consequently,  certain  death 
hangs  over  one  or  other,  if  not  over  both. 

Fabricius,  either  not  observing  the  above 
words  of  Aristotle,  or  neglecting  them,  says: 
“If  an  egg  have  now  and  then  two  yelks,  it  en¬ 
genders  a  chick  having  four  legs  or  wings,  and 
two  heads — a  monster,  in  short;  never  two 
chicks  distinct  from  one  another,  and  that  can 
be  spoken  of  as  a  pair;  there  is  but  one  trunk, 
to  which  are  appended  two  heads,”  &c. 

Whence  we  may  infer  that  he  himself  had 
never  seen  nor  heard  from  credible  persons 
that  such  eggs  produce  two  pullets,  and  there¬ 
fore  that  he  agrees  with  me  in  regarding  such 
eggs  as  rare,  and  in  holding  that  they  never  pro¬ 
duce  two  chicks  both  alike  capable  of  living. 

I  am  surprised,  nevertheless,  that,  with  the 
authority  of  Aristotle  before  him,  he  should 
have  said  that  “two  chicks,  distinct  and  sep¬ 
arate,  are  never  produced  from  such  eggs,”  but 
always  a  monster;  the  rather  as  he  thinks  that 

1  Ibid, 


the  embryo  is  engendered  from  the  chalazae  as 
from  the  appropriate  matter,  and  he  could  not 
but  see  that  there  are  four  chalazae  in  every 
twin-egg. 

I  should  rather  imagine  that  when  two  vitelli 
are  included  by  the  same  albumen  in  a  twin- 
egg,  and  are  so  intimately  associated  that  their 
cicatriculae,  when  they  are  resolved  together, 
constitute  a  single  eye  or  colliquament,  may  en¬ 
gender  a  monstrous  embryo  with  four  feet,  two 
heads,  &c.,  because  I  see  nothing  to  hinder 
this;  and  such  a  production  do  I  conceive  to 
have  been  engendered  by  the  egg  of  which 
Fabricius  speaks. 

But  where  two  yelks  have  existed  separately, 
parted  by  their  several  membranes,  and  fur¬ 
nished  with  chalazae,  albumens,  and  all  else  req¬ 
uisite  to  the  generation  of  the  chick,  I  hold 
that  we  must  conclude,  with  Aristotle,  that 
such  an  egg,  as  it  has  all  the  parts  of  two  eggs 
except  the  shell,  so  does  it  also  possess  the  facul¬ 
ty  or  faculties  of  as  many;  and  unless  it  be  a 
wind  or  barren  egg,  that  it  will  for  the  most  part 
produce  two  embryos,  and  but  rarely  a  single 
monstrous  individual. 

EXERCISE  25.  Certain  deductions  from  the 
preceding  history  of  the  egg 

Such  is  the  history  of  the  hen’s  egg;  in  which 
we  have  spoken  of  its  production,  and  of  its 
action  or  faculty  to  engender  a  chick,  at  too 
great  length,  it  may  appear  to  those  who  do  not 
see  the  end  and  object  of  such  painstaking,  of 
such  careful  observation.  Wherefore  I  think  it 
advisable  here  to  state  what  fruits  may  follow 
our  industry,  and  in  the  words  of  the  learned 
Lord  Verulam,  to  “enter  upon  our  second  vin¬ 
tage.”  Certain  theorems,  therefore,  will  have  to 
be  gathered  from  the  history  given;  some  of 
which  will  be  quite  certain,  some  questionable 
and  requiring  further  sifting,  and  some  para¬ 
doxical  and  opposed  to  popular  persuasion. 
Some  of  these,  moreover,  will  have  reference  to 
the  male,  some  to  the  female,  several  to  the 
egg,  and  finally,  a  few  to  the  formation  of  the 
chick.  When  these  have  been  carefully  dis¬ 
cussed  seriatim,,  we  shall  be  in  a  condition  to 
judge  with  greater  certainty  and  facility  of  the 
generation  of  all  other  animals, 

EXERCISE  26.  Of  the  nature  of  the  egg 

Of  the  theorems  that  refer  to  the  egg,  some 
teach  us  what  it  is,  some  show  its  mode  of  for¬ 
mation,  and  others  tell  of  the  parts  which  com¬ 
pose  it. 

It  is  certain,  in  the  first  place,  that  one  egg 


WILLIAM  HARX'EY 


384 

produces  one  chick  only.  Although  the  egg  be 
in  a  certain  sense  an  external  uterus,  still  it 
most  rarely  engenders  several  embryos,  but  by 
far  the  most  frequently  produces  no  more  than 
a  single  pullet.  And  when  an  egg  produces  two 
chicks,  which  it  does  sometimes,  still  is  this  egg 
to  be  reputed  not  single  but  double,  and  as  pos- 
sessed  of  the  nature  and  parts  of  two  eggs. 

For  an  egg  is  to  be  viewed  as  a  conception 
proceeding  from  the  male  and  the  female, 
equally  endued  with  the  virtue  of  either,  and 
constituting  an  unity  from  which  a  single  ani¬ 
mal  is  engendered. 

Nor  is  it  the  beginning  only,  but  the  fruit 
and  conclusion  likewise.  It  is  the  beginning  as 
regards  the  being  to  be  engendered;  the  fruit 
in  respect  of  the  two  parents:  at  once  the  end 
proposed  in  their  engendering,  and  the  origin  of 
the  chick  that  is  to  be.  “But  the  seed  and  the 
fruit,”  according  to  Aristotle,^  “differ  from  one 
another  in  the  relations  of  prior  and  posterior; 
for  the  fruit  is  that  which  comes  of  another,  the 
seed  is  that  from  which  this  other  comes:  were 
it  otherwise,  both  would  be  the  same.” 

The  egg  also  seems  to  be  a  certain  mean;  not 
merely  in  so  far  as  it  is  beginning  and  end,  but 
as  it  is  the  common  work  of  the  two  sexes  and  is 
compounded  by  both;  containing  within  itself 
the  matter  and  the  plastic  power,  it  has  the 
virtue  of  both,  by  which  it  produces  a  foetus 
that  resembles  the  one  as  well  as  the  other.  It  is 
further  a  mean  between  the  animate  and  the  in¬ 
animate  world;  for  neither  is  it  wholly  en¬ 
dowed  with  life,  nor  is  it  entirely  without  vi¬ 
tality.  It  is  still  further  the  mid-passage  or  tran¬ 
sition  stage  between  parents  and  offspring,  be¬ 
tween  those  who  are,  or  were,  and  those  who 
are  about  to  be:  it  is  the  hinge  and  pivot  upon 
which  the  whole  generation  of  the  bird  re¬ 
volves.  The  egg  is  the  terminus  from  which  all 
fowls,  male  and  female,  have  sprung,  and  to 
which  all  their  lives  tend —  it  is  the  result 
which  nature  has  proposed  to  herself  in  their 
being.  And  thus  it  comes  that  individuals  in 
procreating  their  like  for  the  sake  of  their 
species,  endure  for  ever.  The  egg,  I  say,  is  a 
period  or  portion  of  this  eternity;  for  it  were 
hard  to  say  whether  an  egg  exists  for  the  sake 
of  the  chick  that  it  engenders,  or  the  pullet 
exists  for  the  sake  of  the  egg  which  it  is  to  en¬ 
gender.  Which  of  these  was  the  prior,  whether 
with  reference  to  time  or  nature — the  egg  or 
the  pullet  This  question,  when  we  come  to 
speak  of  the  generation  of  animals  in  general, 
we  shall  discuss  at  length. 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  i.  13. 


The  egg,  moreover — and  this  is  especially  to 
be  noted — corresponds  in  its  proportions  with 
the  seeds  of  plants,  and  has  all  the  same  condi¬ 
tions  as  these,  so  that  it  is  to  be  regarded,  not 
without  reason,  as  the  seed  or  sperma  of  the 
common  fowl,  in  the  same  way  as  the  seeds  of 
plants  are  justly  entitled  their  eggs,  not  only 
as  being  the  matter  ot  that  from  which,  but  the 
efficient  or  that  by  w^hich  the  pullet  is  engen¬ 
dered.  In  which,  finally,  no  part  of  the  future 
offspring  exists  de  facto,  but  in  which  all  parts 
inhere  in  potentia. 

The  seed,  properly  so  called,  differs,  how¬ 
ever,  from  the  geniture,  which  by  Aristotle  is 
defined  to  be  “that  which,  proceeding  from  the 
generator,  is  the  cause,  that  which  first  obtains 
the  principle  of  generation;  in  those,  to  wit, 
whom  nature  destined  to  copulate.  But  the 
seed  is  that  which  proceeds  from  these  two  in 
their  connexion:  and  such  is  the  seed  of  all 
vegetables,  and  of  some  animals,  in  which  the 
sexes  are  not  distinct;  like  that  which  is  first 
produced  by  male  and  female  commingled,  a 
kind  of  promiscuous  conception,  or  animal; 
for  this  already  possesses  what  is  required  of 
both.” 

The  egg,  consequently,  is  a  natural  body  en¬ 
dowed  with  animal  virtues,  viz,,  principles  of 
motion  and  rest,  of  transmutation  and  conser¬ 
vation;  it  is,  moreover,  a  body  which,  under 
favorable  circumstances,  has  the  capacity  to 
pass  into  an  animal  form;  heavy  bodies  indeed 
do  not  sink  more  naturally,  nor  light  ones 
float,  when  they  are  unimpeded,  than  do  seeds 
and  eggs  in  virtue  of  their  inherent  capacity 
become  changed  into  vegetables  and  animals. 
So  that  the  seed  and  the  egg  are  alike  the  fruit 
and  final  result  of  the  things  of  which  they  are 
the  beginning  and  efficient  cause. 

For  a  single  pullet  there  is  a  single  egg;  and 
so  Aristotle  says:  “from  one  seed  one  body  is 
engendered;  for  example,  from  a  single  grain  of 
wheat  one  plant;  from  a  single  egg  one  animal; 
for  a  twin  egg  is,  in  fact,  two  eggs.”^ 

And  Fabricius  with  truth  observes:  “The 
egg  is  not  only  an  exposed  uterus,  and  place  of 
generation,  but  that  also  on  which  the  whole 
reproduction  of  the  pullet  depends,  and  which 
the  egg  achieves  as  agent,  as  matter,  as  instru¬ 
ment,  as  seat,  and  all  else,  if  more  there  be,  that 
is  needful  to  generation.”^  He  shows  it  to  be  an 
organ  because  it  consists  of  several  parts,  and 
this,  from  the  statement  of  Galen,  who  will 
have  the  very  essence  of  an  organ  to  be  that  “it 

^  Ibid.,  I.  20. 

3  Loc.  cit.,  p.  47. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  385 


consist  of  several  parts,  all  of  which  conspire  to 
one  and  the  same  action  though  diverse  in 
faculty  and  use;  for  some  are  principal  instru¬ 
ments  in  the  action;  some  are  indispensable  to 
it — without  them  it  could  not  take  place;  some 
secure  its  better  performance;  and  some,  in 
fine,  are  extant  for  the  safety  and  preservation 
of  everything  else.”  He  also  shows  it  to  be  an 
agents  when  from  Aristotle  and  Galen  he  lays 
down  the  two  actions  of  the  egg,  viz. :  “the  gen¬ 
eration  of  the  chick,  and  the  growth  and  nu¬ 
trition  of  the  pullet.”  At  the  conclusion  he  ex¬ 
presses  himself  clearly  in  these  words:  “In  the 
works  of  nature  we  see  conjunct  and  one,  the 
artificer,  the  instrument,  and  the  matter;  the 
liver,  for  instance,  is  both  the  agent  and  the 
instrument  for  the  production  of  the  blood; 
and  so  every  part  of  the  body;  Aristotle,^  there¬ 
fore,  said  well  that  the  moving  powers  were  not 
easily  distinguished  from  the  instruments.  In 
artificial  things,  indeed,  the  artificer  and  the 
instrument  are  distinct,  as  much  so  as  the 
workman  and  his  hammer,  the  painter  and  his 
pencil.  And  the  reason  adduced  by  Galen^  is 
this:  that  in  things  made  by  art  the  artificer  is 
without  the  work;  in  natural  things,  again,  the 
artificer  is  within  it,  conjunct  with  the  in¬ 
struments,  and  pervading  the  whole  organi¬ 
zation.” 

To  this  I  add  these  perspicuous  words  of 
Aristotle.  “Of  extant  things  some  are  consistent 
with  nature,  others  with  other  causes.  Animals 
and  their  parts,  and  plants,  and  simple  bodies, 
as  earth,  fire,  air,  and  water,  consist  with  na¬ 
ture,  and  are  allowed  universally  to  do  so;  but 
these  bodies  differ  entirely  from  those  that  do 
not  consist  with  nature.  For  whatsoever  con¬ 
sists  with  nature  is  seen  to  have  within  itself  a 
principle  of  motion  and  of  rest,  now  according 
to  place,  now  according  to  increment  and  de¬ 
crement,  and  again  according  to  change.  A 
couch  or  litter,  a  garment,  and  other  things  of 
the  same  description,  however  designated,  inas¬ 
much  as  they  are  made  by  art,  have  no  inherent 
faculty  of  change;  but  inasmuch  as  they  are 
made  of  earth,  or  stone,  or  of  mixtures  of  these, 
they  have  such  a  faculty.  As  if  nature  were  a 
certain  principle  and  cause  wherefore  that 
should  move  and  be  at  rest  in  which  she  in¬ 
heres  originally,  independently,  and  not  by 
accident.  I  say,  particularly,  not  by  accident., 
because  it  might  happen  that  one  being  a  phy¬ 
sician  should  himself  be  the  cause  of  his  own 
good  health;  but  he  is  not  familiar  with  medi- 

^  On  tJie  Generation  of  Animals,  ii.  4. 

^  De  form.  foet. 


cine  in  the  same  respect  as  he  has  worked  his 
own  cure;  it  happens  simply  that  the  man  who 
here  recovers  his  health  is  a  physician.  It,  there¬ 
fore,  occasionally  happens  that  these  two  things 
are  distinct  and  separate.  But  it  is  not  other¬ 
wise  with  everything  besides  that  is  of  art:  none 
of  these  has  in  itself  a  principle  of  performance 
or  action,  though  some  of  them  have  such  a 
principle  in  other  things  and  beyond  them¬ 
selves,  such  as  a  house,  and  aught  else  that  is 
made  with  hands;  and  some  have  even  such  a 
principle  inherent,  but  not  per  se  and  inde¬ 
pendently:  everything,  for  example,  may  by 
accident  become  a  cause  to  itself.  Nature  is, 
therefore,  as  stated;  and  those  things  have  na¬ 
ture  within  them  which  possess  this  principle. 
Now  all  such  are  substances;  for  nature  is  al¬ 
ways  some  subject,  and  inheres  in  the  subject.”^ 

These  things  I  have  spoken  of  at  length,  and 
even  quoted  the  words  of  the  writers  appealed 
to,  that  it  might  thence  appear  first,  that  all  I 
attribute  to  the  egg  is  actually  there,  viz.:  mat¬ 
ter,  organ,  efficient  cause,  place,  and  everything 
else  requisite  to  the  generation  of  the  chick; 
and  next  and  more  especially,  that  the  truth  in 
regard  to  the  following  very  difficult  questions 
might  be  made  clearly  to  appear,  viz. :  Which 
and  what  principle  is  it  whence  motion  and 
generation  proceed.?^  By  what  virtue  does  the 
semen  act,  according  to  Aristotle  .f*  What  is  it 
that  renders  the  semen  itself  fruitful  ?  (for  the 
philosopher  will  have  it  that  nature  in  all  nat¬ 
ural  bodies  is  the  innate  principle  of  motion 
and  of  rest,  and  not  any  second  accident). 
Whether  is  that  which  in  the  egg  is  cause,  arti¬ 
ficer,  and  principle  of  generation  and  of  all  the 
vital  and  vegetative  operations — conservation, 
nutrition,  growth — innate  or  superadded  ?  And 
whether  does  it  inhere  primarily,  of  itself,  and 
as  a  kind  of  nature,  or  intervene  by  accident,  as 
the  physician  in  curing  diseases?  Whether  is 
that  which  transforms  the  egg  into  a  pullet  in¬ 
herent  or  acquired,  or  is  it  already  conceived  in 
the  ovary,  and  does  it  nourish,  augment,  and 
perfect  the  egg  there? 

What  is  it  besides  that  preserves  the  egg 
sweet  after  it  is  laid  ?  What  is  it  that  renders  an 
egg  fruitful — is  it  to  be  called  soul,  or  a  portion 
of  the  soul,  or  something  belonging  to  the  soul, 
or  something  having  a  soul,  or  is  it  intelli¬ 
gence,  or,  finally,  is  it  Divinity  seeing  that  it 
acts  to  a  definite  end,  and  orders  all  with  inimi¬ 
table  providence  and  art,  and  yet  in  an  incom' 
prehensible  manner,  always  obtaining  what  is 
best  both  for  simple  being  and  for  well-being, 

®  Physics,  II.  I. 


386  WILLIAM 

for  protection  also  and  for  ornament?  And  all 
this  not  only  in  the  fruitful  egg  which  it  fecun¬ 
dates,  but  in  the  hypenemic  egg  which  it 
nourishes,  causes  to  increase,  and  preserves. 
Nay,  it  is  not  merely  the  vitellus  in  the  vitel- 
larium  or  egg-bed,  but  the  smallest  speck 
whence  the  yelk  is  produced,  of  no  greater  size 
than  a  millet  or  a  mustard-seed,  that  it  nour¬ 
ishes  and  makes  to  grow,  and  finally  envelopes 
with  albumen,  and  furnishes  with  chalazae,  and 
surrounds  with  membranes  and  a  shell.  For  it  is 
probable  that  even  the  barren  egg,  whilst  it  is 
included  within  the  fowl  and  is  connected  with 
her,  is  nourished  and  preserved  by  its  internal 
and  inherent  principle,  and  made  to  increase 
(not  otherwise  than  the  eggs  of  fishes  and  frogs, 
exposed  externally,  increase  and  are  perfected), 
and  to  be  transformed  from  a  small  speck  into  a 
yelk,  and  transferred  from  the  ovary  to  the 
uterus  (though  it  have  no  connexion  with  the 
uterus),  there  to  be  endued  with  albumen,  and 
at  length  to  be  completed  with  its  chalazse, 
membranes,  and  shell. 

But  what  that  may  be  in  the  hypenemic  egg 
as  well  as  in  the  fruitful  one,  which  in  a  similar 
manner  and  from  the  same  causes  or  principles 
produces  the  same  effects;  whether  it  be  the 
same  soul,  or  the  same  part  of  the  soul,  or  some¬ 
thing  else  inherent  in  both,  must  be  worthy  of 
inquiry:  it  seems  probable,  however,  that  the 
same  things  should  proceed  from  similar  causes. 

Although  the  egg  whilst  it  is  being  produced 
is  contained  within  the  fowl,  and  is  connected 
with  the  ovary  of  the  mother  by  a  pedicle,  and 
is  nourished  by  blood-vessels,  it  is  not  therefore 
to  be  spoken  of  as  a  part  of  the  mother;  nor  is  it 
to  be  held  as  living  and  vegetating  through  her 
vital  principle,  but  by  a  virtue  peculiar  to  itself 
and  an  internal  principle;  just  as  fungi,  and 
mosses,  and  the  mistletoe,  which  although  they 
adhere  to  vegetables  and  are  nourished  by  the 
same  sap  as  their  leaves  and  germs,  still  form  no 
part  of  these  vegetables,  nor  are  they  ever  so 
esteemed.  Aristotle,  with  a  view  to  meeting 
these  difficulties,  concedes  a  vegetative  soul  to 
the  egg,  even  to  the  hypenemic  one.  He  says: 
“Females,  too,  and  all  things  that  live  are  en¬ 
dowed  with  the  vegetative  virtue  of  the  soul,  as 
has  been  often  said;  and  therefore  this  egg  is 
perfect  as  the  conception  of  a  plant,  but  imper¬ 
fect  as  that  of  an  animal.”^  And  he  inculcates 
the  same  doctrine  elsewhere,  when  he  asks:  “In 
what  manner  or  sense  are  hypenemic  eggs  said 
to  live  ?  For  they  cannot  do  so  in  the  same  sense 
as  fruitful  eggs,  otherwise  a  living  thing  might 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  in.  7. 


HARVEY 

be  engendered  by  their  agency.  Nor  do  they 
comport  themselves  like  wood  or  stone;  be¬ 
cause  these  perish  by  a  kind  of  corruption,  as 
having  formerly  had  life  in  a  certain  manner. 
It  is  positive,  therefore,  that  hypenemic  eggs 
have  a  certain  kind  of  soul  potentially;  but 
what?  of  necessity  that  ultimate  soul,  which  is 
the  appanage  of  vegetables;  for  this  equally  in¬ 
heres  in  all  things,  in  animals  as  well  as  vege- 
tables.”2 

But  it  is  not  the  same  soul  that  is  found  in 
hypenemic  as  in  fruitful  eggs;  otherwise  would 
a  pullet  be  indifferently  produced  from  both; 
but  how  and  in  what  respects  the  soul  attached 
to  each  is  different  from  the  other,  Aristotle 
does  not  sufficiently  explain,  when  he  inquires: 
“Wherefore  are  all  the  parts  of  an  egg  present  in 
the  hypenemic  egg,  and  it  still  incapable  of  pro¬ 
ducing  a  chick?  because,”  he  replies,  “it  is  req¬ 
uisite  that  it  have  a  sensitive  soul.”^  As  if  in 
fruitful  eggs,  besides  the  vegetative  soul,  there 
were  a  sensitive  soul  present.  Unless  you  under¬ 
stand  the  vegetative  soul  as  inhering  actually  in 
the  fruitful  egg,  which  contains  the  sensitive 
soul  within  it  potentially;  whence  the  animal, 
and  the  sensible  parts  of  the  animal  are  subse¬ 
quently  produced.  But  neither  do  writers  sat¬ 
isfactorily  untie  this  knot,  nor  set  the  mind  of 
the  inquirer  free  from  the  difficulties  that  en¬ 
tangle  him.  For  he  sees  that  the  egg  is  a  true 
animal  seed,  according  to  this  sentence  of  the 
Stagyrite:  “In  those  things  endowed  with  life, 
in  which  the  male  and  female  sexes  are  not  dis¬ 
tinct,  the  seed  is  already  present  as  a  concep¬ 
tion.  I  entitle  conception  the  first  mixture  from 
the  male  and  female  (the  analogue  of  the  vege¬ 
table  seed  therefore).  Wherefore  from  one  seed 
there  is  engendered  one  body,  as  from  one  egg 
one  animal.”"* 

It  appears,  consequently,  that  for  one  egg 
there  is  one  soul  or  vital  principle.  But  whether 
is  this  that  of  the  mother,  or  that  of  the  father, 
or  a  mixture  ot  the  two?  And  here  the  greatest 
difficulties  are  occasioned  by  those  eggs  that 
are  produced  by  the  concurrence  of  animals  of 
different  species,  as,  for  example,  of  the  com¬ 
mon  fowl  and  pheasant.  In  such  an  egg,  I  ask,  is 
it  the  vital  principle  of  the  father  or  that  of  the 
mother,  which  inheres?  or  is  it  a  mixture  of 
the  two?  But  how  can  vital  principles  be  min¬ 
gled,  if  the  vital  principle  (as  form)  be  act  and 
substance,  which  it  is,  according  to  Aristotle? 
For  no  one  will  deny,  whatever  it  be  ultimately 

2  Ibid.,  II.  4. 

2  Ibid.,  II.  4. 

*  Ibid.,  I.  20. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  387 


which  in  the  fruitful  egg  is  the  beginning  and 
cause  of  the  effects  we  witness,  that  it  is  a  sub¬ 
stance  susceptible  of  divers  powers,  forces,  or 
faculties,  and  even  conditions — virtues,  vices, 
health,  and  sickness.  For  some  eggs  are  es¬ 
teemed  to  be  longer,  others  shorter  lived;  some 
engender  chickens  endowed  with  the  qualities 
and  health  of  body  that  distinguished  their 
parents,  others  produce  young  that  are  predis¬ 
posed  to  disease.  Nor  is  it  to  be  said  that  this  is 
from  any  fault  of  the  mother,  seeing  that  the 
diseases  of  the  father  or  male  parent  are  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  progeny,  although  he  contributes 
nothing  to  the  matter  of  the  egg;  the  procrea¬ 
tive  or  plastic  force  which  renders  the  egg 
fruitful  alone  proceeding  from  the  male;  none 
of  its  parts  being  contributed  by  him.  For  the 
semen  which  is  emitted  by  the  male  during 
intercourse  does  by  no  means  enter  the  uterus 
of  the  female,  in  which  the  egg  is  perfected;  nor 
can  it,  indeed  (as  I  first  announced,  and  Fab- 
ricius  agrees  with  me),  by  any  manner  or  way 
get  into  the  inner  recesses  of  that  organ,  much 
less  ascend  as  high  as  the  ovary,  near  the  waist 
or  middle  of  the  body,  so  that  besides  its  pecul¬ 
iar  virtue  it  might  impart  a  portion  of  matter 
to  the  numerous  ova  whose  rudiments  are  there 
contained.  For  we  know,  and  are  assured  by 
unquestionable  experience,  that  several  ova  are 
fecundated  by  one  and  the  same  connexion — 
not  those  only  that  are  met  with  in  the  uterus 
and  ovary,  but  those  likewise  that  are  in  some 
sort  not  yet  begun,  as  we  shall  state  by  and  by, 
and  indeed,  as  we  have  already  had  occasion  to 
assert  in  our  history. 

If,  therefore,  an  egg  be  rendered  fruitful  by 
its  proper  vital  principle,  or  be  endowed  with 
its  own  inherent  fecundating  force,  whence  or 
whereby  either  a  common  fowl,  or  a  hybrid  be¬ 
twixt  the  fowl  and  the  pheasant  is  produced,  and 
that  either  male  or  female,  like  the  father  or  the 
mother,  healthy  or  diseased;  we  must  infallibly 
conclude  that  the  egg,  even  when  contained  in 
the  ovary,  does  not  live  by  the  vital  principle 
of  the  mother,  but  is,  like  the  youth  who  comes 
of  age,  made  independent  even  from  its  first 
appearance;  as  the  acorn  taken  from  the  oak, 
and  the  seeds  of  plants  in  general,  are  no  longer 
to  be  considered  parts  of  the  tree  or  herb  that 
has  supported  them,  but  things  made  in  their 
own  right,  and  which  already  enjoy  life  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  a  proper  and  inherent  vegetative  power. 

But  if  we  now  admit  that  there  is  a  living 
principle  in  a  fertile  egg,  it  may  become  matter 
of  discussion  whether  it  is  the  same  living  prin¬ 
ciple  which  already  inheres  in  the  egg  that  will 


inhere  in  the  future  chick,  or  whether  it  is  a 
different  one  that  actuates  each  ?  For  it  is  matter 
of  necessity  that  we  admit  the  inherence  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  principle  which  constitutes  and  causes  the 
egg  to  grow,  and  which  further  engenders  and 
makes  the  chick  to  increase.  We  have  to  in¬ 
quire,  therefore,  whether  the  animating  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  egg  and  of  the  chick  be  one  and  the 
same,  or  several  and  different.?  And  then,  were 
several  vital  principles  recognized,  some  apper¬ 
taining  to  the  egg,  others  to  the  chick,  we 
should  next  have  to  inquire:  whence  and  at 
what  epoch  the  animating  principle  of  the 
chick  entered  it .?  and  what  is  it  in  the  egg  which 
causes  the  cicatricula  to  dilate  before  the  ad¬ 
vent  of  the  living  principle;  which  draws  the 
eye  of  the  vitellus  upwards,  as  stated,  and  pro¬ 
duces  the  colliquament,  changes  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  fluids  of  the  egg,  and  preordains 
everything  for  the  construction  of  the  future 
chick  before  there  is  even  a  vestige  of  it  to  be 
seen?  Or  whence  shall  we  say  the  aliment  fit 
for  the  embryo  is  derived,  and  by  which  it  is 
nourished  and  made  to  grow,  before  it  is  yet  in 
being?  For  these  acts  are  seen  to  be  the  work 
of  the  vegetative  soul  of  the  embryo,  and  have 
reference  to  the  coming  pullet,  ensuring  its 
nutrition  and  growth.  And  again,  when  the  em¬ 
bryo  is  begun,  or  the  chick  is  half  formed,  what 
is  it  which  constitutes  that  embryo  or  that 
chick  one  and  continuous  and  connects  with  the 
liquids  of  the  egg  ?  What  nourishes  and  makes 
the  chick  to  grow,  and  preserves  the  fluids  that 
are  fit  for  its  nutrition  from  putrefaction,  and 
prepares,  and  liquefies,  and  concocts  them? 

If  the  vital  principle  be  the  act  of  the  organic 
body  possessing  life  in  potential  it  seems  incredi¬ 
ble  that  this  principle  can  inhere  in  the  chick 
before  something  in  the  shape  of  an  organized 
body  is  extant.  Nor  is  it  more  credible  that  the 
vital  principle  of  the  egg  and  chick  can  be  iden¬ 
tical,  if  the  vital  principle  be  conservative  of 
that  only  to  which  it  belongs;  but  the  egg  and 
the  chick  are  different  things,  and  manifest  dis¬ 
similar  and  even  opposite  vital  acts,  in  so  much 
so  that  one  appears  to  be  produced  by  the  de¬ 
struction  of  the  other.  Or  should  we  perchance 
maintain  that  the  same  principle  and  cause  of 
life  inheres  in  both,  in  the  pullet  half  fashioned, 
to  wit,  and  the  egg  half  consumed,  as  if  it  were 
one  and  a  simple  act  of  the  same  body;  or  as  if 
from  parts  producing  one  natural  body,  one 
soul  or  vital  principle  also  arose,  which  was  all 
in  all,  as  is  commonly  said,  and  all  in  each  par¬ 
ticular  part?  Just  as  with  leaves  and  fruit  con¬ 
spicuous  on  the  stem  of  a  tree,  wherever  a  divi- 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


388 

sion  is  made  vve  still  say  that  the  principle  or 
first  cause  of  the  slip  and  of  the  whole  tree  is 
the  same;  the  leaves  and  the  fruit  are,  as  it  were, 
the  form  and  end,  the  trunk  of  the  tree  the  be¬ 
ginning.  So  too  in  a  line,  wherever  a  division  is 
made,  this  will  become  the  end  or  boundary  of 
the  part  behind  it,  the  commencement  of  the 
part  before  it.  And  the  same  thing  is  seen  to  ob¬ 
tain  in  respect  of  quality  and  motion,  that  is  to 
say,  in  every  kind  of  transmutation  and  gener¬ 
ation. 

So  much  at  this  time  upon  these  topics, 
which  will  by  and  by  engage  us  at  greater 
length,  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  nature 
of  the  living  principle  of  the  embryos  of  ani¬ 
mals  in  general;  of  its  being;  of  its  accession  in 
respect  of  the  how  and  the  when;  and  how  it  is 
all  in  all,  and  all  in  each  particular  part,  the 
same  and  yet  different.  Points  which  we  shall 
determine  from  numerous  observations. 

EXERCISE  27.  The  egg  is  not  the  product  of  the 
uterus,  but  of  the  vital  principle 

“As  we  have  said,”  says  Fabricius,^  “that  the 
action  of  the  stomach  was  to  convert  the  food 
into  chyle,  and  the  action  of  the  testicles  to  pro¬ 
duce  semen,  because  in  the  stomach  we  find 
chyle,  in  the  testes  semen,  so  do  we  definitely 
assert  that  the  egg  is  the  product  of  the  uterus 
of  birds,  because  it  is  found  in  this  part.  The 
organ  and  seat  of  the  generation  of  eggs  is, 
therefore,  intimately  known  and  obvious  to  us. 
And  further,  inasmuch  as  there  are  two  uteri  in 
birds,  one  superior  and  the  other  inferior,  and 
these  are  considerably  different  from  one  an¬ 
other,  and  consequently  perform  different  of¬ 
fices,  it  is  in  like  manner  clear  what  particular 
action  is  to  be  ascribed  to  each.  The  superior  is 
devoted  to  the  production  of  the  yelk,  the  infe¬ 
rior  to  that  of  the  albumen  and  remaining 
parts,  or  of  the  perfect  egg,  as  lies  obvious  to 
sense;  for  in  the  superior  uterus  we  never  find 
aught  beyond  a  multitude  of  yelks,  nor  in  the 
inferior  uterus,  other  than  entire  and  perfect 
eggs.  But  these  are  not  all  the  functions  of  the 
uteri  as  it  appears,  but  the  following  are  further 
to  be  noted  and  enumerated,  viz.:  the  increase 
of  the  egg,  which  succeeds  immediately  upon 
its  production,  and  proceeds  until  it  is  per¬ 
fected  and  acquires  its  proper  dimensions.  For 
the  fowl  does  not  naturally  lay  an  egg  until  it 
has  become  complete  and  has  acquired  its  due 
dimensions.  The  actions  of  the  uteri  are  conse¬ 
quently  the  increase  as  well  as  the  engender- 
ment  of  the  egg;  but  increase  supposes  and  in- 

^  Op.  cit.,  p.  8. 


eludes  nutrition,  as  is  obvious.  And  since  all 
generation  is  the  effect  of  the  concurrence  of 
two,  viz.,  the  agent  and  the  matter,  the  agent 
in  the  generation  of  an  egg  is  nothing  else  than 
the  instruments  or  organs  aforesaid,  to  wit,  the 
double  uterus;  and  the  matter  is  nothing  but 
the  blood.” 

Now  whilst  I  admit  the  action  of  the  uterus 
to  be  in  a  manner  the  generation  of  the  egg,  I 
by  no  means  allow  that  the  egg  is  nourished 
and  increased  by  this  organ.  And  this,  both  for 
the  reasons  already  alleged  by  us  when  we 
treated  of  the  vital  principle  of  the  egg,  which 
is  that  which  nourishes  it,  and  also  because  it 
appears  little  likely  (according  to  Aristotle,-  it 
is  impossible)  that  all  the  internal  parts  of  the 
egg,  in  all  their  dimensions,  should  be  fashioned 
and  made  to  increase  by  an  external  agent,  such 
as  the  uterus  is  with  reference  to  the  egg;  for 
how,  I  beseech  you,  can  that  which  is  extrinsic 
arrange  the  natural  matter  in  things  that  are 
internal,  and  supply  fresh  matter  according  to 
the  several  dimensions  in  the  place  of  that 
which  has  been  lost }  How  can  anything  be  af¬ 
fected  or  moved  by  that  which  does  not  touch 
it.?  Wherefore,  without  question,  the  same 
things  happen  in  the  engenderment  of  eggs 
which  take  place  in  the  beginning  of  all  living 
things  whatsoever,  viz.:  they  are  primarily 
constituted  by  external  and  pre-existing  beings; 
but  so  soon  as  they  are  endowed  with  life,  they 
suffice  for  their  own  nourishment  and  increase, 
and  this  in  virtue  of  peculiar  inherent  forces, 
innate,  implanted  from  the  beginning. 

What  has  already  been  said  of  the  vital  prin¬ 
ciple  appears  clearly  to  proclaim  that  the  egg  is 
neither  the  work  of  the  uterus,  nor  governed  by 
that  organ;  for  it  is  manifest  that  the  vegeta¬ 
tive  principle  inheres  even  in  the  hypenemic 
egg,  inasmuch  as  we  have  seen  that  this  egg  is 
nourished  and  is  preserved,  increases  and  vege¬ 
tates,  all  of  which  acts  are  indications  of  the 
presence  of  the  principle  mentioned.  But 
neither  from  the  mother  nor  the  uterus  can  this 
principle  proceed,  seeing  that  the  egg  has  no 
connexion  or  union  with  them,  but  is  free  and 
unconnected,  like  a  son  emancipated  from  pu¬ 
pillage,  rolling  round  within  the  cavity  of  the 
uterus  and  perfecting  itself,  even  as  the  seeds  of 
plants  are  perfected  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth, 
viz.,  by  an  internal  vegetative  principle,  which 
can  be  nothing  else  than  the  vegetative  soul. 

And  it  will  appear  all  the  more  certain  that  it 
is  possessed  of  a  soul  or  vital  principle,  if  we 
consider  by  what  compact,  what  moving  power, 

2  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  11,  i. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  389 


the  round  and  ample  yelk,  detached  from  the 
cluster  of  the  ovary,  descends  through  the  in¬ 
fundibulum — a  most  slender  tube  composed  of 
a  singularly  delicate  membrane,  and  possessed 
of  no  motory  fibres — and  opening  a  path  for 
itself,  approaches  the  uterus  through  such  a 
number  of  straits,  arrived  in  which  it  contin¬ 
ues  to  be  nourished,  and  grows  and  is  sur¬ 
rounded  with  albumen.  Now  as  there  is  no 
motory  organ  discoverable  either  in  the  ovary 
which  expels  the  vitellus,  or  in  the  infundibu¬ 
lum  which  transmits,  or  in  the  uterus  which 
attracts  it,  and  as  the  egg  is  not  connected  with 
the  uterus,  nor  yet  with  the  ovary  by  means  of 
vessels,  nor  hangs  from  either  by  an  umbili¬ 
cal  cord,  as  Fabricius  truly  states,  and  demon¬ 
strates  most  satisfactorily,  what  remains  for  us 
contemplating  such  great  and  important  pro¬ 
cesses  but  that  we  exclaim  with  the  poet: 

*TA  innate  soul  sustains;  and  mind  infused 

Through  every  party  that  actuates  the  mass}- 

And  although  the  rudiments  of  eggs,  which  we 
have  said  are  mere  specks,  and  have  compared 
to  millet  seeds  in  size,  are  connected  with  the 
ovary  by  means  of  veins  and  arteries,  in  the 
same  manner  as  seeds  are  attached  to  plants, 
and  consequently  seem  to  be  part  and  parcel 
of  the  fowl,  and  to  live  and  be  nourished  after 
the  manner  of  her  other  parts,  it  is  nevertheless 
manifest,  that  seeds  once  separated  from  the 
plants  which  have  produced  them,  are  no 
longer  regarded  as  parts  of  these,  but  like  chil¬ 
dren  come  of  age  and  freed  from  leading-strings, 
they  are  maintained  and  governed  by  their  own 
inherent  capacities. 

But  of  this  matter  we  shall  speak  more  fully, 
when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  soul  or  living 
principle  of  the  embryo  in  general,  and  of  the 
excellence  and  divine  nature  of  the  vegetative 
soul  from  a  survey  of  its  operations,  all  of  which 
are  carried  on  with  such  foresight,  art,  and 
divine  intelligence;  which,  indeed,  surpass  our 
powers  of  understanding  not  less  than  Deity 
surpasses  man,  and  are  allowed,  by  common 
consent,  to  be  so  wonderful  that  their  ineffable 
lustre  is  in  no  way  to  be  penetrated  by  the  dull 
edge  of  our  apprehension. 

What  shall  we  say  of  the  animalcules  which 
are  engendered  in  our  bodies,  and  which  no 
one  doubts  are  ruled  and  made  to  vegetate  by  a 
peculiar  vital  principle  (animci)}  of  this  kind 
are  lumbrici,  ascarides,  lice,  nits,  syrones,  acari, 
&c.;  or  what  of  the  worms  which  are  produced 
from  plants  and  their  fruits,  as  from  gall-nuts, 

^Virgil,  JEneidy  vi. 


the  dog-rose,  and  various  others?  “For  in  al¬ 
most  all  dry  things  growing  moist,  or  moist 
things  becoming  dry,  an  animal  may  be  en¬ 
gendered.”^  It  certainly  cannot  be  that  the  liv¬ 
ing  principles  of  the  animals  which  arise  in  gall- 
nuts  existed  in  the  oak,  although  these  animals 
live  attached  to  the  oak,  and  derive  their  sus¬ 
tenance  from  its  juices.  In  like  manner  it  is 
credible  that  the  rudiments  of  eggs  exist  in  the 
ovarian  cluster  by  their  proper  vital  principle, 
not  by  that  of  the  mother,  although  they  are 
connected  with  her  body  by  means  of  arteries 
and  veins,  and  are  nourished  by  the  same  food 
as  herself.  Because,  as  we  have  stated  in  our  his¬ 
tory,  all  the  vitellary  specks  do  not  increase  to¬ 
gether,  like  the  grapes  of  a  bunch,  or  the  corns 
of  an  ear  of  wheat,  as  if  they  were  pervaded  by 
one  common  actuating  force  or  concocting  and 
forming  cause;  they  come  on  one  after  another, 
as  if  they  grew  by  their  own  peculiar  energy, 
each  that  is  most  in  advance  severing  itself  from 
the  rest,  changing  its  colour  and  consistence, 
and  from  a  white  speck  becoming  a  yelk,  in  reg¬ 
ular  and  determinate  sequence.  And  what  is 
more  particularly  astonishing  is  that  which  we 
witness  among  pigeons  and  certain  other  birds, 
where  two  yelks  only  come  to  maturity  upon 
the  ovarian  cluster  together,  one  of  which,  for 
the  major  part,  produces  a  male,  the  other  a  fe¬ 
male,  an  abundance  of  other  vitellary  specks 
remaining  stationary  in  the  ovary,  until  the 
term  comes  round  for  two  more  to  increase  and 
make  ready  for  a  new  birth.  It  is  as  if  each  suc¬ 
cessive  pair  received  fertility  from  the  repeated 
addresses  of  the  male;  as  if  the  two  became  pos¬ 
sessed  of  the  vital  principle  together;  which, 
once  infused,  they  forthwith  increase  spontan¬ 
eously,  and  govern  themselves,  living  of  their 
own  not  through  their  mother’s  right.  And,  in 
sooth,  what  else  can  you  conceive  working,  dis¬ 
posing,  selecting,  and  perfecting,  as  respects 
this  pair  of  vitellary  papulae  and  none  others, 
but  a  peculiar  vital  principle?  And  although 
they  attract  nourishment  from  the  mother, 
they  still  do  so  no  otherwise  than  as  plants 
draw  food  from  the  ground,  or  as  the  embryo 
obtains  it  from  the  albumen  and  vitellus. 

Lastly,  since  the  papula  existing  in  the  ovary 
receives  fecundity  from  the  access  of  the  male, 
and  this  of  such  a  kind  that  it  passes  into  the 
form  and  likeness  of  the  concurring  male, 
whether  he  were  a  common  cock  or  a  pheasant, 
and  there  is  as  great  diversity  in  the  papulae  as 
there  are  males  of  different  kinds;  what  shall 
we  hold  as  inherent  in  the  papulae  themselves, 

2  Aristotle,  History  of  Animalsy  v.  32. 


390  WILLIAM 

by  whose  virtue  they  are  distinguished  from 
one  another  and  from  the  mother?  Undoubted¬ 
ly  it  must  be  the  vital  principle  by  which  they 
are  distinguished  both  from  each  other  and 
from  the  mother. 

It  is  in  a  similar  manner  that  fungi  and  para¬ 
sitic  plants  live  upon  trees.  And  besides,  we  in 
our  own  bodies  frequently  suffer  from  cancers, 
sarcoses,  melicerides,  and  other  tumours  of  the 
same  description,  which  are  nourished  and  grow 
as  it  seems  by  their  own  inherent  vegetative 
principle,  the  true  or  natural  parts  of  the  body 
meantime  shrinking  and  perishing.  And  this  ap¬ 
parently  because  these  tumours  attract  all  the 
nourishment  to  themselves,  and  defraud  the 
other  parts  of  the  body  of  their  nutritious 
juices  or  proper  genius.  Whence  the  familiar 
names  of  phagedaena  and  lupus;  and  Hippo¬ 
crates,  by  the  words  to  perhaps  under¬ 

stood  those  diseases  which  arise  from  poison  or 
contagion;  as  if  in  these  there  was  a  certain  vi¬ 
tality  and  divine  principle  inherent,  by  which 
they  increase  and  through  contagion  generate 
similar  diseases  even  in  other  bodies.  Aristotle, 
therefore,  says:  “all  things  are  full  of  souh’;^ 
and  elsewhere  he  seems  to  think  that  “even  the 
winds  have  a  kind  of  life,  and  a  birth  and  a 
death. But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  vitellus, 
when  it  is  once  cast  loose  and  freed  from  all 
connexion  with  the  fowl,  during  its  passage 
through  the  infundibulum  and  its  stay  in  the 
cavity  of  the  uterus,  attracts  a  sluggish  mois¬ 
ture  to  itself,  which  it  absorbs,  and  by  which  it 
is  nourished;  there  too  it  surrounds  itself  with 
albumen,  furnishes  itself  with  membranes  and 
a  shell,  and  finally  perfects  itself.  All  of  which 
things,  rightly  weighed,  we  must  needs  con¬ 
clude  that  it  is  possessed  by  a  proper  vital  prin¬ 
ciple  {animd), 

EXERCISE  28.  The  egg  is  not  produced  without  the 
hen 

Leaving  points  that  are  doubtful,  and  dis¬ 
quisitions  bearing  upon  the  general  question, 
we  now  approach  more  definite  and  obvious 
matters. 

And  first,  it  is  manifest  that  a  fruitful  egg 
cannot  be  produced  without  the  concurrence 
of  a  cock  and  hen:  without  the  hen  no  egg  can 
be  formed;  without  the  cock  it  cannot  become 
fruitful.  But  this  view  is  opposed  to  the  opinion 
of  those  who  derive  the  origin  of  animals  from 
the  slime  of  the  ground.  And  truly  when  we  see 
that  the  numerous  parts  concurring  in  the  act 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals y  in.  2. 

^  Ibid.y  IV.  10. 


HARVEY 

of  generation— the  testes  and  vasa  deferentia  in 
the  male,  the  ovarium  and  uterus  and  blood¬ 
vessels  supplying  them  in  the  female— are  all 
contrived  with  such  signal  art  and  forethought, 
and  everything  requisite  to  reproduction  in  a 
determinate  direction — situation,  form,  tem¬ 
perature — arranged  so  admirably,  it  seems  cer¬ 
tain,  as  Nature  does  nothing  in  vain,  nor  works 
in  any  round-about  way  when  a  shorter  path 
lies  open  to  her,  that  an  egg  can  be  produced  in 
no  other  manner  than  that  in  which  we  now  see 
it  engendered,  viz.y  by  the  concurring  act 
of  the  cock  and  hen.  Neither,  in  like  manner,  in 
the  present  constitution  of  things,  can  a  cock  or 
hen  ever  be  produced  otherwise  than  from  an 
egg.  Thus  the  cock  and  the  hen  exist  for  the 
sake  of  the  egg,  and  the  egg,  in  the  same  way,  is 
their  antecedent  cause;  it  were  therefore  reason¬ 
able  to  ask,  with  Plutarch,  which  of  these  was 
the  prior,  the  egg  or  the  fowl  ?  Now  the  fowl  is 
prior  by  nature,  but  the  egg  is  prior  in  time; 
for  that  which  is  the  more  excellent  is  naturally 
first;  but  that  from  which  a  certain  thing  is 
produced  must  be  reputed  first  in  respect  of 
time.  Or  we  may  say:  this  egg  is  older  than  that 
fowl  (the  fowl  having  been  produced  from  it); 
and,  on  the  contrary,  this  fowl  existed  before 
that  egg  (which  she  has  laid).  And  this  is  the 
round  that  makes  the  race  of  the  common  fowl 
eternal;  now  pullet,  now  egg,  the  series  is  con¬ 
tinued  in  perpetuity ;  from  frail  and  perishing  in¬ 
dividuals  an  immortal  species  is  engendered. 
By  these,  and  means  like  to  these,  do  we  see 
many  inferior  or  terrestrial  things  brought  to 
emulate  the  perpetuity  of  superior  or  celestial 
things. 

And  whether  we  say,  or  do  not  say,  that  the 
vital  principle  {animd)  inheres  in  the  egg,  it  still 
plainly  appears,  from  the  circuit  indicated, 
that  there  must  be  some  principle  influencing 
this  revolution  from  the  fowl  to  the  egg  and 
from  the  egg  back  to  the  fowl,  which  gives  them 
perpetuity.  Now  this,  according  to  Aristotle’s 
views,^  is  analogous  to  the  element  of  the  stars; 
and  is  that  which  makes  parents  engender,  and 
gives  fertility  to  their  ova;  and  the  same  prin¬ 
ciple,  Proteus-like,  is  present  under  a  diflerent 
form,  in  the  parents  as  in  the  eggs.  For,  as  the 
same  intelligence  or  spirit  which  incessantly  ac¬ 
tuates  the  mighty  mass  of  the  universe,  and 
compels  the  same  sun  from  the  rising  to  the 
setting,  in  his  passage  over  the  \'arious  regions 
of  the  earth,  so  also  is  there  a  vis  enthea,  a  di¬ 
vine  principle  inherent  in  our  common  poultry, 
showing  itself  now  as  the  plastic,  now  as  the 

3  lbid,y  II.  3. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


nutritive,  and  now  as  the  augmentative  force, 
though  it  is  always  and  at  all  times  present  as 
the  conservative  and  vegetative  force,  and  now 
assumes  the  form  of  the  fowl,  now  that  of  the 
egg;  but  the  same  virtue  continues  to  inhere  in 
either  to  eternity.  And  although  some  animals 
arise  spontaneously,  or  as  is  commonly  said  from 
putrefaction,  and  some  are  produced  from  the 
female  alone,  for  Pliny  says:  “in  some  genera, 
as  in  certain  fishes,  there  are  no  males,  every  one 
taken  being  found  full  of  roe’^;^  still  whatever 
is  produced  from  a  perfect  egg  is  so  in  virtue  of 
the  indispensable  concurrence  of  male  and  fe¬ 
male.  Aristotle  consequently  says:  “the  grand 
principles  of  generation  must  be  held  to  be  the 
male  and  the  female”;^  the  first  two  principles 
of  the  egg  are  therefore  the  male  and  the  fe¬ 
male;  and  the  common  point  or  conception 
of  these  is  the  egg,  which  combines  the  virtues  of 
both  parents.  We  cannot,  in  fact,  conceive  an 
egg  without  the  concurrence  of  a  male  and  fe¬ 
male  fowl,  any  more  than  we  can  conceive  fruit 
to  be  produced  without  a  tree.  We  therefore 
see  individuals,  males  as  well  as  females,  existing 
for  the  sake  of  preparing  eggs,  that  the  species 
may  be  perennial,  though  their  authors  pass 
away.  And  it  is  indeed  obvious  that  the  parents 
are  no  longer  youthful,  or  beautiful,  or  lusty, 
and  fitted  to  enjoy  life,  than  whilst  they  possess 
the  power  of  producing  and  fecundating  eggs, 
and,  by  the  medium  of  these,  of  engendering 
their  like.  But  when  they  have  accomplished 
this  grand  purpose  of  nature,  they  have  already 
attained  to  the  height,  the  a/cjui)  of  their  being 
— the  final  end  of  their  existence  has  been  ac¬ 
complished;  after  this,  effete  and  useless,  they 
begin  to  wither,  and,  as  if  cast  off  and  forsaken 
of  nature  and  the  Deity,  they  grow  old,  and, 
a-weary  of  their  lives,  they  hasten  to  their  end. 
How  different  the  males  when  they  make  them¬ 
selves  up  for  intercourse,  and  swelling  with  de¬ 
sire  are  excited  by  the  venereal  impulse!  It  is 
surprising  to  see  with  what  passion  they  are  in¬ 
flamed;  and  then  how  trimly  they  are  feathered, 
how  vainglorious  they  show  themselves,  how 
proud  of  their  strength,  and  how  pugnacious 
they  prove!  But,  the  grand  business  of  life  ac¬ 
complished,  how  suddenly,  with  failing  strength 
and  pristine  fervour  quenched,  do  they  take  in 
their  swelling  sails,  and,  from  late  pugnacity, 
grow  timid  and  desponding!  Even  during  the 
season  of  jocund  masking  in  Venus’  domains, 
male  animals  in  general  are  depressed  by  inter¬ 
course,  and  become  submissive  and  pusillani- 

^  Hist,  natiir.y  ix.  i6. 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  i.  2. 


mous,  as  if  reminded  that  in  imparting  life  to 
others,  they  were  contributing  to  their  own  de¬ 
struction.  The  cock  alone,  replete  with  spirit 
and  fecundity,  still  shows  himself  alert  and  gay; 
clapping  his  wings,  and  crowing  triumphantly, 
he  sings  the  nuptial  song  at  each  of  his  new 
espousals!  yet  even  he,  after  some  length  of 
time  in  Venus’  service,  begins  to  fail;  like  the 
veteran  soldier,  he  by  and  by  craves  discharge 
from  active  duty.  And  the  hen,  too,  like  the 
tree  that  is  past  bearing,  becomes  effete,  and  is 
finally  exhausted. 

EXERCISE  29.  Of  the  manner.,  according  to  Aris¬ 
totle,  in  which  a  perfect  and  fruitful  egg  is  produced 

by  the  male  and  female  fowl 

Shortly  before  we  said  that  a  fruitful  egg  is 
not  engendered  spontaneously,  that  it  is  not 
produced  save  by  a  hen,  and  by  her  only 
through  the  concurrence  of  the  cock.  This 
agrees  with  the  matter  of  the  following  sen¬ 
tence  of  Aristotle:  “The  principles  of  generation 
have  particular  reference  to  male  and  female; 
the  male  as  supplying  the  original  of  motion 
and  reproduction;  the  female  as  furnishing  the 
matter.”^ 

In  our  view,  however,  an  egg  is  a  true  genera¬ 
tive  seed,  analogous  to  the  seed  of  a  plant;  the 
original  conception  arising  between  the  two 
parents,  and  being  the  mixed  fruit  or  product 
of  both.  For  as  the  egg  is  not  formed  without 
the  hen,  so  is  it  not  made  fruitful  without  the 
concurrence  of  the  cock. 

We  have,  therefore,  to  inquire  how  the  egg  is 
produced  by  the  hen  and  is  fertilized  by  the 
cock;  for  we  have  seen  that  hypenemic  eggs, 
and  these  animated  too,  are  engendered  by 
the  hen,  but  that  they  are  not  prolific  with¬ 
out  the  intercourse  of  the  cock.  The  male  and 
the  female  consequently,  both  set  their  mark 
upon  a  fruitful  egg;  but  not,  I  believe,  in  the 
way  in  which  Aristotle  imagines,  viz.:  that  the 
male  concurs  in  the  motion  and  commencement 
of  generation  only,  the  female  supplying  noth¬ 
ing  but  the  matter,  because  the  contrary  of 
this  is  obvious  in  hypenemic  eggs.  And  al¬ 
though  it  be  true  as  he  says:  “That  male  and 
female  differ  in  respect  of  reason,  because  the 
faculty  of  each  is  different,  and  in  respect  of 
sense,  because  certain  parts  differ  likewise.  The 
difference  according  to  reason  boasts  this  dis¬ 
tinction,  that  the  male  has  the  power  of  en¬ 
gendering  in  another;  the  female  has  only  the 
power  of  engendering  in  herself;  whereby  it 
comes  that  that  which  is  engendered  is  pro- 

^md.,i.  2. 


392  WILLIAM 

duccd,  this  being  contained  in  that  which  en¬ 
genders.  But  as  males  and  females  are  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  certain  faculties  and  functions, 
and  as  an  instrument  is  indispensable  to  every 
office,  and  the  parts  of  the  body  are  adapted  as 
instruments  of  the  functions,  it  was  necessary 
that  certain  parts  should  be  set  aside  for  pur¬ 
poses  of  procreation  and  coition,  and  these  dif¬ 
fering  from  one  another,  whereby  the  male 
differs  from  the  female.’' 

It  does  not,  however,  follow  from  thence, 
that  what  he  appears  inclined  to  infer  is  cor¬ 
rect,  where  he  says:  “The  male  is  the  efficient 
agent,  and  by  the  motion  of  his  generative  vir¬ 
tue  {genitura),  creates  what  is  intended  from  the 
matter  contained  in  the  female;  for  the  female 
always  supplies  the  matter,  the  male  the  power 
of  creation,  and  this  it  is  which  constitutes  one 
male,  another  female.  The  body  and  the  bulk, 
therefore,  are  necessarily  supplied  by  the  fe¬ 
male;  nothing  of  the  kind  is  required  from  the 
male;  for  it  is  not  even  requisite  that  the  instru¬ 
ment,  nor  the  efficient  agent  itself,  be  present 
in  the  thing  that  is  produced.  The  body,  then, 
proceeds  from  the  female,  the  vital  principle 
(anima)  from  the  male;  for  the  essence  of  every 
body  is  its  vital  principle  {anima) T  But  an 
egg,  and  that  animated,  is  engendered  by  the 
pullet  without  the  concurrence  of  the  male; 
whence  it  appears  that  the  hen  too,  or  the  fe¬ 
male,  may  be  the  efficient  agent,  and  that  all 
creative  force  or  vital  power  {anima)  is  not  de¬ 
rived  exclusively  from  the  male.  This  view  in¬ 
deed  appears  to  be  supported  by  the  instance 
quoted  by  Aristotle  himself,  for  he  says: 
“Those  animals  not  of  the  same  species,  which 
copulate  (which  those  animals  do  that  corre¬ 
spond  in  their  seasons  of  heat  and  times  of 
uterogestation,  and  do  not  differ  greatly  in 
their  size),  produce  their  first  young  like  them¬ 
selves,  but  partaking  of  the  species  of  both  par¬ 
ents;  of  this  description  is  the  progeny  of  the 
fox  and  dog,  of  the  partridge  and  common 
fowl,  &c.;  but  in  the  course  of  time  from  diver¬ 
sity  results  diversity,  and  the  progeny  of  these 
different  parents  at  length  acquires  the  form  of 
the  female;  in  the  same  way  as  foreign  seed  is 
changed  at  last  in  conformity  with  the  nature 
of  the  soil,  which  supplies  matter  and  body  to 
the  seed.”^ 

From  this  it  appears,  that  in  the  generation 
of  the  partridge  with  the  common  fowl  it  is  not 
the  male  alone  that  is  efficient,  but  the  female 
also;  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  the  male  form  only, 
but  one  common  or  subordinate  that  appears  in 

^  Op.  cit.y  II.  4. 


HARVEY 

the  hybrid,  as  like  the  female  as  it  is  like  the 
male  in  vital  endowment  {anima) y  and  bodily 
form.  But  the  vital  endowment  {anima)  is  that 
which  is  the  true  form  and  species  of  an  animal. 

Further,  the  female  seems  even  to  have  a 
superior  claim  to  be  considered  the  efficient 
cause:  “In  the  course  of  time,”  says  the  philos¬ 
opher,  “the  progeny  of  different  species  as¬ 
sumes  the  form  of  the  female”  as  if  the  semen 
or  influence  of  the  male  were  the  less  powerful;  as 
if  the  species  impressed  by  him  disappeared 
with  the  lapse  of  time,  and  were  expelled  by  a 
more  powerful  efficient  cause.  And  the  in¬ 
stance  from  the  soil  confirms  this  still  further: 
“for  foreign  seeds  are  changed  at  length  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  nature  of  the  soil.”  Whence  it 
seems  probable  that  the  female  is  actually  of 
more  moment  in  generation  than  the  male;  for, 
“in  the  world  at  large  it  is  admitted  that  the 
earth  is  to  nature  as  the  female  or  mother, 
whilst  climate,  the  sun,  and  other  things  of  the 
same  description,  are  spoken  of  by  the  names  of 
generator  and  father.”^  The  earth,  too,  spon¬ 
taneously  engenders  many  things  without  seed; 
and  among  animals,  certain  females,  but  fe¬ 
males  only,  procreate  of  themselves  and  with¬ 
out  the  concurrence  of  the  male:  hens,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  lay  hypenemic  eggs;  but  males,  without 
the  intervention  of  females,  engender  nothing. 

By  the  same  arguments,  indeed,  by  which 
the  male  is  maintained  to  be  the  principle  and 
prime  efficient  in  generation,  it  would  seem 
that  the  female  might  be  confirmed  in  the  pre¬ 
rogative  of  hepyeia  or  efficiency.  For  is  not 
that  to  be  accounted  efficient  in  which  the  rea¬ 
son  of  the  embryo  and  the  form  of  the  work  ap¬ 
pear;  whose  obvious  resemblance  is  perceived 
in  the  embryo,  and  which,  as  first  existing,  calls 
forth  the  other.?  Since,  therefore,  the  form, 
cause,  and  similitude  inhere  in  the  female  not 
less — and  it  might  even  be  said  that  they  inhere 
more— than  in  the  male,  and  as  she  also  exists 
previously  as  prime  mover,  let  us  conclude  for 
certain  that  the  female  is  equally  efficient  in 
the  work  of  generation  as  the  male. 

And  although  Aristotle  says  well  and  truly, 
“that  the  conception  or  egg  receives  no  part  of 
its  body  from  the  male,  but  only  its  form,  spe¬ 
cies,  and  vital  endowment  {anima)y  and  from 
the  female  its  body  solely,  and  its  dimensions,”^ 
it  is  not  yet  made  sufficiently  to  appear  that 
the  female,  besides  the  matter,  does  not  in  some 
measure  contribute  form,  species,  and  vital  en¬ 
dowment  {anima).  This  indeed  is  obvious  in 

2  Op.  cit.y  I.  2. 

8  Op.  cit.y  II.  4. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


the  hen  which  engenders  eggs  without  the  con¬ 
currence  of  a  male;  in  the  same  way  as  trees 
and  herbs,  in  which  there  is  no  distinction  of 
sexes,  produce  their  seeds.  For  Aristotle  him¬ 
self  admits^  that  even  the  hypenemic  egg  is 
endowed  with  a  vital  principle  {anima).  The  fe¬ 
male  must  therefore  be  esteemed  the  efficient 
cause  of  the  egg. 

Admitting  that  the  hypenemic  egg  is  pos¬ 
sessed  of  a  certain  vital  principle,  still  it  is  not 
prolific;  so  that  it  must  further  be  confessed 
that  the  hen  of  herself  is  not  the  efficient  cause 
of  a  perfect  egg,  but  that  she  is  made  so  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  an  authority,  if  I  may  use  the  word,  or 
power  required  of  the  cock.  For  the  egg,  unless 
prolific,  can  with  no  kind  of  propriety  be  ac¬ 
counted  perfect;  it  only  obtains  perfection 
from  the  male,  or  rather  from  the  female,  as  it 
were,  upon  precept  from  the  male;  as  if  the  hen 
received  the  art  and  reason,  the  form  and  laws 
of  the  future  embryo  from  his  address.  And  so 
in  like  manner  the  female  fowl,  like  to  a  fruitful 
tree,  is  made  fertile  by  coition;  by  this  is  she 
empowered  not  only  to  lay  eggs,  but  these  per¬ 
fect  and  prolific  eggs.  For  although  the  hen 
have  as  yet  no  rudiments  of  eggs  prepared  in 
her  ovary,  nevertheless,  made  fertile  by  the  in¬ 
tercourse  of  the  male,  she  by  and  by  not  only 
produces  them  there,  but  lays  them,  teeming 
with  life,  and  apt  to  produce  embryos.  And 
here  that  practice  of  the  poor  folks  finds  its  ap¬ 
plication:  “Having  hens  at  home,  but  no  cock, 
they  commit  their  females  to  a  neighbour’s 
male  for  a  day  or  two;  and  from  this  short  so¬ 
journ  the  fecundity  of  the  whole  of  the  eggs 
that  will  be  laid  during  the  current  season  is  se¬ 
cured. Not  only  are  those  eggs  which  are  still 
nothing  more  than  yelk  and  have  no  albumen, 
or  which  exist  only  as  most  minute  specks  in 
the  ovary,  but  eggs  not  yet  extant,  that  will  be 
conceived  long  afterwards,  rendered  fertile  by 
the  same  property. 

EXERCISE  30.  Of  the  uses  of  this  disquisition  on 
fecundity 

This  disquisition  on  the  inherent  qualities  of 
the  egg  and  the  cause  of  its  fecundity,  is  alike  in 
point  of  difficulty  and  subtlety,  but  of  the 
highest  importance.  For  it  was  imperative  on  us 
to  inquire  what  there  was  in  the  conception, 
what  in  the  semen  masculinum,  and  what  in 
the  female  fowl,  which  renders  these  fertile; 
and  what  there  is  in  the  fruitful  cock  which 
makes  him  differ  from  a  bird  that  is  barren.  Is 

^  Op.  cit.y  II.  4. 

2  Fabricius,  op.  cit.y  p.  37. 


the  cause  identical  with  that  which  we  have 
called  the  vital  principle  {anima)  in  the  em¬ 
bryo,  or  is  it  a  certain  portion  of  the  vegetative 
principle  Because,  in  order  to  apprehend  the 
entire  cause  of  generation,  it  is  of  much  moment 
that  the  first  cause  be  understood;  for  science  is 
based  upon  causes,  especially  first  causes, 
known.  Nor  is  this  inquiry  less  important  in  en¬ 
abling  us  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  vital 
principle  {anima).  These  questions,  indeed, 
rightly  apprehended,  not  only  are  Aristotle’s 
opinions  of  the  causes  of  generation  refuted  or 
corrected,  but  all  that  has  been  written  against 
him  is  easily  understood. 

We  ask,  therefore,  whether  it  is  the  same 
thing  or  something  different,  which  in  the  rudi¬ 
mentary  ovum,  yelk,  egg,  cock  and  hen,  or  her 
uterus,  confers  fruitfulness In  like  manner  in 
what  respect  does  this  something  agree  or  dif¬ 
fer  in  each.?  Still  further,  is  it  a  substance 
whence  the  fecundating  virtue  flows.? —  it  ap¬ 
pears  susceptible  of  powers,  faculties,  and  acci¬ 
dents.  Likewise,  is  it  corporeal  also.?  for  that 
which  engenders  mixture  appears  to  be  mixed 
— the  progeny  has  a  common  resemblance  to 
the  mother  and  father,  and  exhibits  a  doubtful 
nature  when  animals  of  dissimilar  species,  such 
as  the  pheasant  and  common  fowl,  engender; 
that,  too,  appears  to  be  corporeal  which  suffers 
from  without,  and  to  such  an  extent  that  not 
only  are  weakly  embry^os  procreated,  but  even 
deformed  and  diseased  ones,  obnoxious  to  the 
vices  as  well  as  to  the  virtues  of  their  progeni¬ 
tors. 

With  respect  to  these  several  particulars,  we 
may  further  be  permitted  to  doubt  whether 
that  which  confers  fecundity  is  engendered  or 
accrues  from  without.  Whether,  to  wit,  it  is 
transfused  from  the  egg  to  the  embryo  and 
chick,  from  the  hen  to  the  egg,  from  the  cock 
to  the  hen.  For  there  appears  to  be  something 
that  is  transferred  or  transfused,  something, 
namely,  which  from  the  cock  is  transfused  into 
the  hen,  and  from  her  is  given  to  the  uterus,  to 
the  ovary,  to  the  egg;  something  which,  pass¬ 
ing  from  the  seed  to  the  plant,  is  rendered 
again  by  the  plant  to  the  seed,  and  imparts  fe¬ 
cundity.  Because  there  is  this  common  to  all 
things  which  are  perpetuated  by  generation, 
that  they  derive  their  origin  from  seed.  But  the 
semen,  the  conception,  and  the  egg,  are  all  of 
the  same  essential  kind,  and  that  which  confers 
fertility  on  these  is  one  and  the  same,  or  of  like 
nature;  and  this  indeed  is  divine,  the  analogue 
of  heaven,  possessed  of  art,  intelligence,  fore¬ 
sight.  This  is  plainly  to  be  seen  from  its  admira- 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


394 

ble  operations,  artifices,  and  wisdom,  where 
nothing  is  vain,  or  inconsiderate,  or  accidental, 
but  all  conduces  to  some  good  end. 

Of  the  general  principles  and  science  of  this 
subject  we  shall  treat  more  at  length  in  the 
proper  place;  we  have  now  said  as  much  inci¬ 
dentally  as  seems  necessary,  the  occasion  hav¬ 
ing  presented  itself  along  with  our  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  hen’s  egg,  namely,  how  many  things 
inhere  which  induce  fertility,  and  how  this  is 
induced,  and  whether  it  is  an  affection,  a  habit, 
a  power,  or  a  faculty;  whether  it  is  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  form  and  substance,  as  a  something 
contained  generally,  or  only  in  some  particular 
part — since  it  is  quite  certain  that  a  hypenemic 
egg  is  a  perfect  egg  in  so  far  as  each  sensible 
particular  is  concerned,  and  yet  is  barren;  the 
uterus  in  like  manner,  and  the  hen  and  the 
cock  are  all  perfect;  yet  are  they  severally  ster¬ 
ile,  as  being  without  that  which  confers  fecun¬ 
dity.  All  of  these  matters  we  shall  advert  to  after 
we  have  shown  what  and  how  two  principles, 
male  and  female,  concur  in  the  production  of 
the  egg  and  the  process  of  generation,  and  in 
what  way  both  may  be  regarded  as  efficient 
causes  and  parents  of  the  egg. 

EXERCISE  31.  The  egg  is  not  pwduced-by  the  coc\ 
and  hen  in  the  way  Aristotle  would  have  it. 

It  is  certain,  as  we  have  said,  that  a  fruitful 
egg  is  not  produced  without  the  concurrence  of 
the  cock  and  hen;  but  this  is  not  done  in  the 
way  that  Aristotle  thought,  viz.,  by  the  cock  as 
prime  and  sole  “agent,”  the  hen  only  furnish¬ 
ing  the  “matter.”  Neither  do  I  agree  with  him 
when  he  says:  “When  the  semen  masculinum 
enters  the  female  uterus,  it  coagulates  the  pur¬ 
est  portion  of  the  catamenia”;  and  shortly 
afterwards:  “but  when  the  catamenia  of  the 
female  has  set  in  the  uterus,  it  forms,  with  the 
semen  masculinum,  a  coagulum  like  that  of 
milk;  for  curd  is  milk  containing  vital  heat, 
which  attracts  like  particles  around  it,  and 
combines  and  coagulates  them;  and  the  semen 
of  the  male  {genitiira)  bears  the  same  affinity  to 
the  nature  of  the  catamenia.  For  milk  and  the 
menstrual  discharge  are  of  the  same  nature. 
When  coagulation  has  taken  place,  then  an 
earthy  humour  is  excreted  and  is  drawn  around, 
and  the  earthy  portion  drying  up,  the  mem¬ 
branes  are  produced  both  as  matter  of  neces¬ 
sity,  and  also  for  a  certain  purpose.  And  these 
things  take  place  in  the  same  manner  in  all 
creatures,  both  oviparous  and  viviparous.”^ 

But  the  business  in  the  generation  of  an  egg 
On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  ii.  4. 


is  ver\^  diflercni  from  this;  for  neither  does  the 
semen,  or  rather  the  “geniturc,”  proceeding 
from  the  male  in  the  act  of  intercourse,  enter 
the  uterus  in  any  way,  nor  has  the  hen,  after 
she  conceives,  any  particle  of  excrementitious 
matter,  even  of  the  purest  kind,  or  any  blood 
in  her  uterus  which  might  be  fashioned  or  per¬ 
fected  by  the  discharge  of  the  male.  Neither 
are  the  parts  of  the  egg,  the  membranes,  to  wit, 
and  the  fluids,  produced  by  any  kind  of  coagu¬ 
lation;  neither  is  there  anything  like  curdled 
milk  to  be  discovered  in  the  uterus,  as  must  be 
obvious  from  the  foregoing  exercises.  It  follows, 
therefore,  and  from  thence,  that  neither  does 
the  conception,  whence  the  animal  springs,  as 
the  herb  arises  from  a  fruitful  seed,  comport 
itself  in  the  manner  Aristotle  imagined,  since 
this  takes  place  in  viviparous  animals  in  the 
same  way  as  the  egg  is  formed  in  oviparous  ani¬ 
mals,  as  he  himself  avows,  and  as  shall  be  dem¬ 
onstrated  by  and  by  in  our  observations.  Be¬ 
cause  it  is  certain  that  eggs  of  every  descrip¬ 
tion — prolific  and  barren — are  engendered  and 
formed  by  the  hen  singly,  but  that  fecundity 
accrues  from  the  male  alone;  the  cock,  I  say, 
contributes  neither  form  nor  matter  to  the  egg, 
but  that  only  by  which  it  becomes  fertile  and 
fit  to  engender  a  chick.  And  this  faculty  the 
cock  confers  by  his  semen  {genitiira),  emitted 
in  the  act  of  intercourse,  not  only  on  the  egg 
that  is  already  begun,  or  is  already  formed,  but 
on  the  uterus  and  ov^ary,  and  even  on  the  body 
of  the  fowl  herself,  in  such  wise  that  eggs  which 
have  yet  to  be  produced,  eggs,  none  of  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  which  yet  exists  either  in  the  ovary  or  in 
any  other  part  of  the  body,  are  thence  pro¬ 
duced  possessed  of  fecundity. 

EXERCISE  32.  Nor  in  the  manner  imagined  by 
physicians 

Conception,  according  to  the  opinion  of 
medical  men,  takes  place  in  the  following  way: 
during  intercourse  the  male  and  female  dissolve 
in  one  voluptuous  sensation,  and  eject  their 
seminal  fluids  {geniturae)  into  the  cavity  of  the 
uterus,  where  that  which  each  contributes  is 
mingled  with  that  which  the  other  supplies, 
the  mixture  having  from  both  equally  the  fac¬ 
ulty  of  action  and  the  force  of  matter;  and  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  predominance  of  this  or  of  that 
geniture  does  the  progeny  turn  out  male  or  fe¬ 
male.  It  is  further  imagined  that  immediately 
after  the  intercourse,  the  active  and  passive 
principles  cooperating,  something  of  the  con¬ 
ception  is  formed  in  the  uterus.  For  contrary 
to  the  Aristotelians,  they  maintain  that  the 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


male  is  no  more  the  efficient  cause  of  generation 
than  the  female,  but  some  mixture  of  the  two; 
and  that  neither  the  menstrual  blood  nor  its 
purest  part  is  the  prime  matter  of  the  concep¬ 
tion,  but  the  spermatic  fluid;  whence  the  first 
particles  or  their  rudiments  are  spoken  of  as 
spermatic,  these  at  an  after  period  being  nour¬ 
ished  and  made  to  increase  through  the  blood. 

But  it  is  obvious  that  neither  is  the  egg  en¬ 
gendered  by  the  cock  and  hen  in  this  way;  for 
the  hen  in  the  act  of  intercourse  emits  no  semen 
from  which  an  egg  might  be  formed;  nor  can 
aught  like  a  seminal  fluid  of  the  hen  be  demon¬ 
strated  at  any  time;  and  indeed  the  animal  is 
destitute  of  the  organs  essential  to  its  prepara¬ 
tion,  the  testes  and  vasa  spermatica.  And 
though  the  hen  have  an  effective  force  in  com¬ 
mon  with  the  cock  (as  must  be  manifest  from 
what  precedes),  and  it  is  a  mixture  of  some  sort 
that  renders  an  egg  fruitful,  still  this  does  not 
happen  according  to  the  predominance  of  the 
genitures,  or  the  manner  of  their  mixture,  for 
it  is  certain,  and  Fabricius  admits  it,  that  the 
semen  of  the  cock  does  not  reach  the  cavity  of 
the  uterus;  neither  is  there  any  trace  of  the  egg 
to  be  discovered  in  the  uterus  immediately 
after  intercourse,  and  as  its  consequence,  al¬ 
though  Aristotle  himself  repeatedly  avers  that 
there  is,  asserting  that  “something  of  the  con¬ 
ception  forthwith  ensues.”  But  I  shall  by  and 
by  demonstrate  that  neither  does  any  such  imag¬ 
inary  mixture  of  seminal  fluids  take  place  in 
any  animal,  nor  that  immediately  upon  inter¬ 
course,  even  of  a  fruitful  kind,  is  there  any¬ 
thing  in  the  shape  of  semen  or  blood,  or  of  the 
rudiments  of  an  embry'o  present  or  demon¬ 
strable  in  the  cavity  of  the  uterus.  Nothing  is 
found  in  the  egg  or  embryo  which  leads  us  to 
suppose  that  the  semen  masculinum  is  either 
there  contained  or  mingled.  The  vulgar  notion 
of  the  chalazae  being  the  tread  of  the  cock  is  a 
sheer  mistake;  and  I  am  surprised,  since  there 
are  two  of  them,  one  in  either  end  of  the  egg, 
that  no  one  has  yet  been  found  to  maintain 
that  this  was  the  cock's  seed,  that  the  hen's. 
But  this  popular  error  is  at  once  answered  by 
the  fact  that  the  chalazae  are  present  with  the 
same  characters  in  ever}'  egg,  whether  it  be  fer¬ 
tile  or  barren. 

EXERCISE  33.  The  male  and  the  female  are  ali\e 
efficient  in  the  business  of  generation 

The  medical  writers  with  propriety  main¬ 
tain,  in  opposition  to  the  Aristotelians,  that  both 
sexes  have  the  power  of  acting  as  efficient 
causes  in  the  business  of  generation;  inasmuch 


as  the  being  engendered  is  a  mixture  of  the  two 
which  engender:  both  form  and  likeness  of 
body,  and  species  are  mixed,  as  we  see  in  the 
hybrid  between  the  partridge  and  common 
fowl.  And  it  does  indeed  seem  consonant  with 
reason  to  hold  that  they  are  the  efficient  causes 
of  conception  whose  mixture  appears  in  the 
thing  produced. 

Aristotle  entertaining  this  opinion  says:  “In 
some  animals  it  is  manifest  that  such  as  the  gen¬ 
erator  is,  such  is  the  engendered;  not,  however, 
the  same  and  identical,  not  one  numerically, 
but  one  specifically,  as  in  natural  things.  A  man 
engenders  a  man,  if  there  be  nothing  preter¬ 
natural  in  the  way,  as  a  horse  engenders  a  mule, 
and  other  similar  instances.  For  the  mule  is 
common  to  the  horse  and  the  ass;  it  is  not 
spoken  of  as  an  allied  kind ;  yet  may  horse  and 
ass  both  be  there  conjoined  in  a  hybrid  state.''^ 
He  says  further  in  the  same  place:  “It  is  enough 
that  the  generator  generate,  and  prove  the 
cause  that  the  species  be  found  in  the  matter: 
for  such. and  such  an  entire  species  is  still  found 
associated  with  such  and  such  flesh  and  bones — 
here  it  is  Gallias,  there  it  is  Socrates.” 

Wherefore  if  such  an  entire  form,  as  a  mule, 
be  a  mixture  of  two,  viz.^  a  horse  and  an  ass,  the 
horse  does  not  suffice  to  produce  this  form  of  a 
mule  in  the  “matter”;  but,  as  the  entire  form  is 
mixed,  so  another  efficient  cause  is  contributed 
by  the  ass  and  added  to  that  supplied  by  the 
horse.  That,  therefore,  which  produces  a  mule 
compounded  of  two,  must  itself  be  an  “ade¬ 
quate  efficient,”  and  mixed,  if  only  “univocal.” 
For  example,  this  woman  and  that  man  engen¬ 
der  this  Socrates;  not  in  so  far  as  they  are  both 
human  beings,  and  of  one  and  the  same  species, 
but  in  so  far  as  this  man  and  that  woman  in 
these  bones  and  muscles  constitute  human 
forms,  of  both  of  which,  if  Socrates  be  a  certain 
mixture,  a  compound  of  both,  that  by  which 
he  is  made  must  needs  be  a  mixed  univocal 
compound  of  the  two;  i.  e.,  a  mixed  efficient  of 
a  mixed  effect.  And,  therefore,  it  is  that  the 
male  and  female  by  themselves,  and  separately, 
are  not  genetic,  but  become  so  united  in  coitii^ 
and  made  one  animal,  as  it  were;  whence,  from 
the  two  as  one,  is  produced  and  educed  that 
which  is  the  true  efficient  proximate  cause  of 
conception. 

The  medical  writers  also,  in  directing  their 
attention  to  the  particulars  of  human  genera¬ 
tion  alone,  come  to  conclusions  on  generation  at 
large;  and  the  spermatic  fluid  proceeding  from 
the  parents  in  coitu  has  in  all  probability  beer 

^  Metaphysics^  vii.  8. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


396 

taken  by  them  for  true  seed,  analogous  to  the 
seeds  of  plants.  It  is  not  without  reason,  there¬ 
fore,  that  they  imagine  the  mixed  efficient 
cause  of  the  future  olTspring  to  be  constituted 
bv  a  mixture  of  the  seminal  matters  of  each 
parent.  And  then  they  go  on  to  assert  that  the 
mixture  proceeding  immediately  from  inter¬ 
course  is  deposited  in  the  uterus  and  forms  the 
rudiments  of  the  conception.  That  things  are 
very  different,  however,  is  made  manifest  by 
our  preceding  histor}^  of  the  egg,  which  is  a 
true  conception. 

EXERCISE  34.  O/"  the  matter  of  the  egg^  in  opposi- 

tion  to  the  Aristotelians  and  the  medical  writers 

The  position  taken  up  by  the  medical  writers 
against  the  Aristotelians,  viz,^  that  the  blood  is 
not  the  first  element  in  a  conception,  is  clearly 
shown  from  the  generation  of  the  egg  to  be 
well  chosen:  neither  during  intercourse,  nor  be¬ 
fore  nor  after  it,  is  there  a  drop  of  blood  con¬ 
tained  in  the  uterus  of  the  fowl;  neither  are  the 
rudiments  of  eggs  red,  but  white.  Many  ani¬ 
mals  also  conceive  in  whose  uteri,  if  they  be 
suddenly  laid  open  after  intercourse,  no  blood 
can  be  demonstrated. 

But  when  they  contend  that  the  maternal 
blood  is  the  food  of  the  foetus  in  utero,  especial¬ 
ly  of  its  more  sanguineous  parts,  as  they  style 
them,  and  that  the  foetus  from  the  outset  is  as 
it  were  a  portion  of  the  mother,  being  nour¬ 
ished  and  growing  through  her  blood,  and  veg¬ 
etating  through  her  spirit;  so  that  neither  does 
the  heart  pulsate,  nor  the  liver  compose  blood, 
nor  any  part  of  the  foetus  perform  any  kind  of 
independent  office,  but  everything  is  carried  on 
through  the  mother’s  means,  they  in  their  turn 
are  as  certainly  mistaken,  and  argue  from  er¬ 
roneous  observations.  For  the  embryo  in  the 
egg  boasts  of  its  own  blood,  formed  from  the 
fluids  contained  within  the  egg;  and  its  heart  is 
seen  to  pulsate  from  the  very  beginning:  it  bor¬ 
rows  nothing  in  the  shape  either  of  blood  or 
spirits  from  the  hen,  for  the  purpose  of  forming 
its  so-called  sanguineous  parts  and  its  feathers; 
as  most  clearly  appears  to  anyone  who  looks  on 
with  an  unbiassed  mind.  From  observations 
afterwards  to  be  communicated,  I  believe  in¬ 
deed  that  it  will  be  held  as  sufficiently  proven 
that  even  the  foetus  of  viviparous  animals  still 
contained  in  the  uterus  is  not  nourished  by  the 
blood  of  the  mother  and  does  not  vegetate 
through  her  spirit;  but  boasts  of  its  own  pecu¬ 
liar  vital  principle  and  powers,  and  its  own 
blood,  like  the  chick  in  ovo. 

With  reference  to  the  matter  which  the  em¬ 


bryo  obtains  from  its  male  and  female  parent, 
however,  and  the  way  and  manner  of  genera¬ 
tion  as  commonly  discoursed  of  in  the  schools, 
viz.^  that  conception  is  produced  or  becomes 
prolific  from  mixture  of  the  genitures  and  their 
mutual  action  and  passion,  as  also  of  the  semi¬ 
nal  fluid  of  the  female,  and  the  parts  which  are 
spoken  of  as  sanguineous  and  spermatic,  num¬ 
erous  and  striking  observations  afterwards  to 
be  related  have  compelled  me  to  adopt  opin¬ 
ions  at  variance  with  all  such  views.  At  this 
time  I  shall  only  say  that  I  am  greatly  surprised 
how  physicians,  particularly  those  among  them 
who  are  conversant  with  anatomy,  should  pre¬ 
tend  to  support  their  opinions  by  means  of  two 
arguments  especially,  which  rightly  under¬ 
stood,  seem  rather  to  prove  the  opposite;  viz,^ 
from  the  shock  and  resolution  of  the  forces  and 
the  effusion  of  fluid  which  women  at  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  the  sexual  orgasm  frequently  expe¬ 
rience,  they  argue  that  all  women  pour  out  a 
seminal  fluid,  and  that  this  is  necessary  to 
generation. 

But  passing  over  the  fact  that  the  females  of 
all  the  lower  animals,  and  all  women,  do  not  ex¬ 
perience  any  such  emission  of  fluid,  and  that 
conception  is  nowise  impossible  in  cases  where 
it  does  not  take  place,  for  I  have  known  several, 
who  without  anything  of  the  kind  were  suf¬ 
ficiently  prolific,  and  even  some  who  after  ex¬ 
periencing  such  an  emission  and  having  had 
great  enjoyment,  nevertheless  appeared  to  have 
lost  somewhat  of  their  wonted  fecundity;  and 
then  an  infinite  number  of  instances  might  be 
quoted  of  women  who,  although  they  have 
great  satisfaction  in  intercourse,  still  emit  noth¬ 
ing,  and  yet  conceive;  passing  over  these  facts, 
I  say,  I  cannot  but  express  surprise  at  those  es¬ 
pecially,  who,  conceiving  such  an  emission  on 
the  part  of  the  female  necessary  to  concep¬ 
tion,  have  not  adverted  to  the  fact  that  the 
fluid  emitted  is  discharged,  cast  out,  and  is  par¬ 
ticularly  abundant  about  the  clitoris  and  orifice 
of  the  vulva;  that  it  is  seldom  poured  out  with¬ 
in  the  vulva,  never  within  the  uterus,  and  so  as 
to  be  mingled  with  the  semen  of  the  male; 
moreover,  it  is  of  a  mere  serous  or  ichorous  con¬ 
sistency,  like  urine,  by  no  means  thick  and  ap¬ 
parently  unctuous,  like  the  spermatic  matter 
of  the  male.  But  how  shall  we  suppose  that  to 
be  of  use  internally  which  is  discharged  exter¬ 
nally.?^  Or  shall  we  say  that  this  humour,  as  if 
bidding  the  uterus  farewell,  is  taken  to  the 
verge  of  the  vulva,  that  it  may  be  then  recalled 
with  greater  favour  by  the  uterus? 

The  other  argument  is  drawn  from  the  geni- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


tal  organs  of  women,  the  testes,  to  wit,  and  vasa 
spermatica,  praeparantia  et  deferentia,  which 
are  held  to  serve  for  the  preparation  of  the 
spermatic  fluid.  I,  for  my  part,  greatly  wonder 
how  anyone  can  believe  that  from  parts  so  im¬ 
perfect  and  obscure  a  fluid  like  the  semen,  so 
elaborate,  concoct  and  vivifying,  can  ever  be 
produced,  endowed  with  force  and  spirit  and 
generative  influence  adequate  to  overcome 
that  of  the  male;  for  this  is  implied  in  the  dis¬ 
cussion  concerning  the  predominance  of  the 
male  or  the  female,  as  to  which  of  them  is  to 
become  the  agent  and  efficient  cause,  which 
the  matter  and  pathic  principle.  How  should 
such  a  fluid  get  the  better  of  another  concocted 
under  the  influence  of  a  heat  so  fostering,  of 
vessels  so  elaborate,  and  endowed  with  such 
vital  energy  ? — how  should  such  a  fluid  as  the 
male  semen  be  made  to  play  the  part  of  mere 
matter. — But  of  these  things  more  hereafter. 

Meantime,  it  is  certain  that  the  egg  of  the 
hen  is  not  engendered  from  any  such  discharge 
of  fluid  during  sexual  intercourse,  although 
after  connexion,  and  brimful  of  satisfaction, 
she  shakes  herself  for  joy,  and,  as  if  already  pos¬ 
sessed  of  the  richest  treasure,  as  if  gifted  by 
supreme  Jove,  the  preserver,  with  the  blessing 
of  fecundity,  she  sets  to  work  to  prune  and  or¬ 
nament  herself.  The  pigeon,  particularly  that 
kind  which  comes  to  us  from  Africa,  expresses 
the  satisfaction  she  feels  from  intercourse  in  a 
remarkable  manner;  she  leaps,  spreads  her  tail, 
and  sweeps  the  ground  with  its  extremity,  she 
pecks  and  prunes  her  feathers — all  her  actions 
are  as  if  she  felt  raised  to  the  summit  of  felicity 
by  the  gift  of  fruitfulness. 

We  have  said  that  the  primary  matter  of  the 
egg  does  not  consist  of  blood  as  Aristotle  would 
have  it,  neither  does  it  proceed  from  any  mix¬ 
ture  of  the  male  and  female  seminal  fluids. 
Whence  it  truly  originates  we  have  already 
stated  in  part  in  our  history;  and  we  shall  by 
and  by  have  occasion  to  speak  of  the  subject 
more  at  length  when  we  come  to  treat  generally 
of  the  matter  from  which  every  conception  is 
originally  produced. 

EXERCISE  35.  In  how  far  is  the  fowl  efficient  in 

the  generation  of  the  egg,  according  to  Aristotle? 

And  wherefore  is  the  concurrence  of  the  male 

required? 

It  has  been  already  stated  that  the  cock  and 
hen  are  the  two  principles  in  the  generation  of 
the  egg,  although  of  the  manner  in  which  they 
are  so  I  am  of  a  different  opinion  from  Aristotle 
and  medical  authorities.  From  the  production 


of  the  egg  we  have  clearly  shown  that  the  fe¬ 
male  as  well  as  the  male  was  efficient,  and  that 
she  had  within  her  a  principle  whence  motion 
and  the  faculty  of  forming  flowed;  although  in 
the  sexual  act  the  male  neither  confers  the  mat¬ 
ter,  nor  does  the  female  eject  any  semen  whence 
the  egg  is  constituted.  It  is  consequently  mani¬ 
fest,  in  some  animals  at  least,  that  nature  has 
not,  on  account  of  the  distinction  into  male  and 
female,  established  it  as  a  law  that  the  one,  as 
agent,  should  confer  form,  the  other,  as  passive, 
supply  matter,  as  Aristotle  apprehended;  nor 
yet  that  during  intercourse  each  should  con¬ 
tribute  a  seminal  fluid,  by  the  mixture  of  which 
a  conception  or  ovum  should  be  produced,  as 
physicians  commonly  suppose. 

Now  since  everything  that  has  been  delivered 
by  the  ancients  on  generation  is  comprehended 
in  these  two  opinions,  it  appears  to  have  es¬ 
caped  every  one  up  to  this  time,  first,  why  the 
hen  by  herself  does  not  generate,  like  vege¬ 
tables,  but  requires  a  male  to  be  associated  with 
her  in  the  work;  and  then  how  the  conception 
or  ovum  is  procreated  by  the  male  and  the  fe¬ 
male  together,  or  what  either  of  them  con¬ 
tributes  to  the  process,  and  for  what  end  inter¬ 
course  was  established. 

Aristotle,  in  opposition  to  the  entire  tenor  of 
his  hypothesis,  viz,,  that  the  male  is  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  agent,  the  female  as  supplying  the 
matter  only,  when  he  sees  that  eggs  are  actually 
produced  by  hens  without  the  concurrence  of 
the  male,  is  compelled  to  admit  that  the  female 
is  likewise  efficient;  he  was  further  not  ignorant 
of  the  fact  that  an  egg  even  when  extruded 
could  preserve  itself,  nourish  itself,  increase  in 
size  and  produce  an  embryo,  as  happens  with 
the  eggs  of  fishes;  and  he  has  besides  accorded  a 
vital  principle  to  an  egg,  even  to  a  hypenemic 
one.  But  he  endeavours  to  explain  to  what  ex¬ 
tent  a  female  is  efficient,  and  how  a  hypenemic 
egg  is  endowed  with  a  vital  principle,  in  the 
passage  where  he  says:  “Hypenemic  eggs  ad¬ 
mit  of  generation  to  a  certain  point;  for  that 
they  can  ever  go  the  length  of  producing  an 
animal  is  impossible,  this  being  the  work  of  the 
senses.  But  females  and  all  things  that  live,  as 
already  repeatedly  stated,  possess  the  vegeta¬ 
tive  soul.  Wherefore  the  hypenemic  egg  as  a 
vegetable  is  perfect,  but  as  an  animal  it  is  im¬ 
perfect.”^  By  this  he  seems  to  insinuate  that 
the  hypenemic  egg  Is  possessed  of  a  vegetative 
soul,  inasmuch  as  this  is  inherent  in  all  things 
that  live,  and  an  egg  is  alive.  In  like  manner  he 
ascribes  to  the  hen  the  power  of  creating  and  of 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  iii.  7. 


398  WILLIAM 

conferring  the  vegetative  soul;  because  all  fe¬ 
males  acquire  this  virtue,  so  that  a  hypenemic 
egg  in  so  far  as  it  lives  as  a  vegetable  is  perfect, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  an  animal,  however,  it  is  imper¬ 
fect.  As  if  a  male  were  not  required  that  a  con¬ 
ception  or  ovum  should  be  produced,  and  pro¬ 
duced  perfect;  but  that  from  this  ovum  an  ani¬ 
mal  should  be  engendered.  Not,  I  say,  that  an 
egg  be  produced  as  perfect  in  all  respects  as  is 
the  conception  of  a  vegetable;  but  that  it  should 
be  imbued  with  the  animal  principle.  The  egg, 
consequently,  is  formed  by  the  hen,  but  it  is 
made  prolific  by  the  cock. 

Aristotle  adds  in  the  same  place:  “There  is  a 
distinction  of  sexes  through  the  whole  class  of 
birds.  And,  therefore,  it  happens  that  the  hen 
perfects  her  egg,  not  yet  influenced  by  the  in¬ 
tercourse  of  the  male,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  plant; 
but  as  it  is  not  a  plant,  there  she  does  not  per¬ 
fect  it:  nor  does  anything  come  of  it  which  en¬ 
genders.  For  neither  has  it  arisen  simply,  like 
the  seed  of  a  plant,  nor  like  an  animal  concep¬ 
tion,  by  intercourse.”  He  is  here  speaking  of  the 
wind  egg;  by  and  by  he  adds:  “But  those  eggs 
that  are  conceived  through  intercourse  are  al¬ 
ready  characterized  in  a  portion  of  the  albu¬ 
men:  such  eggs  become  fruitful  through  the 
male  which  first  copulated,  for  they  are  then 
supplied  with  both  principles.” 

By  this  he  seems  to  confess  that  the  female  is 
also  effective  in  the  work  of  generation,  or  is 
possessed  of  the  faculty  of  engendering;  be¬ 
cause  in  every  female  there  inheres  a  vegetative 
soul,  whose  faculty  it  is  to  engender.  And, 
therefore,  when  he  is  speaking  of  the  differences 
between  the  male  and  female,  he  still  acknowl¬ 
edges  both  as  generative;  for  he  says:  “We  call 
that  animal  male  which  engenders  in  another, 
female  that  which  engenders  in  itself.”  From 
his  own  showing,  therefore,  both  engender; 
and  as  there  is  a  vegetative  soul  inherent  in 
both,  so  is  there  also  its  faculty  of  generation. 
But  how  they  differ  has  already  been  shown  in 
the  history  of  the  egg:  the  hen  generates  of  her¬ 
self  without  the  concurrence  of  the  cock,  as  a 
plant  out  of  itself  produces  fruit;  but  it  is  a 
wind  egg  that  is  thus  produced:  it  is  not  made 
fruitful  without  the  concurrence  of  the  cock 
either  preceding  or  succeeding.  The  female  gen¬ 
erates,  then,  but  it  is  only  up  to  a  certain  mark, 
and  the  concurrence  of  the  male  is  requisite 
that  this  faculty  of  engendering  be  made  com¬ 
plete,  that  she  may  not  only  lay  an  egg,  but 
such  an  egg  as  will,  under  favorable  circum¬ 
stances,  produce  a  pullet.  7'he  male  appears  to 
be  ordained  by  nature  to  supply  this  deficiency 


HARVEY 

in  the  generative  powers  of  the  female,  as  will 
be  clearly  shown  by  and  by,  and  that  that 
which  the  female  of  herself  cannot  accom¬ 
plish,  viz.,  the  production  of  a  fruitful  egg, 
may  be  supplied  and  made  good  by  the  act  of 
the  male,  who  imparts  this  virtue  to  the  fowl 
or  the  egg. 

EXERCISE  36.  The  perfect  hen's  egg  is  of  two 
colours 

Every  egg,  then,  is  not  perfect;  but  some  are 
to  be  held  imperfect  because  they  have  not  yet 
attained  their  true  dimensions,  which  they 
only  receive  when  extruded ;  others  are  imperfect 
because  they  are  yet  unprolific,  and  only  ac¬ 
quire  a  fertilizing  faculty  from  without,  such 
are  the  eggs  of  fishes.  Other  eggs  again  are  held 
imperfect  by  Aristotle,  because  they  are  of  one 
colour  only,  inasmuch  as  perfect  eggs  consist  of 
yelk  and  albumen,  and  are  of  two  colours,  as  if 
better  concocted,  more  distinct  in  their  parts, 
endowed  with  higher  heat.  The  eggs  that  are 
called  centenine  or  hundredth  eggs,  and  which 
Fabricius^  will  have  it  are  engendered  of  certain 
remainders  of  albumen,  are  of  one  colour  only, 
and  by  reason  of  their  deficiency  of  heat  and 
their  weakness,  are  regarded  as  imperfect.  Of 
all  eggs,  there  are  none  more  perfect  than  those 
of  the  hen,  which  are  produced  complete  in  all 
their  fluids  and  appendages,  of  proper  size  and 
fruitful. 

Aristotle  assigns  the  following  reason  where¬ 
fore  some  eggs  are  of  two  colours,  others  of  one 
hue  only:  “In  the  hotter  animals  those  things 
from  which  the  principles  of  their  origin  are 
derived  are  distinct  and  separate  from  those 
which  furnish  their  nutrition;  now  the  one  of 
these  is  white,  the  other  is  yellow.”-  As  if  the 
chick  derived  its  origin  from  the  albumen  and 
was  nourished  by  the  vitellus  alone.  In  the  same 
place  he  proceeds  thus:  “That  part  which  is 
hot  contributes  properly  to  the  form  in  the 
constitution  of  the  extremities;  but  the  part 
that  is  more  earthy,  and  is  farther  removed, 
supplies  material  for  the  trunk.  Whence  in  eggs 
of  two  colours  the  animal  derives  its  origin  from 
the  white,  for  the  commencement  of  animal 
existence  is  in  the  white;  but  the  nourishment 
is  obtained  from  the  yellow.”  He  consequently 
thinks  that  this  is  the  reason  why  these  fluids 
are  distinct,  and  why  eggs  are  produced  of  two 
colours. 

Now  these  ideas  are  partly  true,  partly  false. 
It  is  not  true,  for  instance,  that  the  embryo  of 

^  Op.  cit.^  p.  lo. 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals.,  m.  i. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


the  common  fowl  is  first  formed  from  the  albu¬ 
men  and  then  nourished  by  the  vitellus;  for, 
from  the  history  of  the  formation  of  the  chick 
in  ovoy  from  the  course  of  the  umbilical  vessels 
and  the  distribution  of  their  branches,  which 
undoubtedly  serve  for  obtaining  nourishment, 
it  obviously  appears  that  the  constituent  mat¬ 
ter,  and  the  nutriment  are  supplied  to  the 
chick  from  its  first  formation  by  the  yelk,  as 
well  as  the  white;  the  fluid  which  we  have 
called  the  colliquament  seems  further  to  be 
supplied,  not  less  by  the  vitellus  than  the  albu¬ 
men;  a  certain  portion  of  both  the  fluids  seems, 
in  fact,  to  be  resolved.  And  then  the  spot,  by 
the  expansion  of  which  the  colliquament  is 
formed  in  the  first  instance,  and  which  we  have 
called  the  eye,  appears  to  be  impressed  upon 
the  membrane  of  the  vitellus. 

The  distinction  into  yellow  and  white,  how¬ 
ever,  seems  to  be  a  thing  necessary:  these  mat¬ 
ters,  as  they  are  undoubtedly  of  different  na¬ 
tures,  appear  also  to  serve  different  offices;  they 
are,  therefore,  completely  separate  in  the  per¬ 
fect  egg,  one  of  them  being  more,  the  other 
less,  immediately  akin  to  proper  alimentary 
matter;  by  the  one  the  foetus  is  nourished  from 
the  very  beginning,  by  the  other  it  is  nour¬ 
ished  at  a  later  period.  For  it  is  certain,  as  Fab- 
ricius  asserts,  and  as  we  afterwards  maintain, 
that  both  of  them  are  truly  nutritious,  the  al¬ 
bumen  as  well  as  the  vitellus,  the  albumen  be¬ 
ing  the  first  that  is  consumed.  I,  therefore, 
agree  with  Aristotle  against  the  physicians,  that 
the  albumen  is  the  purer  portion  of  the  egg,  the 
better  concocted,  the  more  highly  elaborated; 
and,  therefore,  whilst  the  egg  is  getting  per¬ 
fected  in  the  uterus,  is  the  albumen  as  the  hot¬ 
ter  portion  poured  around  in  the  circumfer¬ 
ence,  the  yelk  or  more  earthy  portion  subsid¬ 
ing  to  the  centre.  For  the  albumen  appears  to 
contain  the  larger  quantity  of  animal  heat,  and 
so  to  be  nutriment  of  a  more  immediate  kind. 
For  like  reasons  it  is  probable  that  the  albumen 
is  purer  and  better  concocted  externally  than  it 
is  internally. 

When  medical  writers  affirm  that  the  yelk  is 
the  hotter  and  more  nutritious  portion  of  the 
egg,  this  I  imagine  is  meant  as  it  affords  food  to 
us,  not  as  it  is  found  to  supply  the  wants  of  the 
chick  in  ovo.  This,  indeed,  is  obvious  from  the 
history  of  the  formation  of  the  chick,  by  which 
the  thin  albumen  is  absorbed  and  used  up 
sooner  than  the  thick,  as  if  it  formed  the  more 
appropriate  aliment,  and  were  more  readily 
transmuted  into  the  substance  of  the  embryo, 
of  the  chick  that  is  to  be.  The  yelk,  therefore, 


appears  to  be  a  more  distant  or  ultimate  ali¬ 
ment  than  the  albumen,  the  whole  of  which 
has  been  used  up  before  any  notable  portion  of 
the  vitellus  is  consumed.  The  yelk,  indeed,  is 
still  found  inclosed  within  the  abdomen  of  the 
chick  after  its  exclusion  from  the  shell,  as  if  it 
were  destined  to  serve  the  new  being  in  lieu  of 
milk  for  its  sustenance. 

Eggs,  consisting  of  white  and  yellow,  are, 
therefore,  more  perfect,  as  more  distinct  in 
constitution,  and  elaborated  by  a  higher  tem¬ 
perature.  For  in  the  egg  there  must  be  included 
not  only  the  matter  of  the  chick  but  also  its 
first  nutriment;  and  what  is  provided  for  a  per¬ 
fect  animal,  must,  itself,  be  perfect  and  highly 
elaborated;  as  that  is,  in  fact,  which  consists  of 
different  parts,  some  of  which,  as  already 
stated,  are  prior  and  purer,  and  so  more  easy  of 
digestion;  others  posterior,  and  therefore  more 
difficult  of  transmutation  into  the  substance  of 
the  chick.  Now  the  yelk  and  albumen  differ 
from  one  another  by  such  kinds  of  distinction. 
Perfect  eggs  are,  consequently,  of  two  colours: 
they  consist  of  albumen  and  yelk,  as  if  these 
constituted  fluids  of  easier  or  more  difficult 
digestion,  adapted  to  the  different  ages  and 
vigour  of  the  chick. 

EXERCISE  37.  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  egg  is 
increased  by  the  albumen 

From  the  history  it  appears  that  the  rudi¬ 
ments  of  the  eggs  in  the  ovary  are  of  very  small 
size,  mere  specks,  smaller  than  millet  seeds, 
white  and  replete  with  watery  fluid:  these 
specks,  however,  by  and  by,  become  yelks,  and 
then  surround  themselves  with  albumen. 

Aristotle  seems  to  think  that  the  albumen  is 
generated  in  the  way  of  secretion  from  the  vi¬ 
tellus.  It  may  be  well  to  add  his  words:  “The 
sex,**  he  says,  “is  not  the  cause  of  the  double 
colour,  as  if  the  white  were  derived  from  the 
male,  the  yellow  from  the  female ;  both  are  fur¬ 
nished  by  the  female.  But  one  of  them  is  hot, 
the  other  is  cold.  Now  these  two  portions  are 
distinct  in  animals  fraught  with  much  heat;  in 
those  that  are  not  so  fraught  the  eggs  are  not 
thus  distinct.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  the 
conceptions  of  these  are  of  one  colour.  But  the 
semen  of  the  male  alone  sets  the  conception; 
therefore  is  the  conception  of  the  bird  small 
and  white  in  the  first  instance;  but  in  the  course 
of  time,  and  when  there  is  a  larger  infusion  of 
blood,  it  becomes  entirely  yellow;  and,  last  of 
all,  when  the  heat  declines,  the  white  portion, 
as  a  humour  of  equal  temperature  surrounds  it 
on  every  side.  For  the  white  portion  of  the  egg 


400  WILLIAM 

is,  by  its  nature,  moist,  and  includes  animal 
heat  in  itself;  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  it  is 
seen  in  the  circumference,  the  yellow  and 
earthy  portion  remaining  in  the  interior.”^ 

Fabricius,  however,  thinks  that  “the  albu¬ 
men  only  adheres  to  the  vitellus  by  juxtaposi¬ 
tion.  For  while  the  yelk  is  rolled  through  the 
second  uterus  and  gradually  descends,  it  also 
gradually  assumes  to  itself  the  albumen  which 
is  there  produced,  and  made  ready,  that  it  may 
be  applied  to  the  yelk;  until  the  yelk  having 
passed  the  middle  spirals  and  reached  the  last 
of  them,  already  surrounded  with  the  albumen, 
it  now  surrounds  itself  with  the  membranes  and 
shell.”  Fabricius  will,  therefore,  have  it  that 
the  egg  increases  in  a  two-fold  manner:  “partly 
by  means  of  the  veins,  as  concerns  the  vitellus, 
and  partly  by  an  appositive  increase,  as  regards 
the  albumen.”^  And,  among  other  reasons,  this 
was  perchance  one  for  the  above  opinion:  that 
when  an  egg  is  boiled  hard  the  albumen  is 
readily  split  into  layers  lying  one  over  another. 
But  this  also  occurs  to  the  yelk  still  connected 
with  the  ovary,  when  boiled  hard. 

Wherefore,  taught  by  experience,  I  rather  in¬ 
cline  to  the  opinion  of  Aristotle;  for  the  albu¬ 
men  is  not  merely  perceived  as  added  in  the 
way  Fabricius  will  have  it,  but  fashioned  also, 
distinguished  by  chalazae  and  membranes,  and 
divided  into  two  different  portions;  and  all  this 
in  virtue  of  the  inherence  of  the  same  vegeta¬ 
tive  vital  principle  by  which  the  egg  is  more 
conspicuously  divided  into  two  distinct  sub¬ 
stances — a  yelk  and  a  white.  For  the  same  fac¬ 
ulty  that  presides  over  the  formation  of  the 
egg  in  general  presides  over  the  constitution  of 
each  of  its  parts  in  particular.  Neither  is  it  al¬ 
together  true  that  the  yelk  is  first  formed  and 
the  albumen  added  to  it  afterwards;  for  what  is 
seen  in  the  ovary  is  not  the  vitellus  of  the  egg, 
but  rather  a  compound  containing  the  two  liq¬ 
uids  mingled  together.  It  has  the  colour  of  the 
vitellus,  indeed,  but  in  point  of  consistence  it  is 
more  like  the  albumen;  and  when  boiled  hard 
it  is  not  friable  like  the  proper  yelk,  but,  like 
the  white,  is  concreted,  jelly-like,  and  seen  to 
be  composed  of  thin  lamellae;  and  it  has  a  kind 
of  white  papula,  or  spot,  in  the  middle. 

Aristotle  seems  to  derive  this  separation  from 
the  dissimilar  nature  of  the  yelk  and  white;  for 
he  says,^  as  we  have  already  stated,  that  if  a 
number  of  eggs  be  thrown  into  a  pan  and 
boiled,  in  such  wise  that  the  heat  shall  not  be 

*  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  ill.  i. 

2  Op.  cit.^  p.  12. 

2  Fabricius,  op.  cit.y  p.  12. 


HARVEY 

quicker  than  the  separation  of  the  eggs  (citatior 
quam  ovortim  distinctio)^  the  same  thing  will 
take  place  in  the  mass  of  eggs  which  occurs  in 
the  individual  egg:  the  whole  of  the  yelks  will 
set  in  the  middle,  the  whites  round  about  them. 

This  I  have  myself  frequently  found  to  be 
true  on  making  the  trial,  and  it  is  open  to  any¬ 
one  to  repeat  the  experiment;  let  him  only  beat 
yelks  and  whites  together,  put  the  mixture  into 
a  dutch  oven,  or  between  two  plates  over  the 
fire,  and  having  added  some  butter,  cause  it  to 
set  slowly  into  a  cake,  he  will  find  the  albumen 
covering  over  the  yelks  situated  at  the  bottom. 

EXERCISE  38.  Of  what  the  coc\  and  hen  severally 
contribute  to  the  production  of  the  egg 

Both  cock  and  hen  are  to  be  reputed  parents 
of  the  chick;  for  both  are  necessary  principles 
of  an  egg,  and  we  have  proved  both  to  be  alike 
its  efficient:  the  hen  fashions  the  egg,  the  cock 
makes  it  fertile.  Both,  consequently,  are  instru¬ 
ments  of  the  plastic  virtue  by  which  this  species 
of  animal  is  perpetuated. 

But  as  in  some  species  there  appears  to  be  no 
occasion  for  males,  females  sufficing  of  them¬ 
selves  to  continue  the  kind;  so  do  we  discover 
no  males  among  these,  but  females  only,  con¬ 
taining  the  fertile  rudiments  of  eggs  in  their  in¬ 
terior;  in  other  species,  again,  none  but  males 
are  discovered  which  procreate  and  preserve 
their  kinds  by  emitting  something  into  the 
mud,  or  earth,  or  water.  In  such  instances  na¬ 
ture  appears  to  have  been  content  with  a  single 
sex,  which  she  has  used  as  an  instrument  ade¬ 
quate  to  procreation. 

Another  class  of  animals  has  a  generative 
fluid  fortuitously,  as  it  were,  and  without  any 
distinction  of  sex;  the  origin  of  such  animals  is 
spontaneous.  But  “as  some  things  are  made  by 
art,  and  some  depend  on  accident,  health  for 
example,”^  so  also  some  semen  of  animals  is  not 
produced  by  the  act  of  an  individual  agent,  as 
in  the  case  of  a  man  engendered  by  a  man;  but 
in  some  sort  univocally,  as  in  those  instances 
where  the  rudiments  and  matter,  produced  by 
accident,  are  susceptible  of  taking  on  the  same 
motions  as  seminal  matter,  as  in  “animals 
which  do  not  proceed  from  coitus,  but  arise 
spontaneously,  and  have  such  an  origin  as  in¬ 
sects  which  engender  worms.”®  For  as  mechan¬ 
ics  perform  some  operations  with  their  un¬ 
aided  hands,  and  others  not  without  the  assist¬ 
ance  of  particular  tools;  and  as  the  more  excel¬ 
lent  and  varied  and  curious  works  of  art  require 

*  Aristotle,  On  the  Parts  of  Animalsy  i.  i. 

5  On  the  Generation  of  Animalsy  in.  9. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


a  greater  variety  in  the  form  and  size  of  the 
tools  to  bring  them  to  perfection,  inasmuch  as 
a  greater  number  of  motions  and  a  larger 
amount  of  subordinate  means  are  required  to 
bring  more  worthy  labours  to  a  successful  issue 
— art  imitating  nature  here  as  everywhere  else, 
so  also  does  nature  make  use  of  a  larger  num¬ 
ber  and  variety  of  forces  and  instruments  as 
necessary  to  the  procreation  of  the  more  per¬ 
fect  animals.  For  the  sun,  or  Heaven,  or  what¬ 
ever  name  is  used  to  designate  that  which  is 
understood  as  the  common  generator  or  parent 
of  all  animated  things,  engenders  some  of  them¬ 
selves,  by  accident,  without  an  instrument,  as 
it  were,  and  equivocally;  and  others  through 
the  concurrence  of  a  single  individual,  as  in 
those  instances  where  an  animal  is  produced 
from  another  animal  of  the  same  genus  which 
supplies  both  matter  and  form  to  the  being  en¬ 
gendered;  so  in  like  manner  in  the  generation  of 
the  most  perfect  animals  where  principles  are 
distinguished,  and  the  seminal  elements  of  ani¬ 
mated  beings  are  divided,  a  new  creation  is  not 
effected  save  by  the  concurrence  of  male  and 
female,  or  by  two  necessary  instruments.  Our 
hen’s  egg  is  of  this  kind;  to  its  production  in  the 
perfect  state  the  cock  and  the  hen  are  neces¬ 
sary.  The  hen  engenders  in  herself,  and  there¬ 
fore  does  she  supply  place  and  matter,  nutri¬ 
ment  and  warmth;  but  the  cock  confers  fecun¬ 
dity;  for  the  male,  as  Aristotle  says,^  always  per¬ 
fects  generation,  secures  the  presence  of  a  sen¬ 
sitive  vital  principle,  and  from  such  an  egg  an 
animal  is  engendered. 

To  the  cock,  therefore,  as  well  as  to  the  hen, 
are  given  the  organs  requisite  to  the  function 
with  which  he  is  intrusted;  in  the  hen  all  the 
genital  parts  are  adapted  to  receive  and  con¬ 
tain,  as  in  the  cock  they  are  calculated  to  give 
and  immit,  or  prepare  that  which  transfers 
fecundity  to  the  female,  he  engendering,  as  it 
were,  in  another,  not  in  himself. 

When  we  anatomize  the  organs  appropriated 
to  generation,  therefore,  we  readily  distinguish 
what  each  sex  contributes  in  the  process;  for  a 
knowledge  of  the  instruments  here  leads  us  by 
a  direct  path  to  a  knowledge  of  their  functions. 

EXERCISE  39.  Of  the  coc\  and  the  particulars  most 
remarkable  in  his  constitution 

The  cock,  as  stated,  is  the  prime  efficient  of 
the  perfect  or  fruitful  hen’s  egg,  and  the  chief 
cause  of  generation:  without  the  male  no  chick 
would  ever  be  produced  from  an  egg,  and  in 
many  ovipara  not  even  would  any  egg  be  pro- 

^  Ibid.y  Ti.  5. 


duced.  It  is,  therefore,  imperative  on  us  that 
we  look  narrowly  into  his  oflftces  and  uses,  and 
inquire  particularly  what  he  contributes  to  the 
egg  and  chick,  both  in  the  act  of  intercourse 
and  at  other  times. 

It  is  certain  that  the  cock  in  coition  emits  his 
“geniture,”  commonly  called  semen,  from  his 
sexual  parts,  although  he  has  no  penis,  as  I 
maintain;  because  his  testes  and  long  and  am¬ 
ple  vasa  deferentia  are  full  of  this  fluid.  But 
whether  it  issues  in  jets,  with  a  kind  of  spirit¬ 
uous  briskness  and  repeatedly  as  in  the  hotter 
viviparous  animals,  or  not,  I  have  not  been 
able  to  ascertain.  But  as  I  do  not  find  any  vesi- 
culas  containing  semen,  from  which,  made  brisk 
and  raised  into  a  froth  by  the  spirits,  it  might 
be  emitted;  nor  any  penis  through  whose  nar¬ 
rower  orifice  it  might  be  forcibly  ejaculated, 
and  so  strike  upon  the  interior  of  the  hen;  and 
particularly  when  I  see  the  act  of  intercourse 
so  rapidly  performed  between  them;  I  am  dis¬ 
posed  to  believe  that  the  parts  of  the  hen  are 
merely  moistened  with  a  very  small  quantity 
of  seminal  fluid,  only  as  much  as  will  adhere  to 
the  orifice  of  the  pudenda,  and  that  the  prolific 
fluid  is  not  emitted  by  any  sudden  ejaculation; 
so  that  whilst  among  animals  repeated  ejacula¬ 
tions  take  place  during  the  same  connexion, 
among  birds,  which  are  not  delayed  with  any 
complexity  of  venereal  apparatus,  the  same  ob¬ 
ject  is  effected  by  repeated  connexions.  Ani¬ 
mals  that  are  long  in  connexion,  copulate  rare¬ 
ly ;  and  this  is  the  case  with  the  swan  and  ostrich 
among  birds.  The  cock,  therefore,  as  he  cannot 
stay  long  in  his  connexions,  supplies  by  dint  of 
repeated  treadings  the  reiterated  ejaculations 
of  the  single  intercourse  in  other  animals;  and 
as  he  has  neither  penis  nor  glans,  still  the  ex¬ 
tremities  of  the  vasa  deferentia,  inflated  with 
spirits  when  he  treads,  become  turgid  in  the 
manner  of  a  glans  penis,  and  the  orifice  of  the 
uterus  of  the  hen,  compressed  by  them,  her 
cloaca  being  exposed  for  the  occasion,  is 
anointed  with  genital  fluid,  which  consequently 
does  not  require  a  penis  for  its  intromission. 

We  have  said,  however,  that  such  was  the 
virtue  of  the  semen  of  the  cock,  that  not  only 
did  it  render  the  uterus,  the  egg  in  utero,  and 
the  vitelline  germ  in  the  ovary,  but  the  whole 
hen  prolific,  so  that  even  the  germs  of  vitelli, 
yet  to  be  produced,  were  impregnated. 

Fabricius  has  well  observed  that  the  quantity 
of  spermatic  fluid  contained  in  the  testes  and 
vasa  deferentia  of  the  cock  was  large;  not  that 
the  hen  requires  much  to  fecundate  each  of  her 
eggs,  but  that  the  cock  may  have  a  supply  for 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


402 

the  large  number  of  hens  he  serves  and  for  his 
repealed  addresses  to  them. 

'Hie  shortness  and  straight  course  of  the 
spermatic  vessels  in  the  cock  also  assist  the  rapid 
emission  of  the  spermatic  lliiid:  anything  that 
must  pass  through  lengthened  and  tortuous 
conduits,  of  course,  escapes  more  slowly  and  re¬ 
quires  a  greater  exercise  of  the  impelling  power 
or  spirit  to  force  it  away. 

Among  male  animals  there  is  none  that  is 
more  active  or  more  haughty  and  erect,  or  that 
has  stronger  powers  of  digestion  than  the  cock, 
which  turns  the  larger  portion  of  his  food  into 
semen;  hence  it  is  that  he  requires  so  many 
wives — ten  or  even  a  dozen.  For  there  are  some 
animals,  single  males  of  which  suffice  for  several 
females,  as  we  see  among  deer,  cattle,  &c.;  and 
there  are  others,  of  which  the  females  are  so 
prurient  that  they  are  scarcely  satisfied  with 
several  males,  such  as  the  bitch  and  the  wolf; 
whence  prostitutes  were  called  lupse  or  wolves, 
as  making  their  persons  common;  and  stews 
were  entitled  lupanaria.  Whilst  some  animals, 
of  a  more  chaste  disposition,  live,  as  it  were,  in 
the  conjugal  estate,  so  that  the  male  is  married 
to  a  single  female  only,  and  both  take  part  in 
providing  for  the  wants  of  the  family;  for  since 
nature  requires  that  the  male  supply  the  de¬ 
ficiencies  of  the  female  in  the  work  of  genera¬ 
tion,  and  as  she  alone  in  many  cases  does  not 
suffice  to  cherish  and  feed  and  protect  the 
young,  the  male  is  added  to  the  wife  that  he 
may  take  part  in  the  burthen  of  bringing  up  the 
offspring.  Partridges  lead  a  wedded  life,  be¬ 
cause  the  females  alone  cannot  incubate  such  a 
number  of  eggs  as  they  lay  (so  that  they  are 
said,  by  some,  to  make  two  nests),  nor  to  bring 
up  such  a  family  as  by  and  by  appears  without 
assistance.  The  male  pigeon  also  assists  in  build¬ 
ing  the  nest,  takes  his  turn  in  incubating  the 
eggs,  and  is  active  in  feeding  the  young.  In  the 
same  way  many  other  instances  of  conjugal  life 
among  the  lower  animals  might  be  quoted,  and 
indeed  we  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  several 
in  what  yet  remains  to  be  said. 

Those  males,  among  animals,  which  serve 
several  females,  such  as  the  cock,  have  an 
abundant  secretion  of  seminal  fluid,  and  are 
provided  with  long  and  ample  vasa  deferentia. 
And  at  whatever  time  or  season  the  clustered 
rudimentary  papuhe  in  the  ovary  come  to 
maturity  and  require  fecundation,  that  they 
may  go  on  to  be  turned  into  perfect  eggs,  the 
males  will  then  be  found  to  have  an  abundance 
of  seminal  fluid,  and  the  testicles  to  enlarge  and 
become  conspicuous  in  the  very  situation  to 


which  they  transfer  their  fecundating  influ¬ 
ence,  viz.y  the  praecordia.  This  is  remarkable  in 
fishes,  birds,  and  the  whole  race  of  oviparous 
animals;  the  males  of  which  teem  with  fecun¬ 
dating  seminal  fluid  at  the  same  precise  seasons 
as  the  females  become  full  of  eggs. 

Whatever  parts  of  the  hen,  therefore,  are 
destined  by  nature  for  purposes  of  generation, 
viz.f  the  ovary,  the  infundibulum,  the  proc¬ 
essus  uteri,  the  uterus  itself,  and  the  pudenda; 
as  also  the  situation  of  these  parts,  their  struc¬ 
ture,  dimensions,  temperature,  and  all  that  fol¬ 
lows  this;  all  these,  1  say,  are  either  subordinate 
to  the  production  and  growth  of  the  egg,  or  to 
intercourse  and  the  reception  of  fecundity 
from  the  male;  or,  for  the  sake  of  parturition, 
to  which  they  conduce  either  as  principal  and 
convenient  means,  or  as  means  necessary, 
and  without  which  what  is  done  could  not  be 
accomplished;  for  nothing  in  nature’s  works  is 
fashionedeithercarelessly  orin  vain.  In  the  same 
way  all  the  parts  in  the  cock  are  fashioned  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  the  preparation  or  concoction  of  the 
spermatic  fluid,  and  its  transference  to  the  hen. 

Now  those  males  that  are  so  vigorously  con¬ 
stituted  as  to  serve  several  females  are  larger 
and  handsomer,  and  in  the  matter  of  spirit  and 
arms  excel  their  females  in  a  far  greater  degree 
than  the  males  of  those  that  live  attached  to  a 
single  female.  Neither  the  male  partridge,  nor 
the  crow,  nor  the  pigeon,  is  distinguished  from 
the  female  bird  in  the  same  decided  way  as  the 
cock  from  his  hens,  the  stag  from  his  does,  &c. 

The  cock,  therefore,  as  he  is  gayer  in  his 
plumage,  better  armed,  more  courageous  and 
pugnacious,  so  is  he  replete  with  semen,  and  so 
apt  for  repeated  intercourse,  that  unless  he 
have  a  number  of  wives  he  distresses  them  by 
his  frequent  assaults;  he  not  only  invites  but 
compels  them  to  his  pleasure,  and  leaping  upon 
them  at  inconvenient  and  improper  seasons 
(even  when  they  are  engaged  in  the  business  of 
incubation)  and  wearing  oft  the  feathers  from 
their  backs,  he  truly  does  them  an  injury.  I 
have  occasionally  seen  hens  so  torn  and  worn  by 
the  ferocious  addresses  of  the  cock,  that  with 
their  backs  stript  of  feathers  and  laid  bare  in 
places,  even  to  the  bone,  they  languished  mis¬ 
erably  for  a  time  and  then  died.  The  same  thing 
also  occurs  among  pheasants,  turkeys,  and 
other  species. 

EXERCISE  40.  Of  the  hen 

There  are  two  instruments  and  two  first 
causes  of  generation,  the  male  and  the  female — 
for  to  the  hen  seems  to  belong  the  formation  of 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


the  egg,  as  to  the  cock  the  fertilizing  principle. 
In  the  act  of  intercourse,  then,  of  these  two, 
that  which  renders  the  egg  fruitful  is  either 
transmitted  from  the  male  to  the  female,  or  by 
means  of  coition  is  generated  in  the  hen.  The 
nature  of  this  principle,  however,  is  no  less  dif¬ 
ficult  to  ascertain  than  are  the  particulars  of  its 
communication,  whether,  for  instance,  we  sup¬ 
pose  such  communication  to  take  place  with 
the  whole  system  of  the  hen,  or  simply  with 
her  womb,  or  with  the  egg  already  formed,  or 
further,  with  all  the  eggs  now  commencing  and 
hereafter  about  to  commence  their  existence  in 
the  ovary.  For  it  is  probable,  from  what  I  have 
formerly  mentioned,  and  also  from  the  experi¬ 
ment  of  Fabricius,^  that  but  a  few  acts  of  inter¬ 
course,  and  the  consorting  of  the  hen  with  the 
cock  for  some  days,  are  sufficient  to  fecundate 
her,  or  at  least  her  womb,  during  the  whole 
year.  And  so  far  I  can  myself  affirm,  from  my 
own  observation,  to  wit,  that  the  twentieth  egg 
laid  by  a  hen,  after  separation  from  the  cock, 
has  proved  prolific.  So  that,  in  like  manner  as 
it  is  well  known  that,  from  the  seed  of  male 
fishes  shed  into  the  water,  a  large  mass  of  ova  is 
impregnated,  and  that  in  dogs,  pigs,  and  other 
animals,  a  small  number  of  acts  of  intercourse 
suffice  for  the  procreation  of  many  young  ones 
(some  even  think  it  well  established,  that  if  a 
bitch  have  connexion  more  than  three  or  four 
times,  her  fruitfulness  is  impaired,  and  that 
more  females  than  males  are  then  engendered), 
so  may  the  cock,  by  a  few  treadings,  render  pro¬ 
lific  not  only  the  egg  in  the  womb,  but  also  the 
whole  ovarium,  and,  as  has  been  often  said,  the 
hen  herself.  Nay,  what  is  more  remarkable,  and 
indeed  wonderful,  it  is  said  that  in  Persia,^  on 
cutting  open  the  female  mouse,  the  young  ones 
still  contained  in  the  belly  are  already  pregnant; 
in  other  words,  they  are  mothers  before  they 
are  born!  as  if  the  male  rendered  not  only  the 
female  fruitful,  but  also  impregnated  the  young 
which  she  had  conceived;  in  the  same  way  as 
our  cock  fertilizes  not  merely  the  hen,  but  also 
the  eggs  which  are  about  to  be  produced  by 
her. 

But  this  is  confidently  denied  by  those  phy¬ 
sicians  who  assert  that  conception  is  produced 
from  a  mixture  of  the  seed  of  each  sex.  And 
hence  Fabricius,^  although  he  affirms  that  the 
seed  of  the  cock  ejected  in  coition  never  does, 
nor  can,  enter  the  cavity  of  the  womb,  where 
the  egg  is  formed,  or  takes  its  increase,  and 

1  Op,  cit.y  p.  31, 

2  Aristotle,  History  of  Animals^  vi.  37, 

3  Op.  cit.y  pp.  38,  39. 


403 

though  he  plainly  sees  that  the  eggs  when  first 
commencing  in  the  ovarium  are,  no  less  than 
those  which  exist  in  the  womb,  fecundated  by 
the  same  act  of  coition,  and  that  of  these  no 
part  could  arise  from  the  semen  of  the  cock, 
yet  has  he  supposed  that  this  semen,  as  if  it 
must  needs  be  present  and  permanent,  is  con¬ 
tained  during  the  entire  year  in  the  bursa  of  the 
fruitful  hen,  and  reserved  in  a  foramen  caecum. 
This  opinion  we  have  already  rejected,  as  well 
because  that  cavity  is  found  in  the  male  and 
female  equally,  as  because  neither  there,  nor 
anywhere  else  in  the  hen,  have  we  been  able  to 
discover  this  stagnant  semen  of  the  cock;  as 
soon  as  it  has  performed  its  office,  and  im¬ 
pressed  a  prolific  power  on  the  female,  it  either 
escapes  out  of  the  body,  or  is  dissolved,  or  is 
turned  into  vapour  and  vanishes.  And  al¬ 
though  Galen,^  and  all  physicians  with  him,  op¬ 
pose  by  various  reasonings  this  dissolving  of 
the  semen,  yet,  if  they  carefully  trace  the  ana¬ 
tomical  arrangement  of  the  genital  parts,  and 
at  the  same  time  weigh  other  proofs  of  the 
strongest  kind,  they  must  confess  that  the 
semen  of  the  male,  as  it  is  derived  from  the 
testicles  through  the  vasa  deferentia,  and  as  it 
is  contained  in  the  vesiculae  seminales,  is  not 
prolific  unless  it  be  rendered  spiritual  and  effer¬ 
vesce  into  a  frothy  nature  by  the  incitement  of 
intercourse  or  desire.  For  it  is  not,  as  Aristotle^ 
bears  witness,  its  bodily  form,  or  fire,  or  any 
such  faculty,  that  renders  the  semen  prolific, 
but  the  spirit  which  is  contained  in  it,  and  the 
nature  which  inheres  in  it,  bearing  a  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  element  of  the  stars.  Wherefore, 
though  we  should  allow  with  Fabricius  that  the 
semen  is  retained  in  the  hursa^  yet,  when  that 
prolific  effervescence  or  spirit  had  been  spent, 
it  would  forthwith  be  useless  and  sterile* 
Hence,  too,  physicians  may  learn  that  the  se¬ 
men  of  the  male  is  the  architect  of  the  progeny, 
not  because  the  first  conception  is  embodied 
out  of  it,  but  because  it  is  spiritual  and  effer¬ 
vescent,  as  if  swelling  with  a  fertilizing  spirit, 
and  a  preternatural  influence.  For  otherwise 
the  story  of  Averrhoes,  of  the  woman  who  con¬ 
ceived  in  a  bath,  might  bear  an  appearance  of 
truth.  But  of  these  things  more  in  their  proper 
place. 

In  the  same  manner  then  as  the  egg  is  formed 
from  the  hen,  so  is  it  probable,  that  from  the 
females  of  other  animals,  as  will  hereafter  be 
shown,  the  first  conceptions  take  both  material 
and  form;  and  that,  too,  some  little  time  after 

^  cf.  Aristotle,  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  ii,  3. 

^Ibid. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


404 

the  semen  of  the  male  has  been  introduced,  and 
has  disappeared  again.  For  the  cock  does  not 
confer  any  fecundity  on  the  hen,  or  her  eggs, 
by  the  simple  emission  of  his  semen,  but  only 
in  so  far  as  that  fluid  has  a  prolific  quality,  and 
is  imbued  with  a  plastic  power;  that  is  to  say,  is 
spiritual,  operative,  and  analogous  to  the  es¬ 
sence  of  the  stars.  The  male,  therefore,  is  no 
more  to  be  considered  the  first  principle,  from 
which  conceptions  and  the  embryo  arise,  be¬ 
cause  he  is  capable  of  secreting  and  emitting 
semen,  than  is  the  female,  which  creates  an  egg 
without  his  assistance.  But  it  is  on  this  consid¬ 
eration  rather  that  he  is  entitled  to  his  preroga¬ 
tive,  that  he  introduces  his  semen,  imbued  as 
it  is  with  the  spirit  and  the  virtue  of  a  divine 
agent,  such  as,  in  a  moment  of  time,  performs 
its  functions,  and  conveys  fertility.  For,  as  we 
see  things  suddenly  set  on  fire  and  blasted  by  a 
spark  struck  from  a  flint,  or  the  lightning  flash¬ 
ing  from  a  cloud,  so  equally  does  the  seed  of  the 
male  instantly  affect  the  female  which  it  has 
touched  with  a  kind  of  contagion,  and  transfer 
to  her  its  prolific  quality,  by  which  it  renders 
fruitful  in  a  moment,  not  only  the  eggs,  but 
the  uterus  also,  and  the  hen  herself.  For  an 
inflammable  material  is  not  set  on  fire  by 
the  contact  of  flame  more  quickly  than  is  the 
hen  made  pregnant  by  intercourse  with  the 
cock.  But  what  it  is  that  is  transferred  from 
him  to  her,  we  shall  afterwards  find  occasion  to 
speak  of,  when  we  treat  this  matter  specially 
and  at  greater  length. 

In  the  meantime,  we  must  remark,  that,  if  it 
be  derived  from  the  soul  (for  whatever  is  fruit¬ 
ful  is  probably  endowed  also  with  a  soul;  and 
we  have  said  before,  that  the  egg,  in  Aristotle’s 
opinion,  as  well  as  the  seeds  of  plants,  has  a 
vegetative  soul),  that  soul,  or  at  all  events  the 
vegetative  one,  must  be  communicated  as  a 
graft,  and  transferred  from  the  male  to  the  fe¬ 
male,  from  the  female  to  the  egg,  from  the  egg 
to  the  foetus;  or  else  be  generated  in  each  of 
these  successively  by  the  contagion  of  coition. 

The  subject,  nevertheless,  seems  full  of  am¬ 
biguity;  and  so  Aristotle,  although  he  allows 
that  the  semen  of  the  male  has  such  great  vir¬ 
tue  that  a  single  emission  of  it  suffices  for  fe¬ 
cundating  very  many  eggs  at  the  same  time, 
yet,  lest  this  admission  should  seem  to  gainsay 
the  efficacy  of  frequent  repetitions  of  inter¬ 
course,  he  further  says,  “In  birds,  not  even 
those  eggs  which  arise  through  intercourse  can 
greatly  increase  in  size,  unless  the  intercourse 
be  continued;  and  the  reason  of  this  is  that,  as 
in  women,  the  menstrual  excretion  is  drawn 


downwards  by  sexual  intercourse  (for  the  uter¬ 
us,  becoming  warm,  attracts  moisture,  and  its 
pores  are  opened),  so  also  does  it  happen  with 
birds,  in  which  the  menstrual  excrement,  be¬ 
cause  it  accumulates  gradually,  and  is  retained 
above  the  cincture,  and  cannot  escape,  from 
being  in  small  quantity,  only  passes  off  when  it 
has  reached  the  uterus  itself.  For  by  this  is  the 
egg  increased,  as  is  the  foetus  of  the  viviparous 
animal  by  that  which  flows  through  the  umbili¬ 
cus.  For  almost  all  birds,  after  but  a  single  act 
of  intercourse,  continue  to  produce  eggs,  but 
they  are  small. 

Now,  so  far  perhaps  would  the  opinion  of 
Aristotle  be  correct,  that  more  and  larger  eggs 
are  procured  by  frequently-repeated  inter¬ 
course;  because,  as  he  says,  there  may  be  “a 
flow  of  more  fruitful  material  to  the  womb, 
when  warmed  by  the  heat  of  coition”;  not, 
however,  that  frequent  coition  must  neces¬ 
sarily  take  place  in  order  to  render  the  eggs 
that  are  laid  prolific.  For  experience,  as  we  have 
said,  teaches  the  contrary,  and  the  reason  which 
he  alleges  does  not  seem  convincing;  since  the 
rudiments  of  eggs  are  not  formed  in  the  uterus 
from  menstrual  blood,  which  is  found  in  no 
part  of  the  hen,  but  in  the  ovary,  where  no 
blood  pre-exists,  and  originate  as  well  without, 
as  along  with  the  intercourse  of  the  cock. 

The  hen,  as  well  as  all  other  females,  supplies 
matter,  nutrition,  and  place  to  the  conception. 
The  matter,  whence  the  rudiments  of  all  eggs 
are  produced  in  the  ovary  and  take  their  in¬ 
crease,  seems  to  be  the  very  same  from  which 
all  the  other  parts  of  the  hen,  namely,  the 
fleshy,  nervous,  and  bony  structures,  as  well  as 
the  head  and  the  rest  of  the  members,  are  nour¬ 
ished  and  grow.  Nourishment  is  in  fact  con¬ 
veyed  to  each  single  papula  and  yelk  contained 
in  the  ovary  by  means  of  vessels,  in  the  same 
way  precisely  as  to  all  the  other  parts  of  the 
hen.  But  the  place  where  the  egg  is  provided 
with  membranes,  and  perfected  by  the  addition 
of  the  chalazae  and  shell,  is  the  uterus. 

But  that  the  hen  neither  emits  any  semen 
during  intercourse,  nor  sheds  any  blood  into 
the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  and  that  the  egg  is  not 
formed  in  the  mode  in  which  Aristotle  sup¬ 
posed  a  conception  to  arise,  nor,  as  physicians 
imagine,  from  a  mixture  of  the  seminal  fluids; 
as  also  that  the  semen  of  the  cock  does  not 
penetrate  into,  nor  is  attracted  towards,  the 
cavity  of  the  uterus  of  the  hen,  is  all  made 
manifestly  clear  by  this  one  observation,  name¬ 
ly,  that  after  intercourse  there  is  nothing  more 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals ^  111.  i. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


to  be  found  in  the  uterus,  than  there  was  be¬ 
fore  the  act.  And  when  this  shall  have  been 
afterwards  clearly  established  and  demon¬ 
strated  to  be  true  of  all  kinds  of  animals  which 
conceive  in  a  uterus,  it  will  at  the  same  time  be 
equally  evident  that  what  has  hitherto  been 
handed  down  to  us  from  all  antiquity  on  the 
generation  of  animals  is  erroneous;  that  the 
foetus  is  not  constituted  of  the  semen  either  of 
the  male  or  female,  nor  of  a  mixture  of  the  two, 
nor  of  the  menstrual  blood,  but  that  in  all  ani¬ 
mals,  as  well  in  the  prolific  conception  as  after 
it,  the  same  series  of  phenomena  occur  as  in  the 
generation  of  the  chick  from  the  egg,  and  as  in 
the  production  of  plants  from  the  seeds  of  their 
several  kinds.  For,  besides  that,  it  appears  the 
male  is  not  required  as  being  in  himself  agent, 
workman,  and  efficient  cause;  nor  the  female, 
as  if  she  supplied  the  matter;  but  that  each, 
male  as  well  as  female,  may  be  said  to  be  in 
some  sort  the  operative  and  parent;  and  the 
foetus,  as  a  mixture  of  both,  is  created  a  mixed 
resemblance  and  kind.  Nor  is  that  true  which 
Aristotle  often  affirms,  and  physicians  take  for 
granted,  namely,  that  immediately  after  inter¬ 
course,  something  either  of  the  foetus  or  the 
conception  may  be  found  in  the  uterus  (for  in¬ 
stance,  the  heart,  the  “three  bullae,’’  or  some 
other  principal  part),  at  any  rate  something — 
a  coagulum,  some  mixture  of  the  spermatic  sub¬ 
stances,  or  other  things  of  the  like  kind.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  not  till  long  after  intercourse 
that  the  eggs  and  conception  first  commence 
their  existence,  among  the  greater  number  of 
animals,  and  these  the  most  perfect  ones;  I 
mean  in  the  cases  where  the  females  have  been 
fruitful  and  have  become  pregnant.  And  that 
the  female  is  prolific,  before  any  conception  is 
contained  in  the  uterus,  there  are  many  indica¬ 
tions,  as  will  be  hereafter  set  forth  in  the  his¬ 
tory  of  viviparous  animals:  the  breasts  enlarge, 
the  uterus  begins  to  swell,  and  by  other  symp¬ 
toms  a  change  of  the  whole  system  is  discerned. 

But  the  hen,  though  she  have  for  the  most 
part  the  rudiments  of  eggs  in  her  before  inter¬ 
course,  which  are  afterwards  by  this  act  ren¬ 
dered  fruitful,  and  there  be,  therefore,  some¬ 
thing  in  her  immediately  after  coition,  yet  even 
when  she,  as  in  the  case  of  other  animals,  has  as 
yet  no  eggs  ready  prepared  in  the  ovary,  or  has 
at  the  time  of  the  intercourse  got  rid  of  all  she 
had,  yet  does  she  by  and  by,  even  after  some 
lapse  of  time,  as  if  in  possession  of  both  principles 
or  the  powers  of  both  sexes,  generate  eggs  by 
herself  after  the  manner  of  plants;  and  these  (I 
speak  from  experience)  not  barren,  but  prolific. 


Nay,  what  is  more,  if  you  remove  all  the  eggs 
from  beneath  a  hen  that  has  been  fecundated 
and  is  now  sitting  (after  having  already  laid  all 
her  eggs,  and  no  more  remain  in  the  ovary), 
she  will  begin  to  lay  again;  and  the  eggs  thus 
laid  will  be  prolific,  and  have  both  principles 
inherent  in  them. 

EXERCISE  41.  Of  the  sense  in  which  the  hen  may 

be  called  the  *'frime  efficient''' :  and  of her  parturition 

It  has  already  been  said  that  the  hen  is  the 
efficient  cause  of  generation,  or  an  instrument 
of  Nature  in  this  work,  not  indeed  immedi¬ 
ately,  or  of  herself;  but  when  rendered  prolific 
by  commission  from,  and  in  virtue  of  the  male. 
But  as  the  male  is  considered  by  Aristotle  to  be 
the  first  principle  of  generation  on  his  own 
merits,  because  the  first  impulse  toward  genera¬ 
tion  proceeds  from  him,  so  may  the  hen  in 
some  measure  be  put  down  as  the  first  cause  of 
generation;  inasmuch  as  the  male  is  undoubt¬ 
edly  inflamed  to  venery  by  the  presence  of  the 
female.  “The  female  fish,”  says  Pliny, ^  “will 
follow  the  male  at  the  season  of  intercourse, 
and  strike  his  belly  with  her  nose;  at  the  spawn¬ 
ing  time  the  male  will  do  the  like  to  the  fe¬ 
male.”  I  have  myself  at  times  seen  male  fishes 
in  shoals  following  a  female  that  was  on  the 
point  of  spawning,  in  the  same  way  as  dogs  pur¬ 
sue  a  bitch,  that  they  might  sprinkle  the  ova 
just  laid  with  their  milk  or  seed.  But  this  is 
particularly  to  be  remarked  in  the  more  wan¬ 
ton  and  lascivious  females,  who  stir  up  the  dor¬ 
mant  fires  of  Cupid,  and  inspire  a  silent  love; 
hence  it  is  that  the  common  cock,  so  soon  as  he 
sees  one  of  his  own  hens  that  has  been  absent 
for  ever  so  short  time,  or  any  other  stranger- 
hen,  forthwith  feels  the  sting  of  desire,  and 
treads  her.  Moreover,  victorious  in  a  battle,  al¬ 
though  wounded  and  tired  from  the  fight,  he 
straightway  sets  about  treading  the  wives  of  his 
vanquished  foe  one  after  another.  And  that  he 
may  further  feed  the  flame  of  love  thus  kindled 
in  his  breast,  by  various  gesticulations,  incite¬ 
ments,  and  caresses,  often  crowing  the  while, 
calling  his  hens  to  him,  approaching  and  walk¬ 
ing  round  them,  and  tripping  himself  with  his 
wings,  he  entices  his  females  to  intercourse  as 
by  a  kind  of  fascination.  Such  are  the  arts  of  the 
male;  but  sometimes  a  certain  sullenness  of  the 
female,  and  an  apparent  disinclination  on  her 
part,  contribute  not  a  little  to  arouse  the  ar¬ 
dour  of  the  male  and  stimulate  his  languishing 
desire,  so  that  he  fills  her  more  quickly  and 
more  copiously  with  prolific  spirit.  But  of  al- 

^  Hist^  nat.^  ix.  50. 


4o6  william 

luremcnls  of  this  kind,  and  in  what  degree  they 
promote  conception,  we  shall  speak  more  here¬ 
after.  For,  if  you  carefully  weigh  the  works  of 
nature,  you  will  find  that  nothing  in  them  was 
made  in  vain,  but  that  all  things  were  ordered 
with  a  purpose  and  for  the  sake  of  some  good 
end. 

Almost  all  females,  though  they  have  pleas¬ 
ure  in  the  act  of  intercourse  and  impregnation, 
suffer  pain  in  parturition.  But  the  reverse  is  the 
case  with  the  hen,  who  loudly  complains  dur¬ 
ing  intercourse  and  struggles  against  it;  but  in 
parturition,  although  the  egg  be  \ery  large  in 
comparison  with  the  body  and  the  orifice  of  the 
uterus,  and  it  does  nothing  to  further  its  exit 
(as  is  customary  with  the  young  of  viviparous 
animals),  yet  she  brings  forth  easily  and  with¬ 
out  pain,  and  immediately  afterwards  com¬ 
mences  her  exultations;  and  with  her  loud 
cackling  calls  the  cock  as  it  seems  to  share  in  her 
triumph. 

But,  although  many  rudiments  of  eggs  are 
found  in  the  hen's  ovary,  of  various  sizes  and  in 
different  stages,  so  that  some  are  larger  and 
nearer  to  maturity  than  others,  yet  all  of  them 
appear  to  be  fecundated,  or  to  receive  the  pro¬ 
lific  faculty  from  the  tread  of  the  cock  at  the 
same  time  and  in  the  same  degree.  And  though 
a  considerable  time  elapse  (namely,  thirty  or 
more  days)  before  the  common  hen  or  hen- 
partridge  lay  all  the  eggs  which  she  has  con¬ 
ceived,  yet  in  a  stated  time  after  the  mother 
has  begun  to  sit  upon  them  (say  twenty  or  two- 
and- twenty  days)  all  the  young  are  hatched 
nearly  at  the  same  time;  nor  are  they  less 
perfect  than  if  they  had  commenced  their 
origin  s'unultaneously,  from  the  period  of  one 
and  the  same  conception,  as  the  whelps  of 
bitches  do. 

And  while  we  are  here,  and  while  I  think  how 
small  are  the  prolific  germs  of  eggs,  mere  papii- 
IcC  and  exudations  less  than  millet-seeds,  and 
contemplate  the  full  proportions  of  the  cock 
that  springs  from  thence,  his  fine  spirit,  and  his 
handsome  plumage,  I  cannot  but  express  my 
admiration  that  such  strength  should  be  re¬ 
posed  in  the  nature  of  things  in  such  insignifi¬ 
cant  elements,  and  that  it  has  pleased  the  om¬ 
nipotent  Creator  out  of  the  smallest  beginnings 
to  exhibit  some  of  his  greatest  works.  From  a 
minute  and  scarce  perceptible  papula  springs 
the  hen,  or  the  cock,  a  proud  and  magnificent 
creature.  From  a  small  seed  springs  a  mighty 
tree;  from  the  minute  gcmmule  or  apex  of  the 
acorn,  how  wide  does  the  gnarled  oak  at  length 
extend  his  arms,  how  loftily  docs  he  lift  his 


ILXRVEY 

branches  to  the  sky,  how  deeply  do  his  roots 
strike  down  into  the  ground!  “It  is  in  truth  a 
great  miracle  of  nature,"  says  Pliny, ^  “that 
from  so  small  an  origin  is  produced  a  material 
that  resists  the  axe,  and  that  supplies  beams, 
masts,  and  battering-rams.  Such  is  the  strength, 
such  the  power  of  nature!"  But  in  the  seeds  of 
all  plants  there  is  a  gemmule  or  bud  of  such  a 
kind,  so  small  that  if  the  top  only,  a  very  point, 
be  lost,  all  hope  of  propagation  is  immediately 
destroyed;  in  so  small  a  particle  does  all  the 
plastic  power  of  the  future  tree  seem  lodged! 
The  provident  ant  by  gnawing  off  this  little 
particle  stores  safely  in  her  subterraneous  hoard 
the  grain  and  other  seeds  she  gathers,  and  in¬ 
geniously  guards  against  their  growing:  “The 
cypress,"  adds  Pliny,  in  the  same  place,  “bears 
a  seed  that  is  greatly  sought  after  by  the  ant; 
which  makes  us  still  further  wonder  that  the 
birth  of  mighty  trees  should  be  consumed  in 
the  food  of  so  small  an  animal."  But  on  these 
points  we  shall  say  more  when  we  show  that 
many  animals,  especially  insects,  arise  and  are 
propagated  from  elements  and  seeds  so  small  as 
to  be  invisible  (like  atoms  flying  in  the  air), 
scattered  and  dispersed  here  and  there  by  the 
winds;  and  yet  these  animals  are  supposed  to 
have  arisen  spontaneously,  or  from  decomposi¬ 
tion,  because  their  ova  are  nowhere  to  be 
found.  These  considerations,  however,  may  fur¬ 
nish  arguments  to  that  school  of  philosophy 
which  teaches  that  all  things  are  produced  from 
nothing;  and  indeed  there  is  hardly  any  ascer¬ 
tainable  proportion  between  the  rudiment  and 
the  full  growth  of  any  animal. 

Nor  should  we  so  much  wonder  what  it  is  in 
the  cock  that  presersxs  and  governs  so  perfect 
and  beautiful  an  animal,  and  is  the  first  cause  of 
that  entity  which  we  call  the  soul;  but  much 
more,  what  it  is  in  the  egg,  aye,  in  the  germ  of 
the  egg,  of  so  great  virtue  as  to  produce  such  an 
animal,  and  raise  him  to  the  very  summit  of 
excellence.  Nor  are  we  only  to  admire  the 
greatness  of  the  artificer  that  aids  in  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  so  noble  a  work,  but  chiefly  the 
“contagion"  of  intercourse,  an  act  which  is  so 
momentary!  What  is  it,  for  instance,  that 
passes  from  the  male  into  the  female,  from  the 
female  into  the  egg,  from  the  egg  into  the 
chick.?  What  is  this  transitor)^  thing,  which  is 
neither  to  be  found  remaining,  nor  touching, 
nor  contained,  as  far  as  the  senses  inform  us, 
and  yet  works  with  the  highest  intelligence  and 
foresight,  beyond  all  art;  and  which,  even  after 
it  has  vanished,  renders  the  egg  prolific,  not  be- 

^  Ibid.,  XVII.  lo. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


cause  it  now  touches,  but  because  it  formerly 
did  so,  and  that  not  merely  in  the  case  of  the 
perfect  and  completed  egg,  but  of  the  imper¬ 
fect  and  commencing  one  when  it  was  yet  but  a 
speck;  aye,  and  makes  the  hen  herself  fruitful 
before  she  has  yet  produced  any  germs  of  eggs, 
and  this  too  so  suddenly,  as  if  it  were  said  by 
the  Almighty,  “Let  there  be  progeny,”  and 
straight  it  is  so? 

Let  physicians,  therefore,  cease  to  wonder  at 
what  always  excites  their  astonishment,  name¬ 
ly,  the  manner  in  which  epidemic,  contagious, 
and  pestilential  diseases  scatter  their  seeds,  and 
are  propagated  to  a  distance  through  the  air, 
or  by  som^fomes  producing  diseases  like  them¬ 
selves,  in  bodies  of  a  different  nature,  and  in  a 
hidden  fashion  silently  multiplying  themselves 
by  a  kind  of  generation,  until  they  become  so 
fatal,  and  with  the  permission  of  the  Deity 
spread  destruction  far  and  wide  among  man  and 
beast;  since  they  will  find  far  greater  wonders 
than  these  taking  place  daily  in  the  generation 
of  animals.  For  agents  in  greater  number  and  of 
more  efficiency  are  required  in  the  construc¬ 
tion  and  preservation  of  an  animal,  than  for  its 
destruction;  since  the  things  that  are  difficult 
and  slow  of  growth,  decay  with  ease  and  rapid¬ 
ity.  Seneca  observes,  with  his  usual  elegance, 
“How  long  a  time  is  needed  for  conception  to  be 
carried  out  to  parturition!  with  what  labour 
and  tenderness  is  an  infant  reared!  to  what  dili¬ 
gent  and  continued  nutrition  must  the  body  be 
subject,  to  arrive  at  adolescence!  but  by  what  a 
nothing  is  it  destroyed!  It  takes  an  age  to  es¬ 
tablish  cities,  an  hour  to  destroy  them.  By  great 
watching  are  all  things  established  and  made  to 
flourish,  quickly  and  of  a  sudden  do  they  fall  in 
pieces.  That  which  becomes  by  long  growth  a 
forest,  quickly,  in  the  smallest  interval  of  time, 
and  by  a. spark,  is  reduced  to  ashes,”^  Nor  is 
even  a  spark  necessary,  since  by  the  solar  rays 
transmitted  through  a  small  piece  of  glass  and 
concentrated  to  a  focus,  fire  may  be  immedi¬ 
ately  produced,  and  the  largest  things  be  set  in 
flames.  So  easy  is  everything  to  nature’s  maj¬ 
esty,  who  uses  her  strength  sparingly,  and  dis¬ 
penses  it  with  caution  and  foresight  for  the 
commencement  of  her  works  by  imperceptible 
additions,  but  hastens  to  decay  with  sudden¬ 
ness  and  in  full  career.  In  the  generation  of 
things  is  seen  the  most  excellent,  the  eternal 
and  almighty  God,  the  divinity  of  nature, 
worthy  to  be  looked  up  to  with  reverence;  but 
all  mortal  things  run  to  destruction  of  their 
own  accord  in  a  thousand  ways. 

*  Nat.  qttaest.^  iii.  27. 


EXERCISE  42.  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  the  chic\  ta^es  place  from  the  egg 

Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  egg  as  the 
fruit  and  end;  it  still  remains  for  us  to  treat  of  it 
as  the  seed  and  beginning.  “We  must  now  in¬ 
quire,”  says  Fabricius^,  “how  the  generation  of 
the  chick  results  from  the  egg,  setting  out  from 
that  principle  of  Aristotle  and  Galen,  which  is, 
even  conceded  by  all,  to  wit,  that  all  things 
which  are  made  in  this  life,  are  manifestly 
made  by  these  three:  workers,  instruments,  and 
matter.” 

But  since  in  natural  phenomena,  the  work  is 
not  extrinsic,  but  is  included  in  the  matter,  or 
the  instruments,  he  concludes  that  wc  must  take 
cognizance  only  of  the  agent  and  the  matter. 

As  we  are  here  about  to  show  in  what  manner 
the  chick  arises  from  the  egg,  however,  I  think 
it  may  be  of  advantage  for  me  to  preface  this  by 
showing  the  number  of  modes  in  which  one 
thing  may  be  said  to  be  made  from  another. 

For  so  it  will  appear,  more  clearly  and  dis¬ 
tinctly,  after  which  of  these  generation  takes 
place  in  the  egg,  and  what  are  the  right  con¬ 
clusions  in  regard  to  its  matter,  its  instruments, 
and  efficient  cause. 

Aristotle  has  laid  down  that  there' are  four 
modes  in  which  One  thing  is  made  from  an¬ 
other:  “first,  when  we  say  that  from  day  night 
is  made,  or  from  a  boy  a  man,  since  one  is  after 
the  other;  secondly,  when  we  say  that  a  statue 
is  made  from  brass,  or  a  bed  from  wood,  or  any¬ 
thing  else  from  a  certain  material,  so  that  the 
whole  consists  of  something,  which  is  inherent 
and  made  into  a  form;  thirdly,  as  when  from  a 
musical  man  is  made  an  unmusical  one,  or  from 
a  healthy,  a  sick  one,  or  contraries  in  any  way: 
fourthly,  as  Epicharmus  exaggerates  it,  as  of 
calumnies,  cursing;  of  cursing,  fighting.  But  all 
these  are  to  be  referred  to  that  from  whence 
the  movement  took  its  rise;  for  the  calumny  is 
a  certain  portion  of  the  whole  quarrel.  Since 
then  these  are  the  methods  in  which  one  thing 
is  made  from  another,  it  is  clear  that  the  seed  is 
in  one  of  two  of  these.  For  that  which  is  born 
arises  out  of  it,  either  as  from  matter,  or  as 
from  the  prime  mover.  For  it  is  not,  ‘as  this  is 
after  that,’  in  the  same  way  as  after  the  Pana- 
thenoea  navigation;  nor  as  ‘one  contrary  from 
another’;  for  in  such  case,  a  thing  would  be 
born  out  of  its  contrary,  because  it  is  in  a  state 
of  decay,  and  there  must  be  something  else  as 
subject-matter.”® 

^  Op.  cit.y  p.  28. 

3  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  i.  18. 


4o8  william 

By  these  words,  Aristotle  rightly  infers  that 
the  semen  proceeding  from  the  male  is  the  ef¬ 
ficient  or  instrumental  cause  of  the  embryo; 
since  it  is  no  part  of  what  is  born,  either  in  the 
first  or  third  manner  (namely,  as  one  thing  is 
after  another,  or  as  it  is  out  of  its  contrary);  nor 
docs  it  arise  from  the  subject-matter. 

But  then,  as  he  adds,  in  the  same  place,  “that 
which  comes  out  of  the  male  in  coition,  is  not 
with  truth  and  propriety  called  semen,  but 
rather  geniture;  and  it  is  difi'erent  from  the 
seed  properly  so  called.  For  that  is  called  the 
geniture  which,  proceeding  from  the  generant, 
is  the  cause  which  first  promotes  the  beginning 
of  generation.  I  mean  in  those  creatures  which 
nature  designed  to  have  connexion;  but  the 
seed  is  that  which  derives  its  origin  from  the  in¬ 
tercourse  of  the  two  (i.e,,  of  the  male  and  fe¬ 
male)  ;  such  is  the  seed  of  all  plants;  and  of  some 
animals  in  which  the  sex  is  not  distinct;  it  is  the 
produce,  as  it  were,  of  the  male  and  female 
mixed  together  originally,  like  a  kind  of  promis¬ 
cuous  conception”;  and  such  as  we  have  for¬ 
merly  in  our  history  declared  the  egg  to  be, 
which  is  called  both  fruit  and  seed.  For  the 
seed  and  the  fruit  are  distinct  from  each  other, 
and  in  the  relation  of  antecedent  and  conse¬ 
quent;  the  fruit  is  that  which  is  out  of  some¬ 
thing  else,  the  seed  is  that  out  of  which  some¬ 
thing  else  comes;  other\vise,  both  were  the 
same. 

It  remains  then,  to  inquire,  in  how  many  of 
the  aforesaid  ways  the  foetus  may  arise,  not  in¬ 
deed  from  the  geniture  of  the  male,  but  out  of 
the  true  seed,  or  out  of  the  egg  or  conception, 
which  is  in  reality  the  seed  of  animals. 

EXERCISE  43.  In  how  many  ways  the  chicly  may 
be  said  to  be  formed  from  the  egg 

It  is  admitted,  then,  that  the  foetus  is  formed 
from  a  prolific  egg,  as  out  of  the  proper  matter, 
and  as  it  were  by  the  requisite  agency,  and  that 
the  same  egg  stands  for  both  causes  of  the 
chick.  For  inasmuch  as  it  derives  its  origin 
from  the  hen,  and  is  considered  as  a  fruit,  it  is 
the  matter:  but,  in  so  far  as  it  contains  in  its 
whole  structure  the  prolifie  and  plastic  faculty 
infused  by  the  male,  it  is  called  the  efficient 
cause  of  the  chick. 

Moreover,  not  only  as  Fabricius  supposed, 
are  these,  namely,  the  agent  and  the  instru¬ 
ment,  inseparably  joined  in  one  and  the  same 
egg,  but  it  is  also  necessary  that  the  aliment  by 
which  the  chick  is  nourished  be  present  in  the 
same  place.  Indeed,  in  the  prolific  egg,  these 
four  are  found  together,  to  wit,  the  agent,  the 


HARVEY 

instrument,  the  matter,  and  the  aliment,  as  we 
have  shown  in  our  history. 

Wherefore,  we  say,  that  the  chick  is  formed 
from  the  prolific  egg  in  all  the  aforesaid  ways, 
namely,  as  from  matter,  by  an  efficient,  and  by 
an  instrument;  and  moreover,  as  a  man  grows 
out  of  a  boy,  as  the  whole  is  made  up  of  its 
parts,  and  as  a  thing  grows  from  its  nutriment; 
a  contrary  thing  springs  from  a  contrary. 

For  after  incubation  is  begun,  as  soon  as  by 
the  internal  motive  principle  a  certain  clear 
liquid  which  we  have  called  the  eye  of  the  egg 
is  produced,  we  say  that  that  liquid  is  made,  as 
it  were,  out  of  a  contrary;  in  the  same  way  as 
we  suppose  the  chyle  through  concoction  to  be 
formed  out  of  its  contraries  (namely,  crude  ar¬ 
ticles  of  food),  and  in  the  same  way  as  we  are 
said  to  be  nourished  by  contraries;  so,  from  the 
albumen  is  formed  and  augmented  that  to 
which  we  have  given  the  names  of  the  eye  and 
the  colliquament;  and  in  the  same  manner, 
from  that  clear  fluid  do  the  blood  and  pulsating 
vesicle,  the  first  particles  of  the  chick,  receive 
their  being,  nutrition,  and  growth.  The  nutri¬ 
ment,  I  say,  is  by  the  powers  of  an  inherent 
and  innate  heat,  assimilated  by  means  of  con¬ 
coction,  as  it  were,  out  of  a  contrary.  For  the 
crude  and  unconcocted  are  contrary  to  the  con¬ 
cocted  and  assimilated,  as  the  unmusical  man  is 
to  the  musical,  and  the  sick  to  the  sound  man. 

And  when  the  blood  is  engendered  from  the 
clear  colliquament,  or  a  clear  fluid  is  produced 
from  the  white  or  the  yelk,  there  is  generation 
as  regards  the  former,  corruption  as  regards  the 
latter;  a  transmutation,  namely,  is  made  from 
the  extremes  of  contraries,  the  subject-matter 
all  the  while  remaining  the  same.  To  explain: 
by  the  breaking  up  of  the  first  form  of  the 
white,  the  colliquament  is  produced;  and  from 
the  consumption  of  this  colliquament,  follows 
the  form  of  the  blood,  in  the  same  way  precisely 
as  food  is  converted  into  the  substance  of  the 
thing  fed. 

It  is  thus,  then,  that  the  chick  is  said  to  be 
made  out  of  the  egg,  as  it  were  by  a  contrary; 
for  in  the  nutrition  and  growth  of  the  chick  in 
the  egg,  white  and  yelk  are  equally  broken  up 
and  consumed,  and  finally  the  whole  substance 
of  the  egg.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  chick 
is  formed  from  the  egg,  as  it  were,  by  a  con¬ 
trary,  namely  the  aliment,  and  as  if  by  an  ab¬ 
straction,  and  from  a  non-entity.  For  the  first 
particle  of  the  chick,  viz.^  the  blood  or  punctum 
saliens,  is  constituted  out  of  something  which  is 
not  blood,  and  altogether  its  contrary,  the 
same  subject-matter  always  remaining. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


The  chick  too  is  made  from  the  egg,  as  a  man 
is  made  from  a  boy.  For  in  the  same  way,  as  out 
of  plants  seeds  arise,  and  out  of  seeds,  buds, 
sprouts,  stems,  flowers,  and  fruits;  so  also  out 
of  the  egg,  the  seed  of  the  hen  is  produced,  the 
dilatation  of  the  cicatricula  and  the  colliqua- 
ment,  the  blood  and  the  heart,  as  the  first  par¬ 
ticle  of  the  foetus  or  fruit;  and  all  this,  in  the 
same  way  as  the  day  from  the  night,  the  sum¬ 
mer  from  the  spring,  a  man  from  a  boy — one 
follows  or  comes  after  the  other.  So  that,  in  the 
same  way  as  fruits  arise  after  flowers  on  the 
same  stem,  so  likewise  is  the  colliquament 
formed  after  the  egg,  the  blood  after  this,  as 
from  the  primogeneous  humour,  the  chick  after 
the  blood,  and  out  of  it,  as  the  whole  out  of  a 
part;  in  the  same  way,  as  by  Epicharmus’  ex¬ 
aggeration,  out  of  calumnies  comes  cursing,  and 
out  of  cursing,  fighting.  For  the  blood  first  be¬ 
gins  its  existence  with  the  punctum  saliens,  and 
at  the  same  time,  seems  to  be  as  well  a  part  of 
the  chick,  and  a  kind  of  efficient  or  instrument 
of  its  generation,  inseparable,  as  Fabricius 
thinks,  from  the  agent.  But  how  the  egg  may 
be  called  the  efficient  and  instrument  of  genera¬ 
tion,  has  partly  been  explained  already,  and 
will  be  illustrated  more  copiously  by  what  we 
shall  presently  say. 

So  much  has  been  fully  established  in  our 
history,  that  the  punctum  pulsans  and  the 
blood,  in  the  course  of  their  growth,  attach 
round  themselves  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  all 
the  other  members  of  the  chick,  just  as  the 
yelk  in  the  uterus,  after  being  evolved  from  the 
ovary,  surrounds  itself  with  the  white;  and  this 
not  without  concoction  and  nutrition.  Now 
the  common  instrument  of  all  vegetative  oper¬ 
ations,  is,  in  the  opinion  of  all  men,  an  internal 
heat  or  calidum  innatum,  or  a  spirit  diffused 
through  the  whole,  and  in  that  spirit  a  soul  or 
faculty  of  a  soul.  The  egg,  therefore,  beyond 
all  doubt,  has  its  own  operative  soul,  which  is  all 
in  the  whole,  and  all  in  each  individual  part, 
and  contains  within  itself  a  spirit  or  animal 
heat,  the  immediate  instrument  of  that  soul. 
To  one  who  should  ask,  then,  how  the  chick  is 
made  from  the  egg,  we  answer:  after  all  the 
ways  recited  by  Aristotle,  and  devised  by 
others,  in  which  it  is  possible  for  one  thing  to  be 
made  from  another. 

EXERCISE  44.  'Fabricius  is  mistaJ^n  with  regard  to 

the  matter  of  the  generation  of  the  chic\  in  ovo 

As  I  proposed  to  myself  at  the  outset,  I  con¬ 
tinue  to  follow  Fabricius  as  pointing  out  the 
way;  and  we  shall,  therefore,  consider  the  three 


things  which  he  says  are  to  be  particularly  re¬ 
garded  in  the  generation  of  the  chick,  viz, :  the 
agent,  the  matter,  and  the  nourishment  of  the 
embryo.  These  must  needs  be  all  contained  in 
the  egg;  he  proposes  various  doubts  or  ques¬ 
tions,  and  quotes  the  opinions  of  the  most 
weighty  authorities  in  regard  to  them,  these 
opinions  being  frequently  discordant.  The  first 
difficulty  is  in  reference  to  the  matter  and 
nourishment  of  the  chick.  Hippocrates,^  An¬ 
axagoras,  Alcmaeon,  Menander,  and  the  an¬ 
cient  philosophers  all  thought  that  the  chick 
was  engendered  from  the  vitellus,  and  was 
nourished  by  the  albumen.  Aristotle,^  however, 
and  after  him,  Pliny maintained,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  that  the  chick  was  incorporated  from  the 
albumen,  and  nourished  by  the  vitellus.  But 
Fabricius  himself,  will  have  it  that  neither  the 
white  nor  yelk  forms  the  matter  of  the  chick; 
he  strives  to  combat  both  of  the  preceding 
opinions,  and  teaches  that  the  white  and  the 
yellow  alike  do  no  more  than  nourish  the  chick. 
One  of  his  arguments,  amongst  a  great  number 
of  others  which  I  think  are  less  to  be  acquiesced 
in,  appears  to  me  to  have  some  force.  The 
branches  of  the  umbilical  vessels,  he  says, 
through  which  the  embryo  undoubtedly  im¬ 
bibes  its  nourishment,  are  distributed  to  the  al¬ 
bumen  and  the  vitellus  alike,  and  both  of  these 
fluids  diminish  as  the  chick  grows.  And  it  is  on 
this  ground,  that  Fabricius  in  confirmation  of 
his  opinion,  says:  “Of  the  bodies  constituting 
the  egg,  and  adapted  to  forward  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  the  chick,  there  are  only  three,  the  al¬ 
bumen,  the  vitellus,  and  the  chalazae;  now  the 
albumen  and  vitellus  are  the  nourishment  of 
the  chick;  so  that  the  chalazae  alone  remain  as 
matter  from  which  it  can  be  produced.’*^ 

Nevertheless,  that  the  excellent  Fabricius  is 
in  error  here,  we  have)  demonstrated  above  in 
our  history.  For  after  the  chick  is  already  al¬ 
most  perfected,  and  its  head  and  its  eyes  are  dis¬ 
tinctly  visible,  the  chalazae  can  readily  be 
found  entire,  far  from  the  embryo,  and  pushed 
from  the  apices  towards  the  sides:  the  office  of 
these  bodies,  as  Fabricius  himself  admits,  is 
that  of  ligaments,  and  to  preserve  the  vitellus 
in  its  proper  position  within  the  albumen.  Nor 
is  that  true,  which  Fabricius  adds  in  confirma¬ 
tion  of  his  opinion,  namely,  that  the  chalazaeare 
situated  in  the  direction  of  the  blunt  part  of  the 

^  De  nat,  pueri. 

^  History  of  Animals y  vi.  3;  On  the  Generation  of 
Animals y  iii.  i,  2. 

3  Hist,  nat.  x.  53. 

*  Op.  nl.,  p.  34. 


WILLIAM  H  \R\^EY 


410 

egg.  For  after  even  a  single  day's  incubation, 
the  relative  positions  of  the  fluids  of  the  egg  are 
changed,  the  yelk  being  drawn  upwards,  and 
the  chala2:a£  on  either  hand  removed,  as  we 
have  already  had  occasion  to  say. 

He  is  also  mistaken  when  he  speaks  of  the 
chalaza^,  as  proper  parts  of  the  egg.  The  egg 
consists  in  fact  but  of  white  and  yelk;  the 
chalazae  as  well  as  the  membranes,  are  mere  ap¬ 
pendages  of  the  albumen  and  vitellus.  The 
chalazae,  in  particular,  are  the  extremities  of 
certain  membranes,  twisted  and  knotted;  they 
are  produced  in  the  same  way  as  a  rope  is 
formed  by  the  contortion  of  its  component  fila¬ 
ments,  and  exist  for  the  purpose  of  more  cer¬ 
tainly  securing  the  several  elements  of  the  egg 
in  their  respective  places. 

Fabriciiis,  therefore,  reasons  ill  when  he  says, 
that  “the  chalazae  are  found  in  the  part  of  the 
egg  where  the  embr)'o  is  produced,  wherefore 
it  is  engendered  from  them”;  for  even  on  his 
ow  n  showing,  this  could  never  take  place,  he 
admitting  that  the  chalazae  are  extant  in  either 
extremity  of  the  egg,  whilst  the  chick  never 
makes  its  appearance  save  at  the  blunt  end;  in 
which,  moreover,  at  the  first  commencement 
of  generation,  no  chalaza  can  be  seen.  Further, 
if  you  examine  the  matter  in  a  fresh  egg,  you 
will  find  the  superior  chalaza  not  immediately 
under  the  blunt  end  or  its  cavity,  but  declined 
somewhat  to  the  side;  not  to  that  side,  how¬ 
ever,  where  the  cavity  is  extending,  but  rather 
to  the  opposite  side.  Still  further,  from  what  has 
preceded,  it  is  obvious  that  the  relative  posi¬ 
tions  of  the  fluids  of  the  egg  are  altered  im¬ 
mediately  that  incubation  is  begun:  the  eye  in¬ 
creased  by  the  colliquament  is  drawn  up  to¬ 
wards  the  cavity  in  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg, 
whence  the  white  and  the  chalaza  are  on  either 
hand  withdraw  n  to  the  side.  For  the  macula  or 
cicatricula  which  before  incubationwas  situated 
midway  between  the  two  ends,  no\v  increased 
into  the  eye  of  the  egg,  adjoins  the  cavity  in 
the  blunt  end,  and  whilst  one  of  the  chalazae  is 
depressed  from  the  blunt  end,  the  other  is 
raised  from  the  sharp  end,  in  the  same  way  as 
the  poles  of  a  globe  are  situated  when  the  axis 
is  set  obliquely;  the  greater  portion  of  the  al¬ 
bumen,  particularly  that  which  is  thicker,  sub¬ 
sides  at  the  same  time,  into  the  sharp  end. 

Neither  is  it  correct  to  say  that  the  chalazae 
iK-ar  a  resemblance  in  length  and  configuration 
to  ihe  chick  on  its  first  formation,  and  that  the 
number  of  their  nodules  corresponds  with  the 
number  of  the  principal  parts  of  the  embryo;  a 
statement  which  gives  Fabriciiis  an  opportu¬ 


nity  of  adducing  an  argument  connected  with 
the  matter  of  the  chick,  based  on  the  similarity 
of  its  eonsistency  to  that  of  the  chalazae.  But 
the  red  mass  (w  hich  Fabricius  regarded  as  the 
liver)  is  neither  situated  in  nor  near  the  chalaza, 
but  in  the  middle  of  the  clear  colliquament; 
and  it  is  not  any  rudiment  of  the  liver  but  of 
the  heart  alone.  Neither  does  his  view’  square 
w  ith  the  example  he  quotes  of  the  tadpole,  “of 
which,”  he  says,  “there  is  nothing  to  be  seen 
but  the  head  and  the  tail,  that  is  to  say,  the 
head  and  spine,  without  a  trace  of  upper  or 
low’er  extremities.”  And  he  adds,  “he  who  has 
seen  a  chalaza,  and  this  kind  of  conception,  in 
so  far  as  the  body  is  concerned,  will  believe 
that  in  the  former,  he  has  already  seen  the  lat¬ 
ter.”  I,  however,  have  frequently  dissected  the 
tadpole,  and  have  found  the  belly  of  large  size, 
and  containing  intestines  and  liver  and  heart 
pulsating;  I  have  also  distinguished  the  head 
and  the  eyes.  The  part  which  Fabricius  takes 
for  the  head,  is  the  rounded  mass  of  the  tad¬ 
pole,  w’hence  the  creature  is  called  from 

its  circular  form.  It  has  a  tail  with  which  it 
sw  ims,  but  is  without  legs.  About  the  epoch  of 
the  summer  solstice,  it  loses  the  tail,  when  the 
extremities  begin  to  sprout.  Nothing  however 
occurs  in  the  nature  of  a  division  of  the  embrv^o 
pullet  into  the  head  and  spine,  w’hich  should  in¬ 
duce  us  to  regard  it  as  produced  from  the  cha¬ 
lazae,  and  in  the  same  manner  as  the  tadpole. 

The  position  and  fame  of  Fabricius,  however, 
a  man  exceedingly  well  skilled  in  anatomy,  do 
not  allow’  me  to  push  this  refutation  further. 
Nor  indeed,  is  there  any  necessity  so  to  do,  see¬ 
ing  that  the  thing  is  so  clearly  exhibited  in  our 
history. 

Our  author  concludes,  by  stating  that  his 
opinion  is  of  great  antiquity,  and  was  in  vogue 
even  in  the  times  of  Aristotle. 

For  my  own  part,  nevertheless,  I  regard  the 
view^  of  Ulysses  Aldrovandus  as  the  older,  he 
maintaining  that  the  chalazae  are  the  spermatic 
fluid  of  the  cock,  from  which  and  through 
which  alike  the  chick  is  engendered. 

Neither  notion,  however,  is  founded  on  fact, 
but  is  the  popular  error  of  all  times:  the 
chalazae,  treads,  or  treadles,  as  our  English 
name  implies,  are  still  regarded  by  the  country 
folks  as  the  semen  of  the  cock. 

“The  treadles  {grandines)"'  says  Aldro\’an- 
dus:  “are  the  spermatic  fluid  of  the  cock,  be¬ 
cause  no  fertile  egg  is  w  ithout  them.”  But  nei¬ 
ther  is  any  unprolific  egg  without  these  parts, 
a  fact  which  Aldrovandus  was  either  ignorant 
of  or  concealed.  Fabricius  admits  this  fact;  but 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


though  he  has  denied  that  the  semen  of  the 
male  penetrates  to  the  uterus  or  is  ever  found 
in  the  egg,  he,  nevertheless,  contends  that  the 
chalazas  alone  of  all  the  parts  of  the  egg  are  im¬ 
pregnated  with  the  prolific  power  of  the  egg, 
and  are  the  repositories  of  the  fecundating  in¬ 
fluence;  and  this,  with  the  fact  staring  hkn  in 
the  face  all  the  while  that  there  is  no  percepti¬ 
ble  difference  between  the  chalazae  of  a  prolific 
and  an  unprolific  egg.  And  when  he  admits  that 
the  mere  rudiments  of  eggs  in  the  ovary,  as 
well  as  the  vitelli  that  are  surrounded  with  al¬ 
bumen,  become  fecundated  through  the  inter¬ 
course  of  the  cock,  I  conceive  that  this  must 
have  been  the  cause  of  the  error  committed  by 
so  distinguished  an  individual.  It  was  the  cur¬ 
rent  opinion,  as  I  have  said  oftener  than  once, 
both  among  philosophers  and  physicians,  that 
the  matter  of  the  embryo  in  animal  generation, 
was  the  geniture,  either  of  the  male,  or  of  the 
female,  or  resulted  from  a  mixture  of  the  two, 
and  that  from  this,  deposited  in  the  uterus,  like 
a  seed  in  the  ground,  which  produces  a  plant, 
the  animal  was  engendered.  Aristotle,  himself, 
is  not  very  far  from  the  same  view,  when  he 
maintains  the  menstrual  blood  of  the  female  to 
be  the  seed,  which  the  semen  of  the  male  coagu¬ 
lates,  and  so  composes  the  conception. 

The  error  which  we  have  announced,  having 
been  admitted  by  all  in  former  times,  as  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  certainty,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that  various  erroneous  opinions,  based  on  each 
man’s  conjecture,  should  have  emanated  from 
it.  They,  however,  are  wholly  mistaken,  who 
fancy  that  anything  in  the  shape  of  a  “pre¬ 
pared  or  fit  matter”  must  necessarily  remain  in 
the  uterus  after  intercourse,  from  which  the 
foetus  is  produced,  or  the  first  conception  is 
formed,  or  that  anything  is  immediately  fash¬ 
ioned  in  the  uterine  cavity  that  corresponds 
to  the  seed  of  a  plant  deposited  in  the  bosom 
of  the  ground.  For  it  is  quite  certain  that,  in 
the  uterus  of  the  fowl,  and  the  same  thing  is 
true  of  the  uterus  of  every  other  female  animal, 
there  is  nothing  discoverable  after  intercourse 
more  than  there  was  before  it. 

It  appears,  consequently,  that  Fabricius 
erred  when  he  said:  “In  the  same  way  as  a  vivi¬ 
parous  animal  is  incorporated  from  a  small 
quantity  of  seminal  matter,  whilst  the  matter 
which  is  taken  up  as  food  and  nourishment  is 
very  large;  so  a  small  chalaza  suffices  for  the 
generation  of  a  chick,  and  the  rest  of  the  mat¬ 
ter  contained  in  the  egg  goes  to  it  in  the  shape 
of  nutriment.”^  From  which  it  is  obvious,  that 

1  Op,  sup,  cit,y  p.  35. 


he  sought  for  some  such  “prepared  matter” 
in  the  egg,  whence  the  chick  should  be  incor¬ 
porated;  mainly,  as  it  seems,  that  he  might  not 
be  found  in  contradiction  with  Aristotle’s  def¬ 
inition  of  an  egg,  viz.:  as  “that  from  part  of 
which  an  animal  is  engendered;  and  the  remain¬ 
der  of  which  is  food  for  the  thing  engendered.”" 
This  of  Fabricius,  therefore,  has  the  look  of  a 
valid  argument,  namely,  “Since  there  are  only 
three  parts  in  the  egg — the  albumen,  the  vitel- 
lus,  and  the  chalazae;  and  the  two  former  alone 
supply  aliment;  it  necessarily  follows  that  the 
chalazae  alone  are  the  matter  from  which  the 
chick  is  constituted.” 

Thus,  our  learned  anatomist,  blinded  by  a 
popular  error,  seeking  in  the  egg  for  some  par¬ 
ticular  matter  fitted  to  engender  the  chick  dis¬ 
tinct  from  the  rest  of  the  contents  of  the  egg, 
has  gone  astray.  And  so  it  happens  to  all,  who, 
forsaking  the  light,  which  the  frequent  dis¬ 
section  of  bodies,  and  familiar  converse  with 
nature  supplies,  expect  that  they  are  to  under¬ 
stand  from  conjecture,  and  arguments  founded 
on  probabilities,  or  the  authority  of  writers, 
the  things  or  the  facts  which  they  ought  them¬ 
selves  to  behold  with  their  own  eyes,  to  per¬ 
ceive  with  their  proper  senses.  It  is  not  wonder¬ 
ful,  therefore,  when  we  see  that  we  have  so 
many  errors  accredited  by  general  consent, 
handed  down  to  us  from  remote  antiquity,  that 
men  otherwise  of  great  ingenuity,  should  be 
egregiously  deceived,  which  they  may  very 
well  be,  when  they  are  satisfied  with  taking 
their  knowledge  from  books,  and  keeping  their 
memory  stored  with  the  notions  of  learned 
men.  They  who  philosophize  in  this  way,  by 
tradition,  if  I  may  so  say,  know  no  better  than 
the  books  they  keep  by  them. 

In  the  egg  then,  as  we  have  said,  there  is  no 
distinct  part  or  prepared  matter  present,  from 
which  the  foetus  is  formed;  but  in  the  same  way 
as  the  apex  or  gemmule  protrudes  in  a  seed ;  so  in 
the  egg,  there  is  a  macula  or  cicatricula,  which, 
endowed  with  plastic  power,  grows  into  the  eye 
of  the  egg  and  the  colliquament,  from  which  and 
in  which  the  primordial  or  rudimentary  parts 
of  the  chick,  the  blood,  to  wit,  and  the  punc- 
tum  saliens  are  engendered,  nourished,  and 
augmented,  until  the  perfect  chick  is  developed. 
Neither  is  Aristotle’s  definition  of  an  egg  cor¬ 
rect,  as  a  body  from  part  of  which  an  embryo  is 
formed,  and  by  part  of  which  it  is  nourished, 
unless  the  philosopher  is  to  be  understood  in  the 
following  manner:  the  egg  is  a  body,  from  part 
of  which  the  chick  arises,  not  as  from  a  special 

^  History  of  Animals,  iii.  8. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


412 

matter,  but  as  a  man  grows  out  of  a  boy;  or  an 
egg  is  a  perfect  conception  from  which  the 
chick  is  said  to  be  partly  constituted,  partly 
nourished;  or  to  conclude,  an  egg  is  a  body,  the 
fluids  of  which  serve  both  for  the  matter  and 
the  nourishment  of  the  parts  of  the  foetus.  In 
this  sense,  indeed,  Aristotle  teaches  us  that  the 
matter  of  the  human  foetus  is  the  menstrual 
blood;  “which  (when  poured  into  the  uterus  by 
the  veins)  nature  employs  to  a  new  purpose; 
viz.^  that  of  generation,  and  that  a  future  being 
may  arise,  such  as  the  one  from  which  it 
springs;  for  potentially  it  is  already  such  as  is 
the  body  whose  secretion  it  is,  namely  the 
mother.”^ 

EXERCISE  45.  What  is  the  material  of  the  chic\^ 
and  how  it  is  formed  in  the  egg 

Since,  then,  we  are  of  opinion  that  for  the  ac¬ 
quisition  of  truth  we  cannot  rely  on  the  theories 
of  others,  whether  these  rest  on  mere  assertions, 
or  even  may  have  been  confirmed  by  plausible 
arguments,  except  there  be  added  thereto  a 
diligent  course  of  observation;  we  propose  to 
show,  by  clearly -arranged  remarks  derived 
from  the  book  of  nature,  what  is  the  material  of 
the  foetus,  and  in  what  manner  it  thence  takes 
its  origin.  We  have  seen  that  one  thing  is  made 
out  of  another  (tanqiiam  ex  materia)  in  two 
ways,  and  this  as  well  in  works  of  art,  as  in 
those  of  nature,  and  more  particularly  in  the 
generation  of  animals. 

One  of  these  ways,  viz,^  when  the  object  is 
made  out  of  something  pre-existing,  is  exem¬ 
plified  by  the  formation  of  a  bed  out  of  wood, 
or  a  statue  from  stone;  in  which  case,  the  whole 
material  of  the  future  piece  of  work  has  already 
been  in  existence,  before  it  is  finished  into 
form,  or  any  part  of  the  work  is  yet  begun;  the 
second  method  is,  when  the  material  is  both 
made  and  brought  into  form  at  the  same  time. 
Just  then  as  the  works  of  art  are  accomplished 
in  two  manners,  one,  in  which  the  workman 
cuts  the  material  already  prepared,  divides  it, 
and  rejects  what  is  superfluous,  till  he  leaves  it 
in  the  desired  shape  (as  is  the  custom  of  the  stat¬ 
uary);  the  other,  as  when  the  potter  educes  a 
form  out  of  clay  by  the  addition  of  parts,  or  in¬ 
creasing  its  mass,  and  giving  it  a  figure,  at  the 
same  time  that  he  provides  the  material,  which 
he  prepares,  adapts,  and  applies  to  his  work 
(and  in  this  point  of  view,  the  form  may  be 
said  rather  to  have  been  made  than  educed); 
so  exactly  is  it  with  regard  to  the  generation  of 
animals. 

*  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  ii.  4. 


Some,  out  of  a  material  previously  concocted, 
and  that  has  already  attained  its  bulk,  receive 
their  forms  and  transfigurations;  and  all  their 
parts  are  fashioned  simultaneously,  each  with 
its  distinctive  characteristic,  by  the  process 
called  metamorphosis,  and  in  this  way  a  perfect 
animal  is  at  once  born;  on  the  other  hand,  there 
are  some  in  which  one  part  is  made  before 
another,  and  then  from  the  same  material, 
afterwards  receive  at  once  nutrition,  bulk,  and 
form:  that  is  to  say,  they  have  some  parts  made 
before,  some  after  others,  and  these  are  at  the 
same  time  increased  in  size  and  altered  in  form. 
The  structure  of  these  animals  commences  from 
some  one  part  as  its  nucleus  and  origin,  by  the 
instrumentality  of  which  the  rest  of  the  limbs 
are  joined  on,  and  this  we  say  takes  place  by  the 
method  of  epigenesis,  namely,  by  degrees,  part 
after  part;  and  this  is,  in  preference  to  the 
other  mode,  generation  properly  so  called. 

In  the  former  of  the  ways  mentioned,  the 
generation  of  insects  is  effected  where  by  meta¬ 
morphosis  a  worm  is  born  from  an  egg;  or  out 
of  a  putrescent  material,  the  drying  of  a  moist 
substance  or  the  moistening  of  a  dry  one,  rudi¬ 
ments  are  created,  from  which,  as  from  a  cater¬ 
pillar  grown  to  its  full  size,  or  from  an  aurelia, 
springs  a  butterfly  or  fly  already  of  a  propei 
size,  which  never  attains  to  any  larger  growth 
after  it  is  first  born;  this  is  called  metamor¬ 
phosis.  But  the  more  perfect  animals  with  red 
blood  are  made  by  epigenesis,  or  the  superad¬ 
dition  of  parts.  In  the  former,  chance  or  hazard 
seems  the  principal  promoter  of  generation, 
and  there,  the  form  is  due  to  the  potency  of  a 
pre-existing  material;  and  the  first  cause  of 
generation  is  “matter,”  rather  than  “an  exter¬ 
nal  efficient”;  whence  it  happens  too  that  these 
animals  are  less  perfect,  less  preserv^ative  of 
their  own  races,  and  less  abiding  than  the  red- 
blooded  terrestrial  or  aquatic  animals,  which 
owe  their  immortality  to  one  constant  source, 
viz.,  the  perpetuation  of  the  same  species;  of 
this  circumstance  we  assign  the  first  cause  to 
nature  and  the  vegetative  faculty. 

Some  animals,  then,  are  born  of  their  own 
accord,  concocted  out  of  matter  spontaneously, 
or  by  chance,  as  Aristotle  seems  to  assert,  when 
he  speaks  of  animals  whose  matter  is  capable  of 
receiving  an  impulse  from  itself,  viz.^  the  same 
impulse  given  by  hazard,  as  is  attributable  to 
the  seed,  in  the  generation  of  other  animals. 
And  the  same  thing  happens  in  art,  as  in  the 
generation  of  animals.  Some  things,  which  are 
the  result  of  art,  are  so  likewise  of  chance,  as 
good  health;  others  always  owe  their  existence 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


to  art;  for  instance,  a  house.  Bees,  wasps,  but¬ 
terflies,  and  whatever  is  generated  from  cater¬ 
pillars  by  metamorphosis,  are  said  to  have 
sprung  from  chance,  and,  therefore,  to  be  not 
preservative  of  their  own  race;  the  contrary  is 
the  case  with  the  lion  and  the  cock;  they  owe 
their  existence,  as  it  were,  to  nature  or  an  oper¬ 
ative  faculty  of  a  divine  quality,  and  require 
for  their  propagation  an  identity  of  species, 
rather  than  any  supply  of  fitting  material. 

In  the  generation  by  metamorphosis  forms 
are  created  as  if  by  the  impression  of  a  seal,  or 
as  if  they  were  adjusted  in  a  mould;  in  truth, 
the  whole  material  is  transformed.  But  an 
animal  which  is  created  by  epigenesis  attracts, 
prepares,  elaborates,  and  makes  use  of  the  ma¬ 
terial,  all  at  the  same  time;  the  processes  of 
formation  and  growth  are  simultaneous.  In  the 
former  the  plastic  force  cuts  up,  and  distributes, 
and  reduces  into  limbs  the  same  homogeneous 
material;  and  makes  out  of  a  homogeneous  ma¬ 
terial  organs  which  are  dissimilar.  But  in  the 
latter,  while  it  creates  in  succession  parts  which 
are  differently  and  variously  distributed,  it  re¬ 
quires  and  makes  a  material  which  is  also  vari¬ 
ous  in  its  nature,  and  variously  distributed,  and 
such  as  is  now  adapted  to  the  formation  of  one 
part,  now  of  another;  on  which  account  we  be¬ 
lieve  the  perfect  henVegg  to  be  constituted  of 
various  parts. 

Now  it  appears  clear  from  my  history  that 
the  generation  of  the  chick  from  the  egg  is  the 
result  of  epigenesis,  rather  than  of  metamor¬ 
phosis,  and  that  all  its  parts  are  not  fashioned 
simultaneously,  but  emerge  in  their  due  suc¬ 
cession  and  order;  it  appears,  too,  that  its  form 
proceeds  simultaneously  with  its  growth,  and 
its  growth  with  its  form;  also  that  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  some  parts  supervenes  on  others  pre¬ 
viously  existing,  from  which  they  become  dis¬ 
tinct;  lastly,  that  is  origin,  growth,  and  con¬ 
summation  are  brought  about  by  the  method  of 
nutrition;  and  that  at  length  the  foetus  is  thus 
produced.  For  the  formative  faculty  of  the 
chick  rather  acquires  and  prepares  its  own  ma¬ 
terial  for  itself  than  only  finds  it  when  pre¬ 
pared,  and  the  chick  seems  to  be  formed  and  to 
receive  its  growth  from  no  other  than  itself. 
And,  as  all  things  receive  their  growth  from  the 
same  power  by  which  they  are  created,  so  like¬ 
wise  should  we  believe  that  by  the  same  power 
by  which  the  chick  is  preserved,  and  caused  to 
grow  from  the  commencement  (whether  that 
may  have  been  the  soul  or  a  faculty  of  the  soul), 
by  that  power,  I  say,  is  it  also  created.  For  the 
same  efficient  and  conservative  faculty  is  found 


in  the  egg  as  in  the  chick;  and  of  the  same  ma¬ 
terial  of  which  it  constitutes  the  first  particle 
of  the  chick,  out  of  the  very  same  does  it 
nourish,  increase,  and  superadd  all  the  other 
parts.  Lastly,  in  generation  by  metamorphosis 
the  whole  is  distributed  and  separated  into 
parts;  but  in  that  by  epigenesis  the  whole  is  put 
together  out  of  parts  in  a  certain  order,  and 
constituted /row  them. 

Wherefore  Fabricius  was  in  error  when  he 
looked  for  the  material  of  the  chick  (as  a  dis¬ 
tinct  part  of  the  egg,  from  which  its  body  was 
formed),  as  if  the  chick  were  created  by  meta¬ 
morphosis,  or  a  transformation  of  the  material 
in  mass;  and  as  if  all,  or  at  least  the  principal 
parts  of  the  body  sprang  from  the  same  ma¬ 
terial,  and,  to  use  his  own  words,  were  incor¬ 
porated  simultaneously.  [He  is,  therefore,  of 
course,  opposed  to  the  notion]  of  the  chick 
being  formed  by  epigenesis,  in  which  a  certain 
order  is  observed  according  to  the  dignity  and 
the  use  of  parts,  where  at  first  a  small  founda¬ 
tion  is,  as  it  were,  laid,  which,  in  the  course  of 
growth,  has  at  one  and  the  same  time  distinct 
structures  formed  and  its  figure  established, 
and  acquires  an  additional  birth  of  parts  after¬ 
wards,  each  in  its  own  order;  in  the  same  way, 
for  instance,  as  the  bud  bursting  from  the  top 
of  the  acorn,  in  the  course  of  its  growth,  has  its 
parts  separately  taking  the  form  of  root,  wood, 
pith,  bark,  boughs,  branches,  leaves,  flowers, 
and  fruit,  until  at  length  out  comes  a  perfect 
tree;  just  so  is  it  with  the  creation  of  the  chick 
in  the  egg:  the  little  cicatrix,  or  small  spot,  the 
foundation  of  the  future  structure,  grows  into 
the  eye  and  is  at  the  same  time  separated  into 
the  colliquament;  in  the  centre  of  which  the 
punctum  sanguineum  pulsans  commences  its 
being,  together  with  the  ramification  of  the 
veins;  to  these  is  presently  added  the  nebula, 
and  the  first  concretion  of  the  future  body;  this 
also,  in  proportion  as  its  bulk  increases,  is  grad¬ 
ually  divided  and  distinguished  into  parts, 
which  however  do  not  all  emerge  at  the  same 
time,  but  one  after  the  other,  and  each  in  its 
proper  order.  To  conclude,  then:  in  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  those  animals  which  are  created  by 
epigenesis,  and  are  formed  in  parts  (as  the  chick 
in  the  egg),  we  need  not  seek  one  material  for 
the  incorporation  of  the  foetus,  another  for  its 
commencing  nutrition  and  growth;  for  it  re¬ 
ceives  such  nutrition  and  growth  from  the  same 
material  out  of  which  it  is  made;  and,  vice  ver¬ 
sa,  the  chick  in  the  egg  is  constituted  out  of  the 
materials  of  its  nutrition  and  growth.  And  an 
animal  which  is  capable  of  nutrition  is  of  the 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


414 

same  potency  as  one  which  is  augmentative^  as 
we  shall  afterwards  show;  and  they  difler  only, 
as  Aristotle  says,  in  their  distinctness  of  being; 
in  all  other  respects  they  are  alike.  For,  in  so 
far  as  anything  is  convertible  into  a  substance, 
it  is  nutritious,  and  under  certain  conditions  it 
is  augmentative:  in  virtue  of  its  repairing  a 
loss  of  substance,  it  is  called  nutriment,  in  vir¬ 
tue  of  its  being  added,  where  there  is  no  such 
loss  of  substance,  it  is  called  increment.  Now  the 
material  of  the  chick,  in  the  processes  of  genera¬ 
tion.  nutrition,  and  augmentation  is  equally  to 
be  considered  as  aliment  and  increment.  We  say 
simply  that  anything  is  generated,  when  no 
part  of  it  has  pre-existed;  we  speak  of  its  being 
nourished  and  growing  when  it  has  already  ex¬ 
isted.  The  part  of  the  foetus  which  is  first 
formed  is  said  to  be  begotten  or  born;  all  sub¬ 
stitutions  or  additions  are  called  adnascent,  or 
aggenerate.  In  all  there  is  the  same  transmuta¬ 
tion  or  generation  from  the  same  to  the  same; 
as  concerns  a  part,  this  is  performed  by  the 
process  of  nutrition  and  augmentation,  but  as 
regards  the  whole,  by  simple  generation;  in 
other  respects  the  same  processes  occur  equally. 
For  from  the  same  source  from  which  the  ma¬ 
terial  first  takes  its  existence,  from  that  source 
also  does  it  gain  nutriment  and  increase.  More¬ 
over,  from  what  we  shall  presently  say,  it  will 
be  made  clear  that  all  the  parts  of  the  body  are 
nourished  by  a  common  nutritious  juice;  for, 
as  all  plants  arise  from  one  and  the  same  com¬ 
mon  nutriment  (whether  it  be  dew  or  a  mois¬ 
ture  from  the  earth),  altered  and  concocted  in  a 
diversity  of  manners,  by  which  they  are  also 
nourished  and  grow;  so  likewise  to  identical 
fluids  of  the  egg,  namely,  the  albumen  and  the 
yelk,  do  the  whole  chick  and  each  of  its  parts 
owe  their  birth  and  growth. 

We  will  explain,  also,  what  are  the  animals 
whose  generation  takes  place  by  metamorpho¬ 
sis,  and  of  what  kind  is  the  pre-existent  material 
of  insects  which  take  their  origin  from  a  worm 
or  a  caterpillar;  a  material  from  which,  by 
transmutation  alone,  all  their  parts  are  simul¬ 
taneously  constituted  and  embodied,  and  a  per¬ 
fect  animal  is  born;  likewise,  to  what  animals 
any  constant  order  in  the  successive  generation 
of  their  parts  attaches,  as  is  the  case  with  such 
as  are  at  first  born  in  an  imperfect  condition, 
and  afterwards  grow  to  maturity  and  perfec¬ 
tion;  and  this  happens  to  all  those  tliat  are  born 
from  an  egg.  As  in  these  the  processes  of  growth 
and  formation  are  carried  on  at  the  same  time, 
and  a  separation  and  distinction  of  parts  takes 
place  in  a  regularly  observed  order,  so  in  their 


case  is  there  no  immediate  pre-existing  ma¬ 
terial  present,  for  the  incorporation  of  the 
foetus  (such  as  the  mixture  of  the  semina  of  the 
male  and  female  is  generally  thought  to  be,  or 
the  menstrual  blood,  or  some  very  small  por¬ 
tion  of  the  egg),  but  as  soon  as  ever  the  ma¬ 
terial  is  created  and  prepared,  so  soon  are 
growth  and  form  commenced;  the  nutriment  is 
immediately  accompanied  by  the  presence  of 
that  which  it  has  to  feed.  And  this  kind  of  gen¬ 
eration  is  the  result  of  epigenesis  as  the  man 
proceeds  from  the  boy;  the  edifice  of  the  body, 
to  wit,  is  raised  on  the  punctum  saliens  as  a 
foundation;  as  a  ship  is  made  from  a  keel,  and  as 
a  potter  makes  a  vessel,  as  the  carpenter  forms 
a  footstool  out  of  a  piece  of  wood,  or  a  statuary 
his  statue  from  a  block  of  marble.  For  out  of 
the  same  material  from  which  the  first  part  of 
the  chick  or  its  smallest  particle  springs,  from 
the  very  same  is  the  whole  chick  born;  whence 
the  first  little  drop  of  blood,  thence  also  pro¬ 
ceeds  its  whole  mass  by  means  of  generation  in 
the  egg;  nor  is  there  any  difference  between  the 
elements  which  constitute  and  form  the  limbs 
or  organs  of  the  body,  and  those  out  of  which 
all  their  similar  parts,  to  wit,  the  skin,  the  flesh, 
veins,  membranes,  nerves,  cartilages,  and  bones, 
derive  their  origin.  For  the  part  which  was  at 
first  soft  and  fleshy,  afterwards,  in  the  course  of 
its  growth,  and  without  any  change  in  the  mat¬ 
ter  of  nutrition,  becomes  a  nerve,  a  ligament, 
a  tendon;  what  was  a  simple  membrane  becomes 
an  investing  tunic;  what  had  been  cartilage  is 
afterwards  found  to  be  a  spinous  process  of 
bone,  all  variously  diversified  out  of  the  same 
similar  material.  For  a  similar  organic  body 
(which  the  vulgar  believe  to  consist  of  the  ele¬ 
ments)  is  not  created  out  of  elements  at  first 
existing  separately,  and  then  put  together, 
united,  and  altered;  nor  is  it  put  together  out  of 
constituent  parts;  but,  from  a  transmutation  of 
it  when  in  a  mixed  state,  another  compound  is 
created:  to  take  an  instance,  from  the  colli- 
quament  the  blood  is  formed,  from  the  blood 
the  structure  of  the  body  arises,  which  appears 
to  be  homogeneous  in  the  beginning,  and  re¬ 
sembles  the  spermatic  jelly;  but  from  this  the 
parts  are  at  first  delineated  by  an  obscure  divi¬ 
sion,  and  afterwards  become  separate  and  dis¬ 
tinct  organs. 

Those  parts,  I  say,  are  not  made  similar  by 
any  successive  union  of  dissimilar  and  hetero¬ 
geneous  elements,  but  spring  out  of  a  similar 
material  through  the  process  of  generation, 
have  their  different  elements  assigned  to  them 
by  the  same  process,  and  are  made  dissimilar. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


Just  as  if  the  whole  chick  was  created  by  a  com¬ 
mand  to  this  effect,  of  the  Divine  Architect: 
“Let  there  be  a  similar  colourless  mass,  and  let 
it  be  divided  into  parts  and  made  to  increase, 
and  in  the  meantime,  while  it  is  growing,  let 
there  be  a  separation  and  delineation  of  parts; 
and  let  this  part  be  harder,  and  denser,  and 
more  glistening,  that  be  softer  and  more  col¬ 
oured,”  and  it  was  so.  Now  it  is  in  this  very 
manner  that  the  structure  of  the  chick  in  the 
egg  goes  on  day  by  day;  all  its  parts  are  formed, 
nourished,  and  augmented  out  of  the  same  ma¬ 
terial.  First,  from  the  spine  arise  the  sides,  and 
the  bones  are  distinguishable  from  the  flesh  by 
minute  lines  of  extreme  whiteness;  in  the  head 
three  bullae  are  perceived,  full  of  crystalline 
fluid,  which  correspond  to  the  brain,  the  cere¬ 
bellum,  and  one  eye,  easily  observable  by  a 
black  speck;  the  substance  which  at  first  ap¬ 
pears  a  milky  coagulum,  afterwards  gradually 
becomes  cartilaginous,  has  spinous  processes  at¬ 
tached  to  it,  and  ends  in  being  completely  os¬ 
seous;  what  was  at  first  of  a  mucous  nature  and 
colourless,  is  converted  at  length  into  red  flesh 
and  parenchyma;  what  was  at  one  time  limpid 
and  perfectly  pure  water,  presently  assumes  the 
form  of  brain,  cerebellum,  and  eyes.  For  there 
is  a  greater  and  more  divine  mystery  in  the 
generation  of  animals  than  the  simple  collect¬ 
ing  together,  alteration,  and  composition  of  a 
whole  out  of  parts  would  seem  to  imply;'  inas¬ 
much  as  here  the  whole  has  a  separate  constitu¬ 
tion  and  existence  before  its  parts,  the  mixture 
before  the  elements.  But  of  this  more  at  an¬ 
other  time,  when  we  come  to  specify  the  causes 
of  these  things. 

EXERCISE  46.  Of  the  efficient  cause  of  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  the  chic\  and  foetus 

We  have  thus  far  spoken  of  the  matter  from 
which  the  chick  in  ovo  is  generated.  We  have 
still  with  Fabricius  to  say  a  few  words  on  the 
efficient  cause  of  the  chick.  As  this  subject  is 
surrounded  with  difficulties,  however;  as  writ¬ 
ers  nowhere  else  dispute  more  virulently  or 
more  wordily,  and  Aristotle  himself  in  explain¬ 
ing  the  matter  is  singularly  intricate  and  per¬ 
plexed,  and  as  various  questions  that  can  by  no 
means  be  lightly  treated  do  in  fact  present 
themselves  for  consideration,  I  conceive  that  I 
shall  be  undertaking  a  task  worthy  of  the  toil 
if,  as  I  have  done  in  the  disquisition  on  the 
“matter,”  I  set  out  here  by  stating  in  how 
many  ways  anything  can  be  said  to  be  “ef¬ 
ficient”  or  “effective.”  We  shall  thus  obtain  a 
clearer  idea  of  what  it  is  which  we  are  to  in¬ 


quire  after  under  the  name  of  “efficient,”  and 
further,  what  estimate  we  are  to  form  of  the 
ideas  of  writers  upon  this  subject;  it  will  at  the 
same  time  appear  from  our  obser\^ations  what 
is  truly  and  properly  to  be  called  “an  efficient.” 

Aristotle  defines  an  efficient  cause  to  be  that 
“whence  is  derived  the  first  principle  of  change 
or  quiescence;  as  a  counsel,  a  father;  and  sim¬ 
ply  as  doing  that  which  is  done;  the  transmute 
of  the  thing  transmuted.”^  In  the  generation  of 
animals,  accordingly,  many  and  various  kinds 
of  causes  inducing  motion  are  brought  forward; 
sometimes  an  accident  or  quality  is  assigned; 
and  so  animal  heat  and  the  formative  faculty 
are  called  efficient  causes.  Sometimes  it  is  an  ex¬ 
ternal  substance,  previously  existing,  in  which 
inheres  the  plastic  force  or  formative  faculty 
that  is  designated  in  the  same  way;  as  the  cock 
or  his  seminal  fluid,  by  the  influence  of  which 
the  chick  is  procreated  from  the  egg.  Occasion¬ 
ally  it  is  some  internal  substance,  self-existent, 
such  as  spirit,  or  innate  heat.  And  again,  it  is 
some  other  substance,  such  as  form,  or  nature, 
or  soul,  or  some  portion  of  the  vegetative  soul, 
that  is  regarded  as  the  efficient,  such  a  principle 
as  we  have  already  declared  to  inhere  in  the 

Besides,  since  one  thing  whence  motion  pro¬ 
ceeds  is  nearer  and  another  more  remote,  it 
sometimes  happens  that  the  media  between  the 
prime  efficient  and  the  thing  last  effected,  and 
instruments  are  regarded  as  efficient  causes; 
subordinate  conclusions,  likewise,  or  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  subsequents,  are  reckoned  among  the 
number  of  efficient  causes;  in  this  way  some 
parts' are  themselves  spoken  of  as  genital  parts, 
such  as  the  heart,  whence  Aristotle  affirms  that 
all  the  rest  of  the  body  is  produced;  a  state¬ 
ment  which  we  have  found  borne  out  by  our 
history.  The  heart,  I  repeat,  or  at  all  events  its 
rudimentary  parts,  namely,  the  vesicle  and 
pulsating  point,  construct  the  rest  of  the  body 
as  their  future  dwelling-place;  when  erected  it 
enters  and  conceals  itself  within  its  habitation, 
which  it  vivifies  and  governs,  and  applying  the 
ribs  and  sternum  as  a  defence,  it  walls  itself 
about.  And  there  it  abides,  the  household  div¬ 
inity,  first  seat  of  the  soul,  prime  receptacle  of 
the  innate  heat,  perennial  centre  of  animal  ac¬ 
tion;  source  and  origin  of  all  the  faculties;  only 
solace  in  adversity! 

Moreover,  since  the  “efficient”  is  so  styled 
with  reference  to  the  effect,  as  some  parts  pro¬ 
duced  by  epigenesis  are  posterior  in  order  to 
other  parts,  and  are  different  from  antecedent 
^  Metaphysics^  v.  2;  PhysieSy  ii.  3. 


4i6  william 

parts — as  effects  differ,  so  does  it  seem  probable 
that  efficients  also  vary:  from  things  that  pro¬ 
duce  different  operations,  different  motions 
likewise  proceed.  Thus  physicians  in  their 
physiologies  assign  certain  organs  as  the  agents 
of  chylification,  others  of  sanguification,  others 
of  generation,  &c.;  and  anatomists  speak  of  the 
ossific,  carnific,  and  neurific  faculties,  which 
they  conceive  produce  bones,  flesh,  and  nerves. 

But  in  the  generation  of  the  chick,  of  several 
actions  differing  not  a  little  from  one  another,  it 
is  certain  that  the  efficient  causes  must  also  dif¬ 
fer;  those  that  present  themselves  to  us  as  ac¬ 
cidental  efficients  of  generation  must  neverthe¬ 
less  be  necessary,  seeing,  that  unless  they  are  as¬ 
sociated  or  intervene,  nothing  is  effected;  those, 
to  wit,  are  rightly  held  “efficients”  which, 
whilst  they  remove  external  hinderances,  ei¬ 
ther  cherish  the  conception,  or  stimulate  and 
turn  mere  potentiality  into  positive  action.  Un¬ 
der  this  head  we  should  arrange  incubation,  the 
proper  temperature  of  the  air  and  the  place, 
the  spring  season,  the  approach  of  the  sun  in 
the  circle  of  the  zodiac;  in  like  manner  the  pre¬ 
paring  causes  which  lead  the  vitellus  to  rise, 
make  the  macula  to  dilate,  and  the  fluids  in  the 
egg  to  liquefy,  are  all  properly  held  “efficients.” 

Further,  to  the  number  of  efficient  causes  are 
to  be  reckoned  the  generative  and  architec¬ 
tonic  faculties,  styled  parts  by  Fabricius,  viz.y 
the  immutative,  the  concoctive,  the  formative, 
the  augmentative,  as  also  the  effective  causes  of 
certain  accidentals,  viz.y  that  which  constitutes 
the  pullet  male  or  female,  like  the  father  or 
the  mother,  taking  after  the  form  of  the  first 
or  last  male  having  connexion  with  the  mother; 
that  too  whence  the  offspring  is  an  animal; 
w'hether  perfect  or  defective;  robust  and 
healthy,  or  diseased;  longer  or  shorter  lived; 
keeping  up  the  characters  of  the  race  or  degen¬ 
erating  from  them;  a  monster,  an  hybrid,  &c. 

Lastly,  when  we  were  discussing  the  efficient 
causes  of  the  foetus,  we  were  not  inattentive  to 
its  admirable  structure,  to  the  functions  and 
uses  of  all  its  parts  and  members;  neither  did 
we  overlook  the  foresight,  the  art,  the  intelli¬ 
gence,  the  divine  inspiration  with  which  all 
things  were  ordained  and  skilfully  continued 
for  the  ends  of  life.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  in¬ 
quire  what  is  the  “efficient,”  the  architect,  the 
adviser,  but  that  we  likewise  venerate  and 
adore  the  omnipotent  Creator  and  preserver  of 
a  work,  which  has  been  well  entitled  a  micro¬ 
cosm.  We  also  ask  whence  this  divine  some¬ 
thing  comes,  when  it  arrives,  and  where  it  re¬ 
sides  in  the  egg;  this  something  which  is  anal- 


HARVEY 

ogous  to  the  essence  of  the  stars,  and  is  near 
akin  to  art  and  intelligence,  and  the  vicar  of  the 
Almighty  Creator 

From  what  precedes  it  will  be  apparent  how 
difficult  it  were  to  enumerate  all  the  efficient 
causes  of  the  chick;  it  is  indispensable,  indeed, 
in  the  complete  investigation  of  this  subject  to 
refer  to  a  general  disquisition;  we  could  not 
from  the  single  generation  of  the  chick  in  ovOy 
and  without  clearer  light  derived  from  investi¬ 
gations  extended  to  other  animals,  venture  on 
conclusions  that  should  be  applicable  to  the 
whole  animal  creation.  And  this  all  the  more, 
since  Aristotle  himself  has  enumerated  such  a 
variety  of  efficient  principles  of  animals;  for  he 
at  one  time  adduces  the  “male”^  as  the  prin¬ 
cipal  efficient  cause,  as  that,  to  wit,  in  which  the 
reason  of  the  engendered  chick  resides,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  axiom:  “all  things  are  made  by  the 
same  ‘univocal’  ”;^  at  another  time  he  takes 
“the  male  semen”  or,  “the  nature  of  the  male 
emitting  semen” sometimes  it  is  “that  which 
inheres  in  the  semen,  which  causes  seeds  to  be 
prolific,  spirit,  to  wit,  and  nature  in  that  spirit 
corresponding  in  its  qualities  to  the  essence  of 
the  stars”;®  elsewhere  he  says  it  is  “heat”;® 
“moderate  heat”;^  “a  certain  and  proportion¬ 
ate  degree  of  heat”;®  “the  heat  in  the  blood”;^ 
“the  heat  of  the  ambient  air”;  “the  winds’’;^® 
“the  sun”;  “the  heavens”;  “Jupiter”;  “the 
soul”;  and,  somewhere,  nature  is  spoken  of  by 
him  as  “the  principle  of  motion  and  rest.” 

Aristotle  concludes  the  discussion  on  the 
efficient  cause  by  declaring  it  “extremely  doubt¬ 
ful”  whether  it  be  “anything  extrinsic;  or 
something  inherent  in  the  geniture  or  semen; 
and  whether  it  be  any  part  of  the  soul,  or  the 
soul  itself,  or  something  having  a  soul?”“ 

To  escape  from  such  a  labyrinth  of  “efficient 
causes,”  it  were  necessary  to  be  furnished  with 
Ariadne's  thread,  composed  from  observations 
on  almost  every  animal  that  lives;  on  this  ac¬ 
count  the  subject  is  deferred  till  we  come  to  our 
more  general  disquisition.  Meantime  we  shall 
recount  the  particulars  which  either  manifestly 
appear  in  the  special  history  of  the  chick  from 

^  Metaphysics,  i.  2;  iv.  i. 

^  Ibid.,  VII.  10. 

*  On  the  Parts  of  Animals,  i.  i. 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  i.  20. 

®  Ibid.,  n.  3. 

®  Ibid.,  V.  3. 

^  Ibid.,  IV  2. 

®  Ibid.,  IV.  4. 

®  On  the  Parts  of  Animals,  11.  2. 

^0  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  iv.  2;  History  of 

Animals,  vi.  19. 

On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  11.  i. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


the  egg,  or  which  differ  from  the  ideas  usually 
entertained,  or  that  seem  to  demand  further 
inquiry. 

EXERCISE  47.  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  efficient 
cause  of  the  chic\  acts,  according  to  Aristotle 

It  is  universally  allowed,  that  the  male  is  the 
primary  efficient  cause  in  generation,  on  the 
ground  that  in  him  the  species  or  form  resides; 
and  it  is  further  affirmed,  that  the  emission  of 
his  “geniture^*  during  coition,  is  the  cause  both 
of  the  existence  and  the  fertility  of  the  egg. 
But  none  of  the  philosophers  nor  physicians, 
ancient  or  modern,  have  sufficiently  explained 
in  what  manner  the  seed  of  the  cock  produced 
a  chick  from  the  egg;  nor  have  they  solved  the 
question  proposed  by  Aristotle.  Nor,  indeed,  is 
Aristotle  himself  much  more  explanatory,  when 
he  says  “that  the  male  contributes  not  in  re¬ 
spect  of  quantity,  but  of  quality,  and  is  the 
origin  of  action;  but  that  it  is  the  female  which 
brings  the  material.”  And  a  little  after,  “It  is 
not  every  male  that  emits  seed,  and  in  those 
which  do  so,  this  is  no  part  of  the  foetus;  just  as 
in  the  case  of  a  carpenter,  nothing  is  translated 
from  him  to  the  substance  of  the  wood  which  he 
uses,  nor  does  any  part  of  the  artist’s  skill  reside 
in  the  work  when  completed;  but  a  form  and 
appearance  are  given  by  his  operation  to  the 
matter;  and  the  soul,  which  originates  the  idea 
of  forms,  and  the  skill  to  imitate  them,  moves 
the  hands,  or  other  limb,  whatever  it  may  be, 
by  a  motion  of  a  certain  quality;  or  from  diver¬ 
sity  proceeds  difference;  or  from  similarity  pro¬ 
ceeds  resemblance.  But  the  hands  and  instru¬ 
ments  move  the  material.  So  the  nature  of  a 
male,  which  emits  semen,  uses  that  semen  as  an 
instrument,  and  an  act  having  motion;  as  in 
works  of  art  the  instruments  are  moved,  for  in 
them,  in  some  sort,  the  motion  of  the  art 
exists.” 

By  these  words  he  seems  to  imply  that  gener¬ 
ation  is  owing  to  the  motion  of  a  certain  quality. 
Just  as  in  art,  though  the  first  cause  (the  ratio 
operis)  be  in  the  mind  of  the  artist,  yet  after¬ 
wards,  the  work  is  effected  by  the  movement  of 
the  hands  or  other  instruments;  and  although 
the  first  cause  be  removed  (as  in  automatons), 
yet  is  it  in  some  sort  said  to  move  what  it  now 
does  not  touch,  but  once  has  touched,  so  long  as 
motion  continues  in  the  instrument. 

Also  in  the  next  book,  he  says:  “When  the 
semen  of  the  male  has  arrived  as  far  as  the  uterus 
of  the  female,  it  arranges  and  coagulates  the 
purest  part  of  the  excrement  (meaning  the 
menstrual  blood  existing  in  the  uterus);  and, 


by  a  motion  of  this  kind,  changes  the  material, 
which  has  been  prepared  in  the  uterus,  till  it 
forms  part  of  the  chick;  and  this,  hereafter, 
although  the  semen  after  the  performance  of 
this  motion  disappears,  exists  as  part  of  the  foe¬ 
tus,  and  becomes  animate  (as  the  heart)  and 
regulates  its  own  powers  and  growth,  as  a  son 
emancipated  from  his  father,  and  having  his 
own  establishment.  And  so  it  is  necessary  that 
there  be  some  commencing  principle,  from 
which  afterwards  the  order  of  the  limbs  may  be 
delineated,  and  a  proper  disposition  made  of 
those  things  that  concern  the  absolution  of  the 
animal;  a  principle,  which  may  be  the  source  of 
growth  and  motion  to  all  the  other  parts;  the 
origin  of  all,  both  similar  and  dissimilar  parts, 
and  the  source  of  their  ultimate  aliment.  For 
that  which  is  already  an  animal  grows,  but  the 
ultimate  aliment  of  an  animal  is  the  blood,  or 
something  corresponding  to  the  blood,  whose 
vessels  and  receptacles  are  the  veins;  wherefore, 
the  heart  is  the  origin  of  the  veins.  But  veins, 
like  roots,  spread  to  the  uterus,  and  through 
these  the  foetus  derives  its  nourishment.  The 
heart  too,  being  the  beginning  of  all  nature  and 
the  containing  end,  ought  to  be  made  first;  as 
if  it  were  a  genital  part  by  its  own  nature,  which, 
as  the  original  of  all  the  other  parts,  and  of  the 
whole  animal,  and  of  sense,  must  needs  be  the 
first;  and  by  its  heat  (since  all  the  parts  are  in 
the  material  potentially),  when  once  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  motion  has  taken  place,  all  that  fol¬ 
lows  is  excited,  just  as  in  spontaneous  miracles; 
and  the  parts  are  commenced,  not  by  change  of 
place,  but  by  alteration  in  softness,  hardness, 
temperature,  and  the  other  differences  observed 
in  similar  parts,  these  being  now  actually  made, 
which  had  before  existed  only  potentially.” 

This  is,  in  nearly  so  many  words,  the  opinion 
of  Aristotle,  which  supposes  that  the  foetus  is 
formed  from  the  seed  by  motion,  although  it  is 
not  at  present  in  communication  with  the  foe¬ 
tus,  but  simply  has  been  so  at  a  former  time:  his 
reasonings  are,  indeed,  ingenious,  and  carefully 
put  together,  and  from  what  we  see  in  the  order 
of  the  generation  of  parts,  not  improbable.  For 
the  heart,  with  the  channel  of  the  veins,  is  first 
noticed  as  an  animate  principle,  in  which  mo¬ 
tion  and  sense  reside;  or,  as  it  were,  an  emanci¬ 
pated  son,  and  a  genital  part,  whence  the  order 
of  the  members  is  delineated,  whence  all  things 
pertaining  to  the  completion  of  the  animal  are 
disposed,  and  which  has  all  the  attributes  be¬ 
stowed  upon  it  by  Aristotle. 

But  it  seems  impossible  that  the  heart  should 
be  formed  in  the  egg  by  the  seed  of  the  male. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


418 

when  that  seed  neither  exists  in  the  egg,  nor 
touches  it,  nor  ever  has  touched  it;  because  the 
seed  does  not  enter  the  uterus  where  the  egg  is 
(as  is  allowed  by  Fabricius),  nor  is  in  any  way 
attracted  by  it;  nay,  even  the  maternal  blood 
is  not  in  the  egg,  nor  any  other  prepared  mat¬ 
ter,  out  of  which  the  seed  of  the  male  may  form 
this  genital  part,  the  author  of  all  the  others. 
For  it  is  not  immediately  after  coition,  while 
the  seed  still  remains  within  the  body,  and  is 
in  communication,  that  any  part  of  the  chick 
exists  in  the  egg,  but  after  many  days,  when  in¬ 
cubation  has  taken  place.  Moreover,  in  fishes, 
when  the  geniture  of  the  male  does  nothing  but 
touch  the  eggs  externally,  and  does  not  enter 
into  them,  it  is  not  likely  that  it  performs  any 
more  ample  functions  when  the  agency  is  ex¬ 
ternal,  than  does  the  seed  of  the  cock  in  the 
already  formed  eggs  of  the  hen.  Besides,  since 
immediately  after  coition  no  trace  of  the  egg  as 
yet  exists,  but  it  is  afterwards  generated  by  the 
hen  herself  (I  am  speaking  of  the  prolific  egg); 
when  now  the  seed  of  the  cock  is  departed  and 
vanished,  there  is  no  probability  that  the  foetus 
is  formed  in  that  egg  by  the  aforesaid  seed, 
through  means  of  one  or  any  number  of  suc¬ 
cessive  motions. 

Nor  indeed  does  the  difference  between  pro¬ 
lific  and  unprolific  or  wind  eggs  consist  herein, 
that  the  former  contained  the  seed  of  the  male, 
as  Aldrovandus  supposed;  nor  has  it  been  no¬ 
ticed  that  anything  has  been  formed  and  coagu¬ 
lated  in  the  egg  by  the  seed  of  the  male,  nor  has 
any  sensible  transmutation  been  discovered  (for 
indeed,  there  is  no  sensible  difference  between 
the  fertile  and  the  wind  egg);  and  yet  a  prolific 
egg,  conceived  long  after  coition,  has  in  itself 
the  faculties  of  both  sexes;  viz,^  the  capability 
of  being  both  formed  itself,  and  of  forming  a 
chick;  as  if,  according  to  the  idea  of  Aristotle,  it 
had  derived  its  origin  from  the  coition  of  the 
two,  and  their  mutual  endeavours  towards  the 
same  end;  and  compelled  by  the  force  of  this 
argument,  as  mentioned  above,  when  speaking 
of  the  generation  of  the  ovum,  he  has  endowed 
the  egg  with  a  vital  principle  {animd).  If  such 
really  exist,  then,  without  doubt  it  would  be 
the  origin  and  efficient  of  all  the  natural  phe¬ 
nomena  which  take  place  in  the  egg.  For  if  we 
consider  the  structure  of  the  chick,  displaying, 
as  it  docs,  so  much  art,  so  divine  an  intelligence 
and  foresight;  when  we  see  the  eyes  adapted  for 
vision,  the  bill  for  taking  food,  the  feet  for 
walking,  the  wings  for  llying,  and  similarly  the 
rest  of  its  parts,  each  to  its  own  end,  we  must 
conclude,  whatever  the  power  be  which  cre¬ 


ates  such  an  animal  out  of  an  egg,  that  it  is 
either  the  soul,  or  part  of  the  soul,  or  something 
having  a  soul,  or  something  existing  previous  to, 
and  more  excellent  than  the  soul,  operating 
with  intelligence  and  foresight. 

From  the  generation  of  the  chick,  it  is  also 
manifest  that,  whatever  may  have  been  its 
principle  of  life  or  first  vegetative  cause,  this 
cause  itself  first  existed  in  the  heart.  Now,  if 
this  be  the  soul  of  the  chicken,  it  is  equally  clear 
that  that  soul  must  have  existed  in  the  punctum 
saliens  and  the  blood;  since  we  there  discover 
motion  and  sense;  for  the  heart  moves  and  leaps 
like  an  animal.  But  if  a  soul  exists  in  the  punc¬ 
tum  saliens,  forming,  nourishing,  and  augment¬ 
ing  the  rest  of  the  body,  in  the  manner  which 
we  have  pointed  out  in  our  histor)%  then  it, 
without  doubt,  flows  from  the  heart,  as  from  a 
fountain-head,  into  the  whole  body.  Likewise, 
if  the  existence  of  the  vital  principle  {anima)  in 
the  egg,  or,  as  Aristotle  supposes,  if  the  vege¬ 
tative  part  of  the  soul  be  the  cause  of  its  fer¬ 
tility,  it  must  follow  that  the  punctum  saliens, 
or  animate  genital  part,  proceeds  from  the  vital 
principle  (anima)  of  the  egg  (for  nothing  is  its 
own  author),  and  that  the  said  vital  principle 
(anima)  passes  from  the  egg  into  the  punctum 
saliens,  presently  into  the  heart,  and  thence  in¬ 
to  the  chick. 

Moreover,  if  the  egg  have  a  prolific  virtue, 
and  a  vegetative  soul,  by  which  the  chick  is 
constructed,  and  if  it  owe  them,  as  is  allowed  on 
all  hands,  to  the  semen  of  the  cock;  it  is  clear 
that  this  semen  is  also  endowed  with  an  active 
principle  (anima).  For  such  is  Aristotle’s  opin¬ 
ion,  when  he  expresses  himself  as  follows:  “As 
to  whether  the  semen  has  a  vital  principle  (ani¬ 
ma)  or  not,  the  same  reasoning  must  be  adduced 
which  we  have  employed  in  the  consideration 
of  other  parts.  For  no  active  principle  (anima) 
can  exist,  except  in  that  thing  whose  vital  prin¬ 
ciple  it  is;  nor  can  there  be  any  part  which  is 
not  partaker  of  the  vital  principle,  except  it  be 
equivocally,  as  the  eye  of  a  dead  man.  We  must, 
therefore,  allow,  both  that  the  semen  has  an  ac¬ 
tive  principle  (anima)  and  is  potential.” 

Now  from  these  premises,  it  follows  that  the 
male  is  the  primary  efficient  in  which  the  ratio 
and  forma  reside,  which  produces  a  seed  or 
rather  a  prolific  geniture,  and  imparts  it,  im¬ 
bued  as  it  is  with  an  anima  vegetativa  (with 
which  also  the  rest  of  its  parts  are  endowed)  to 
the  female.  The  introduction  of  this  geniture 
begets  such  a  movement  in  the  material  of  the 
hen,  that  the  production  of  an  animate  egg  is 
the  result,  and  from  thence  too  the  first  particle 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


of  the  chick  is  animated,  and  afterwards  the 
whole  chick.  And  so,  according  to  Aristotle, 
either  the  same  soul  passes,  by  means  of  some 
metempsychosis,  from  the  cock  into  his  geni- 
ture,  from  the  geniture  into  the  material  of  the 
female,  thence  into  the  egg,  and  from  the  egg 
into  the  chick;  or  else,  it  is  raised  up  in  each  of 
the  subsequent  things  by  its  respective  ante¬ 
cedent;  namely,  in  the  seed  of  the  male  by  the 
male  himself,  in  the  egg  by  the  seed,  last  in  the 
chick  by  the  egg,  as  light  is  derived  from  light. 

The  efficient,  therefore,  which  we  look  for  in 
the  egg,  to  explain  the  birth  of  the  chick,  is  the 
vital  principle  (animd) ;  and  therefore,  the  vital 
principle  of  the  egg;  for,  according  to  Aristotle, 
a  soul  does  not  exist  except  in  that  thing  whose 
soul  it  is. 

But  it  is  manifest  that  the  seed  of  the  male  is 
not  the  efficient  of  the  chick;  neither  as  an  in¬ 
strument  capable  of  forming  the  chick  by  its 
motion,  as  Aristotle  would  have  it,  nor  as  an 
animate  substance  transferring  its  vitality  (ani' 
md)  to  the  chick.  For  in  the  egg  there  is  no 
semen,  neither  does  any  touch  it,  nor  has  ever 
done  so  (“and  it  is  impossible  that  that  which 
does  not  touch  should  move,  or  that  anything 
should  be  affected  by  that  which  does  not  move 
it”);  and  therefore  the  vitality  of  the  semen 
ought  not  to  be  said  to  exist  in  it;  and  although 
the  vital  principle  may  be  the  efficient  in  the 
egg,  yet  it  would  not  appear  to  result  more 
from  the  cock  or  his  semen,  than  from  the  hen. 

Nor,  indeed,  is  it  transferred  by  any  metem¬ 
psychosis  or  translation  from  the  cock  and  his 
semen  into  the  egg,  and  thence  into  the  chick. 
For  how  can  this  translation  be  carried  on  into 
the  eggs  that  are  yet  to  exist,  and  to  be  con¬ 
ceived  after  intercourse }  unless  either  some  ani¬ 
mate  semen  be  in  the  mean  time  working  in 
some  part  of  the  hen;  or  the  vital  principle  only 
have  been  translated  without  the  seed,  in  order 
to  be  infused  into  any  egg  which  might  there¬ 
after  be  produced;  but  neither  of  these  alter¬ 
natives  is  true.  For  in  no  part  of  the  hen  is  the 
semen  to  be  found;  nor  is  it  possible  that  the 
hen  after  coition  should  be  possessed  of  a  double 
vital  principle,  to  wit,  her  own,  and  that  of  the 
future  eggs  and  chicks;  since  “the  living  prin¬ 
ciple  or  soul  is  said  to  be  nowhere  but  in  that 
thing  whose  soul  it  is,”  much  less  can  one  or 
more  vital  principles  lie  hidden  in  the  hen,  to 
be  afterwards  subservient  to  the  future  eggs 
and  chicks  in  their  order,  as  they  are  produced. 

We  have  adduced  these  passages  out  of  Aris¬ 
totle  in  order  to  set  forth  his  opinion  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  seed  of  the  cock  produces 


the  chick  from  the  egg;  and  thereby  throw  at 
least  some  light  on  this  difficult  question.  But 
whereas  the  said  passages  do  not  explain  the 
mode  in  which  this  is  accomplished,  nor  even 
solve  the  doubts  proposed  by  himself,  it  ap¬ 
pears  that  we  are  still  sticking  in  the  same  mud, 
and  caught  in  the  same  perplexities  (concerning 
the  efficient  cause  of  the  foetus  in  the  genera¬ 
tion  of  animals) ;  indeed,  so  far  from  Aristotle’s 
arguments  rendering  this  question  more  clear, 
they  appear  on  the  contrary  to  involve  it  in 
more  and  greater  doubts. 

Wherefore  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  most  ex¬ 
cellent  philosopher  was  in  perplexity  on  this 
head,  and  that  he  has  admitted  so  great  a  vari¬ 
ety  of  efficient  causes,  and  at  one  time  has  been 
compelled  to  resort  to  automatons,  coagula¬ 
tion,  art,  instruments,  and  motions,  for  illustra¬ 
tions;  at  another  time  to  an  animd'  in  the  egg, 
and  in  the  seed  of  the  male.  Moreover,  when  he 
seems  positively  and  definitively  to  determine 
what  it  is  in  each  seed,  whether  of  plants  or  ani¬ 
mals,  which  render  the  same  fertile,  he  repudi¬ 
ates  heat  and  fire  as  improper  agents;  nor  does 
he  admit  any  faculty  of  a  similar  quality;  nor 
can  he  find  anything  in  the  seed  which  should 
be  fit  for  that  office;  but  he  is  driven  to  ac¬ 
knowledge  something  incorporeal,  and  coming 
from  foreign  sources,  which  he  supposes  (like 
art,  or  the  mind)  to  form  the  foetus  with  intelli¬ 
gence  and  foresight,  and  to  institute  and  ordain 
all  its  parts  for  its  welfare.  He  takes  refuge,  I 
say,  in  a  thing  which  is  obscure  and  not  recog¬ 
nizable  by  us;  namely,  in  a  spirit  contained  in 
the  seed,  and  in  a  frothy  body,  and  in  the  na¬ 
ture  in  that  spirit,  corresponding  in  proportion 
to  the  elements  of  the  stars.  But  what  that  is, 
he  has  nowhere  informed  us. 

EXERCISE  48.  The  opinion  of  Fabricius  on  the 
efficient  cause  of  the  chic\  is  refuted 

As  I  have  chosen  Aristotle,  the  most  eminent 
among  the  ancient  philosophers,  and  Fabricius 
of  Aquapendente,  one  of  the  foremost  anato¬ 
mists  of  modern  times,  as  my  especial  guides 
and  sources  of  information  on  the  subject  of 
animal  generation,  when  I  find  that  I  can  make 
nothing  of  Aristotle  upon  a  particular  topic,  I 
straightway  turn  to  Fabricius;  and  now  I  desire 
to  know  what  he  thought  of  the  efficient  cause 
of  generation. 

I  find  that  he  endeavours  to  satisfy  three 
doubts  or  difficulties  involved  in  this  subject: 
First,  What  is  the  “efficient”  of  the  chick.?  This 
he  answers,  by  saying,  the  semen  of  the  male. 
Secondly,  How  does  this  appear  in  the  egg,  and 


420  WILLIAM 

in  what  way  does  the  semen  of  the  cock  fecun¬ 
date  the  egg?  Thirdly  and  lastly,  In  what  order 
are  the  parts  of  the  chick  engendered  ? 

As  to  the  first  query,  it  appears  from  our 
observations,  that  the  cock  and  his  seminal  fluid 
are  verily  the  “efficient,”  but  not  the  “ade¬ 
quate”  cause  of  generation;  that  the  hen  comes 
in  here  as  something.  In  this  place,  therefore, 
we  are  principally  to  inquire  how  the  semen  of 
the  cock  fecundates  the  egg  otherwise  unpro- 
lific,  and  secures  the  engenderment  of  a  chick 
from  it? 

But  let  us  hear  Fabricius:  “Those  things  dif¬ 
fer,”  he  observes,  “that  are  produced  from 
eggs,  from  those  that  originate  from  semen,  in 
this,  that  oviparous  animals  have  the  matter 
from  which  the  embryo  is  incorporated  distinct 
and  separate  from  the  agent;  whilst  viviparous 
animals  have  the  efficient  cause  and  the  matter 
associate  and  concorporate.  For  the  ‘agent’  in 
the  oviparous  animal  is  the  semen  of  the  male, 
in  the  fowl  the  semen  of  the  cock,  which  neither 
is  nor  can  be  in  the  egg;  the  ‘matter,’  again,  is 
the  chalazae  from  which  the  foetus  is  incorpo¬ 
rated.  These  two  differ  widely  from  one  an¬ 
other;  for  the  chalazae  are  added  after  the  vitel- 
lus  is  formed,  whilst  it  is  passing  through  the 
second  uterus,  and  are  an  accession  to  the  in¬ 
ternal  egg;  the  semen  galli,  on  the  contrary,  is 
stored  near  the  fundament,  is  separated  from 
the  chalazse  by  a  great  interval,  and  neverthe¬ 
less  by  its  irradiating  faculty,  fecundates  both 
the  whole  egg  and  the  uterus.  Now  in  the  vivip¬ 
arous  animal,  the  semen  is  both  ‘matter’  and 
‘agent,’  the  two  consisting  and  being  conjoined 
in  the  same  body.”^ 

Our  author  appears  to  have  introduced  this 
distinction  between  oviparous  and  viviparous 
animals,  that  he  might  spare,  or  at  all  events, 
that  he  might  not  directly  shock  or  upset  the 
notions  of  medical  writers  on  the  generation  of 
man,  they  teaching  that  the  seminal  fluids  of 
either  sex,  projected  together  in  intercourse, 
are  mingled;  that  as  one  or  other  preponderates, 
this  becomes  the  “efficient,”  that  stands  in  lieu 
of  the  “matter”;  and  that  the  two  together, 
tending  to  the  same  end,  amalgamate  into  the 
“conception”  of  the  viviparous  animal. 

But  when  he  finds  that  neither  in  the  egg  nor 
uterus  of  the  fowl  is  there  any  semen  or  blood, 
and  avows  his  belief  that  nothing  is  emitted  by 
the  male  in  intercourse,  that  can  by  possibility 
reach  the  uterus  of  the  female,  nor  in  the  egg 
discovers  a  trace  of  aught  supplied  by  the  male, 
he  is  compelled  to  doubt  how  the  semen,  which 

^  Op.  cit.^  p.  38. 


HARVEY 

is  nowhere  to  be  detected,  which  is  neither 
mixed  with  the  “geniture”  of  the  female,  nor 
yet  is  added  to  it,  nor  touches  it,  can  fecundate 
the  egg,  or  constitute  the  chick.  And  this  all 
the  more  urgently,  when  he  has  stated  that  a 
few  connexions  in  the  beginning  of  the  season 
suffice  to  secure  the  fecundity  of  all  the  eggs 
that  will  be  laid  in  its  course.  For  how  should 
it  seem  otherwise  than  impossible  that  from  the 
semen  galli  communicated  in  the  spring,  but 
now  long  vanished,  lost  or  consumed,  the  eggs 
that  continue  to  be  laid  through  the  summer 
and  autumn,  should  still  be  rendered  fruitful 
and  fit  to  produce  pullets? 

It  is  that  he  may  meet  such  a  difficulty  half 
way,  that  he  coins  the  difference  which  has  been 
noticed.  By  way  of  bolstering  up  his  views,  he 
further  adduces  three  additional  considerations: 
First,  since  the  semen  galli  is  neither  extant  in 
the  egg,  nor  was  ever  present  in  the  uterus,  nor 
is  added  as  “material  cause”  as  in  viviparous 
animals,  he  has  chosen  to  make  it  resident  for  a 
whole  year  in  the  body  of  the  hen.  And  then 
that  he  may  have  a  fit  receptacle  or  storehouse 
for  the  fecundating  fluid,  he  finds  a  blind  sac 
near  the  inlet  to  the  uterus,  in  which  he  says  the 
cock  deposits  his  semen,  wherein,  as  in  a  treas¬ 
ury,  it  is  stored,  and  from  which  all  the  eggs  are 
fecundated.  Lastly,  although  the  semen  in  that 
bursa  comes  into  contact  neither  with  the  uter¬ 
us,  nor  the  egg,  nor  the  ovary,  whereby  it  might 
fecundate  the  egg,  or  secure  the  generation  of  a 
chick,  he  says,  nevertheless,  that  from  thence,  a 
certain  spiritual  substance  or  irradiation  pene¬ 
trates  to  the  egg,  fecundates  its  chalazse,  and 
from  these  produces  a  chick.  By  this  affirma¬ 
tion,  however,  he  appears  to  support  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  Aristotle,  namely,  that  the  female  sup¬ 
plies  the  “matter”  in  generation,  the  male  the 
“efficient  force”;  and  to  oppose  the  postulate  of 
medical  writers  about  the  mixture  of  seminal 
fluids,  for  the  sake  of  which,  nevertheless,  as  I 
have  said,  he  seems  to  have  laid  down  his  dis¬ 
tinction  between  oviparous  and  viviparous  ani¬ 
mals.  To  give  an  air  of  greater  likeliliood  to  this 
notion  of  his,  he  goes  on  to  enumerate  the 
changes  which  the  semen,  not  yet  emitted,  but 
laid  up  in  the  testes  and  vesiculae  seminales  of 
animals,  occasions. 

But  besides  the  fact  that  all  this  does  not 
bear  upon  the  question,  for  the  principal  ele¬ 
ment  under  discussion  is,  not  how  the  semen 
galli  renders  the  egg  prolific,  but  rather,  how 
does  the  semen  galli  fashion  and  construct  the 
chick  from  the  egg?  Almost  everything  he 
adduces  in  support  of  his  view  appears  either 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


false  or  open  to  suspicion,  as  is  obvious,  from 
the  facts  stated  in  our  history;  for  neither  is  the 
blind  cavity  situated  at  the  root  of  the  uro- 
pygium  or  coccyx  of  the  fowl,  which  he  entitles 
“bursa,”  destined  as  a  receptacle  for  the  semen 
of  the  cock,  nor  can  any  semen  be  discovered 
there,  as  we  have  said;  but  the  cavity  is  en¬ 
countered  in  the  male  as  well  as  in  the  female 
fowl. 

Our  authority  nowhere  explains  what  he 
understands  by  a  “spiritual  substance,”  and  an 
“irradiation”;  nor  what  he  means  by  “a  sub¬ 
stance  through  whose  virtue  the  egg  is  vivi¬ 
fied”:  he  does  not  say  whether  it  is  any  “cor¬ 
poreal”  or  “formal”  substance,  which  by  “irra¬ 
diation”  proceeds  from  the  semen  laid  up  in 
the  bursa,  and  (what  is  especially  required) 
constructs  a  pullet  from  the  egg. 

In  my  opinion,  Fabricius  does  no  more  here 
than  say:  “It  produces  the  chick  because  it  irra¬ 
diates  the  egg;  and  forms  because  it  vivifies”; 
he  attempts  to  explain  or  illustrate  the  exceed¬ 
ingly  obscure  subject  of  the  formation  of  a  liv¬ 
ing  being  by  means  still  more  obscure.  For  the 
same  doubt  remains  untouched,  how,  to  wit, 
the  semen  of  the  cock  without  contact,  an  “ex¬ 
ternal  efficient”  at  best,  separate  in  point  of 
place,  and  existing  in  the  bursa,  can  form  the 
internal  parts  of  the  foetus  in  ovo^  the  heart, 
liver,  lungs,  intestines,  &c.,  out  of  the  chalazae 
by  “irradiation.”  Unless,  indeed,  our  author 
will  have  it  that  all  takes  place  at  the  dictum  as 
it  were  of  a  creator  seated  on  his  throne,  and 
speaking  the  words:  Let  such  things  be!  name¬ 
ly,  bones  for  support,  muscles  for  motion,  spe¬ 
cial  organs  for  sense,  members  for  action,  vis¬ 
cera  for  concoction  and  the  like,  and  all  ordered 
for  an  end  and  purpose  with  foresight,  and 
understanding  and  art.  But  Fabricius  nowhere 
demonstrates  that  the  semen  has  any  such  vir¬ 
tue,  nowhere  explains  the  manner  in  which 
without  so  much  as  contact  the  semen  can  effect 
such  things;  particularly  when  we  see  that  the 
egg  incubated  by  a  bird  of  another  kind  than 
that  which  laid  it,  or  cherished  in  any  other 
way,  or  in  dung,  or  in  an  oven,  far  from  the 
bursa  of  the  parent  hen,  is  still  quickened  and 
made  to  produce  an  embryo. 

The  same  difficulty  still  remains,  I  say:  how 
or  in  what  way  is  the  semen  of  the  cock  the 
“efficient”  of  the  chick?  It  is  in  no  wise  re¬ 
moved  by  invoking  the  irradiation  of  a  spiritual 
substance.  For  did  we  even  admit  that  the 
semen  was  stored  in  the  bursa,  and  that  it  in¬ 
corporated  the  embryo  from  the  chalazae  by 
metamorphosis  and  irradiation,  we  should  not 


be  the  less  deeply  immersed  in  the  difficulty  of 
accounting  for  the  formation  of  all  the  internal 
parts  of  the  chick.  But  these  notions  have  al¬ 
ready  been  sufficiently  refuted  by  us. 

Wherefore,  in  investigating  the  efficient  cause 
of  the  chick,  we  must  look  for  it  as  inhering  in 
the  egg,  not  as  concealed  in  the  bursa;  and  it 
must  be  such,  that  although  the  egg  have  long 
been  laid,  be  miles  removed  from  the  hen  that 
produced  it,  and  be  set  under  another  hen  than 
its  parent,  even  under  a  bird  of  a  different  kind, 
such  as  a  turkey  or  guinea-fowl,  or  merely 
among  hot  sand  or  dung,  or  in  an  oven  con¬ 
structed  for  the  purpose,  as  is  done  in  Egypt,  it 
will  still  cause  the  egg  to  produce  a  creature  of 
the  same  species  as  its  parents,  like  them,  both 
male  and  female,  and  if  the  parents  were  of 
different  kinds,  of  a  hybrid  species,  and  having 
a  mixed  resemblance. 

The  knot  therefore  remains  untied,  neither 
Aristotle  nor  Fabricius  having  succeeded  even 
in  loosening  it,  namely:  how  the  semen  of  the 
male  or  of  the  cock  forms  a  pullet  from  an  egg, 
or  is  to  be  termed  the  “efficient”  of  the  chick, 
especially  when  it  is  neither  present  in,  nor  in 
contact  with,  nor  added  to  the  egg.  And  al¬ 
though  almost  all  assert  that  the  male  and  his 
semen  are  the  efficient  cause  of  the  chick,  still 
it  must  be  admitted,  that  no  one  has  yet  suffi¬ 
ciently  explained  how  it  is  so,  particularly  in 
our  common  hen’s  egg. 

EXERCISE  49.  The  inquiry  into  the  efficient  cause 
of  the  chic\  is  one  of  great  difficulty 

The  discussion  of  the  efficient  cause  of  the 
chick  is,  as  we  have  said,  sufficiently  difficult, 
and  all  the  more  in  consequence  of  the  various 
titles  by  which  it  has  been  designated.  Aristotle, 
indeed,  recites  several  efficient  causes  of  ani¬ 
mals,  and  numerous  controversies  have  arisen 
on  the  subject  among  writers  (these  having 
been  particularly  hot  between  medical  authors 
and  Aristotelians)  who  have  come  into  the  are¬ 
na  with  various  explanations,  both  of  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  efficient  cause  and  of  the  mode  of  its 
operation. 

And  indeed  the  Omnipotent  Creator  is  no¬ 
where  more  conspicuous  in  his  works,  nowhere 
is  his  divinity  more  loudly  proclaimed,  than  in 
the  structure  of  animals.  And  though  all  know 
and  admit  that  the  offspring  derives  its  origin 
from  male  and  female,  that  an  egg  is  engen¬ 
dered  by  a  cock  and  a  hen,  and  that  a  pullet 
proceeds  from  an  egg,  still  we  are  not  informed 
either  by  the  medical  schools  or  the  sagacious 
Aristotle,  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  cock  or 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


422 

his  semen  fashions  the  chick  from  the  egg.  For 
from  what  we  have  had  occasion  to  say  of  the 
generation  of  oviparous  and  other  animals,  it  is 
sudiciently  obvious  that  neither  is  the  opinion 
of  the  medical  authorities  admissible,  who  de- 
rive  generation  from  the  admixture  of  the  semi¬ 
nal  fluids  of  the  two  sexes,  nor  that  of  Aristotle, 
who  holds  the  semen  masculinum  for  the  efli- 
cient,  and  the  menstrual  blood  for  the  material 
cause  of  procreation.  For  neither  in  the  act  of 
intercourse  nor  shortly  after  it,  is  aught  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  cavity  of  the  uterus,  from  which 
as  matter  any  part  of  the  foetus  is  immediately 
constituted.  Neither  does  the  “geniture”  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  the  male  in  the  act  of  union 
(whether  it  be  animated  or  an  inanimate  in¬ 
strument)  enter  the  uterus;  neither  is  it  at¬ 
tracted  into  this  organ;  neither  is  it  stored  up 
within  the  fowl;  but  it  is  either  dissipated  or 
escapes.  Neither  is  there  anything  contained  in 
the  uterus  immediately  after  intercourse,  which, 
proceeding  from  the  male,  or  from  the  female, 
or  from  both,  can  be  regarded  as  the  matter  or 
rudiment  of  the  future  foetus.  Neither  is  the 
semen  galli  stored  and  retained  in  the  bursa 
Fabricii  of  the  hen  or  elsewhere,  that  from 
thence,  as  by  the  irradiation  of  some  spiritual 
substance,  or  by  contact,  the  egg  may  be  fash¬ 
ioned  or  the  chick  constituted  from  the  egg. 
Neither  has  the  hen  any  other  semen  save  papu¬ 
lae,  yelks,  and  eggs.  These  observations  of  ours, 
therefore,  render  the  subject  of  generation  one 
of  greater  difficulty  than  ever,  inasmuch  as  all 
the  presumptions  upon  which  the  two  old 
opinions  repose  are  totally  overthrown.  The 
fact  is  especial,  as  we  shall  afterwards  demon¬ 
strate,  that  all  animals  are  alike  engendered 
from  eggs;  and  in  the  act  of  intercourse,  whether 
of  man  or  the  lower  quadrupeds,  there  is  no 
seminal  fluid,  proceeding  from  the  male  or  the 
female,  thrown  into  the  uterus  or  attracted  by 
this  organ;  there  is  nothing  to  be  discovered 
within  its  cavity,  either  before  intercourse, 
during  the  act,  or  immediately  after  it,  which 
can  be  regarded  as  the  matter  of  the  future 
foetus,  or  as  its  efficient  cause,  or  as  its  com¬ 
mencement. 

Daniel  Sennert,  a  man  of  learning  and  a  close 
observer  of  nature,  having  first  passed  the  rea¬ 
sonings  of  a  host  of  others  under  review,  ap¬ 
proaches  the  subject  himself;  and  concludes 
that  the  vital  principle  inheres  in  the  semen 
and  is  almost  identical  with  that  which  resides 
in  the  future  offspring.  So  that  Sennert  does 
not  hesitate  to  aver  that  the  rational  soul  of 
man  is  present  in  his  seminal  fluid,  and  by  a 


parity  of  reasoning  that  the  egg  possesses  the 
animating  principle  of  the  pullet;  that  the  vital 
principle  is  transported  to  the  uterus  of  the  fe¬ 
male  with  the  semen  of  the  male,  and  that  from 
the  seminal  fluids  of  either  conjoined,  not  mixed 
(for  mixture,  he  says,  is  applied  to  things  of  dif¬ 
ferent  species),  and  endowed  with  soul  or  the 
vital  principle  a  perfect  animal  emerges.  And 
therefore,  he  says,  the  semen  of  either  parent  is 
required,  whether  to  the  constitution  of  the 
ovum  or  of  the  embryo.  And  having  said  so 
much,  he  seems  to  think  that  he  has  overcome 
all  difficulties,  and  has  delivered  a  certain  and 
perspicuous  truth. 

But  in  order  that  we  should  concede  a  soul  or 
vital  principle  {(wima)  to  the  egg,  and  that 
combined  from  the  souls  of  the  parents,  these 
being  occasionally  of  difterent  species,  the  horse 
and  the  ass,  the  common  fowl  and  the  pheasant, 
for  example,  this  vital  principle  not  being  a 
mixture  but  only  an  union;  and  allow  the  pullet 
to  be  produced  in  the  manner  of  the  seeds  of 
plants,  by  the  same  efficient  principle  by 
which  the  perfect  animal  is  afterwards  preserved 
through  the  rest  of  its  life,  so  that  it  would  be 
absurd  to  say  that  the  foetus  grew  by  one  vital 
principle  without  the  uterus  or  ovum,  and  by 
another  within  the  uterus  or  ovum — did  we 
grant  all  this,  I  say  (although  it  is  invalid  and 
undeserving  faith),  our  history  of  generation 
from  the  egg,  nevertheless,  upsets  the  founda¬ 
tions  of  the  doctrine,  and  shows  it  to  be  entirely 
false;  namely,  that  the  egg  is  produced  from  the 
semen  of  the  cock  and  hen,  or  that  any  seminal 
fluid  from  either  one  or  other  is  carried  to  the 
uterus,  or  that  the  embryo  or  any  particle  of  it 
is  fashioned  from  any  seminal  fluid  transported 
to  the  uterus,  or  that  the  semen  galli,  as  effi¬ 
cient  cause  and  plastic  agent,  is  anywhere  stored 
up  or  reserved  within  the  body  of  the  hen  to 
serve  when  attracted  into  the  uterus,  as  the 
matter  and  nourishment  whence  the  foetus 
which  it  has  produced  should  continue  to  grow. 
The  conditions  are  wanting  which  he  himself 
admits,  after  Aristotle,  to  be  necessary,  viz., 
that  the  embryo  be  constituted  by  that  which 
is  actual  and  pre-exists,  and  the  chick  by  that 
which  is  present  and  exists  in  the  place  where 
the  chick  is  first  formed  and  increases;  further, 
that  it  be  produced  by  that  which  is  accom¬ 
plished  immediately  and  conjunctly,  and  is  the 
same  by  which  the  chick  is  preserved  and  grows 
through  the  whole  of  its  life.  For  the  semen 
galli  (and  whether  it  is  viewed  as  animate  or 
inanimate  is  of  no  moment)  is  nowise  present 
and  conjunct  either  in  the  egg  or  in  the  uterus; 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


neither  in  the  matter  from  which  the  chick  is 
fashioned,  nor  yet  in  the  chick  itself  already 
begun,  and  as  contributing  either  to  its  forma¬ 
tion  or  perfection. 

He  dreams,  too,  when  he  seeks  illustrations 
of  his  opinions  on  an  animated  semen  from  such 
instances  as  the  seeds  of  plants  and  acorns;  be¬ 
cause  he  does  not  perceive  the  difference  alleged 
by  Aristotle^  between  the  “geniture”  admitted 
in  intercourse  and  the  first  conception  engen¬ 
dered  by  both  parents;  neither  does  he  observe 
on  the  egg  produced  originally  in  the  cluster  of 
the  vitellarium,  and  without  any  geniture, 
whether  proceeding  from  the  male  or  the  fe¬ 
male,  translated  to  the  uterus.  Neither  does  he 
understand  that  the  uterus  is,  even  after  inter¬ 
course,  completely  empty  of  matter  of  every 
kind,  whether  transmitted  by  the  parents,  or 
produced  by  the  intercourse,  or  transmuted  in 
any  way  whatever.  Neither  had  he  read,  or  at 
all  events  he  does  not  refer  to  the  experiment 
of  Fabricius,  namely,  that  a  hen  is  rendered  so 
prolific  by  a  few  treads  of  the  cock,  that  she 
will  continue  to  lay  fruitful  eggs  for  the  rest  of 
the  year,  although  in  the  interval  she  receives 
no  new  accessions'of  semen  for  the  fecundation 
of  each  egg  as  it  is  laid,  neither  does  she  retain 
any  of  the  seminal  fluid  which  she  received  so 
long  ago. 

So  much  is  certain,  and  disputed  by  no  one, 
that  animals,  all  those  at  least  that  proceed 
from  the  intercourse  of  male  and  female,  are  the 
ofl'spring  of  this  intercourse,  and  that  they  are 
procreated  as  it  seems  by  a  kind  of  contagion, 
much  in  the  same  way  as  medical  men  observe 
contagious  diseases,  such  as  leprosy,  lues  venera, 
plague,  phthisis,  to  creep  through  the  ranks  of 
mortal  men,  and  by  mere  extrinsic  contact  to 
excite  diseases  similar  to  themselves  in  other 
bodies;  nay,  contact  is  not  necessary;  a  mere 
halitus  or  miasm  suffices,  and  that  at  a  distance 
and  by  an  inanimate  medium,  and  with  nothing 
sensibly  altered:  that  is  to  say,  where  the  con¬ 
tagion  first  touches,  there  it  generates  an  “univ- 
ocal”  like  itself,  neither  touching  nor  existing 
in  fact,  neither  being  present  nor  conjunct,  but 
solely  because  it  formerly  touched.  Such  virtue 
and  efficacy  is  found  in  contagions.  And  the 
same  thing  perchance  occurs  in  the  generation 
of  animals.  For  the  eggs  of  fishes,  which  come 
spontaneously  to  their  full  size  extrinsically, 
and  without  any  addition  of  male  seminal  fluid, 
and  are  therefore  indubitably  possessed  of  vi¬ 
tality  without  it,  merely  sprinkled  and  touched 
with  the  milt  of  the  male,  produce  young  fishes. 

^  On  the  Generation  of  AnimalSy  ii,  i. 


The  semen  of  the  male,  I  say,  is  not  intromitted 
in  such  wise  as  to  perform  the  part  of  “agent” 
in  each  particular  egg,  or  to  fashion  the  body, 
or  to  introduce  vitality  (anima);  the  ova  are 
only  fecundated  by  a  kind  of  contagion.  Whence 
Aristotle  calls  the  milt  of  the  male  fish,  or  the 
genital  fluid  difl'used  in  water,  at  one  time  “the 
genital  and  foetific  fluid,”  at  another,  “the  vital 
virus.”  For  he  says:  “The  male  fish  sprinkles 
the  ova  with  his  genital  semen,  and  from  the 
ova  that  are  touched  by  this  vital  virus  young 
fishes  are  engendered. 

Let  it  then  be  admitted  as  matter  of  certainty 
that  the  embryo  is  produced  by  contagion.  But 
a  great  difficulty  immediately  arises,  when  we 
ask:  how,  in  what  way  is  this  contagion  the 
author  of  so  great  a  work.f^  By  what  condition 
do  parents  through  it  engender  offspring  like 
themselves,  or  how  does  the  semen  masculinum 
produce  an  “univocal”  like  the  male  whence  it 
flowed }  When  it  disappears  after  the  contact, 
and  is  naught  in  act  ulteriorly,  either  by  virtue 
of  contact  or  presence,  but  is  corrupt  and  has 
become  a  nonentity,  how,  I  ask,  does  a  non¬ 
entity  2iCt?  How  does  a  thing  which  is  not  in 
contact  fashion  another  thing  like  itself.^  How 
does  a  thing  which  is  dead  itself  impart  life  to 
something  else,  and  that  only  because  at  a 
former  period  it  was  in  contact.? 

For  the  reasoning  of  Aristotle  appears  to  be 
false,  or  at  all  events  defective,  where  he  con¬ 
tends  “That  generation  cannot  take  place  with¬ 
out  an  active  and  a  passive  principle;  and  that 
those  things  can  neither  act  nor  prove  passive 
which  do  not  touch;  but  that  those  things  come 
into  mutual  contact  which,  whilst  they  are  of 
different  sizes,  and  are  in  different  places,  have 
their  extremes  together.”^ 

But  when  it  clearly  appears  that  contagion 
from  noncontingents,  and  things  not  having 
their  extremities  together,  produce  ill  effects 
on  animals,  wherefore  should  not  the  same  law 
avail  in  respect  of  their  life  and  generation? 
There  is  an  “efficient”  in  the  egg  which,  by  its 
plastic  virtue  (for  the  male  has  only  touched 
though  he  no  longer  touches,  nor  are  there  any 
extremes  together),  produces  and  fashions  the 
foetus  in  its  kind  and  likeness.  And  through  so 
many  media  or  instruments  is  this  power,  the 
agent  of  fecundity,  transmitted  or  required  that 
neither  by  any  movement  of  instruments  as  in 
works  of  art,  nor  by  the  instance  of  the  autom¬ 
aton  quoted  by  Aristotle,  nor  of  our  clocks, 
nor  of  the  kingdom  in  which  the  mandate  of 

^  History  of  Animals y  vi,  13. 

3  On  Generation  and  Corruptiony  i,  6. 


424  WILLIAM 

the  sovereign  is  everywhere  of  avail,  nor  yet  by 
the  introduction  of  a  vital  principle  or  soul  into 
the  semen  or  “geniture,”  can  the  aforemen¬ 
tioned  doctrine  be  defended. 

And  hence  have  arisen  all  the  controversies 
and  problems  concerning  the  attraction  of  the 
magnet  and  of  amber;  on  sympathy  and  antip¬ 
athy;  on  poisons  and  the  contagion  of  pesti¬ 
lential  diseases;  on  alexipharmics  and  medicines 
which  prove  curative  or  injurious  through  some 
hidden  or  rather  unknown  property,  all  of 
which  seem  to  come  into  play  independently  of 
contact.  And  above  all  on  what  it  is  in  genera¬ 
tion  which,  in  virtue  of  a  momentary  contact — 
nay,  not  even  of  contact,  save  through  several 
media — forms  the  parts  of  the  chick  from  the 
egg  by  epigenesis  in  a  certain  order,  and  pro¬ 
duces  an  “univocal”  and  like  itself,  and  that  en¬ 
tirely  because  it  was  in  contact  at  a  former  pe¬ 
riod.  How,  I  ask  again,  does  that  which  is  not 
present,  and  which  only  enjoyed  extrinsic  con¬ 
tact,  come  to  constitute  and  order  all  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  chick  in  the  egg  exposed  without 
the  body  of  the  parent,  and  often  at  a  long  in- 
ter\  al  after  it  is  laid  ?  how  does  it  confer  life  or 
soul,  and  a  species  compounded  of  those  of  the 
concurring  generants.?  Inasmuch  as  nothing,  it 
seems,  can  reproduce  itself  in  another’s  likeness. 

EXERCISE  50.  Of  the  efficient  cause  of  animals^ 
and  its  conditions 

That  we  may  proceed  in  our  subject,  there¬ 
fore,  and  penetrate  so  far  into  the  knowledge  of 
the  efficient  cause  of  animal  generation  as  seems 
needful  in  this  place,  we  must  begin  by  observ¬ 
ing  what  instruments  or  media  are  devoted  to 
it.  And  here  we  come  at  once  to  the  distinction 
into  male  and  female;  seminal  fluid  and  ovum, 
and  its  primordium.  For  some  males,  as  well  as 
some  females,  are  barren,  or  but  little  prolific; 
and  the  seed  of  the  male  is  at  one  time  more,  at 
another  time  less  prolific;  because  the  semen 
masculinum  stored  up  in  the  vesiculae  seminales 
is  esteemed  unfruitful,  unless  it  is  raised  into 
froth  by  the  spirits  and  ejected  with  force.  And 
even  then  perchance  it  is  not  endowed  with 
equal  fecundating  force  at  all  times.  Neither  are 
all  the  germs  of  yelks  in  the  ovary,  nor  all  the 
eggs  in  the  uterus  made  fertile  at  the  same 
instant. 

Now  I  call  that  fruitful  which,  unless  im¬ 
peded  by  some  extrinsic  cause,  attains  by  its 
inherent  force  to  its  destined  end,  and  brings 
about  the  consequence  for  the  sake  of  which  it 
is  ordained.  Thus  the  cock  is  called  fruitful 
which  has  his  hens  more  frequently  and  surely 


HARVEY 

pregnant,  the  eggs  they  lay  being  at  the  same 
time  perfect  and  proper  for  incubation. 

The  hen  in  like  manner  is  esteemed  fruitful 
which  has  the  faculty  of  producing  eggs,  or  of 
receiving  and  long  retaining  the  virtue  of  pro¬ 
lific  conception  from  the  cock.  The  cluster  of 
germs  and  the  ovary  itself  are  regarded  as  pro¬ 
lific  when  the  germs  are  numerous  and  of  good 
size. 

The  egg  in  the  same  way  is  fruitful  which  dif¬ 
fers  from  a  subventaneous  or  hypenemic  egg, 
and  which,  cherished  by  incubation,  or  in  any 
other  way,  does  not  fail  to  produce  a  chick. 

Such  an  efficient  cause  consequently  is  re¬ 
quired  for  the  chick,  as  shall  impart  the  virtue 
of  fecundity  to  it,  and  secure  it  the  power  of 
acting  as  an  efficient  cause  in  its  turn.  Because 
that,  or  its  analogue  at  least,  by  means  of  which 
they  become  prolific,  is  present  in  all  animals. 
And  the  inquiry  is  the  same  in  each  case,  when 
we  ask  what  it  is  in  the  egg  which  renders  it 
prolific,  and  distinguishes  it  from  a  wind  egg; 
what  in  the  vitellary  germ  and  ovary;  what  in 
the  female;  what,  finally,  in  the  semen  and  the 
cock  himself.?^  What,  moreover,  it  is  in  the 
blood  and  punctum  saliens,  or  first  formed  par¬ 
ticle  of  the  chick,  whence  all  the  other  parts 
arise  with  their  appropriate  structures  and  ar¬ 
rangements;  what  in  the  embryo  or  chick  itself 
whereby  it  becomes  more  or  less  robust  and 
agile,  attains  to  maturity  with  greater  or  less 
rapidity,  and  lives  with  various  degrees  of 
health,  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period } 

Nor  is  the  inquiry  very  different  which  goes 
to  ascertain  what  sex  the  male  and  the  female, 
or  the  cock  and  the  hen,  confer  upon  the  pro¬ 
lific  egg;  and  what  proceeds  from  each  that  con¬ 
tributes  to  the  perfection  or  resemblance  of  the 
chick,  viz.,  whether  the  egg,  the  conception, 
the  matter,  and  the  nutriment  proceed  from 
the  mother,  and  the  plastic  virtue  from  the 
father;  or  rather  a  certain  contagion  immitted 
during  intercourse,  or  produced  and  received 
from  him,  which  in  the  body  of  the  hen,  or  in 
the  eggs,  either  permanently  excites  the  matter 
of  the  eggs,  or  attracts  nourishment  from  the 
female,  and  concocts  and  distributes  it  first  for 
the  growth  of  the  eggs,  and  then  for  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  the  chicks;  finally,  whether  from  the 
male  proceeds  all  that  has  reference  to  form  and 
life  and  fecundity,  from  the  female,  again,  all 
that  is  of  matter,  constitution,  place,  and  nour¬ 
ishment.?  For  among  animals  where  the  sexes 
are  distinct,  matters  are  so  arranged,  that  since 
the  female  alone  is  inadequate  to  engender  an 
embryo  and  to  nourish  and  protect  the  young. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


a  male  is  associated  with  her  by  nature,  as  the 
superior  and  more  worthy  progenitor,  as  the 
consort  of  her  labour,  and  the  means  of  supply¬ 
ing  her  deficiencies;  in  the  case  of  the  hen,  of 
correcting  by  his  contagion  the  inferiority  of 
the  hypenemic  eggs  which  she  produces,  and 
so  rendering  them  prolific.  For  as  the  pullet, 
engendered  of  an  egg,  is  indebted  to  that  egg 
for  his  body,  vitality,  and  principal  or  gener¬ 
ative  part,  so  and  in  like  manner  does  the  egg 
receive  all  that  is  in  it  from  the  female,  the  fe¬ 
male  in  her  turn  being  dependent  on  the  male 
for  her  fecundity  which  is  conferred  in  coition. 

And  here  we  have  an  opportunity  of  inquir¬ 
ing,  whether  the  male  be  the  first  and  principal 
cause  of  the  generation  of  the  offspring;  or 
whether  the  male  along  with  the  female  are  the 
mediate  and  instrumental  causes  of  nature  it¬ 
self,  or  of  the  first  and  supreme  generator.?  And 
such  an  inquiry  is  both  becoming  and  neces¬ 
sary,  for  perfect  science  of  every  kind  depends 
on  a  knowledge  of  causes.  To  the  full  under¬ 
standing  of  generation,  therefore,  it  is  incum¬ 
bent  on  us  to  mount  from  the  final  to  the  first 
and  supreme  efficient  cause,  and  to  hold  each 
and  every  cause  in  especial  regard. 

We  shall  have  occasion  to  define  that  which 
is  the  first  and  supreme  efficient  cause  of  the 
chick  in  ovo  by  and  by,  when  we  treat  of  that 
which  constitutes  the  efficient  cause  among  ani¬ 
mals  in  general.  Here,  meantime,  we  shall  see 
what  its  nature  may  be. 

The  first  condition,  then,  of  the  primary 
efficient  cause  of  generation,  properly  so  called, 
is,  as  we  have  said,  that  it  be  the  prime  and  prin¬ 
cipal  fertilizer,  whence  all  mediate  causes  re¬ 
ceive  the  fecundity  imparted.  For  example,  the 
chick  is  derived  from  the  punctum  saliens  in 
the  egg,  not  only  as  regards  the  body,  but  also, 
and  this  especially,  as  respects  the  life  (animd) : 
the  punctum  saliens,  or  heart,  is  derived  from 
the  egg,  the  egg  from  the  hen,  and  the  hen  has 
her  fecundity  from  the  cock. 

Another  condition  of  the  prime  efficient  is 
discovered  from  the  work  achieved,  viz,^  the 
chick,  because  that  is  the  prime  efficient  in 
which  the  reason  of  the  effect  is  principally  dis¬ 
played.  But  since  every  generative  efficient  en¬ 
genders  another  like  itself,  and  the  offspring  is 
of  a  mixed  nature,  the  prime  efficient  must  also 
be  a  certain  mixed  something. 

Now,  I  maintain  that  the  offspring  is  of  a 
mixed  nature,  inasmuch  as  a  mixture  of  both 
parents  appears  plainly  in  it,  in  the  form  and 
lineaments,  and  each  particular  part  of  its  body, 
in  its  colour,  mother-m_arks,  disposition  to  dis¬ 


eases,  and  other  accidents.  In  mental  constitu¬ 
tion,  also,  and  its  manifestations,  such  as  man¬ 
ners,  docility,  voice,  and  gait,  a  similar  tem¬ 
perament  is  discoverable.  For  as  we  say  of  a 
certain  mixture,  that  it  is  composed  of  ele¬ 
ments,  because  their  qualities  or  virtues,  such 
as  heat,  cold,  dryness,  and  moisture,  are  there 
discovered  associated  in  a  certain  similar  com¬ 
pound  body,  so,  in  like  manner,  the  work  of  the 
father  and  mother  is  to  be  discerned  both  in  the 
body  and  mental  character  of  the  offspring, 
and  in  all  else  that  follows  or  accompanies  tem¬ 
perament.  In  the  mule,  for  instance,  the  body 
and  disposition,  the  temper  and  voice,  of  both 
parents  (of  the  horse  and  the  ass,  e.  g.)  are  min¬ 
gled;  and  so,  also,  in  the  hybrid  between  the 
pheasant  and  the  fowl,  in  that  between  the  wolf 
and  the  dog,  &c.,  corresponding  traits  are  con¬ 
spicuous. 

When,  therefore,  the  chick  shows  his  resem¬ 
blance  to  both  parents,  and  is  a  mixed  effect, 
the  primary  genital  cause  (which  it  resembles) 
must  needs  be  mixed.  Wherefore  that  which 
fashions  the  chick  in  the  egg  is  of  a  mixed  na¬ 
ture,  a  certain  something  mixed  or  compounded, 
and  the  work  of  both  parents.  And  if  any  kind 
of  contagion,  engendered  under  the  influence 
of  sexual  intercourse,  in  which  the  male  and  fe¬ 
male  mingle  and  form  but  one  body,  either 
originates  or  remains  in  the  body  of  the  female, 
that,  too,  must  be  of  a  mixed  nature  or  power, 
whence,  subsequently,  a  fertile  egg  will  be  pro¬ 
duced,  endowed  with  plastic  powers,  the  con¬ 
sequence  of  a  mixed  nature,  or  of  a  mixed  effi¬ 
cient  instrument,  from  which  a  chick,  also  of  a 
mixed  nature,  will  be  produced. 

I  have  used  the  word  contagion  above,  be¬ 
cause  Aristotle’s  view  is  contradicted  by  all  ex¬ 
perience,  that  a  certain  part  of  the  embryo 
is  immediately  made  by  intercourse.  Neither  is 
it  true,  as  some  of  the  moderns  assert,  that  the 
vital  principle  {animd)  of  the  future  chick  is 
present  in  the  egg;  for  that  cannot  be  the  vital 
principle  of  the  chick  which  inheres  in  no  part 
of  its  body.  Neither  can  the  living  principle  be 
said  either  to  be  left  or  to  be  originated  by  in¬ 
tercourse;  otherwise  in  every  pregnant  woman 
there  would  be  two  vital  principles  {animdd) 
present.  Wherefore,  until  it  shall  have  been  de¬ 
termined  what  the  efficient  cause  of  the  egg  is, 
what  it  is  of  mixed  nature  that  must  remain 
immediately  upon  intercourse,  we  may  be  per¬ 
mitted  to  speak  of  it  under  the  title  of  a  con¬ 
tagion. 

But  where  this  contagion  lies  hid  in  the  fe¬ 
male  after  intercourse,  and  how  it  is  communi- 


426  WILLIAM 

cated  and  given  to  the  egg,  demands  quite  a 
special  inquiry,  and  we  shall  have  occasion  to 
treat  of  the  matter  when  we  come  to  discuss 
the  conception  of  females  in  general.  It  will  suf¬ 
fice,  meantime,  if  we  say  that  the  same  law  ap¬ 
plies  to  the  prime  efficient — in  which  inheres 
the  reason  of  the  future  offspring — as  to  the 
offspring;  as  this  is  of  a  mixed  nature,  the  na¬ 
ture  of  its  cause  must  also  be  mixed;  and  it  must 
either  proceed  equally  from  both  parents,  or 
from  something  else  which  is  employed  by  both 
concurrently  as  instruments,  animated,  co-oper¬ 
ating,  mixed,  and  in  the  sexual  act  coalescing 
unto  one.  And  this  is  the  third  condition  of  the 
prime  efficient,  that  it  either  imparts  motion  to 
all  the  intermediate  instruments  in  succession, 
or  uses  them  in  some  other  way,  but  comes  not 
itself  into  play.  Whence  the  origin  of  the  doubt 
that  has  arisen,  whether,  in  the  generation  of 
the  chick,  the  cock  were  the  true  prime  effi¬ 
cient,  or  whether  there  were  not  another  prior, 
superior  to  him.^  For,  indeed,  all  things  seem  to 
derive  their  origin  from  a  celestial  influence,  and 
to  follow  the  movements  of  the  sun  and  moon. 
But  we  shall  be  able  to  speak  more  positively  of 
this  matter  after  we  have  shown  what  we  under¬ 
stand  by  the  “instrument,”  or  “instrumental 
efficient  cause,”  and  how  it  is  subdivided. 

Instrumental  efficients,  then,  are  of  different 
kinds:  some,  according  to  Aristotle,  are  factive, 
others  active;  some  have  no  capacity  any  way 
unless  conjoined  with  another  prior  efficient,  as 
the  hand,  foot,  genital  organs,  &c.  with  the  rest 
of  the  body ;  others  have  an  influence  even  when 
separate  and  distinct,  as  the  seminal  fluid  and 
the  ovum.  Some  instruments,  again,  have  neither 
motion  nor  action  beyond  those  that  are  im¬ 
parted  to  them  by  the  prime  efficient;  and 
others  have  peculiar  inherent  principles  of  ac¬ 
tion,  to  which  Nature  indeed  allows  no  motion 
in  the  business  of  generation,  though  she  still 
uses  their  faculties,  and  prescribes  them  laws  or 
limits  in  their  operations,  not  otherwise  than 
the  cook  makes  use  of  fire  in  cooking,  and  the 
physician  of  herbs  and  drugs  in  curing  diseases. 

Sennert,  that  he  may  uphold  the  opinion  he 
had  espoused  of  the  vital  principle  {animd) 
being  present  in  the  semen,  and  the  formative 
faculty  of  the  chick  being  extant  in  the  egg,  as¬ 
serts  that  not  only  is  the  egg,  but  the  semen  of 
the  cock,  endowed  with  the  living  principle  of 
the  future  chick.  Moreover,  he  distinctly  de¬ 
nies  that  there  is  any  separate  instrumental  effi¬ 
cient;  and  says,  that  tliat  only  ought  to  be  en¬ 
titled  “instrument”  which  is  conjoined  with 
the  prime  efficient;  and  that  only  “instrumen¬ 


HARVEY 

tal  efficient,”  which  has  no  motion  or  action 
save  that  which  is  imparted  to  it  by  the  prime 
efficient,  or  which  is  continuously  and  succes¬ 
sively  received,  and  in  virtue  of  which  it  acts. 
And  on  this  ground  he  rejects  the  example  of 
projectiles,  which  have  received  force  from  the 
projecting  agent,  and,  separated  from  it,  act 
nevertheless;  as  if  swords  and  spears  were  prop¬ 
erly  to  be  called  warlike  weapons,  but  arrows 
and  bullets  to  be  refused  this  title.  He  also  re¬ 
jects  the  argument  derived  from  the  republic, 
denying  thereby  that  magistrates,  counsellors, 
or  ministers,  are  instruments  of  government; 
although  Aristotle  regards  a  counsel  as  an  effi¬ 
cient,  and  in  express  terms  calls  a  minister  an 
instrument.*  Sennert  likewise  denies  the  ex¬ 
ample  of  automata;  and  says  and  gainsays  much 
besides,  with  a  view  to  confirming  himself  in 
his  position,  that  the  semen  and  the  egg  arc 
possessed  of  a  living  principle  {animd),  and  are 
not  mediate  or  instrumental,  but  principal 
agents.  Sennert,  nevertheless,  as  it  were  com¬ 
pelled  by  the  force  of  truth,  lays  down  such 
conditions  for  a  principal  agent,  as  fully  and 
effectually  contradict  all  that  he  had  said  be¬ 
fore.  He  tells  us,  for  instance,  that  “whatever 
produces  a  work  or  an  effect  more  noble  than 
itself,  or  an  effect  unlike  itself,  is  not  a  principal 
efficient,  but  an  instrumental  cause”;  granting 
which,  who  would  not  infer  that  the  semen  and 
the  egg  were  instruments.^  seeing  that  the  pul¬ 
let  is  an  effect  more  noble  than  the  egg.  and 
every^  way  unlike  either  this  or  the  spermatic 
fluid.  Wherefore,  when  the  learned  Sennert  de¬ 
nies  the  semen  and  the  egg  to  be  instruments  or 
organs,  because  they  are  distinct  from  the  prime 
agents,  he  takes  his  position  upon  a  false  basis; 
because,  as  the  prime  generator  procreates  off¬ 
spring  by  various  means  or  media,  the  medium 
being  here  conjunct,  as  the  hand  of  the  work¬ 
man  is  with  his  body,  there  separate  and  dis¬ 
tinct,  as  is  the  arrow  let  loose  from  the  bow,  it 
is  still  to  be  regarded  as  an  instrument. 

From  the  conditions  now  enumerated  of  an 
instrumental  cause,  it  seems  to  follow  that  the 
prime  efficient  in  the  generation  of  the  chick  is 
the  cock,  or,  at  all  events,  the  cock  and  hen, 
because  the  resulting  pullet  resembles  these; 
nor  can  it  be  held  more  noble  than  they,  which 
are  its  prime  efficients  or  parents.  I  shall,  there¬ 
fore,  add  another  condition  of  the  prime  effi¬ 
cient,  whence  it  may,  perhaps,  appear  that  the 
male  is  not  the  prime,  but  only  the  instrumen¬ 
tal,  cause  of  the  chick;  viz.,  thafthe  prime  effi¬ 
cient  in  the  formation  of  the  chick  makes  use  of 

*  Politics,  I.  4. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


artifice,  and  foresight,  and  wisdom,  and  good¬ 
ness,  and  intelligence,  which  far  surpass  the 
powers  of  our  rational  soul  to  comprehend,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  all  things  are  disposed  and  perfected 
in  harmony  with  the  purpose  of  the  future 
work,  and  that  there  be  action  to  a  determinate 
end;  so  that  ever}%  even  the  smallest,  part  of 
the  chick  is  fashioned  for  the  sake  of  a  special 
use  and  end,  and  with  respect  not  merely  to  the 
rearing  of  the  fabric,  but  also  to  its  well-being, 
and  elegance  and  preservation.  But  the  male  or 
his  semen  is  not  such  either  in  the  act  of  kind 
or  after  it,  that  art,  intelligence,  and  foresight 
can  be  ascribed  to  him  or  it. 

The  proper  inference  from  these  premises 
appears  to  be  that  the  male,  as  well  as  his  semi¬ 
nal  fluid  is  the  efficient  instrument;  and  the  fe¬ 
male  not  less  than  the  egg  she  lays  the  same. 
Wherefore,  we  have  to  seek  refuge  in  a  prior, 
superior,  and  more  excellent  cause,  to  which, 
with  all  propriety,  are  ascribed  foresight,  in¬ 
telligence,  goodness,  and  skill,  and  which  is  by 
so  much  more  excellent  than  its  effect  or  work, 
as  the  architect  is  more  worthy  than  the  pile  he 
rears,  as  the  king  is  more  exalted  than  his  min¬ 
ister,  as  the  workman  is  better  than  his  hands 
or  tools. 

The  male  and  female,  therefore,  will  come  to 
be  regarded  as  merely  the  efficient  instruments, 
subservient  in  all  respects  to  the  Supreme  Cre¬ 
ator,  or  Father  of  all  things.  In  this  sense,  con¬ 
sequently,  it  is  well  said  that  the  sun  and  moon 
engender  man;  because,  with  the  advent  and 
secession  of  the  sun,  come  spring  and  autumn, 
seasons  which  mostly  correspond  with  the  gen¬ 
eration  and  decay  of  animated  beings.  So  that 
the  great  leader  in  philosophy  says:  “The  first 
motion  is  not  the  cause  of  generation  and  de¬ 
struction;  it  is  the  motion  of  the  ecliptic  that 
is  so,  this  being  both  continuous  and  having 
two  movements;  for,  if  future  generation  and 
corruption  are  to  be  eternal,  it  is  necessary  that 
something  likewise  move  eternally,  that  inter¬ 
changes  do  not  fail,  that  of  the  two  actions  one 
only  do  not  occur.  The  cause  of  the  perpetuity 
is,  therefore,  the  law  of  the  universe;  and  the 
obliquity  is  the  cause  of  the  approach  and  acces- 
sion,  and  of  his  being  now  nearer,  now  more  re¬ 
mote:  when  he  quits  us,  and  removes  to  a  dis¬ 
tance,  it  is  then  that  decay  and  corruption  inter¬ 
vene;  and,  in  like  manner,  when  he  approaches, 
it  is  then  that  he  engenders;  and  if,  as  he  fre¬ 
quently  approaches,  he  engenders;  so,  because  he 
frequently  recedes,  does  he  cause  corruption;  for 
the  causes  of  contraries  are  contrary.”^ 

^  On  Generation  and  Corruptiony  ii.  lo. 


All  things,  therefore,  grow  and  flourish  in 
spring  (on  the  approach  of  the  sun,  that  is  to 
say,  he  being  the  common  parent  and  producer, 
or  at  all  events  the  immediate  and  universal  in¬ 
strument  of  the  Creator  in  the  work  of  repro¬ 
duction);  and  this  is  true  not  of  plants  only  but 
of  animals  also;  nor  less  of  those  that  come 
spontaneously,  than  of  those  that  are  propa¬ 
gated  by  the  consentient  act  of  male  and  fe¬ 
male.  It  is  as  if,  with  the  advent  of  this  glorious 
luminary,  Venus  the  bountiful  descended  from 
heaven,  waited  on  by  Cupid  and  a  cohort  of 
graces,  and  prompted  all  living  things  by  the 
bland  incitement  of  love  to  secure  the  perpetu¬ 
ity  of  their  kinds.  Or  (and  it  is  thus  that  we 
have  it  in  the  mythology)  it  is  as  if  the  genital 
organs  of  Saturn,  cast  into  the  sea  at  this  season, 
raised  a  foam,  whence  sprung  Aphrodite.  For, 
in  the  generation  of  animals,  as  the  poet  says, 
^'superat  tener  omnibus  humor, — a  gentle  mois¬ 
ture  all  pervades — and  the  genitals  froth  and 
are  replete  with  semen. 

The  cock  and  the  hen  are  especially  fertile  in 
the  spring;  as  if  the  sun,  or  heaven,  or  nature, 
or  the  soul  of  the  world,  or  the  omnipotent 
God — for  all  these  names  signify  the  same  thing 
— were  a  cause  in  generation  superior  and  more 
divine  than  they;  and  thus  it  is  that  the  sun 
and  man,  the  sun  through  man  as  the  in¬ 
strument,  engenders  man.  In  the  same  way  the 
preserver  of  all  things,  and  the  male  among 
birds,  give  birth  to  the  egg,  from  whence  the 
chick,  the  perfect  bird,  is  made  eternal  in  its 
kind  by  the  approach  and  recession  of  the  god 
of  day,  who,  by  the  Divine  will  and  pleasure, 
or  by  fate,  serves  for  the  generation  of  all  that 
lives. 

Let  us  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  male, 
although  a  prior  and  more  excellent  efficient 
than  the  female,  is  still  no  more  than  an  instru¬ 
mental  efficient,  and  that  he,  not  less  than  the 
female,  must  refer  his  fecundity  or  faculty  of 
engendering  as  received  from  the  approaching 
sun;  and,  consequently,  that  the  skill  and  fore¬ 
sight,  which  are  apparent  in  his  work,  are  not  to 
be  held  as  proceeding  from  him  but  from  God; 
inasmuch  as  the  male  in  the  act  of  kind  neither 
uses  counsel  nor  understanding;  neither  does 
man  engender  the  rational  part  of  his  soul, 
but  only  the  vegetative  faculty;  which  is  not 
regarded  as  any  principal  or  more  divine  faculty 
of  the  soul,  but  one  only  of  a  lower  order. 

Since,  then,  there  is  not  less  of  skill  and  pre¬ 
science  manifested  in  the  structure  of  the  chick 
than  in  the  creation  of  man  and  the  universe  at 
large,  it  is  imperative  even  in  the  generation  of 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


428 

man  to  admit  an  eflicient  cause,  superior  to, 
and  more  excellent  than  man  himself:  other¬ 
wise  the  vegetative  faculty,  or  that  part  of  the 
soul  or  living  principle  which  fashions  and  pre¬ 
serves  a  man,  would  have  to  be  accounted  far 
more  excellent  and  divine,  and  held  to  bear  a 
closer  resemblance  to  God  than  the  rational 
portion  of  the  soul,  whose  excellence,  neverthe¬ 
less,  we  extol  over  all  the  faculties  of  all  ani¬ 
mals,  and  esteem  as  that  which  has  right  and 
empire  in  them,  and  to  which  all  created  things 
are  made  subservient.  Or  we  should  else  have 
to  own  that  in  the  works  of  nature  there  was 
neither  prudence,  nor  art,  nor  understanding; 
but  that  these  appeared  to  us,  who  are  wont  to 
judge  of  the  divine  things  of  nature  after  our 
own  poor  arts  and  faculties,  or  to  contrast  them 
with  examples  due  to  ourselves;  as  if  the  active 
principles  of  nature  produced  their  effects  in 
the  same  way  as  we  are  used  to  produce  our 
artificial  works,  by  counsel,  to  wit,  or  discipline 
acquired  through  the  mind  or  understanding. 

But  nature,  the  principle  of  motion  and  rest 
in  all  things  in  which  it  inheres,  and  the  vege¬ 
tative  soul,  the  prime  efficient  cause  of  all  gen¬ 
eration,  move  by  no  acquired  faculty  which 
might  be  designated  by  the  title  of  skill  or  fore¬ 
sight,  as  in  our  undertakings;  but  operate  in 
conformity  with  determinate  laws  like  fate  or 
special  commandments — in  the  same  way  and 
manner  as  light  things  rise  and  heavy  things  de¬ 
scend.  The  vegetative  faculty  of  parents,  to 
wit,  engenders  in  the  same  way,  and  the  semen 
finally  arriv^es  at  the  form  of  the  foetus,  as  the 
spider  weaves  her  v/eb,  as  birds  build  nests,  in¬ 
cubate  their  eggs,  and  cherish  their  young,  or 
as  bees  and  ants  construct  dwellings,  and  lay  up 
stores  for  their  future  wants;  all  of  which  is 
done  naturally  and  from  a  connate  genius  or 
disposition;  by  no  means  from  forecast,  instruc¬ 
tion,  or  reason.  That  which  in  us  is  the  prin¬ 
ciple  or  cause  of  artificial  operations,  and  is 
called  art,  intellect,  or  foresight,  in  the  natural 
operations  of  the  lower  animals  is  nature,  which 
is  avTodidaKTOSy  self-taught,  instilled  by  no 
one;  what  in  them  is  innate  or  connate,  is  with 
us  acquired.  On  this  account  it  is,  that  they 
who  refer  all  to  art  and  artifice  are  to  be  held 
indifferent  judges  of  nature  or  natural  things; 
and,  indeed,  it  is  wiser  to  act  in  the  opposite 
way,  and  selecting  standards  in  nature  to  judge 
of  things  made  by  art  according  to  them.  For 
all  the  arts  are  but  imitations  of  nature  in  one 
way  or  another;  as  our  reason  or  understanding 
is  a  derivative  from  the  Divine  intelligence, 
manifested  in  his  works;  and  when  perfected  by 


habit,  like  another  adventitious  and  acquired 
soul,  gaining  some  semblance  of  the  Supreme 
and  Divine  agent,  it  produces  somewhat  simi¬ 
lar  effects. 

Wherefore,  according  to  my  opinion,  he  takes 
the  right  and  pious  view  of  the  matter,  who  de¬ 
rives  all  generation  from  the  same  eternal  and 
omnipotent  Deity,  on  whose  nod  the  universe 
itself  depends.  Nor  do  I  think  that  we  are  great¬ 
ly  to  dispute  about  the  name  by  which  this  first 
agent  is  to  be  called  or  worshipped;  whether  it 
be  God,  Nature,  or  the  Soul  of  the  universe — 
whatever  the  name  employed — all  still  intend 
by  it  that  which  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of 
all  things;  which  exists  from  eternity  and  is  al¬ 
mighty;  which  is  author  or  creator,  and,  by 
means  of  changing  generations,  the  preserver 
and  perpetuator  of  the  fleeting  things  of  mortal 
life;  which  is  omnipresent,  not  less  in  the  single 
and  several  operations  of  natural  things,  than 
in  the  infinite  universe;  which,  by  his  deity  or 
providence,  his  art  and  mind  divine,  engenders 
all  things,  whether  they  arise  spontaneously 
without  any  adequate  efficient,  or  are  the  work 
of  male  and  female  associated  together,  or  of  a 
single  sex,  or  of  other  intermediate  instruments, 
here  more  numerous,  there  fewer,  whether  they 
be  univocal,  or  are  equivocally  or  accidentally 
produced:  all  natural  bodies  are  both  the  work 
and  the  instruments  of  that  Supreme  Good, 
some  of  them  being  mere  natural  bodies,  such 
as  heat,  spirit,  air,  the  temperature  of  the  air, 
matters  in  putrefaction,  &c.,  or  they  are  at 
once  natural  and  animated  bodies;  for  he  also 
makes  use  of  the  motions,  or  forces,  or  vital 
principles  of  animals  in  some  certain  way,  to 
the  perfection  of  the  universe  and  the  procrea¬ 
tion  of  the  several  kinds  of  animated  beings. 

From  what  has  now  been  said,  we  are  ap¬ 
prized  to  a  certain  extent  of  the  share  which 
the  male  has  in  the  business  of  generation.  The 
cock  confers  that  upon  the  egg,  which,  from 
unprolific,  makes  it  prolific,  this  being  identical 
with  that  which  the  fruit  of  vegetables  receives 
from  the  fervour  of  the  summer  sun,  which  se¬ 
cures  to  them  maturity,  and  to  their  seeds  fer¬ 
tility;  and  not  different  from  that  which  ferti¬ 
lizes  things  spontaneously  engendered,  and 
brings  caterpillars  from  worms,  aurelias  from 
caterpillars,  from  aurelias  moths,  butterflies, 
bees,  &cc. 

In  this  way  is  the  sun,  by  his  approach,  both 
the  beginning  of  motion  and  transmutation 
in  the  coming  fruit,  and  the  end,  also,  inasmuch 
as  he  is  the  author  of  the  fertility  of  its  included 
seed:  and,  as  early  spring  is  the  prime  efficient 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


of  leaves  and  flowers  and  fruits,  so  is  summer,  in 
its  strength,  the  cause  of  final  perfection  in  the 
ripeness  and  fecundity  of  the  seed.  With  a  view 
to  strengthen  this  position,  I  shall  add  this  one 
from  among  a  large  number  of  observations. 
Some  persons  in  these  countries  cultivate  or¬ 
ange  trees  with  singular  care  and  economy,  and 
the  fruit  of  these  trees,  which,  in  the  course  of 
the  first  year,  will  grow  to  the  size  of  the  point 
of  the  thumb,  comes  to  maturity  the  following 
summer.  This  fruit  is  perfect  in  all  respects, 
save  and  except  that  it  is  without  pips  or  seeds. 

Pondering  upon  this  with  myself,  I  thought 
that  I  had  here  an  example  of  the  barren  egg, 
which  is  produced  by  the  hen  without  the  con¬ 
currence  of  the  cock,  and  which  comprises 
everything  that  is  visible  in  a  fruitful  egg,  but 
is  still  destitute  of  germinant  seed;  as  if  it  were 
the  same  thing  that  was  imparted  by  the  cock, 
in  virtue  of  which  a  wind  egg  becomes  a  fruit¬ 
ful  egg,  which  in  warmer  countries  is  dispensed 
by  the  sun,  and  causes  tiiC  fruit  of  the  orange 
tree  to  be  produced  replete  with  prolific  seed. 
It  is  as  if  the  summer  in  England  sufficed  for  the 
production  of  the  fruit  only,  as  the  hen  for  the 
production  of  the  egg,  but  like  the  female  fowl 
was  impotent  as  a  pro-genetrix;  whilst  in  other 
countries  enjoying  the  sun’s  light  in  larger  pro¬ 
portion,  the  summer  acquired  the  characters  of 
the  male,  and  perfected  the  work  of  generation. 

Thus  far  have  we  treated  this  subject  by  the 
way,  that,  from  the  instance  of  the  egg,  we 
might  learn  what  conditions  were  required  in 
the  prime  efficient  in  the  generation  of  animals; 
for  it  is  certain  that  in  the  egg  there  is  an  agent, 
as  there  is  also  in  every  conception  and  germ, 
which  is  not  merely  infused  by  the  mother, 
but  is  first  communicated  in  coitu  by  the  father, 
by  means  of  his  spermatic  fluid;  and  which  is 
itself  primarily  endowed  with  such  virtue  by 
heaven  and  the  sun,  or  the  Supreme  Creator. 
It  is  equally  manifest  that  this  agent,  existing 
in  every  egg  and  seed,  is  so  imbued  with  the 
qualities  of  the  parents,  that  it  builds  up  the 
offspring  in  their  likeness,  not  in  its  own;  and 
this  mingled  also  as  proceeding  from  both  united 
in  copulation.  Now,  as  all  this  proceeds  with 
the  most  consummate  foresight  and  intelligence, 
the  presence  of  the  Deity  therein  is  clearly 
proclaimed. 

But  we  shall  have  to  speak  at  greater  length 
upon  this  subject  when  we  strive  to  show  what 
it  is  that  remains  with  the  female  immediately 
after  intercourse,  and  where  it  is  stored;  at  the 
same  time  that  we  explain — since  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  visible  in  the  cavity  of  the  uterus  after  in' 


tercourse — what  that  prolific  contagion  or  prime 
conception  is;  whether  it  is  corporeal  and  laid 
up  within  the  female,  or  is  incorporeal;  whether 
the  conception  of  the  uterus  be  of  the  same  na¬ 
ture  or  not  with  the  conceptions  of  the  brain, 
and  fecundity  be  acquired  in  the  same  way  as 
knowledge — a  conclusion,  in  favour  of  which 
there  is  no  lack  of  arguments;  or,  as  motion  and 
the  animal  operations,  which  we  call  appetites, 
derive  their  origin  from  the  conceptions  of  the 
brain,  may  not  the  natural  motions  and  the 
operations  of  the  vegetative  principle,  and  par¬ 
ticularly  generation,  depend  on  the  conception 
of  the  uterus  ?  And  then  we  have  to  inquire  how 
this  prolific  contagion  is  of  a  mixed  nature,  and 
is  imparted  by  the  male  to  the  female,  and  by 
her  is  transferred  to  the  ovum?  Finally,  how 
the  contagious  principle  of  all  diseases  and  pre¬ 
ternatural  affections  spreads  insensibly,  and  is 
propagated  ? 

EXERCISE  51.  Of  the  order  of  generation;  andy 
firsts  of  the  primary  genital  particle 

It  will  be  our  business,  by  and  by,  when  we 
come  to  treat  of  the  matter  in  especial,  to  show 
what  happens  to  the  female  from  a  fruitful  em¬ 
brace;  what  it  is  that  remains  with  her  after 
this,  and  which  we  have  still  spoken  of  under 
the  name  of  contagion,  by  which,  as  by  a  kind 
of  infection,  she  conceives,  and  an  embryo  sub¬ 
sequently  begins  to  grow  of  its  own  accord. 
Meantime,  we  shall  discourse  of  those  things 
that  manifestly  appear  in  connexion  with  the 
organs  of  generation  which  seem  most  worthy 
of  particular  comment. 

And  first,  since  it  appears  certain  that  the 
chick  is  produced  by  epigenesis,  or  addition  of 
the  parts  that  successively  arise,  we  shall  in¬ 
quire  what  part  is  formed  first,  before  any  of 
the  rest  appear,  and  what  may  be  observed  of 
this  and  its  particular  mode  of  generation. 

What  Aristotle^  says  of  the  generation  of  the 
more  perfect  animals,  is  confirmed  and  made 
manifest  by  all  that  passes  in  the  egg,  viz, :  that 
all  the  parts  are  not  formed  at  once  and  to¬ 
gether,  but  in  succession,  one  after  another; 
and  that  there  first  exists  a  particular  genital 
particle,  in  virtue  of  which,  as  from  a  begin¬ 
ning,  all  the  other  parts  proceed.  As  in  the  seeds 
of  plants,  in  beans  and  acorns,  to  quote  particu¬ 
lar  instances,  we  see  the  gemmula,  or  apex,  pro¬ 
truding,  the  commencement  of  the  entire  pro¬ 
spective  herb  or  tree.  “And  this  particle  is  like 
a  child  emancipated,  placed  independently,  a 
principle  existing  of  itself,  from  whence  the 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals ^  ii,  i. 


430  WILLIAM 

series  of  members  is  subsequently  thrown  out, 
and  to  which  belongs  all  that  is  to  conduce  to 
the  perfection  of  the  future  animal.”^  Since, 
therefore,  “Ko  part  engenders  itself,  but,  after 
it  is  engendered,  concurs  in  its  own  growth,  it 
is  indispensable  that  the  part  first  arise  which 
contains  within  itself  the  principle  of  increase; 
for  whether  it  be  a  plant  or  an  animal,  still  has 
it  within  itself  the  power  of  vegetation  or  nutri¬ 
tion”;^  and  at  the  same  time  distinguishes  and 
fashions  each  particular  part  in  its  several  order; 
and  hence,  in  this  same  primogenate  particle, 
there  is  a  primary  vital  principle  inherent, 
which  is  the  author  and  original  of  sense  and 
motion,  and  every  manifestation  of  life. 

That,  therefore,  is  the  principal  particle 
whence  vital  spirit  and  native  heat  accrue  to  all 
other  parts,  in  which  the  calidum  innatum  sive 
implantatum  of  physicians  first  shows  itself, 
and  the  household  deity  or  perennial  fire  is 
maintained;  whence  life  proceeds  to  the  body 
in  general,  and  to  each  of  its  parts  in  particular; 
whence  nourishment,  growth,  aid,  and  solace 
flow;  lastly,  where  life  first  begins  in  the  being 
that  is  born,  and  last  fails  in  that  which  dies. 

All  this  is  certainly  true  as  regards  the  first 
engendered  part,  and  appears  manifestly  in  the 
formation  of  the  chick  from  the  egg.  I  am, 
therefore,  of  opinion  that  we  are  to  reject  the 
views  of  certain  physicians,  indifferent  philoso¬ 
phers,  who  will  have  it  that  three  principal  and 
primogenate  parts  arise  together,  viz.:  the 
brain,  the  heart,  and  the  liver;  neither  can  I 
agree  with  Aristotle  himself,  who  maintains 
that  the  heart  is  the  first  engendered  and  ani¬ 
mated  part;  for  I  think  that  the  privilege  of 
priority  belongs  to  the  blood  alone;  the  blood 
being  that  which  is  first  seen  of  the  newly  en¬ 
gendered  being,  not  only  in  the  chick  in  ovoy 
but  in  the  embryo  of  every  animal  whatsoever, 
as  shall  plainly  be  made  to  appear  at  a  later 
stage  of  our  inquiry. 

There  appears  at  first,  I  say,  a  red-coloured 
pulsating  point  or  vesicle,  with  lines  or  canals 
extending  from  it,  containing  blood  in  their 
interior,  and,  in  so  far  as  we  are  enabled  to  per¬ 
ceive  from  the  most  careful  examination,  the 
blood  is  produced  before  the  punctum  saliens 
is  formed,  and  is,  further,  endowed  with  vital 
heat  before  it  is  put  in  motion  by  a  pulse;  so 
that  as  pulsation  commences  in  it  and  from  it, 
so,  in  the  last  struggle  of  mortal  agony,  does 
motion  also  end  there.  I  have  indeed  ascer¬ 
tained  by  numerous  experiments  instituted 

1  Ibid. 

2  Jbid.y  4. 


HARVEY 

upon  the  egg,  as  well  as  upon  other  subjects, 
that  the  blood  is  the  element  of  the  body  in 
which,  so  long  as  the  vital  heat  has  not  entirely 
departed,  the  power  of  returning  to  life  is  con¬ 
tinued. 

And  since  the  pulsating  vesicle  and  the  san¬ 
guineous  tubes  extending  thence  are  visible 
before  anything  else,  I  hold  it  as  consonant  with 
reason  to  believe  that  the  blood  is  prior  to  its 
receptacles,  the  thing  contained,  to  wit,  to  its 
container,  inasmuch  as  this  is  made  subservient 
to  that.  The  vascular  ramifications  and  the 
veins,  therefore,  after  these  the  pulsating  vesi¬ 
cle,  and,  finally,  the  heart,  as  being  every  one 
of  them  organs  destined  to  receive  and  contain 
the  blood,  are,  in  all  likelihood,  constructed  for 
the  express  purpose  of  impelling  and  distribut¬ 
ing  it,  and  the  blood  is,  consequently,  the  prin¬ 
cipal  portion  of  the  body. 

This  conclusion  is  favoured  by  numerous  ob¬ 
servations;  particularly  by  the  fact  that  some 
animals,  and  these  red-blooded,  too,  live  for 
long  periods  without  any  pulse;  some  even  lie 
concealed  through  the  whole  winter,  and  yet 
escape  alive,  though  their  heart  had  ceased 
from  motion  of  every  kind,  and  their  lungs  no 
longer  played;  they  had  lain  in  fact  like  those 
who  lie  half  dead  in  a  state  of  asphyxia  from 
syncope,  leipothymia,  or  the  hysterical  passion. 

Emboldened  by  what  I  have  observed  both 
in  studying  the  egg,  and  whilst  e-ngaged  in  the 
dissection  of  living  animals,  I  maintain,  against 
Aristotle,  that  the  blood  is  the  prime  part  that 
is  engendered,  and  the  heart  the  mere  organ 
destined  for  its  circulation.  The  function  of  the 
heart  is  the  propulsion  of  the  blood,  as  clearly 
appears  in  all  animals  furnished  with  red  blood; 
and  the  office  of  the  pulsating  vesicle  in  the 
generation  of  the  chick  ab  ovo,  as  well  as  in  the 
embryos  of  mammiferous  animals,  is  not  differ¬ 
ent,  a  fact  which  I  have  repeatedly  demon¬ 
strated  to  others,  showing  the  vesicula  pulsans 
as  a  feeble  glancing  spark,  contracting  in  its 
action,  now  forcing  out  the  blood  which  was 
contained  in  it,  and  again  relaxing  and  receiv¬ 
ing  a  fresh  supply. 

The  supremacy  of  the  blood  further  appears 
from  this:  that  the  pulse  is  derived  from  it;  for, 
as  there  are  two  parts  in  a  pulsation,  viz.:  dis¬ 
tension  or  relaxation,  and  contraction,  or  dias¬ 
tole  and  systole,  and,  as  distension  is  the  prior 
of  these  two  motions,  it  is  manifest  that  this 
motion  proceeds  from  the  blood;  the  contrac¬ 
tion,  again,  from  the  vesicula  pulsans  of  the 
embryo  in  ovOy  from  the  heart  in  the  pullet,  in 
virtue  of  its  own  fibres,  as  an  instrument  des- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


tined  fur  this  particular  end.  Certain  it  is,  that 
the  vesicle  in  question,  as  also  the  auricle  of  the 
heart  at  a  later  period,  whence  the  pulsation 
begins,  is  excited  to  the  motion  of  contraction 
by  the  distending  blood.  The  diastole,  I  say, 
takes  place  from  the  blood  swelling,  as  it  were, 
in  consequence  of  containing  an  inherent  spirit, 
so  that  the  opinion  of  Aristotle  in  regard  to  the 
pulsation  of  the  heart — namely,  that  it  takes 
place  by  a  kind  of  ebullition — is  not  without 
some  mixture  of  truth;  for  what  we  witness 
every  day  in  milk  heated  over  the  fire,  and  in 
beer  that  is  brisk  with  fermentation,  comes  into 
play  in  the  pulse  of  the  heart;  in  which  the 
blood,  swelling  with  a  sort  of  fermentation,  is 
alternately  distended  and  repressed;  the  same 
thing  that  takes  place  in  the  liquids  mentioned 
through  an  external  agent,  namely  adventitious 
heat,  is  efiected  in  the  blood  by  an  intimate 
heat,  or  an  innate  spirit;  and  this,  too,  is  regu¬ 
lated  in  conformity  with  nature  by  the  vital 
principle  {anima),  and  is  continued  to  the  bene¬ 
fit  of  animated  beings. 

The  pulse,  then,  is  produced  by  a  double 
agent:  first,  the  blood  undergoes  distension  or 
dilatation,  and  secondly,  the  vesicular  mem¬ 
brane  of  the  embryo  in  the  egg,  the  auricles  and 
ventricles  in  the  extruded  chick,  effect  the  con¬ 
striction.  By  these  alternating  motions  asso¬ 
ciated,  is  the  blood  impelled  through  the  whole 
body,  and  the  life  of  animals  is  thereby  con¬ 
tinued. 

Nor  is  the  blood  to  be  styled  the  primogenial 
and  principal  portion  of  the  body,  because  the 
pulse  has  its  commencement  in  and  through  it; 
but  also  because  animal  heat  originates  in  it, 
and  the  vital  spirit  is  associated  with  it,  and  it 
constitutes  the  vital  principle  itself  {ipsa  animd) ; 
for  wheresoever  the  immediate  and  principal 
instrument  of  the  vegetative  faculty  is  first  dis¬ 
covered,  there  also  does  it  seem  likely  will  the 
living  principle  be  found  to  reside,  and  thence 
take  its  rise;  seeing  that  the  life  is  inseparable 
from  spirit  and  innate  heat. 

For  “however  distinct  are  the  artist  and  the 
instrument  in  things  made  by  art,’’  as  Fabricius^ 
well  reminds  us,  “in  the  works  of  nature  they 
are  still  conjoined  and  one.  Thus  the  stomach  is 
the  author  and  the  organ  of  chylopoesis.”  In 
like  manner  are  the  vital  principle  and  its  in¬ 
strument  immediately  conjoined;  and  so,  in 
whatever  part  of  the  body  heat  and  motion 
have  their  origin,  in  this  also  must  life  take  its 
rise,  in  this  be  last  extinguished;  and  no  one,  I 
presume,  will  doubt  that  there  are  the  lares 

^  Op.  sup.  cit.y  p.  28. 


and  penates  of  life  enshrined,  that  there  the 
vital  principle  {anima)  itself  has  its  seat. 

The  life,  therefore,  resides  in  the  blood  (as 
we  are  also  informed  in  our  sacred  writings),^ 
because  in  it  life  and  the  soul  first  show  them¬ 
selves,  and  last  become  extinct.'  For  I  have  fre¬ 
quently  found,  from  the  dissection  of  living 
animals,  as  I  have  said,  that  the  heart  of  an  ani¬ 
mal  that  was  dying,  that  was  dead,  and  had 
ceased  to  breathe,  still  continued  to  pulsate  for 
a  time,  and  retained  its  vitality.  The  ventricles 
failing  and  coming  to  a  stand,  the  motion  still 
goes  on  in  the  auricles,  and  finally  in  the  right 
auricle  alone;  and  even  when  all  motion  has 
ceased,  there  the  blood  may  still  be  seen  affected 
with  a  kind  of  undulation  and  obscure  palpita¬ 
tion  or  tremor,  the  last  evidence  of  life.  Every¬ 
one,  indeed,  may  perceive  that  the  blood — this 
author  of  pulsation  and  life — longest  retains  its 
heat;  for  when  this  is  gone,  and  it  is  no  longer 
blood,  but  gore,  so  is  there,  then,  no  hope  of  a 
return  to  life.  But,  truly,  as  has  been  stated, 
both  in  the  chick  in  ovo  and  in  the  moribund 
animal,  if  you  but  apply  some  gentle  stimulus 
either  to  the  punctum  saliens  or  to  the  right 
auricle  of  the  heart  after  the  failure  of  all  pulsa¬ 
tion,  forthwith  you  will  see  motion,  pulsation, 
and  life  restored  to  the  blood — provided  al¬ 
ways,  be  it  understood,  that  the  innate  heat 
and  vital  spirit  have  not  been  wholly  lost. 

From  this  it  clearly  appears  that  the  blood  is 
the  generative  part,  the  fountain  of  life,  the 
first  to  live,  the  last  to  die,  and  the  primary  seat 
of  the  soul;  the  element  in  which,  as  in  a  foun¬ 
tain  head,  the  heat  first  and  most  abounds  and 
flourishes;  from  whose  influxive  heat  all  the 
other  parts  of  the  body  are  cherished,  and  ob¬ 
tain  their  life;  for  the  heat,  the  companion  of 
the  blood,  flows  through  and  cherishes  and  pre¬ 
serves  the  whole  body,  as  I  formerly  demon¬ 
strated  in  my  work  on  the  motion  of  the  blood. 

And  since  blood  is  found  in  every  particle  of 
the  body,  so  that  you  can  nowhere  prick  with  a 
needle,  nor  make  the  slightest  scratch,  but 
blood  will  instantly  appear,  it  seems  as  if,  with¬ 
out  this  fluid,  the  parts  could  neither  have  heat 
nor  life.  So  that  the  blood,  being  in  ever  so 
trifling  a  degree  concentrated  and  fixed — Hip¬ 
pocrates  called  the  state  aT6\r}\l/LS  rwv  <j)Ke^(hVj 
stasis  of  the  veins — as  in  lipothymia,  alarm,  ex¬ 
posure  to  severe  cold,  and  on  the  accession  of  a 
febrile  paroxysm,  the  whole  body  is  observed  to 
become  cold  and  torpid,  and,  overspread  with 
pallor  and  livor,  to  languish.  But  the  blood,  re¬ 
called  by  stimulants,  by  exercise,  by  certain 

^Leviticus,  17.  11,  14. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


432 

emotions  of  the  mind,  such  as  joy  or  anger,  sud¬ 
denly  all  is  hot,  and  flushed,  and  vigorous,  and 
beautiful  again. 

Therefore  it  is  that  the  red  and  sanguine 
parts,  such  as  the  flesh,  are  alone  spoken  of  as 
hot,  and  the  white  and  bloodless  parts,  on  the 
contrary',  such  as  the  tendons  and  ligaments, 
are  designated  as  cold.  And  as  red-blooded  ani¬ 
mals  excel  exsanguine  creatures,  so  also,  in  our 
estimate  of  the  parts,  are  those  which  are  more 
liberally  furnished  with  native  heat  and  blood, 
held  more  excellent  than  all  the  others.  The 
liver,  spleen,  kidneys,  lungs,  and  heart  itself — 
parts  which  are  especially  entitled  viscera — if 
you  will  but  squeeze  out  all  the  blood  they  con¬ 
tain,  become  pale  and  fall  within  the  category 
of  cold  parts.  The  heart  itself,  1  say,  receives  in- 
fluxive  heat  and  life  along  with  the  blood  that 
reaches  it,  through  the  coronary  arteries;  and 
only  so  long  as  the  blood  has  access  to  it.  Neither 
can  the  liver  perform  its  offlee  without  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  the  blood  and  heat  it  receives  through 
the  coeliac  artery;  for  there  is  no  influx  of  heat 
without  an  afflux  of  blood  by  the  arteries,  and 
this  is  the  reason  wherefore,  when  parts  are  first 
produced,  and  before  they  have  taken  upon 
them  the  performance  of  their  respective  du¬ 
ties,  they  all  look  bloodless  and  pale,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  which  they  were  formerly  regarded 
as  spermatic  by  physicians  and  anatomists,  and 
in  generation  it  was  usual  to  say  that  several 
days  were  passed  in  the  milk.  The  liver,  lungs, 
and  substance  of  the  heart  itself,  when  they 
first  appear,  are  extremely  white;  and,  indeed, 
the  cone  of  the  heart  and  the  walls  of  the  ven¬ 
tricles  are  still  seen  to  be  white,  when  the  auri¬ 
cles,  replete  with  crimson  blood,  are  red,  and 
the  coronary  vein  is  purple  with  its  stream.  In 
like  manner,  the  parenchyma  of  the  liver  is 
white,  when  its  veins  and  their  branches  are  red 
with  blood;  nor  does  it  perform  any  duty  until 
it  is  penetrated  with  blood. 

The  blood,  in  a  word,  so  flows  around  and 
penetrates  the  whole  body,  and  imparts  heat 
and  life  conjoined  to  all  its  parts,  that  the  vital 
principle,  having  its  first  and  chief  seat  there, 
may  truly  be  held  as  resident  in  the  blood;  in 
this  way,  in  common  parlance,  it  comes  to  be 
all  in  all,  and  all  in  each  particular  part. 

But  so  little  is  it  true,  as  Aristotle  and  the 
medical  writers  assert,  that  the  liver  and  the 
heart  are  the  authors  and  compounders  of  the 
blood,  that  the  contrary  even  appears  most 
obviously  from  the  formation  of  the  chick  in 
ovo,  viz,y  that  the  blood  is  much  rather  the 
fashioner  of  the  heart  and  liver;  a  fact  which 


physicians  themselves  appear  unintentionally 
to  confirm,  when  they  speak  of  the  parenchyma 
of  the  liver  as  a  kind  of  effusion  of  blood,  as  if 
it  were  nothing  more  than  so  much  blood  co¬ 
agulated  there.  But  the  blood  must  exist  before 
it  can  either  be  shed  or  coagulated;  and  experi¬ 
ence  palpably  demonstrates  that  the  thing  is  so, 
seeing  that  the  blood  is  already  present  before 
there  is  a  vestige  either  of  the  body  or  of  any 
viscus;  and  that  in  circumstances  where  none 
of  the  mother’s  blood  can  by  possibility  reach 
the  embryo,  an  event  which  is  vulgarly  held  to 
occur  among  viviparous  animals. 

The  liver  of  fishes  is  always  perceived  of  a 
white  colour,  though  their  veins  are  of  a  deep 
purple  or  black;  and  our  fowls,  the  fatter  they 
become,  the  smaller  and  paler  grows  the  liver. 
Cachectic  maidens,  and  those  who  labour  under 
chlorosis,  are  not  only  pale  and  blanched  in 
their  bodies  generally,  but  in  their  livers  as 
well,  a  manifest  indication  of  a  want  of  blood  in 
their  system.  The  liver,  therefore,  receives  both 
its  heat  and  colour  from  the  blood;  the  blood  is 
in  no  wise  derived  from  the  liver. 

From  what  has  now  been  said,  then,  it  ap¬ 
pears  that  the  blood  is  the  first  engendered 
part,  whence  the  living  principle  in  the  first 
instance  gleams  forth,  and  from  which  the  first 
animated  particle  of  the  embryo  is  formed; 
that  it  is  the  source  and  origin  of  all  other  parts, 
both  similar  and  dissimilar,  which  thence  obtain 
their  vital  heat  and  become  subservient  to  it  in 
its  duties.  But  the  heart  is  contrived  for  the 
sole  purpose  of  ministering  between  the  vein.s 
and  the  arteries — of  receiving  blood  from  the 
veins,  and,  by  its  ceaseless  contractions,  of  pro¬ 
pelling  it  to  all  parts  of  the  body  through  the 
arteries. 

This  fact  is  made  particularly  striking,  when 
we  find  that  neither  is  there  a  heart  found  in 
every  animal,  neither  does  it  necessarily  and  in 
every  instance  pulsate  at  all  times  where  it  is 
encountered;  the  blood,  however,  or  a  fluid 
which  stands  in  lieu  of  it,  is  never  wanting. 

EXERCISE  52.  Of  the  blood  as  prime  element  in  the 
body 

It  is  unquestionable,  then,  and  obvious  to 
sense,  that  the  blood  is  the  first  formed,  and 
therefore  the  genital  part  of  the  embryo,  and 
that  it  has  all  the  attributes  which  have  been 
ascribed  to  it  in  the  preceding  exercise.  It  is 
both  the  author  and  preserver  of  the  body;  it 
is  the  principal  element  moreover,  and  that  in 
which  the  vital  principle  (animd)  has  its  dwell¬ 
ing-place.  Because,  as  already  said,  before  there 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


is  any  particle  of  the  body  obvious  to  sight,  the 
blood  is  already  extant,  has  already  increased  in 
quantity,  “and  palpitates  within  the  veins,”  as 
Aristotle^  expresses  it,  “being  moved  hither  and 
thither,  and  being  the  only  humour  that  is  dis¬ 
tributed  to  every  part  of  the  animal  body.  The 
blood,  moreover,  is  that  alone  which  lives  and  is 
possessed  of  heat  whilst  life  continues.” 

And  further,  from  its  various  motions  in  ac¬ 
celeration  or  retardation,  in  turbulence  and 
strength,  or  debility,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
blood  perceives  things  that  tend  to  injure  by 
irritating,  or  to  benefit  by  cherishing  it.  We 
therefore  conclude  that  the  blood  lives  of  itself, 
and  supplies  its  own  nourishment;  and  that  it 
depends  in  nowise  upon  any  other  part  of  the 
body,  which  is  either  prior  to  itself  or  of  greater 
excellence  and  worth.  On  the  contrary,  the 
whole  body,  as  posthumous  to  it,  as  added  and 
appended,  as  it  were,  to  it,  depends  on  the 
blood,  though  this  is  not  the  place  to  prove  the 
fact;  I  shall  only  say,  with  Aristotle,  that  “The 
nature  of  the  blood  is  the  undoubted  cause 
wherefore  many  things  happen  among  animals, 
both  as  regards  their  tempers  and  their  capaci- 
ties.”2  To  the  blood,  therefore,  we  may  refer  as 
the  cause  not  only  of  life  in  general — inasmuch 
as  there  is  no  other  inherent  or  influxive  heat 
that  may  be  the  immediate  instrument  of  the 
living  principle  except  the  blood — but  also  of 
longer  or  shorter  life,  of  sleep  and  watching,  of 
genius  or  aptitude,  strength,  &c.  “For  through 
its  tenuity  and  purity,”  says  Aristotle  in  the 
same  place,  “animals  are  made  wiser  and  have 
more  noble  senses;  and  in  like  manner  they  are 
more  timid  and  courageous,  or  passionate  and 
furious,  as  their  blood  is  more  dilute,  or  replete 
with  dense  fibres.” 

Nor  is  the  blood  the  author  of  life  only,  but, 
according  to  its  diversities,  the  cause  of  health 
and  disease  likewise:  so  that  poisons,  which 
come  from  without,  such  as  poisoned  wounds, 
unless  they  infect  the  blood,  occasion  no  mis¬ 
chief.  Life  and  death,  therefore,  flow  for  us 
from  the  same  spring.  “If  the  blood  becomes 
too  diffluent,”  says  Aristotle,^  “we  fall  sick;  for 
it  sometimes  resolves  itself  into  such  a  sanguino- 
lent  serum,  that  the  body  is  covered  with  a 
bloody  sweat;  and  if  there  be  too  great  a  loss  of 
blood,  life  is  gone.”  And,  indeed,  not  only  do 
the  parts  of  the  body  at  all  times  become  tor¬ 
pid  when  blood  is  lost,  but  if  the  loss  be  exces¬ 
sive,  the  animal  necessarily  dies.  I  do  not  think 

^  History  of  Animals^  iii.  19. 

^  On  the  Parts  of  Animals^  ii.  4. 

^History  of  Animals^  iii.  19. 


it  requisite  to  quote  any  particular  experiment 
in  confirmation  of  these  views:  the  whole  sub¬ 
ject  would  require  to  be  treated  specially. 

The  admirable  circulation  of  the  blood  orig¬ 
inally  discovered  by  me,  I  have  lived  to  see 
admitted  by  almost  all;  nor  has  aught  as  yet 
been  urged  against  it  by  anyone  which  has 
seemed  greatly  to  require  an  answer.  Where¬ 
fore,  I  imagine  that  I  shall  perform  a  task  not 
less  new  and  useful  than  agreeable  to  philoso¬ 
phers  and  medical  men,  if  I  here  briefly  dis¬ 
course  of  the  causes  and  uses  of  the  circulation, 
and  expose  other  obscure  matters  respecting 
the  blood;  if  I  show,  for  instance,  how  much 
it  concerns  our  welfare  that  by  a  wholesome 
and  regulated  diet  we  keep  our  blood  pure  and 
sweet.  When  I  have  accomplished  this  it  will  no 
longer,  I  trust,  seem  so  improbable  and  absurd 
to  anyone  as  it  did  to  Aristotle^  in  former 
times,  that  the  blood  should  be  viewed  as  the 
familiar  divinity,  as  the  soul  itself  of  the  body, 
which  was  the  opinion  of  Critias  and  others, 
who  maintained  that  the  prime  faculty  of  the 
living  principle  {animd)  was  to  feel,  and  that 
this  faculty  inhered  in  the  body  in  virtue  of  the 
nature  of  the  blood.  Thales,  Diogenes,  Heracli¬ 
tus,  Alcmaeon,  and  others,  held  the  blood  to  be 
the  soul,  because,  by  its  nature,  it  had  a  faculty 
of  motion. 

Now  that  both  sense  and  motion  are  in  the 
blood  is  obvious  from  many  indications,  al¬ 
though  Aristotle®  denies  the  fact.  And,  indeed, 
when  we  see  him,  yielding  to  the  force  of  truth, 
brought  to  admit  that  there  is  a  vital  principle 
even  in  the  hypenemic  egg;  and  in  the  spermat¬ 
ic  fluid  and  blood  a  “certain  divine  something 
corresponding  with  the  element  of  the  stars,” 
and  that  it  is  vicarious  of  the  Almighty  Creator; 
and  if  the  moderns  be  correct  in  their  views 
when  they  say  that  the  seminal  fluid  of  animals 
emitted  in  coitii  is  alive,  wherefore  should  we 
not,  with  like  reason,  affirm  that  there  is  a  vital 
principle  in  the  blood,  and  that  when  this  is 
first  ingested  and  nourished  and  moved,  the 
vital  spark  is  first  struck  and  enkindled?  Un¬ 
questionably  the  blood  is  that  in  which  the 
vegetative  and  sensitive  operations  first  pro¬ 
claim  themselves;  that  in  which  heat,  the  pri¬ 
mary  and  immediate  instrument  of  life,  is  in¬ 
nate;  that  which  is  the  common  bond  between 
soul  and  body,  and  the  vehicle  by  which  life  is 
conveyed  into  every  particle  of  the  organized 
being. 

^  On  the  Soul,  i.  2. 

^History  of  Animals,  i.  19;  On  the  Parts  of  Animals, 

II.  3. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


434 

Besides,  if  it  be  a  matter  of  such  difficulty  to 
understand  the  spermatic  lluid  as  we  have 
found  it,  to  fathom  how  through  it  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  the  body  is  made  to  begin  and  proceed 
with  such  foresight,  art,  and  divine  intelli¬ 
gence,  wherefore  should  we  not,  with  equal 
propriety,  admit  an  exalted  nature  in  the  blood, 
and  think  at  least  as  highly  of  it  as  we  have 
been  led  to  do  of  the  semen? — the  rather,  as 
this  fluid  is  itself  produced  from  the  blood,  as 
appears  from  the  history  of  the  egg;  and  the 
whole  organized  body  not  only  derives  its  ori¬ 
gin,  as  from  a  genital  part,  but  even  appears 
to  owe  its  preservation  to  the  blood. 

We  have,  indeed,  already  said  so  much  inci¬ 
dentally  above,  intending  to  speak  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  more  particularly  at  another  time.  Nor  do 
I  think  that  we  are  here  to  dispute  whether  it  is 
strictly  correct  to  speak  of  the  blood  as  a  part; 
some  deny  the  propriety  of  such  language, 
moved  especially  by  the  consideration  that  it  is 
not  sensible,  and  that  it  flows  into  all  parts  of 
the  body  to  supply  them  with  nourishment. 
For  myself,  however,  I  have  discovered  not  a 
few  things  connected  with  the  manner  of  gen¬ 
eration  which  differ  essentially  from  those  mo¬ 
tions  which  philosophers  and  medical  writers 
generally  either  admit  or  reject.  At  this  time  I 
say  no  more  on  this  point;  but  though  I  admit 
the  blood  to  be  without  sensation,  it  does  not 
follow  that  it  should  not  form  a  portion,  and 
even  a  very  principal  portion,  of  a  body  which 
is  endowed  with  sensibility.  For  neither  does 
the  brain  nor  the  spinal  marrow,  nor  the  crys¬ 
talline  or  the  vitreous  humour  of  the  eye,  feel 
anything,  though,  by  the  common  consent  of 
all,  philosophers  and  physicians  alike,  these  are 
parts  of  the  body.  Aristotle  placed  the  blood 
among  the  partes  similares;  Hippocrates,  as  the 
animal  body  according  to  him  is  made  up  of 
containing,  contained,  and  impelling  parts,  of 
course,  reckoned  the  blood  among  the  number 
of  parts  contained. 

But  we  shall  have  more  to  say  on  this  topic 
when  we  treat  of  that  wherein  a  part  consists, 
and  how  many  kinds  of  parts  there  are.  Mean¬ 
time,  I  cannot  be  silent  on  the  remarkable  fact 
that  the  heart  itself,  this  most  distinguished 
member  in  the  body,  appears  to  be  insensible. 

A  young  nobleman,  eldest  son  of  the  Vis¬ 
count  Montgomery,  when  a  child,  had  a  severe 
fall,  attended  with  fracture  of  the  ribs  of  the 
left  side.  The  consequence  of  this  was  a  suppu¬ 
rating  abscess,  which  went  on  discharging 
abundantly  for  a  long  time,  from  an  immense 
gap  in  his  side;  this  I  had  from  himself  and 


other  credible  persons  who  were  witnesses.  Be¬ 
tween  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  years  of 
his  age,  this  young  nobleman,  having  travelled 
through  France  and  Italy,  came  to  London, 
having  at  this  time  a  very  large  open  cavity  in 
his  side,  through  which  the  lungs,  as  it  was  be¬ 
lieved,  could  both  be  seen  and  touched.  When 
this  circumstance  was  told  as  something  mirac¬ 
ulous  to  his  Serene  Majesty  King  Charles,  he 
straightway  sent  me  to  wait  on  the  young  man, 
that  I  might  ascertain  the  true  state  of  the  case. 
And  what  did  I  find?  A  young  man,  well 
grown,  of  good  complexion,  and  apparently 
possessed  of  an  excellent  constitution,  so  that  I 
thought  the  whole  stor}^  must  be  a  fable.  Hav¬ 
ing  saluted  him  according  to  custom,  however, 
and  informed  him  of  the  king’s  expressed  de¬ 
sire  that  I  should  wait  upon  him,  he  immedi¬ 
ately  showed  me  everything,  and  laid  open  his 
left  side  for  my  inspection,  by  removing  a  plate 
which  he  wore  there  by  way  of  defence  against 
accidental  blows  and  other  external  injuries.  I 
found  a  large  open  space  in  the  chest,  into 
which  I  could  readily  introduce  three  of  my 
fingers  and  my  thumb;  which  done,  I  straight¬ 
way  perceived  a  certain  protuberant  fleshy 
part,  affected  with  an  alternating  extrusive  and 
intrusive  movement;  this  part  I  touched  gen¬ 
tly.  Amazed  with  the  novelty  of  such  a  state,  I 
examined  everything  again  and  again,  and 
when  I  had  satisfied  myself,  I  saw  that  it  was  a 
case  of  old  and  extensive  ulcer,  beyond  the 
reach  of  art,  but  brought  by  a  miracle  to  a  kind 
of  cure,  the  interior  being  invested  with  a  mem¬ 
brane,  and  the  edges  protected  with  a  tough 
skin.  But  the  fleshy  part  (which  I  at  first  sight 
took  for  a  mass  of  granulations,  and  others  had 
always  regarded  as  a  portion  of  the  lung,  from 
its  pulsating  motions  and  the  rhythm  they  ob¬ 
served  with  the  pulse) — when  the  fingers  of  one 
of  my  hands  were  applied  to  it,  those  of  the 
other  to  the  artery  at  the  wrist — as  well  as  from 
their  discordance  with  the  respiratory  move¬ 
ments,  I  saw  was  no  portion  of  the  lung  that  I 
was  handling,  but  the  apex  of  the  heart!  cov¬ 
ered  over  with  a  layer  of  fungous  flesh  by  way 
of  external  defence,  as  commonly  happens  in 
old  foul  ulcers.  The  servant  of  this  young  man 
was  in  the  habit  daily  of  cleansing  the  cavity 
from  its  accumulated  sordes  by  means  of  injec¬ 
tions  of  tepid  water;  after  which  the  plate  was 
applied,  and,  with  this  in  its  place,  the  young 
man  felt  adequate  to  any  exercise  or  expedition, 
and,  in  short,  he  led  a  pleasant  life  in  perfect 
safety. 

Instead  of  a  verbal  answer,  therefore,  I  car- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


ried  the  young  man  himself  to  the  king,  that 
his  majesty  might  with  his  own  eyes  behold  this 
wonderful  case:  that,  in  a  man  alive  and  well, 
he  might,  without  detriment  to  the  individual, 
observe  the  movement  of  the  heart,  and,  with 
his  proper  hand  even  touch  the  ventricles  as 
they  contracted.  And  his  most  excellent  maj¬ 
esty,  as  well  as  myself,  acknowledged  that  the 
heart  was  without  the  sense  of  touch;  for  the 
youth  never  knew  when  we  touched  his  heart, 
except  by  the  sight  or  the  sensation  he  had 
through  the  external  integument. 

We  also  particularly  observed  the  move¬ 
ments  of  the  heart,  viz, :  that  in  the  diastole  it 
was  retracted  and  withdrawn;  whilst  in  the  sys¬ 
tole  it  emerged  and  protruded;  and  the  systole 
of  the  heart  took  place  at  the  moment  the  dias¬ 
tole  or  pulse  in  the  wrist  was  perceived;  to  con¬ 
clude,  the  heart  struck  the  walls  of  the  chest, 
and  became  prominent  at  the  time  it  bounded 
upwards  and  underwent  contraction  on  itself. 

Neither  is  this  the  place  for  taking  up  that 
other  controversy;  to  wit,  whether  the  blood 
alone  serves  for  the  nutrition  of  the  body  ?  Aris¬ 
totle  in  several  places  contends  that  the  blood 
is  the  ultimate  aliment  of  the  body,  and  in  this 
view  he  is  supported  by  the  whole  body  of 
physicians.  But  many  things  of  difficult  inter¬ 
pretation,  and  that  hang  but  indifferently  to¬ 
gether,  follow  from  this  opinion  of  theirs.  For 
when  the  medical  writers  speak  of  the  blood  in 
their  physiological  disquisitions,  and  teach  that 
the  above  is  its  sole  use  and  end,  viz, :  to  supply 
nourishment  to  the  body,  they  proceed  to  com¬ 
pose  it  of  four  humours,  or  juices,  adducing 
arguments  for  such  a  view  from  the  combina¬ 
tions  of  the  four  primary  qualities;  and  then 
they  assert  that  the  mass  of  the  blood  is  made 
up  of  the  two  kinds  of  bile,  the  yellow  and  the 
black,  of  pituita,  and  the  blood  properly  so 
called.  And  thus  they  arrive  at  their  four  hu¬ 
mours,  of  which  the  pituita  is  held  to  be  cold  and 
moist;  the  black  bile  cold  and  dry;  the  yellow 
bile  hot  and  dry;  and  the  blood  hot  and  moist. 
Further,  of  each  of  these  several  kinds,  they 
maintain  that  some  are  nutritious,  and  com¬ 
pose  the  whole  of  the  body;  others,  again,  they 
say  are  excrementitious.  Still  further,  they  sup¬ 
pose  that  the  blood  proper  is  composed  of  the 
nutritious  or  heterogeneous  portions;  but  the 
constitution  of  the  mass  is  such  that  the  pituita 
is  a  cruder  matter,  which  the  more  powerful 
native  heat  can  convert  into  perfect  blood. 
They  deny,  however,  that  the  bile  can  by  any 
means  be  thus  transformed  into  blood;  al¬ 
though  the  blood,  they  say,  is  readily  changed 


into  bile,  an  event  which  they  conceive  takes 
place  in  melancholic  diseases,  through  an  ex¬ 
cess  of  the  concocting  heat. 

Now,  if  all  this  were  true,  and  there  be  no 
retrogressive  movement,  viz.y  from  black  bile 
to  bile,  from  bile  to  blood,  they  would  be 
brought  to  the  dilemma  of  having  to  admit 
that  all  the  juices  were  present  for  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  black  bile,  and  that  this  was  a  principal 
and  most  highly  concocted  nutriment.  It  would 
further  be  imperative  on  them  to  recognize  a 
kind  of  twofold  blood,  viz.y  one  consisting  of 
the  entire  mass  of  fluid  contained  in  the  veins, 
and  composed  of  the  four  humours  aforesaid; 
and  another  consisting  of  the  purer,  more  fluid 
and  spirituous  portion,  the  fluid,  which  in  the 
stricter  sense  they  call  blood,  which  some  of 
them  contend  is  contained  in  the  arteries  apart 
from  the  rest,  and  which  they  then  depute 
upon  sundry  special  offices.  On  their  own  show¬ 
ing,  therefore,  the  pure  blood  is  no  aliment  for 
the  body,  but  a  certain  mixed  fluid,  or  rather 
black  bile,  to  which  the  rest  of  the  humours 
tend. 

Aristotle,^  too,  although  he  thought  that  the 
blood  existed  as  a  means  of  nourishing  the 
body,  still  believed  that  it  was  composed,  as  it 
were,  of  several  portions,  viz.y  of  a  thicker  and 
black  portion  which  subsides  to  the  bottom  of 
the  basin  when  the  blood  coagulates,  and  this 
portion  he  held  to  be  of  an  inferior  nature;  “for 
the  blood,”  he  says,  “if  it  be  entire,  is  of  a  red 
colour  and  sweet  taste;  but  if  vitiated  either  by 
nature  or  disease,  it  is  blacker.”^  He  also  will 
have  it  fibrous  in  part  or  partly  composed  of 
fibres,  which  being  removed,  he  continues,^ 
the  blood  neither  sets  nor  becomes  any  thicker. 
He  further  admitted  a  sanies  in  the  blood: 
“Sanies  is  unconcocted  blood,  or  blood  not  yet 
completely  concocted,  or  which  is  as  yet  dilute 
like  serum.”  And  this  part,  he  says,  is  of  a  colder 
nature.  The  fibrous  he  believed  to  be  the 
earthy  portion  of  the  blood. 

According  to  the  view  of  the  Stagirite,  there¬ 
fore,  the  blood  of  different  animals  differs  in 
several  ways;  in  one  it  is  more  serous  and  thin¬ 
ner,  a  kind  of  ichor  or  sanies,  as  in  insects,  and 
the  colder  and  less  perfect  animals;  in  another 
it  is  thicker,  more  fibrous,  and  earthy,  as  in  the 
wild  boar,  bull,  ass,  &c.  In  some  where  the  con¬ 
stitution  is  distempered,  the  blood  is  ©f  a  blacker 
hue;  in  others  it  is  bright,  pure,  and  florid,  as  in 
birds,  and  the  human  subject  especially. 

*  On  the  Parts  ef  AnimalSy  ii.  3. 

2  History  of  Animalsy  iii.  19. 

3  Ibid. 


436  WILLIAM 

Whence,  it  appears,  that  in  the  opinion  of  the 
physicians,  as  well  as  of  Aristotle,  the  blood 
consists  of  several  parts,  in  some  sort  of  the 
same  description,  according  to  the  views  of 
each.  Medical  men,  indeed,  only  pay  attention 
to  human  blood,  taken  in  phlebotomy  and  con¬ 
tained  in  cups  and  coagulated.  But  Aristotle  took 
a  view  of  the  blood  of  animals  generally,  or  of 
the  fluid  which  is  analogous  to  it.  And  I,  omit¬ 
ting  all  points  of  controversy,  and  passing  by 
any  discussion  of  the  inconveniences  that  wait 
upon  the  opinions  of  writers  in  general,  shall 
here  touch  lightly  upon  the  points  that  all  are 
agreed  in,  that  can  be  apprehended  by  the  senses, 
and  that  pertain  more  especially  to  our  sub¬ 
ject;  intending,  however,  to  treat  of  everything 
at  length  elsewhere. 

Although  the  blood  be,  as  I  have  said,  a  por¬ 
tion  of  the  body — the  primogenial  and  princi¬ 
pal  part,  indeed — still,  if  it  be  considered  in  its 
mass,  and  as  it  presents  itself  in  the  veins,  there 
is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  believing  that  it 
contains  and  concocts  nourishment  within  it¬ 
self,  which  it  applies  to  all  the  other  parts  of 
the  body.  With  the  matter  so  considered,  we 
can  understand  how  it  should  both  nourish  and 
be  nourished,  and  how  it  should  be  both  the 
matter  and  the  efficient  cause  of  the  body,  and 
have  the  natural  constitution  which  Aristotle 
held  necessary  in  a  primogenial  part,  viz,y  that 
it  should  be  partly  of  similar,  partly  of  dissimi¬ 
lar  constitution;  for  he  says,  “As  it  was  requi¬ 
site  for  the  sake  of  sensation  that  there  should 
be  similar  members  in  animal  bodies,  and  as  the 
faculty  of  perceiving,  the  faculty  of  moving, 
and  the  faculty  of  nourishing,  are  all  contained 
in  the  same  member  {viz.,  the  primogenate 
particle),  it  follows  necessarily  that  this  mem¬ 
ber,  which  originally  contains  inherent  princi¬ 
ples  of  the  above  kind,  be  extant  both  simply, 
that  it  may  be  capable  of  sensation  of  every 
description,  and  dissimilarly,  that  it  may  move 
and  act.  Wherefore,  in  the  tribes  that  have 
blood,  the  heart  is  held  to  be  such  a  member; 
in  the  bloodless  tribes,  however,  it  is  propor¬ 
tional  to  their  state.” 

Now,  if  Aristotle  understands  by  the  heart 
that  which  first  appears  in  the  embryo  of  the 
chick  in  ovOy  the  blood,  to  wit,  with  its  contain¬ 
ing  parts — the  pulsating  vesicles  and  veins,  as 
one  and  the  same  organ,  I  conceive  that  he  has 
expressed  himself  most  accurately;  for  the 
blood,  as  it  is  seen  in  the  egg  and  the  vesicles,  is 
partly  similar  and  partly  dissimilar.  But  if  he 
understands  the  matter  otherwise,  what  is  seen 
in  the  egg  sufficiently  refutes  him,  inasmuch  as 


HARVEY 

the  substance  of  the  heart,  considered  inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  blood — the  ventricular  cone 
— is  engendered  long  afterwards,  and  continues 
white  without  any  infusion  of  blood,  until  the 
heart  has  been  fashioned  into  that  form  of 
organ  by  which  the  blood  is  distributed  through 
the  whole  body.  Nor  indeed  does  the  heart 
even  then  present  itself  with  the  structure  of  a 
similar  and  simple  part,  such  as  might  become  a 
primogenial  part,  but  is  seen  to  be  fibrous, 
fleshy,  or  muscular,  and  indeed  is  obviously 
what  Hippocrates  styled  it,  a  muscle  or  instru¬ 
ment  of  motion.  But  the  blood,  as  it  is  first  per¬ 
ceived,  and  as  it  pulsates,  included  within  its 
vesicle,  has  as  manifestly  the  constitution  which 
Aristotle  held  necessary  in  a  principal  part.  For 
the  blood,  whilst  it  is  naturally  in  the  body,  has 
everywhere  apparently  the  same  constitution; 
when  extravasated,  however,  and  deprived  of 
its  native  heat,  immediately,  like  any  dissimi¬ 
lar  compound  it  separates  into  several  parts. 

Were  the  blood  destined  by  nature,  how¬ 
ever,  for  the  nourishment  of  the  body  only,  it 
would  have  a  more  .f/m/Zirr  constitution,  like  the 
chyle  or  the  albumen  of  the  egg;  or  at  all  events 
it  would  be  truly  one  and  a  single  body  com¬ 
posed  of  the  parts  or  juices  indicated,  like  the 
other  humours,  such  as  bile  of  either  kind,  and 
pituita  or  phlegm,  which  retain  the  same  form 
and  character  without  the  body,  which  they 
showed  within  their  appropriate  receptacles; 
they  undergo  no  such  sudden  change  as  the 
blood. 

Wherefore,  the  qualities  which  Aristotle 
ascribed  to  a  principal  part  are  found  associated 
in  the  blood;  which  as  a  natural  body,  existing 
heterogeneously  or  dissimilarly y  is  composed  of 
these  juices  or  parts;  but  as  it  lives  and  is  a  very 
principal  animal  part,  consisting  of  these  juices 
mingled  together,  it  is  an  animated  similar  part, 
composed  of  a  body  and  a  vital  principle.  When 
this  living  principle  of  the  blood  escapes,  how¬ 
ever,  in  consequence  of  the  extinction  of  the 
native  heat,  the  primary  substance  is  forthwith 
corrupted  and  resolved  into  the  parts  of  which 
it  was  formerly  composed;  first  into  cruor, 
aftei^vards  with  red  and  white  parts,  those  of 
the  red  parts  that  are  uppermost  being  more 
florid,  those  that  are  lowest  being  black.  Of 
these  parts,  moreover,  some  are  fibrous  and 
tough  (and  these  are  the  uniting  medium  of  the 
rest),  others  ichorous  and  serous,  in  which  the 
mass  of  coagulum  is  wont  to  swim.  Into  such  a 
serum  does  the  blood  almost  wholly  resolve  it¬ 
self  at  last.  But  these  parts  have  no  existence 
severally  in  living  blood ;  it  is  in  that  only  which 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


has  become  corrupted  and  is  resolved  by  death 
that  they  are  encountered. 

Besides  the  constituents  of  the  blood  now 
indicated,  there  is  yet  another  which  is  seen  in 
the  blood  of  the  hotter  and  stronger  animals, 
such  as  horses,  oxen,  and  men  also  of  ardent 
constitution.  This  is  seen  in  blood  drawn  from 
the  body  as  it  coagulates,  in  the  upper  part  of 
the  red  mass,  and  bears  a  perfect  resemblance 
to  hartshorn')  elly,  or  mucilage,  or  thick  white 
of  egg.  The  vulgar  believe  this  matter  to  be  the 
pit.uita;  Aristotle  designated  it  the  crude  and 
unconcocted  portion  of  the  blood. 

I  have  observed  that  this  part  of  the  blood 
differs  both  from  the  others  and  from  the  more 
serous  portion  in  which  the  coagulated  clot  is 
wont  to  swim  in  the  basin,  and  also  from  the 
urine  which  percolates  through  the  kidneys 
from  the  blood.  Neither  is  it  to  be  regarded  as 
any  more  crude  or  colder  portion  of  the  blood, 
but  rather,  as  I  conceive,  as  a  more  spiritual 
part;  a  conclusion  to  which  I  am  moved  by  two 
motives:  first,  because  it  swims  above  the 
bright  and  florid  portion — commonly  thought 
to  be  the  arterial  blood — as  if  it  were  hotter 
and  more  highly  charged  with  spirits,  and  takes 
possession  of  the  highest  place  in  the  disinte¬ 
gration  of  the  blood. 

Secondly,  in  venesection,  blood  of  this  kind, 
which  is  mostly  met  with  among  men  of  warm 
temperament,  strong  and  muscular,  escapes  in 
a  longer  stream  and  with  greater  force,  as  if 
pushed  from  a  syringe,  in  the  same  way  as  we 
say  that  the  spermatic  fluid  which  is  ejected 
vigorously  and  to  a  distance  is  both  more  fruit¬ 
ful  and  full  of  spirits. 

That  this  mucaginous  matter  differs  greatly 
from  the  ichorous  or  watery  part  of  the  blood, 
which,  as  if  colder  than  the  rest,  subsides  to  the 
bottom  of  the  basin,  appears  on  two  distinct 
grounds:  for  the  watery  and  sanious  portion  is 
too  crude  and  unconcocted  ever  to  pass  into 
purer  and  more  perfect  blood;  and  the  thicker 
and  more  fibrous  mucus  swimming  above  the 
clot  of  the  blood  itself  appears  more  concoct 
and  better  elaborated  than  this;  and  so  in  the 
resolution  or  separation  of  the  blood  it  comes 
that  the  mucus  occupies  the  upper  place,  the 
sanies  the  lower;  the  clot  and  red  parts,  how¬ 
ever — both  those  of  a  brighter  and  those  of  a 
darker  colour — occupy  the  middle  space. 

For  it  is  certain  that  not  only  this  part,  but 
the  whole  blood,  and  indeed  the  flesh  itself— as 
may  be  seen  in  criminals  hung  in  chains — may 
be  reduced  to  an  ichorous  sanies;  that  is  to  say, 
become  resolved  into  the  matters  of  which  they 


were  composed,  like  salt  into  the  lixivium  from 
which  it  had  been  obtained.  In  like  manner, 
the  blood  taken  away  in  any  cachexy  abounds 
in  serum,  and  this  to  such  an  extent  that  oc¬ 
casionally  scarce  any  clot  is  seen — the  whole 
mass  of  blood  forms  one  sanies.  This  is  observed 
in  leucophlegmatia,  and  is  natural  in  bloodless 
animals. 

Further,  if  you  take  away  some  blood  short¬ 
ly  after  a  meal,  before  the  second  digestion  has 
been  completed  and  the  serum  has  had  time  to 
descend  by  the  kidneys,  or  at  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  an  attack  of  intermittent  fever,  you 
will  find  it  sanious,  inconcoct,  and  abounding 
in  serum.  On  the  contrary,  if  you  open  a  vein 
after  fasting,  or  a  copious  discharge  of  urine  or 
sweat,  you  will  find  the  blood  thick,  as  if  with¬ 
out  serum,  and  almost  wholly  condensed  into 
clot. 

And  in  the  same  way  as  in  coagulating  blood 
you  find  a  little  of  the  afore-mentioned  super¬ 
natant  mucus,  so  if  you  expose  the  sanies  in 
question,  separated  from  the  clot,  to  a  gentle 
heat  over  the  fire,  you  will  find  it  to  be  speedily 
changed  into  the  mucus;  an  obvious  indication 
that  the  water  or  sanies  which  separates  from 
the  blood  in  the  basin,  is  perchance  a  certain 
element  in  the  urine,  but  not  the  urine  itself, 
although  in  colour  and  consistence  it  seems  so 
in  fact.  The  urine  is  not  coagulated  or  con¬ 
densed  into  a  fibrous  mucus,  but  rather  into  a 
lixivium;  the  watery  or  sanious  portion  of  the 
urine,  however,  when  lightly  boiled,  does  oc¬ 
casionally  run  into  a  mucus  that  swims  through 
the  fluid;  in  the  same  way,  as  the  mucus  in 
question  rendered  recrudescent  by  corruption, 
liquefies  and  returns  to  the  state  of  sanies. 

So  far  at  this  time  have  I  thought  fit  to  pro¬ 
duce  these  my  own  observations  on  this  constit¬ 
uent  of  the  blood,  intending  to  speak  more 
fully  of  it  as  well  as  of  the  other  constituents 
cognizable  by  the  senses,  and  admitted  by  Aris¬ 
totle  and  the  medical  writers. 

That  I  may  not  seem  to  wander  too  widely 
from  my  purpose,  I  would  here  have  it  under¬ 
stood  that  with  Aristotle  I  receive  the  blood  as 
a  part  of  the  living  animal  body,  and  not  as  it  is 
commonly  regarded  in  the  light  of  mere  gore. 
The  Stagirite  says:  “The  blood  is  warm,  in  the 
sense  in  which  we  should  understand  warm 
water,  did  we  designate  that  fluid  by  a  simple 
name,  not  viewing  it  as  heated.  For  heat  be¬ 
longs  to  its  nature;  just  as  whiteness  is  in  the 
nature  of  a  white  man.  But  when  the  blood  be¬ 
comes  hot  through  any  affection  or  passion,  it 
is  not  then  hot  of  itself.  The  same  thing  must 


438  WILLIAM 

be  said  in  regard  to  the  qualities  of  dryness  and 
moist  ness.  Wherefore,  in  the  nature  of  such 
things  they  are  partly  hot  and  partly  moist; 
hut  separated,  they  congeal  and  become  cold; 
and  such  is  the  blood.” ^ 

The  blood,  consequently,  as  it  is  a  living  ele¬ 
ment  of  the  body,  is  of  a  doubtful  nature,  and 
lalls  to  be  considered  under  two  points  of  view. 
Materially  and  per  se  it  is  called  nourishment; 
but  formally  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  endowed  with 
heat  and  spirits,  the  immediate  instruments  of 
the  vital  principle,  and  even  with  vitality  {ani- 
ma),  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  familiar  divinity 
and  preserver  of  the  body,  as  the  generative 
first  engendered  and  very  principal  part.  And 
as  the  prolific  egg  contains  within  it  the  matter, 
instrument,  and  framer  of  the  future  pullet, 
and  all  physicians  admit  a  mixture  of  the  semi¬ 
nal  fluids  of  the  two  sexes  in  the  uterus  during 
or  immediately  after  intercourse  as  constituting 
the  mixed  cause,  both  material  and  efficient,  of 
the  foetus;  so  might  one  with  more  propriety 
maintain  that  the  blood  was  both  the  matter 
and  preserver  of  the  body,  though  not  the  sole 
aliment;  because  it  is  observed  that  in  animals 
which  die  of  hunger,  and  in  men  who  perish  of 
marasmus,  a  considerable  quantity  of  blood  is 
still  found  after  death  in  the  veins.  And  fur¬ 
ther,  in  youthful  subjects  still  growing,  and  in 
aged  individuals  declining  and  falling  away,  the 
relative  quantity  of  blood  continues  the  same, 
and  is  in  the  ratio  of  the  flesh  that  is  present,  as 
if  the  blood  were  a  part  of  the  body,  but  not 
destined  solely  for  its  nourishment;  for  if  it 
were  so,  no  one  would  die  of  hunger  so  long  as 
he  had  any  blood  left  in  his  veins,  just  as  the 
lamp  is  not  extinguished  whilst  there  is  a  drop 
of  inflammable  oil  left  in  the  cruse. 

Now  when  I  maintain  that  the  living  princi¬ 
ple  resides  primarily  and  principally  in  the 
blood,  I  would  not  have  it  inferred  from  thence 
that  I  hold  all  bloodletting  in  discredit,  as  dan¬ 
gerous  and  injurious;  or  that  I  believe  with  the 
vulgar  that  in  the  same  measure  as  blood  is  lost, 
is  life  abridged,  because  the  sacred  writings  tell 
us  that  the  life  is  in  the  blood;  for  daily  expe¬ 
rience  satisfies  us  that  bloodletting  has  a  most 
salutary  effect  in  many  diseases,  and  is  indeed 
the  foremost  among  all  the  general  remedial 
means:  vitiated  states  and  plethora  of  the 
blood,  are  causes  of  a  whole  host  of  diseases;  and 
the  timely  evacuation  of  a  certain  quantity  of 
the  fluid  frequently  delivers  patients  from 
very  dangerous  diseases,  and  even  from  immi¬ 
nent  death.  In  the  same  measure  as  blood  is  de- 
^  On  the  Parts  of  Animals^  ii.  3. 


HARVEY 

tracted,  therefore,  under  certain  circumstances, 
it  may  be  said  that  life  and  health  are  added. 

This  indeed  nature  teaches,  and  physicians 
at  all  events  propose  to  themselves  to  imitate 
nature;  for  copious  critical  discharges  of  blood 
from  the  nostrils,  from  hemorrhoids,  and  in  the 
shape  of  the  menstrual  flux,  often  deliver  us 
from  very  serious  diseases.  Young  persons, 
therefore,  who  live  fully  and  lead  indolent  lives, 
unless  between  their  eighteenth  and  twentieth 
years  they  have  a  spontaneous  hemorrhage 
from  the  nose  or  lower  parts  of  the  body,  or 
have  a  vein  opened,  by  which  they  are  relieved 
of  the  load  of  blood  that  oppresses  them,  are 
apt  to  be  seized  with  fever  or  smallpox,  or  they 
suffer  from  headache  and  other  morbid  symp¬ 
toms  of  various  degrees  of  severity  and  danger. 
Veterinary  surgeons  are  in  the  habit  of  begin¬ 
ning  the  treatment  of  almost  all  the  diseases  of 
cattle  with  bloodletting. 

EXERCISE  53.  Of  the  inferences  deducible  from  the 
course  of  the  umbilical  vessels  in  the  egg 

We  find  the  blood  formed  in  the  egg  and  em¬ 
bryo  before  any  other  part;  and  almost  at  the 
same  moment  appear  its  receptacles,  the  veins 
and  the  vesicula  pulsans.  Wherefore,  if  we  re¬ 
gard  the  punctum  saliens  as  the  heart,  and  this 
along  with  the  blood  and  the  veins  as  constitut¬ 
ing  one  and  the  same  organ,  conspicuous  in  the 
very  commencement  of  the  embryo,  although 
we  should  admit  that  the  proper  substance  of 
the  heart  was  deposited  subsequently,  still  we 
should  be  ready  to  admit  with  Aristotle  that 
the  heart  (an  organ  made  up  of  ventricles,  auri¬ 
cles,  vessels,  and  blood)  was  in  truth  the  princi¬ 
pal  and  primogenate  part  of  the  body,  its  own 
prime  and  essential  element  having  been  the 
blood,  both  in  the  order  of  nature  and  of  genet¬ 
ic  production. 

The  parts  that  in  generation  succeed  the 
blood  are  the  veins,  for  the  blood  is  necessarily 
inclosed  and  contained  in  vessels;  so  that,  as 
Aristotle  observes,  we  find  two  meatus  venales 
even  from  the  very  first,  which  canals,  as  we 
have  shown  in  our  history,  afterwards  consti¬ 
tute  the  umbilical  vessels.  It  seems  necessary, 
therefore,  to  say  something  here  of  the  situa¬ 
tion  and  course  of  these  vessels. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  it  is  to  be  observed 
that  all  the  arteries  and  veins  have  their  origin 
from  the  heart  and  are,  as  it  were,  appendices 
or  parts  added  to  the  central  organ.  If,  there¬ 
fore,  you  carefully  examine  the  embryo  of  the 
human  subject,  or  one  of  the  lower  animals,  and 
having  divided  the  vena  cava  between  the  right 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


auricle  and  the  diaphragm,  look  into  it  upwards 
or  towards  the  heart,  you  will  perceive  three 
foramina,  the  largest  and  most  posterior  of 
which  tending  to  the  spine  is  the  vena  cava;  the 
anterior  and  lesser  proceeds  to  the  root  and 
trunk  of  the  umbilical  vessels;  the  third  and 
least  of  all  enters  the  liver  and  is  the  origin  and 
trunk  of  all  the  ramifications  distributed  to  the 
convexity  of  that  organ.  Whence  it  clearly  ap¬ 
pears  that  the  veins  do  by  no  means  all  proceed 
from  the  liver  as  their  origin  and  commence¬ 
ment,  but  from  the  heart — unless  indeed  any 
one  would  be  hardy  enough  to  contend  that  a 
vessel  proceeded  from  its  branches,  not  the 
branches  from  the  trunk  of  the  vessel. 

Moreover,  as  the  vessels  in  question  are  dis¬ 
tributed  equally  to  the  albumen  and  vitellus  of 
the  egg,  not  otherwise  than  as  the  roots  of  trees 
are  connected  with  the  ground,  it  is  obvious 
that  both  of  these  substances  must  serve  for  the 
nutriment  of  the  embryo,  and  that  they  are 
taken  up  and  carried  to  it  by  these  vessels. 
But  this  view  is  opposed  to  that  of  Aristotle, 
who  everywhere  maintains  that  the  chick  is 
formed  from  the  albumen,  and  receives  nourish¬ 
ment  through  the  umbilicus  alone.  The  al¬ 
bumen  indeed  is  first  consumed,  and  the  yelk 
serves  subsequently  for  food,  supplying  the 
place  of  the  milk,  which  viviparous  animals  re¬ 
ceive  after  their  birth  from  their  mothers.  The 
food  which  Nature  provides  for  the  young  of 
viviparous  tribes  in  the  dug  of  the  mother,  she 
supplies  in  the  yelk  of  the  egg  to  the  young  of 
oviparous  animals.  Whence  it  happens,  that 
when  the  albumen  is  almost  wholly  consumed, 
the  vitellus  still  remains  nearly  entire  in  the 
egg,  the  chick  being  already  perfect  and  com¬ 
plete;  more  than  this,  the  yelk  is  still  found  in 
the  abdomen  of  the  chick  long  after  its  exclu¬ 
sion.  Aristotle  discovered  some  on  the  eight¬ 
eenth  day  after  the  hatching;  and  I  have  my¬ 
self  seen  a  small  quantity  connected  with  the 
intestine  at  the  end  of  six  weeks  from  that 
epoch. 

Nevertheless,  from  the  yelk  (which  certainly 
does  not  decrease  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  albu¬ 
men  whilst  the  chick  is  forming)  that  is  taken 
into  the  abdomen  of  the  chick,  and  from  the 
distribution  of  vessels  through  its  substance, 
the  whole  of  these  collecting  into  a  single 
trunk  which  enters  the  porta  of  the  liver,  and 
doubtless  carrying  that  portion  of  yelk  they 
have  absorbed  for  more  perfect  elaboration  in 
that  viscus — these  and  other  arguments  of  the 
like  kind  force  me  to  say  that  I  cannot  do  other¬ 
wise  than  admit  with  Aristotle  that  the  yelk 


supplies  food  to  the  chick,  and  is  analogous  to 
milk. 

The  whole  of  the  yelk,  indeed,  does  not  re¬ 
main  after  the  foetus  of  the  fowl  is  fully  formed; 
for  a  certain  portion  of  it  has  been  liquefied  on 
the  very  first  appearance  of  the  embryo,  and  re¬ 
ceives  branches  of  vessels  no  less  than  the  albu¬ 
men,  by  which,  already  prepared,  it  is  carried 
as  nourishment  for  the  chick;  still  it  is  certain 
that  the  greater  portion  of  the  yelk  remains 
after  the  disappearance  of  the  albumen;  that  it 
is  laid  up  in  the  abdomen  of  the  chick  when 
excluded,  and,  attracted  or-  absorbed  by  the 
branches  of  the  vena  portae,  that  it  is  finally 
carried  to  the  liver. 

It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  the  chick  when 
hatched,  is  nourished  by  the  yelk  in  the  first 
period  of  its  independent  existence.  And  as 
within  the  egg  the  embryo  was  nourished  part¬ 
ly  by  the  albumen,  partly  by  the  vitellus,  but 
principally  by  the  albumen,  which  is  both 
present  in  larger  quantity,  and  is  more  speedily 
consumed,  so  when  the  chick  is  hatched,  and 
when  all  the  nourishment  that  is  taken  must 
pass  through  the  liver  to  undergo  ulterior  prep¬ 
aration,  is  it  nourished  partly  by  the  vitellus 
and  partly  by  chyle  absorbed  from  the  intes¬ 
tines,  but  principally  by  chyle,  which  the  host 
of  subdivisions  of  the  mesenteric  vessels  seize 
upon,  whilst  there  is  but  a  single  vessel  from  the 
porta  distributed  to  the  vitellus,  and  by  and  by 
but  little  of  it  remains.  Nature,  therefore,  acts 
as  does  the  nurse,  who  gradually  habituates  her 
infant  to  the  food  which  is  to  take  the  place  of 
her  failing  supply  of  milk.  The  pullet  is  thus 
gradually  brought  from  food  of  more  easy  to 
food  of  more  difficult  digestion,  from  yelk  to 
chyle. 

Wherefore,  there  is  every  reason  for  what  we 
perceive  in  connexion  with  the  course  of  the 
veins  in  the  egg.  When  the  embryo  first  begins 
to  be  formed,  they  are  distributed  to  the  colli- 
quament  only,  where  the  blood  finds  suitable 
nutriment  and  matter  for  the  formation  of  the 
body;  but  by  and  by  they  extend  into  the  thin¬ 
ner  albumen,  whence  the  chick,  whilst  it  is  yet 
in  the  state  of  gelatine  or  mucor,  and  resembles 
a  maggot  in  form,  derives  its  increase;  the 
branches  next  extend  into  the  thicker  albumen, 
and  then  into  the  vitellus,  that  they  may  also 
contribute  to  the  support  of  the  foetus,  which, 
having  at  length  arrived  at  maturity  and  been 
extruded,  still  preserves  a  portion  of  the  yelk 
(or  milk)  within  its  abdomen,  whereby  it  is 
maintained  in  part,  in  part  by  food  selected 
and  prepared  for  it  by  the  mother,  until  it  is 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


440 

able  to  look  out  for  and  to  digest  its  own  ali¬ 
ment.  Thus  does  nature  most  wisely  provide 
food  through  the  whole  round  of  generation, 
suited  to  the  various  strength  of  the  digestive 
faculty  in  the  future  being.  In  the  first  period 
of  the  foetal  chick’s  existence  a  more  delicate 
food  is  prepared  for  it;  more  advanced,  firmer 
and  firmer  food  is  supplied;  and  this  is  the  rea¬ 
son,  1  apprehend,  wherefore,  the  perfect  egg 
consists  not  only  of  two  portions  of  different 
colours,  but  is  even  provided  with  two  kinds  of 
albumen. 

Now  all  this  that  we  discover  from  actual  ex¬ 
perience  of  the  matter  accords  with  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  Aristotle,  where  he  says:  “The  part 
which  is  hot  is  best  adapted  to  give  form  to  the 
limbs;  that  which  is  more  earthy  rather  con¬ 
duces  to  the  constitution  of  the  body  and  is 
more  remote.  Wherefore  in  eggs  of  two  colours, 
the  animal  begins  to  be  engendered  from  the 
white  (for  the  beginning  of  animal  life  is  in  the 
hot),  and  derives  its  nourishment  from  the  yel¬ 
low.  In  the  warmer  animals,  consequently, 
these  parts  are  kept  distinct  from  one  another, 
viz.^  that  from  which  the  beginning  is  derived, 
and  that  whence  the  nourishment  is  obtained, 
and  the  one  is  white,  the  other  yellow.”^ 

From  what  has  now  been  said  it  appears  that 
the  chick — and  w'e  shall  show  that  it  is  not 
otherwise  in  all  other  animals — arises  and  is 
constituted,  as  it  were,  by  a  principle  or  soul 
inherent  in  the  egg,  and  that  in  the  same  way 
the  proper  aliment  is  sought  for  and  is  supplied 
within  the  egg;  whereby  it  comes  that  the  chick 
is  not  dependent  on  its  mother  in  the  same  way 
as  plants  are  dependent  on  the  ground;  and  it  is 
not  more  correct  to  say  that  the  chick  is  nour¬ 
ished  by  the  blood  of  its  mother,  or  that  its 
heart  beats,  and  that  it  lives  through  the 
spirits  of  its  parent,  than  it  would  be  to  assert 
that  it  moved  and  felt  through  the  organs,  or 
grew  and  attained  to  adult  age  through  the 
vital  principle  of  its  parent.  It  is  manifest,  on 
the  contrary,  and  is  allowed  by  all  that  the 
foetal  chick  is  nourished  through  its  umbilical 
vessels;  and  that  the  vascular  ramifications  dis¬ 
persed  over  the  albumen  and  yelk  imbibe  nour¬ 
ishment  from  them  and  convey  it  to  the  foetus. 
It  is  also  admitted  that  the  chick,  when  ex¬ 
cluded  from  the  shell,  is  supplied  with  nourish¬ 
ment,  partly  from  yelk,  partly  from  chyle,  and 
that  in  either  case  the  aliment  passes  by  the 
same  route,  viz.,  by  the  vena  portae  into  the 
liver,  the  branches  of  this  vessel  effecting  the 
transit. 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  iii.  i. 


It  is  therefore  obvious,  as  I  now  say  by  the 
way,  that  the  chyle  by  which  all  animals  are 
nourished  is  brought  by  the  mesenteric  veins 
from  the  intestines;  nor  is  there  occasion  to 
look  for  any  new  passage — by  the  lacteal  ves¬ 
sels,  to  wit — or  any  route  in  adult  animals  other 
than  that  which  we  discover  in  the  egg  and 
chick.  But  we  shall  recur  more  fully  in  another 
place  to  the  inconveniences  of  such  an  opinion 
as  that  referred  to. 

Lastly,  from  the  structure  of  the  umbiheal 
vessels  of  the  chick  in  ovo,  some  of  which  as 
stated  in  the  history  are  veins,  others  arteries, 
it  is  legitimate  to  conclude  that  there  is  here  a 
circular  motion  of  the  blood,  such  as  we  have 
already  demonstrated  in  the  animal  body,  in 
our  book  On  the  Motion  of  the  Blood,  and  this 
for  the  sake  of  the  nutrition  and  growth  of  the 
embryo,  and  because  the  umbilical  veins  are 
distributed  to  either  fluid  of  the  egg,  that  they 
may  thence  bring  nutriment  to  the  chick,  and 
the  arteries  accompany  the  veins,  that  by  their 
affluxive  heat  the  alimentary  matter  may  be 
duly  concocted,  liquefied,  and  made  fit  to  an¬ 
swer  the  ends  of  nutrition. 

And  hence  it  happens  that  wherever  veins — 
and  here  1  would  have  it  understood  that  both 
arteries  and  veins  are  intended — make  their 
way  into  the  albumen  or  vitellus,  there  these 
fluids  look  liquefied  and  different  from  the  rest. 
For  as  soon  as  the  branches  of  the  veins  shoot 
forth,  the  upper  portion  of  the  albumen  in 
which  they  are  implanted,  passing  into  colli- 
quament,  becomes  transparent,  whilst  the  lower 
portion,  continuing  thick  and  compact,  is 
pushed  into  the  inferior  angle  of  the  egg.  In  like 
manner  a  separation  of  the  vitellus,  as  it  seems 
into  two  portions,  makes  its  appearance,  the 
one  being  superior,  and  the  other  inferior,  and 
these  do  not  differ  less  from  one  another  in 
character  than  melted  differs  from  solid  wax; 
now  this  division  corresponds  to  the  two  parts 
which  severally  receive  or  do  not  receive  blood¬ 
vessels. 

Hence  are  we  further  made  more  certain  as 
to  the  commencement  of  animal  generation 
and  the  prime  inherent  principle  of  the  egg. 
For  it  is  assuredly  known  that  the  cicatricula  or 
spot  on  the  yelk  is  the  chief  point  in  the  egg, 
that  to  which  all  the  rest  are  subordinate,  and 
to  which,  if  to  any  one  thing  more  than  an¬ 
other,  is  to  be  referred  the  cause,  whatever  it 
be,  of  fecundity  in  the  egg: — certain  it  is  that 
the  generation  of  the  embryo  is  begun  within 
its  precincts.  Wherefore,  as  we  have  said,  the 
first  effect  of  incubation  is  to  cause  dilatation  of 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


the  cicatricula,  and  the  formation  of  the  colli- 
quament,  in  which  the  blood  first  flushes  and 
veins  are  distributed,  and  where  the  effects  of 
the  native  heat  and  the  influence  of  the  plastic 
power  first  show  themselves.  And  then,  the 
more  widely  the  ramifications  of  these  veins 
extend,  in  the  same  proportion  do  indications 
of  the  presence  of  the  vital  power  and  vegeta¬ 
tive  force  appear.  For  every  effect  is  a  clear  evi¬ 
dence  of  its  efficient  cause. 

In  a  word  I  say — from  the  cicatricula  (in 
which  the  first  trace  of  the  native  heat  ap¬ 
pears)  proceeds  the  entire  process  of  genera¬ 
tion;  from  the  heart  the  whole  chick,  and  from 
the  umbilical  vessels  the  whole  of  the  mem¬ 
branes  called  secundines  that  surround  it.  We 
therefore  conclude  that  the  parts  of  the  embryo 
are  severally  subordinate,  and  that  life  is  first 
derived  from  the  heart. 

EXERCISE  54.  Of  the  order  of  the  parts  in  generation 
from  an  eggy  according  to  Fahricius 

Having  already  determined  what  part  is  to 
be  esteemed  the  first,  the  blood,  to  wit,  with 
its  receptacles,  the  heart,  veins,  and  arteries, 
the  next  thing  we  have  to  do  is  to  speak  of  the 
rest  of  the  parts  of  the  body  and  of  the  order 
and  manner  of  their  generation. 

Fabricius,  in  whose  footsteps  we  have  re¬ 
solved  to  tread,  in  speaking  of  the  generation 
of  the  chick  in  ovoy  passes  in  review  the  actions 
which  take  place  in  the  egg,  and  by  the  effect 
of  which  the  parts  are  produced,  discussing 
them  seriatiniy  as  if  a  clearer  view  were  thence 
to  be  obtained  of  the  order  or  sequence  of  gen¬ 
eration.  “There  are  three  primary  actions,”  he 
says,^  “which  present  themselves  in  the  egg  of 
the  bird:  ist,  the  generation  of  the  embryo; 
2d,  its  growth;  3d,  its  nourishment.  The  first, 
or  generation,  is  the  proper  action  of  the  egg; 
the  second  and  third,  viz.y  growth  and  nutri¬ 
tion,  go  on  for  the  major  part  without  the  egg, 
though  they  are  begun  and  also  perfectly  per¬ 
formed  within  it.  Now  these  actions,  as  they 
flow  from  three  faculties,  the  generative,  the 
nutritive,  and  auctive,  so  do  three  operations 
follow  them.  From  generation  all  the  parts  of 
the  chick  result;  from  increase  and  nutrition, 
the  growth  and  maintenance  of  its  body.  From 
studying  the  formation  of  the  chick,  we  per¬ 
ceive  that,  under  the  influence  of  the  genera¬ 
tive  faculty,  the  parts  of  the  creature  which 
formerly  had  no  existence  are  produced:  the 
matter  of  the  egg  is  changed  into  the  organized 
body  of  a  chicken.  But  whilst  any  part  or  sub- 

^  Op.  sztpra  cit.y  p.  41. 


stance  undergoes  transmutation  into  another,  it 
must  needs  be  that  its  proper  essence  under¬ 
goes  change,  otherwise  would  it  still  remain  as 
it  was  and  unaltered;  it  must  at  the  same  time 
receive  figure,  position,  and  dimensions  apt 
and  convenient  to  its  new  nature;  and  indeed 
it  is  into  these  two  states  or  circumstances  that 
procreation  of  matter  resolves  itself,  viz.y  trans¬ 
formation  and  conformation.  The  transforma¬ 
tive  and  the  formative  faculties  would,  there¬ 
fore,  be  the  cause  of  these  functions;  and  whilst 
one  of  them  has  produced  every  individual 
part  of  the  chick,  such  as  we  see  it,  from  the 
chalaza  of  the  egg,  the  other  has  given  it  figure, 
articulations,  and  position,  fitting  it  for  its  des¬ 
tined  uses.  The  first,  the  transformative  or  al¬ 
terative  faculty,  is  entirely  natural,  and  acts 
without  all  consciousness;  and  taking  the  hot, 
the  cold,  the  moist,  and  the  dry,  it  alters  all 
through  the  substance  of  the  chalaza,  and  in 
altering  this  substance  changes  it  into  the  com¬ 
ponent  parts  of  the  chick,  that  is  to  say,  into 
flesh,  bones,  cartilages,  ligaments,  veins,  arter¬ 
ies,  nerves,  and  all  the  other  similar  and  simple 
parts  of  the  animal,  and  these,  through  the 
proper  and  innate  heat  and  spirit  of  the  semen 
of  the  cock,  out  of  the  substance  of  the  egg, 
that  is  to  say,  its  chalaza;  by  altering  and  com¬ 
muting,  it  engenders,  creates,  produces  the 
proper  substance  of  the  chick,  imparting  at  the 
same  time  to  every  substance  its  appropriate 
quality.  The  other,  which  is  called  the  forma¬ 
tive  faculty,  and  which  out  of  similar  forms  dis¬ 
similar  parts — namely,  giving  them  elegance 
through  figure,  due  dimensions,  proper  posi¬ 
tion,  and  congruous  number — is  much  more 
noble  than  the  former,  is  possessed  of  consum¬ 
mate  sapience,  and  acts  not  naturally,  but  with 
election,  and  consciousness,  and  intelligence. 
For  the  formative  faculty  appears  to  have 
exact  cognizance  and  foresight  both  of  the 
future  action  and  use  of  every  part  and  organ. 
So  much  of  the  primary  action  of  the  egg, 
which  is  the  generation  of  the  chick,  and  to 
accomplish  which  both  the  semen  of  the  cock  as 
agent  and  fecundator,  and  the  chalaza  as  mat¬ 
ter  are  required.  In  the  second  place  comes  ac¬ 
cretion  or  growth,  which  is  accomplished  by 
nutrition,  whose  faculties  consist  in  attraction, 
retention,  concoction,  expulsion,  and,  finally, 
apposition,  agglutination,  and  assimilation  of 
food.” 

But  for  my  part  I  neither  regard  such  a  dis¬ 
tribution  of  actions  as  correct,  or  useful,  or  con¬ 
venient  in  this  place.  It  is  incorrect,  because 
those  actions  which  he  would  make  distinct  in 


WILLIAM  HAR\^EY 


442 

kind  and  in  time — for  instance,  that  parts  are 
first  produced  similar  by  the  alterative  or 
transformative  faculty,  to  he  afterwards  fash¬ 
ioned  and  organized  by  the  formative  faculty, 
and  finally  made  to  grow  by  the  auctive  facul¬ 
ty — are  never  apparent  in  the  generation  of 
the  chick;  for  the  several  parts  are  produced 
and  distinguished  and  increased  simultaneous¬ 
ly.  For  although  in  the  generation  of  those  ani¬ 
mals  which  are  formed  by  metamorphosis, 
where  from  matter  previously  existing,  and  al¬ 
ready  adequate  in  quantity  and  duly  prepared, 
all  the  parts  are  made  distinct  and  conformed 
by  transformation,  as  when  a  butterfly  is  formed 
from  a  caterpillar,  a  silkworm  from  a  grub,  still 
in  generation  by  epigenesis  the  thing  is  very 
diflerent,  nor  do  the  same  processes  go  on  as  in 
ordinary  nutrition,  which  is  effected  by  the 
various  actions  of  different  parts  working  to¬ 
gether  to  a  common  end,  the  food  being  here 
first  assumed  and  retained,  then  digested,  next 
distributed,  and  finally  agglutinated.  Nor  is  the 
similar  constitution  the  result  of  the  transforma¬ 
tive  faculty,  void  of  all  foresight,  as  Fabricius 
imagined;  but  the  organic  comes  from  the 
formative  faculty  which  proceeds  with  both 
consciousness  and  foresight.  For  generation  and 
growth  do  not  proceed  without  nutrition,  nor 
nutrition  or  increase  without  generation;  “to 
nourish”  being,  in  other  terms,  to  substitute 
for  a  certain  quantity  of  matter  lost  as  much 
matter  of  the  same  quality,  flesh  or  nerve,  in 
lieu  of  the  matter,  flesh  or  nerve,  that  has  be¬ 
come  effete.  But  what  is  this  but  to  make  or 
engender  flesh  or  nerve?  In  like  manner, 
growth  cannot  go  on  without  generation,  for 
all  natural  bodies  are  increased  by  the  accession 
of  new  particles  similar  to  those  of  which  they 
formerly  consisted,  and  this,  taking  place  ac¬ 
cording  to  all  their  dimensions,  they  are  dis¬ 
tinguished  as  regards  their  parts,  and  are  or¬ 
ganized  at  the  same  time  that  they  grow. 

But  to  engender  the  chick  is  in  truth  nothing 
else  than  to  fashion  or  make  its  several  mem¬ 
bers  and  organs,  which,  although  they  are  pro¬ 
duced  in  a  certain  order,  and  some  are  post- 
genate  toothers — the  less  important  to  the  more 
principal  organs — still,  whilst  the  organs  them¬ 
selves  are  all  distinguished,  they  are  not  en¬ 
gendered  in  such  wise  and  order  that  the  simi¬ 
lar  parts  are  first  formed,  and  the  organic  parts 
afterwards  compoun^led  from  them;  or  so  that 
certain  composing  parts  existed  before  other 
compounded  parts  which  must  be  fashioned 
from  them.  For  although  the  head  of  the  chick 
and  the  rest  of  the  body  exist  in  the  shape  of  a 


mucus  or  soft  jelly,  whence  each  of  the  parts  is 
afterwards  formed  in  sequence,  and  all  are  of 
similar  constitution  in  the  first  instance,  still 
are  they  simultaneously  produced  and  aug¬ 
mented  in  virtue  of  the  same  processes  directed 
by  the  same  agent;  and  in  the  same  proportion 
as  the  matter  resembling  jelly  increases,  in  like 
measure  are  the  parts  distinguished;  for  they 
are  engendered,  transmuted,  and  formed  simul¬ 
taneously;  similar  and  dissimilar  parts  exist  to¬ 
gether,  and  from  a  small  similar  organ  a  larger 
one  is  produced.  The  thing,  in  short,  is  not 
otherwise  than  it  is  among  vegetables,  where 
from  the  straw  proceeds  the  ear,  the  awns,  and 
the  grain — distinctly,  severally,  and  yet  to¬ 
gether;  or  as  trees  put  forth  buds,  from  which 
are  produced  leaves,  flowers,  fruit,  and  finally 
seed. 

All  this  we  learn  from  an  attentive  study  of 
the  parts  and  processes  of  the  incubated  egg, 
inasmuch  as  from  things  done,  actions  or  oper¬ 
ations  are  apprehended;  from  operations,  facul¬ 
ties  or  forces,  and  from  these  we  then  infer  the 
artificer,  generator,  or  cause.  In  the  generation 
of  the  pullet,  consequently,  the  actions  or  fac¬ 
ulties  of  the  engendering  cause  enumerated  by 
Fabricius,  namely,  the  metamorphic  and  form¬ 
ative,  do  not  differ  in  kind,  or  even  in  the 
relation  of  sequence,  as  that  one  is  first  and  the 
other  second,  but,  as  Aristotle  is  wont  to  say, 
are  one  and  the  same  in  reason;  not  as  happens 
with  reference  to  the  actions  of  the  nutritive 
faculty — attraction,  concoction,  distribution 
and  apposition,  to  wit — which  all  come  into 
play  in  several  places  at  several  times.  Were 
this  not  so,  the  engendering  cause  itself  would 
be  forced  to  make  use  of  various  instruments  in 
order  to  accomplish  its  various  operations. 

Fabricius,  therefore,  asserts  erroneously  that 
the  transmutative  force  works  with  the  prop¬ 
erties  of  the  elements — hot,  cold,  moist,  and 
dry — as  its  instruments;  whilst  the  formative 
faculty  acts  independently  of  these  and  by  a 
more  divine  power,  performing  its  task  with 
consciousness,  as  it  seems,  with  foresight  and 
election.  But  if  he  had  looked  more  closely  at 
the  matter  he  would  have  seen  that  the  forma¬ 
tive  as  well  as  the  metamorphic  force  made  use 
of  the  hot  and  the  cold,  the  moist  and  the  dry, 
as  instruments;  nor  would  he  have  been  less 
struck  with  indications  of  the  Supreme  Artifi¬ 
cer's  interference  in  the  processes  of  nutrition 
and  transformation  than  in  that  of  formation 
itself.  For  nature  ordained  each  and  all  of  these 
faculties  to  some  definite  end,  and  everywhere 
labours  with  forethought  and  intelligence. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


Whatever  it  is  in  the  seeds  of  plants  which  ren¬ 
ders  them  fertile  and  exercises  a  plastic  force  in 
their  interior;  whatever  it  is  which  in  the  egg 
performs  the  duty  of  a  most  skilful  artificer, 
producing  and  fashioning  the  parts  of  the  pul¬ 
let,  warming,  cooling,  moistening,  drying,  con¬ 
cocting,  condensing,  hardening,  softening  and 
liquefying  at  once,  impressing  distinctive  char¬ 
acters  on  each  of  them  by  means  of  configura¬ 
tion,  situation,  constitution,  temperament, 
number  and  order — still  is  this  something  at 
work,  disposing  and  ordering  all  with  no  less  of 
foresight,  intelligence,  and  choice  in  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  transmuting,  than  in  the  processes  of 
nutrition,  growth,  and  formation. 

The  concoctive  and  metamorphic,  the  nu¬ 
tritive  and  augmentive  faculties,  which  Fa- 
bricius  would  have  it  act  through  the  qualities 
of  hot,  cold,  moist,  and  dry,  without  all  con¬ 
sciousness,  I  maintain,  on  the  contrary,  work 
no  less  to  a  definite  end,  and  with  not  less  of 
artifice  than  the  formative  faculty,  which  Fa- 
bricius  declares  has  knowledge  and  foresight  of 
the  future  action  and  use  of  every  particular 
part  and  organ.  In  the  same  way  as  the  arts  of 
the  physician,  cook,  and  baker,  in  which  heat 
and  cold,  moisture  and  dryness,  and  similar 
natural  properties  are  employed,  require  the 
use  of  reason  no  less  than  the  mechanical  arts  in 
which  either  the  hands  or  various  instruments 
are  employed,  as  in  the  business  of  the  black¬ 
smith,  statuary,  potter,  &c.;  in  the  same  way, 
as  in  the  greater  world,  we  are  told  that  “All 
things  are  full  of  Jove,” — Jovis  omnia  plena — so 
in  the  slender  body  of  the  pullet,  and  in  every 
one  of  its  actions,  does  the  finger  of  God  or  na¬ 
ture  no  less  obviously  appear. 

Wherefore,  if  from  manifestations  it  be  legit¬ 
imate  to  judge  of  faculties,  we  might  say  that 
the  vegetative  acts  appear  rather  to  be  per¬ 
formed  with  art,  election,  and  foresight,  than 
the  acts  of  the  rational  soul  and  mind;  and  this 
even  in  the  most  perfect  man,  whose  highest 
excellence  in  science  and  art,  if  we  may  take 
the  God  for  our  guide,  is  that  he  know  him¬ 
self. 

A  superior  and  more  divine  agent  than  man, 
therefore,  appears  to  engender  and  preserve 
mankind,  a  higher  power  than  the  male  bird  to 
produce  a  young  one  from  the  egg.  We  ac¬ 
knowledge  God,  the  supreme  and  omnipotent 
creator,  to  be  present  in  the  production  of  all 
animals,  and  to  point,  as  it  were,  with  a  finger 
to  his  existence  in  his  works,  the  parents  being 
in  every  case  but  as  instruments  in  his  hands. 
In  the  generation  of  the  pullet  from  the  egg  all 


things  are  indeed  contrived  and  ordered  with 
singular  providence,  divine  wisdom,  and  most 
admirable  and  incomprehensible  skill.  And  to 
none  can  these  attributes  be  referred  save  to 
the  Almighty,  first  cause  of  all  things,  by  what¬ 
ever  name  this  has  been  designated, — the  Z)/- 
vtne  Mind  by  Aristotle;  the  Soul  of  the  Universe 
by  Plato;  the  Natura  Naturans  by  others;  Sat¬ 
urn  and  Jove  by  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Ro¬ 
mans;  by  ourselves,  and  as  is  seeming  in  these 
days,  the  Creator  and  Father  of  all  that  is  in 
heaven  and  earth,  on  whom  animals  depend 
for  their  being,  and  at  whose  will  and  pleasure 
all  things  are  and  were  engendered. 

Moreover,  as  I  have  said,  I  neither  hold  this 
arrangement  of  the  faculties  of  the  vital  princi¬ 
ple,  which  Fabricius  has  placed  at  the  head  of 
his  account  of  the  organs  of  generation,  as  cor¬ 
rect  in  itself,  nor  as  useful  or  calculated  to  as¬ 
sist  us  in  the  matter  we  have  in  hand.  For  we 
do  not  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  effects  from  a 
discussion  of  actions  or  faculties;  the  contrary  is 
rather  the  case:  from  actions  we  ascend  to  a 
knowledge  of  faculties,  inasmuch  as  manifesta¬ 
tions  are  more  cognizable  to  us  than  the  powers 
whence  they  proceed,  and  the  parts  which  we 
investigate  already  formed  are  more  readily  ap¬ 
preciated  than  the  actions  whence  they  pro¬ 
ceed. 

Neither  is  it  well  from  the  generation  of  a 
single  chick  from  an  egg,  to  venture  upon  gen¬ 
eral  conclusions,  which  can  in  fact  only  be  cor¬ 
rectly  arrived  at  after  extensive  observations 
on  the  mode  of  generation  among  animals  at 
large.  But  of  this  matter  I  shall  have  more  to 
say  immediately. 

Meantime,  however,  that  we  may  come  to 
the  parts  subservient  to  generation,  as  Fabri¬ 
cius  says,  “let  us  consider  and  perpend  in  what 
order  the  organs  subserving  generation  are  pro¬ 
duced — which  are  formed  first,  which  last.  In 
this  investigation  two  bases  are  to  be  laid,  one 
having  reference  to  the  corporeal,  the  other  to 
the  incorporeal;  that  is  to  say,  to  nature  and 
the  vital  principle.  The  corporeal  base,”  he  con¬ 
tinues,  “I  call  that  which  depends  on  and  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  the  nature  of  the  body,  and  of  which 
illustrations  are  readily  supplied  from  things 
made  by  art ;  as  for  example,  that  every  build¬ 
ing  requires  a  foundation  upon  which  it  may  be 
established  and  reared;  from  whence  walls  are 
raised,  by  which  both  floors  and  ceilings  are 
supported;  then  are  all  the  supplementary 
parts  added  and  ornaments  appended:  and  so, 
in  fact,  does  Nature  strive  in  the  construction 
of  the  animal  body;  for  first  she  forms  the  bones 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


444 

as  a  foundation,  in  order  that  all  the  parts  of 
the  body  may  grow  upon  and  be  appended  to 
and  established  around  them.  These  are  the 
parts,  in  other  words,  that  are  first  formed  and 
solidified;  for  as  the  bones  derive  their  origin 
from  a  very  soft  and  membranous  substance, 
and  by  and  by  become  extremely  hard,  much 
time  is  required  to  complete  the  formation  of  a 
bone,  and  it  is  therefore  that  they  are  first  pro¬ 
duced.  Hence  Galen  did  not  compare  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  the  animal  body  to  every  kind  of  artifi¬ 
cial  structure,  but  particularly  to  a  ship;  for  he 
says,  as  the  commencement  and  foundation  of 
a  ship  is  the  keel,  from  which  the  ribs,  circular¬ 
ly  curved,  proceed  on  either  side  at  moderate 
distances  from  each  other,  like  the  sticks  of  a 
hurdle,  in  order  that  the  whole  fabric  of  the 
vessel  may  afterwards  be  reared  upon  the  keel 
as  a  suitable  basis;  so  in  the  formation  of  the 
animal  body  does  Nature,  by  means  of  the  out¬ 
stretched  spine  and  the  ribs  drawn  around  it, 
secure  a  keel  and  suitable  foundation  for  the 
entire  superstructure,  which  she  then  raises  and 
perfects.”^ 

But  experience  teaches  us  that  all  this  is  very 
different  in  fact,  and  that  the  bones  are  rather 
among  the  last  parts  to  be  formed.  The  bones  of 
the  extremities  and  skull,  and  the  teeth,  do  not 
arise  any  sooner  than  the  brain,  the  muscles, 
and  the  other  fleshy  parts:  in  new-born  foetuses, 
perfect  in  other  respects,  the  place  of  the  bones 
is  supplied  by  mere  membranes  or  cartilages, 
which  are  only  subsequently  and  in  the  lapse  of 
time  converted  into  bones;  a  circumstance 
which  sufficiently  appears  in  the  crania  of  new¬ 
born  infants,  and  in  the  state  of  their  ribs  and 
articulations. 

And  although  it  be  true  that  the  first  rudi¬ 
ments  of  the  body  are  seen  in  the  guise  of  a  re¬ 
curved  keel,  still  this  is  a  soft  mucous  and  jelly- 
like  substance,  which  has  no  affinity  in  nature, 
structure,  or  office  to  bone;  and  although  cer¬ 
tain  globules  depend  from  thence,  the  destined 
rudiments  of  the  head,  still  these  contain  no 
solid  matter,  but  are  mere  vesicles  full  of  limpid 
water,  which  are  afterwards  formed  into  the 
brain,  cerebellum,  and  eyes,  which  are  all  sub¬ 
sequently  surrounded  by  the  skull,  at  a  period, 
however,  when  the  beak  and  nails  have  already 
acquired  consistency  and  hardness. 

This  view  of  Fabricius  is  therefore  both  im¬ 
perfect  and  incorrect;  inasmuch  as  he  does  not 
think  of  what  Nature  performs  in  fact  in  the 
work  of  generation,  so  much  as  of  what  in  his 
opinion  she  ought  to  do,  betrayed  into  this  by 

^  Op.  supra  p.  43. 


his  comparison  with  the  edifice  reared  by  art. 
As  if  nature  had  imitated  art,  and  not  rather 
art  nature! — mindful  of  which  he  himself  says 
afterwards:  “It  were  better  to  say  that  art 
learned  of  Nature,  and  was  an  imitator  of  her 
doings;  for,  as  Galen  everywhere  reminds  us. 
Nature  is  both  older  and  displays  greater  wis¬ 
dom  in  her  works  than  art.”^ 

And  then  when  we  admit  that  the  bones  are 
the  foundation  of  the  whole  body,  without 
which  it  could  neither  support  itself  nor  per¬ 
form  any  movement,  it  is  still  sufficient  if  they 
arise  simultaneously  with  the  parts  that  are 
attached  to  them.  And  indeed  the  things  that 
are  to  be  supported  not  yet  existing,  the  sup¬ 
ports  would  be  established  in  vain.  Nature, 
however,  does  nothing  in  vain;  nor  does  she 
form  parts  before  there  is  a  use  for  them.  But 
animals  receive  their  organs  as  soon  as  the  of¬ 
fices  of  these  are  required.  The  first  basis  of 
Fabricius,  therefore,  is  distinctly  overthrown 
by  his  own  observations  on  the  egg,  and  the 
comparison  drawn  by  Galen. 

He  appears  to  have  come  nearer  the  truth 
where  he  says:  “The  other  basis  of  the  parts  to 
be  formed  first  or  last  is  obtained  from  nature, 
that  is,  from  the  vital  principle  by  which  the 
animal  body  is  ruled  and  directed.  If  there  be 
two  grades  of  this  principle,  the  vegetative  and 
animal,  the  vegetative  must  be  held  prior  in 
point  of  nature  and  time,  inasmuch  as  it  is  com¬ 
mon  to  plants  and  animals;  and  assuredly  the 
organs  officiating  in  the  vegetative  office  will 
be  engendered  and  formed  before  those  that 
belong  to  the  sensitive  and  motive  principle, 
especially  to  the  chief  organs  which  are  in  im¬ 
mediate  relationship  with  the  governing  prin¬ 
ciple.  Now  these  organs  are  two  in  especial— 
the  liver  and  the  heart:  the  liver  as  seat  of  con¬ 
cupiscence,  of  the  vegetative  or  nutritive  fac¬ 
ulty;  the  heart,  as  the  organ  whose  heat  main¬ 
tains  and  perfects  the  vegetative  and  every 
other  faculty,  and  in  this  way  has  most  intimate 
connexions  and  relations  with  the  vegetative 
force.  Whence,  if  after  the  third  day  you  see 
the  heart  palpitating  in  the  point  where  the 
chick  is  engendered,  as  Aristotle  bears  witness 
to  the  fact  that  you  can,  you  will  not  be  sur¬ 
prised  but  rather  be  disposed  to  admit  that  the 
heart  belongs  to  the  vegetative  degree  and 
exists  for  its  sake.  It  is  also  consonant  with  rea¬ 
son  that  the  liver  should  be  engendered  simul¬ 
taneously  with  the  heart,  but  should  lie  perdue 
or  hidden,  as  it  does  not  pulsate.  And  Aristotle 
himself  admits  that  the  heart  and  liver  exist  in 
2  op.  cit.j  p.  44. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


the  animal  body  for  similar  reasons;  so  that 
where  there  is  a  heart  there  also  is  a  liver  dis¬ 
covered.  If  the  heart  and  liver  be  the  parts  first 
produced,  then,  it  is  also  fair  to  suppose  that 
the  other  organs  subserving  these  two  should 
be  engendered  in  the  same  manner — the  lungs 
which  exist  for  the  sake  of  the  heart;  and,  for 
the  sake  of  the  liver,  almost  all  the  viscera 
which  present  themselves  in  the  abdomen.”^ 
Still  is  all  this  very  different  from  the  se¬ 
quence  we  witness  in  the  egg.  Nor  is  it  true 
that  the  liver  is  engendered  simultaneously 
with  the  heart;  nor  does  the  salve  avail  with 
which  he  would  cover  that  infirmity  where  he 
says  that  the  liver  is  concealed  because  it  does 
not  palpitate;  for  the  eyes  and  vena  cava  and 
Carina  are  all  conspicuous  enough  from  the 
commencement,  although  none  of  them  palpi¬ 
tate.  How  come  the  liver  and  lungs,  if  they  be 
then  extant,  to  be  visible  without  any  palpi¬ 
tation.?*  And  then  Fabricius  himself  has  indi¬ 
cated  a  minute  point  situated  in  the  centre  of 
his  figure  of  the  chick  of  the  fourth  day,  with¬ 
out  stating,  however,  that  it  had  any  pulsation; 
and  this  he  did  not  perceive  to  be  the  heart, 
but  rather  believed  it  to  be  the  rudiment  of  the 
body.  It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  Fabricius 
spoke  only  from  conjecture  and  preconceived 
opinion  of  the  origin  of  the  liver;  even  in  the 
same  way  as  others  have  done,  Aldrovandus 
and  Parisanus  among  the  number,  who,  light¬ 
ing  upon  two  points,  and  perceiving  that  they 
did  not  pulsate  simultaneously,  straightway 
held  that  one  was  the  heart,  the  other  the  liver. 
As  if  the  liver  ever  pulsated,  and  these  two 
points  were  aught  but  the  two  pulsating  vesi¬ 
cles  replying  to  each  other  by  alternate  con¬ 
tractions,  in  the  way  and  manner  we  have  in¬ 
dicated  in  our  history! 

Fabricius,  therefore,  is  either  deceived  or 
deceives,  when  he  says,  “In  the  first  stage  of 
the  production  of  the  chick,  the  liver,  heart, 
veins,  arteries,  lungs,  and  all  the  organs  con¬ 
tained  in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  are  en¬ 
gendered  together;  and  in  like  manner  are  the 
Carina,  in  other  words,  the  head  with  the  eyes 
and  entire  vertebral  column  and  thorax  en¬ 
gendered.*’  For  the  heart,  veins,  and  arteries 
are  perfectly  distinguished  some  time  before  the 
Carina;  the  carina,  again,  is  seen  before  the  eyes; 
the  eyes,  beak,  and  sides  before  the  organs  con¬ 
tained  in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen;  the  stom¬ 
ach  and  intestines  before  the  liver  or  lungs; 
and  there  are  still  other  particulars  connected 
with  the  order  of  production  of  the  parts  in 
^  Op.  cit.  ut.  sup. 


generation,  of  which  we  shall  speak  by  and  by. 

He  is  also  mistaken  when  he  would  have  the 
vegetative  portion  of  the  vital  principle  prior 
in  nature  and  time  to  the  sensitive  and  motive 
element.  For  that  which  is  prior  in  nature  is 
mostly  posterior  in  the  order  of  generation.  In 
point  of  time,  indeed,  the  vegetative  principle 
is  prior;  because  without  it  the  sensitive  prin¬ 
ciple  cannot  exist:  an  act — if  the  act  of  an  or¬ 
ganic  body — cannot  take  place  without  or¬ 
gans;  and  the  sensitive  and  motive  organs  are 
the  work  of  the  vegetative  principle;  the  sensi¬ 
tive  soul  before  the  existence  of  action,  is  like  a 
triangle  within  a  quadrangle.  But  nature  in¬ 
tended  that  that  which  was  primary  and  most 
noble  should  also  be  primary;  wherefore  the 
vegetative  force  is  by  nature  posterior  in  point 
of  order,  as  subordinate  and  ministrative  to  the 
sensitive  and  motive  faculties. 

EXERCISE  55.  Of  the  order  of  the  parts  according 
to  Aristotle 

The  following  appear  to  be  Aristotle’s  views 
of  the  order  of  generation:  “When  conception 
takes  place,  the  germ  comports  itself  like  a  seed 
sown  in  the  ground.  For  seeds  likewise  contain 
a  first  principle,  which,  existing  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  in  potentiay  by  and  by  when  it  manifests 
itself,  sends  forth  a  stem  and  a  root,  by  which 
aliment  is  taken  up;  for  increase  is  indispensable. 
And  so  in  a  conception,  in  which  all  the  parts 
of  the  body  inhere  in  potentia,  and  the  first 
principle  exists  in  a  state  of  special  activity.”^ 

This  principle  in  the  egg — the  body  anal¬ 
ogous  to  the  seed  of  a  vegetable — we  have 
called  with  Fabricius  the  spot  or  cicatricula, 
and  have  spoken  of  it  as  a  very  primary  part  of 
the  egg,  as  that  in  which  all  the  other  parts  in¬ 
here  in  potentiay  and  from  whence  each  in  its 
order  afterwards  arises.  In  this  spot,  in  fact,  is 
contained  that — whatever  it  may  be  —  by 
which  the  egg  is  made  productive;  and  here  is 
the  first  action  of  the  formative  faculty,  the 
first  effect  of  the  vegetative  heat  revealed. 

This  spot,  as  we  have  said,  dilates  from  the 
very  commencement  of  the  incubation,  and  ex¬ 
pands  in  circles,  in  the  centre  of  which  a 
minute  white  speck  is  displayed,  like  the  shin¬ 
ing  point  in  the  pupil  of  the  eye;  and  here  anon 
is  discovered  the  punctum  saliens  rubrum, 
with  the  ramifications  of  the  sanguiferous  ves¬ 
sels,  and  this  as  soon  as  the  fluid,  which  we  have 
called  the  colliquament,  has  been  produced. 

“Wherefore,”  adds  Aristotle,®  “the  heart  is 

^  On  the  Generation  of  AnimalSy  ii.  4. 

3  Ibid, 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


446 

the  first  part  perceived  in  fact;  and  this  is  in 
conformity  not  only  with  sense,  but  also  with 
reason.  For  as  that  which  is  engendered  is  al¬ 
ready  disjunct  and  severed  from  both  parents, 
and  ought  to  rule  and  regulate  itself  like  a  son 
who  comes  of  age  and  has  his  separate  establish¬ 
ment,  it  must  therefore  possess  a  principle,  an 
intrinsic  principle,  by  which  the  order  of  the 
members  may  be  subsequently  determined, 
and  whatever  is  necessary  to  the  constitution 
of  a  perfect  animal  arranged.  For  if  this  prin¬ 
ciple  were  at  any  time  extrinsic,  and  entered 
into  the  body  at  a  subsequent  period,  you 
would  not  only  be  in  doubt  as  to  the  time  at 
which  it  entered,  but  as  every  part  is  distinct, 
YOU  would  also  see  it  as  necessary  that  that 
should  first  exist  from  which  the  other  parts  de¬ 
rive  both  increase  and  motion.”  The  same 
writer  elsewhere^  asserts:  “This  principle  is  a 
portion  of  the  whole,  and  not  anything  added, 
or  included  apart.  For,”  he  proceeds, “the 
generation  of  the  animal  completed,  does  this 
principle  perish,  or  does  it  continue  ?  But  noth¬ 
ing  can  be  shown  existing  intrinsically  which  is 
not  a  part  of  the  whole  organized  being,  wheth¬ 
er  it  be  plant  or  animal;  wherefore  it  would  be 
absurd  to  maintain  that  the  principle  in  ques¬ 
tion  perished  after  the  formation  either  of  any 
one  or  of  any  number  of  parts;  for  what  should 
form  those  that  were  not  yet  produced }  Where¬ 
fore,”  he  continues  further,  “they  say  not  well 
who  with  Democritus  assert  that  the  external 
parts  of  animals  are  those  first  seen,  and  then 
the  internal  parts,  as  if  they  were  rearing  an  ani¬ 
mal  of  wood  and  stone,  for  such  a  thing  would 
include  no  principle  within  itself.  But  all  ani¬ 
mals  have  and  hold  a  principle  in  their  interior. 
Wherefore  the  heart  is  seen  as  the  first  distinct 
part  in  animals  that  have  blood;  for  it  is  the 
origin  of  all  the  parts,  whether  similar  or  dissim¬ 
ilar;  and  the  creature  that  begins  to  feel  the 
necessity  of  nourishment,  must  already  be  pos¬ 
sessed  by  the  principle  of  an  animal  and  a  full- 
grown  foetus.” 

From  the  above,  it  clearly  appears  that  Aris¬ 
totle  recognizes  a  certain  order  and  commence¬ 
ment  in  animal  generation,  namely,  the  heart, 
which  he  regards  as  the  first  produced  and  first 
vivified  part  of  the  animal,  and,  like  a  son  set 
free  from  the  tutelage  of  his  parents,  as  self- 
sufficing  and  independent,  whence  not  only 
does  the  order  of  the  parts  proceed,  but  as  that 
by  which  tlie  animal  itself  is  maintained  and 
preserved,  receiving  from  it  at  once  life  and 
sustenance,  and  everything  needful  to  the  per- 

*  Ibid,  n.  I. 


fection  of  its  being.  For  as  Seneca  says:  “In  the 
semen  is  comprised  the  entire  cause  of  the  fu¬ 
ture  man;  and  the  unborn  babe  has  written 
within  it  the  law  of  a  beard  and  a  hoary  head. 
For  the  whole  body  and  the  load  of  future 
years  are  already  traced  in  delicate  and  obscure 
outlines  in  its  constitution.”^ 

We  have  already  determined  whether  the 
heart  were  this  primigenial  part  or  not;  in 
other  words,  whether  Aristotle’s  words  refer  to 
that  part  which,  in  the  dissection  of  animals,  is 
seen  sooner  than  all  the  rest,  the  punctum 
saliens,  to  wit,  with  its  vessels  full  of  blood;  and 
we  have  cordially  assented  to  an  answer  in  the 
affirmative.  For  I  believe  that  the  blood,  to¬ 
gether  with  its  immediate  instruments,  the  um¬ 
bilical  vessels,  by  which,  as  by  roots,  nutriment 
is  attracted,  and  the  pulsating  vesicles,  by 
which  this  nutriment  is  distributed,  to  main¬ 
tain  life  and  growth  in  every  other  part,  are 
formed  first  and  foremost  of  all.  For  as  Aris¬ 
totle^  has  said,  it  is  the  same  matter  by  which  a 
thing  grows,  and  by  which  it  is  primarily  con¬ 
stituted. 

Many,  however,  err  in  supposing  that  dif¬ 
ferent  parts  of  the  body  require  different  kinds 
of  matter  for  their  nourishment.  As  if  nutrition 
were  nothing  more  than  the  selection  and  at¬ 
traction  of  fit  aliment;  and  in  the  several  parts 
of  the  body  to  be  nourished,  no  concoction,  as¬ 
similation,  apposition,  and  transmutation  were 
required.  This  as  we  learn,  was  the  opinion  of 
Anaxagoras  of  old : 

Who  held  the  principles  of  things  to  be 
Homoeotneric: — bone  to  be  produced 
Of  small  and  slender  bones;  the  viscera 
Of  small  and  slender  viscera ;  the  blood 
Of  numerous  associate  drops  of  bloods 

But  Aristotle,  with  the  greatest  propriety, 
observes:  “Distinction  of  parts  is  not  effected, 
as  some  think,  by  like  being  carried  by  its  na¬ 
ture  to  like;  for,  besides  innumerable  difficulties 
belonging  to  this  opinion  in  itself,  it  happens 
that  each  similar  part  is  severally  created;  for 
example,  the  bones  by  themselves,  the  nerves, 
the  flesh,  &c.”^  But  the  nourishment  of  all  parts 
is  common  and  homogeneous,  such  as  we  see  the 
albumen  to  be  in  the  egg,  not  heterogeneous 
and  composed  of  different  parts.  Wherefore  all 
we  have  said  of  the  matter  from  which  parts  are 
made,  is  to  be  stated  of  that  by  which  they  in- 

^Nat.  Qiixst.  in.  29. 

3  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  ii.  4. 

^  Lucretius,  On  the  Nature  of  Things,  i.  834-838. 

6  Loc.  sup.  cit. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


crease:  all  derive  nourishment  from  that  in 
which  they  exist  in  potential  though  not  in  act. 
Precisely  as  from  the  same  rain  plants  of  every 
kind  increase  and  grow;  because  the  moisture 
which  was  a  like  power  in  reference  to  all,  be¬ 
comes  actually  like  to  each  when  it  is  changed 
into  their  substances  severally:  then  does  it  ac¬ 
quire  bitterness  in  rue,  sharpness  in  mustard, 
sweetness  in  liquorice,  and  so  on. 

He  explains,  moreover,  what  parts  are  en¬ 
gendered  before  others,  and  assigns  a  reason 
which  does  not  differ  from  the  second  basis  of 
Fabricius.  “The  cause  by  which,  and  the  cause 
of  this  cause,  are  different;  one  is  first  in  genera¬ 
tion,  the  other  in  essence”;  by  which  we  are  to 
understand  that  the  end  is  prior  in  nature  and 
essence  to  that  which  happens  for  the  sake  of 
the  end ;  but  that  which  happens  for  the  sake  of 
the  end  must  be  prior  in  generation.  And  on 
this  ground  Fabricius  rightly  infers  that  all 
those  parts  which  minister  to  the  vegetative 
principle  are  engendered  before  those  that 
serve  the  sensitive  principle,  inasmuch  as  the 
former  is  subordinate  to  the  latter. 

He  subsequently  adds  the  differences  of  those 
parts  which  are  made  for  some  special  purpose: 
some  parts,  for  example,  are  instituted  for  a 
purpose  by  nature,  because  this  purpose  ensues; 
and  others  because  they  are  instruments  which 
the  purpose  employs.  The  former  he  designates 
genitalia^  the  latter  instrumental  For  the  end  or 
purpose,  he  says,  in  some  cases,  is  posterior,  in 
others  prior  to  that  which  is  its  cause.  For  both 
the  generator  and  the  instruments  it  uses  must 
exist  anteriorly  to  that  which  is  engendered  by 
or  from  them.  The  parts  serving  the  vegetative 
principle,  therefore,  are  prior  to  the  parts  which 
are  the  ministers  of  sense  and  motion.  But  the 
parts  dedicated  to  motion  and  sensation  are 
posterior  to  the  motive  and  sensitive  faculties, 
because  they  are  the  instruments  which  the 
motive  and  sensitive  faculties  employ.  For  it  is 
a  law  of  nature  that  no  parts  or  instruments  be 
produced  before  there  be  some  use  for  them, 
and  the  faculty  be  extant  which  employs  them. 
Thus  there  is  neither  any  eye  nor  any  motive 
organ  engendered  until  the  brain  is  produced, 
and  the  faculties  pre-exist  which  are  to  see  and 
to  govern  motion. 

In  like  manner,  as  the  pulsating  vesicles  serve 
as  instruments  for  the  motion  of  the  blood,  and 
the  heart  in  its  entire  structure  does  the  same 
(as  I  have  shown  in  the  work  On  the  Motion  of 
the  Blood),  urging  the  blood  in  a  ceaseless  round 
through  every  part  of  the  body,  we  see  that  the 
blood  must  exist  before  the  heart,  both  in  the 


order  of  generation  and  of  nature  and  essence. 
For  the  blood  uses  the  heart  as  an  instrument, 
and  moreover,  when  engendered  it  continues  to 
nourish  the  organ  by  means  of  the  coronary 
arteries,  distributing  heat,  spirits,  and  life  to  it 
through  their  ramifications. 

We  shall  have  further  occasion  to  show  from 
an  entire  series  of  anatomical  observ^ations,  how 
this  rule  of  Aristotle  in  respect  of  the  true  pri¬ 
ority  of  the  parts  is  borne  out.  Meantime  we 
shall  see  how  he  himself  succeeds  in  duly  in¬ 
ferring  the  causes  of  priority  in  conformity  with 
his  rule. 

“After  the  prime  part — viz.,  the  heart — is 
engendered,”  he  says,  “the  internal  parts  are 
produced  before  the  external  ones,  the  superior 
before  the  inferior;  for  the  lower  parts  exist  for 
the  sake  of  the  superior,  and  that  they  may 
serve  as  instruments,  after  the  manner  of  the 
seeds  of  vegetables,  which  produce  roots  sooner 
than  branches.” 

Nature,  however,  follows  no  such  order  in 
generation;  nor  is  the  instance  quoted  invari¬ 
ably  applicable;  for  in  beans,  peas,  and  other 
leguminous  seeds,  in  acorns,  also,  and  in  grain, 
it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  stem  shoots  upwards 
and  the  root  downwards  from  the  same  germ: 
and  onions  and  other  bulbous  plants  send  oil 
stalks  before  they  strike  root. 

He  then  subjoins  another  cause  of  this  order, 
viz.:  “That  as  Nature  does  nothing  in  vain  or 
superfluously,  it  follows  that  she  makes  nothing 
either  sooner  or  later  than  the  use  she  has  for  it 
requires.”  That  is  to  say,  those  parts  are  first 
engendered  whose  use  or  function  is  first  re¬ 
quired;  and  some  are  begun  at  an  earlier  period 
because  a  longer  time  is  requisite  to  bring  them 
to  perfection;  and  that  so  they  may  be  in  the 
same  state  of  forwardness  at  birth  as  those  that 
are  more  rapidly  produced.  Just  as  the  cook, 
having  to  dress  certain  articles  for  supper,  which 
by  reason  of  their  hardness  are  done  with  dilfi- 
culty,  or  require  gentle  boiling  for  a  great  length 
of  time,  these  he  puts  on  the  first,  and  only 
turns  subsequently  to  those  that  are  prepared 
more  quickly  and  with  less  expenditure  of  heat; 
and  further,  as  he  makes  ready  the  articles  that 
are  to  come  on  in  the  first  course  first  of  all, 
and  those  that  are  to  be  presented  in  the  second 
course  afterwards;  so  also  does  Nature  in  the 
generation  of  animals  only  proceed  at  a  later 
period  to  the  construction  of  the  soft  and  moist 
and  fleshy  parts,  as  requiring  but  a  short  time 
for  their  concoction  and  formation,  whilst  the 
hard  parts,  such  as  the  bones,  as  requiring  ample 
evaporation  and  abundant  drying,  and  their 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


448 

matter  long  remaining  inconcoct,  she  proceeds 
to  fashion  almost  from  the  very  beginning. 
“And  the  same  thing  obtains  in  the  brain,”  he 
adds,  “which,  large  in  quantity  and  exceedingly 
moist  at  first,  is  by  and  by  better  concocted  and 
condensed,  so  that  the  brain  as  well  as  the  eye 
diminishes  in  size.  The  head  is,  therefore,  very 
large  at  first,  in  comparison  with  the  rest  of  the 
body,  which  it  far  surpasses  because  of  the  brain 
and  the  eyes,  and  the  large  quantity  of  mois¬ 
ture  contained  in  them.  These  parts,  neverthe¬ 
less,  are  among  the  last  to  be  perfected,  for  the 
brain  acquires  consistence  with  difficulty,  and 
it  is  long  before  it  is  freed  from  cold  and  mois¬ 
ture  in  any  animal,  and  especially  in  man.  The 
sinciput,  too,  is  consolidated  the  last,  the  bones 
here  being  quite  soft  when  the  infant  sees  the 
light.” 

He  gives  another  reason,  viz.^  because  the 
parts  are  formed  of  different  kinds  of  matter: 
“Every  more  excellent  part,  the  sharer  in  the 
highest  principle  is,  further,  engendered  from 
the  most  highly  concocted,  the  purest  and  first 
nutriment;  the  other  needful  parts,  produced 
for  the  sake  of  the  former,  from  the  worse  and 
excrementitious  remainder.  For  Nature,  like  the 
sage  head  of  a  family,  is  wont  to  throw  away 
nothing  that  may  be  turned  to  any  useful  pur¬ 
pose.  But  he  still  regulates  his  household  so  that 
the  best  food  shall  be  given  to  his  children,  the 
more  indifferent  to  his  menials,  the  worst  to  the 
animals.  As  then,  man’s  growth  being  complete 
and  mind  having  been  superadded  (in  other 
words,  and,  as  1  interpret  the  passage,  adult  man 
having  acquired  sense  and  prudence),  things 
are  ordered  in  this  way,  so  does  Nature  at  the 
period  of  production  even  compose  the  flesh 
and  the  other  more  sensitive  parts  of  the  purest 
matter.  Of  the  excrementitious  remainder  she 
makes  the  bones,  sinews,  hair,  nails,  and  other 
parts  of  the  same  constitution.  And  this  is  the 
reason  why  this  is  done  last  of  all,  when  Nature 
has  an  abundant  supply  of  recrementitious  ma¬ 
terial.”  Our  author  then  goes  on  to  speak  of  “a 
twofold  order  of  aliment”:  “one  for  nutrition, 
another  for  growth”;  “the  nutritive  is  the  one 
which  supplies  existence  to  the  whole  and  to 
the  parts;  the  augmentative,  that  which  causes 
increase  to  the  bulk.” 

This  is  in  accordance  with  what  we  find  in 
the  egg,  where  the  albumen  supplies  a  kind  of 
purer  aliment  adapted  to  the  nutrition  of  the 
embryo  in  its  earlier  stages,  and  the  yelk  affords 
the  material  for  the  growth  of  the  chick  and 
pullet.  The  thinner  albumen,  moreover,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  used  in  fashioning  the  first  and 


more  noble  parts;  the  thicker  albumen  and  the 
yelk,  again,  are  employed  in  nourishing  and 
making  these  to  grow,  and  further  in  forming 
the  less  important  parts  of  the  body.  “For,”  he 
says,  “the  sinews,  too,  are  produced  in  the  same 
way  as  the  bones,  and  from  the  same  material, 
viz.:  the  seminal  and  nutritive  excrementitious 
matter.  But  the  nails,  hair,  horns,  beak,  and 
spurs  of  birds,  and  all  other  things  of  the  same 
description,  are  engendered  of  the  adventitious 
and  nutritive  aliment,  which  is  obtained  both 
from  the  mother  and  from  without.”  And  then 
he  gives  a  reason  why  man,  whilst  other  ani¬ 
mals  are  endowed  by  nature  with  defensive  and 
offensive  arms,  is  born  naked  and  defenceless, 
which  is  this:  that  whilst  in  the  lower  animals 
these  parts  are  formed  of  remainders  or  excre¬ 
ments,  man  is  compounded  of  a  purer  material, 
“which  contains  too  small  a  quantity  of  incon¬ 
coct  and  earthy  matter.” 

Thus  far  have  we  followed  Aristotle  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  “The  Order  in  Generation,”  the  whole  of 
which  seems  to  be  refer rible  to  one  principle, 
viz.:  the  perfection  of  Nature,  who  in  her 
works  does  nothing  in  vain  and  has  no  short¬ 
comings,  but  still  does  that  in  the  best  manner 
which  was  best  to  be  done.  Hence  in  generation 
no  part  would  either  precede  or  follow,  did  she 
prefer  producing  them  altogether,  viz.:  in  cir¬ 
cumstances  where  she  acts  freely  and  by  elec¬ 
tion;  for  sometimes  she  works  under  compul¬ 
sion,  as  it  were,  and  beside  her  purpose,  as  when 
through  deficiency  or  superabundance  of  ma¬ 
terial,  or  through  some  defect  in  her  instru¬ 
ments,  or  is  hindered  of  her  ends  by  external 
injuries.  And  thus  it  occasionally  happens  that 
the  final  parts  are  formed  before  the  instrumen¬ 
tal  parts — understanding  by  final  parts,  those 
that  use  others  as  instruments. 

And  as  some  of  the  parts  are  genital,  nature 
making  use  of  them  in  the  generation  of  other 
parts,  as  the  means  of  removing  obstacles  the 
presence  of  which  would  interfere  with  the  due 
progress  of  the  work  of  reproduction,  and  others 
exist  for  other  special  ends;  it  therefore  hap¬ 
pens  that  for  the  disposition  of  material,  and 
other  requisites,  some  parts  are  variously  en¬ 
gendered  before  others,  some  of  them  being 
begun  earlier  but  completed  at  a  later  period, 
some  being  both  begun  and  perfected  at  an 
earlier  period,  and  others  being  begun  together 
but  perfected  at  different  times  subsequently. 
And  then  the  same  order  is  not  observed  in  the 
generation  of  all  animals,  but  this  is  variously 
altered;  and  in  some  there  is  nothing  like  suc¬ 
cession,  but  all  the  parts  are  begun  and  per- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


fected  simultaneously,  by  metamorphosis,  to 
wit,  as  has  been  already  stated.  Hence  it  fol¬ 
lows,  in  fine,  that  the  primogenate  part  must 
be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  contain  both  the  be¬ 
ginning  and  the  end,  and  be  that  for  whose  sake 
all  the  rest  is  made,  namely,  the  living  principle, 
or  soul,  and  that  which  is  the  potential  and 
genital  cause  of  this,  the  heart,  or  in  our  view 
the  blood,  which  we  regard  as  the  prime  seat  of 
the  soul,  «s  the  source  and  perennial  centre  of 
life,  as  the  generative  heat,  and  indeed  as  the 
inherent  heat;  in  a  word,  the  heart  is  the  first 
efficient  of  the  whole  of  the  instrumental  parts 
that  are  produced  for  the  ends  of  the  soul,  and 
used  by  it  as  instruments.  The  heart,  according 
to  Aristotle,  I  say,  is  that  for  which  all  the  parts 
of  animals  are  made,  and  it  is  at  the  same  time 
that  which  is  at  once  the  origin  and  Hshioner  of 
them  all. 

EXE  RCISE  56.  Of  the  order  of  the  parts  in  generation 
as  it  appears  from  observation 

That  we  may  now  propose  our  own  views  of 
the  order  of  the  parts  in  generation  as  we  have 
gathered  it  from  our  observations,  it  appears 
that  the  whole  business  of  generation  in  all  ani¬ 
mals  may  be  divided  into  two  periods,  or  con¬ 
nected  with  two  structures:  the  ovum,  i.  e.,  the 
conception  and  seed,  or  that,  whatever  it  be, 
which  in  spontaneous  productions  corresponds 
to  the  seed,  whether  with  Fernelius  it  be  called 
‘‘the  native  celestial  heat  in  the  primogenial 
moisture,”  or  with  Aristotle,  “the  vital  heat  in¬ 
cluded  in  moisture.”  For  the  conception  in 
viviparous  animals,  as  we  have  said,  is  analogous 
to  the  seed  and  fruit  of  plants;  in  the  same  way 
as  it  is  to  the  egg  of  oviparous  creatures;  to 
worms  in  spontaneously  engendered  animals,  or 
to  certain  vesicles  fruitful  by  the  vital  warmth 
of  their  included  moisture.  In  each  and  all  of 
these  the  same  things  inhere  which  might  with 
propriety  lead  to  their  being  called  seeds;  they 
are  all  bodies,  to  wit,  from  which  and  by  which, 
as  previously  existing  matter,  artificer  and  or¬ 
gan,  the  whole  of  an  animal  body  is  primarily 
engendered  and  produced. 

The  other  structure  is  the  embryo  produced 
from  the  seed  or  conception.  For  both  the  mat¬ 
ter  and  the  moving  and  efficient  cause,  and  the 
instruments  needful  to  the  operation,  must 
necessarily  precede  operation  of  any  and  every 
kind. 

We  have  already  examined  the  structure  of 
the  egg.  Now  the  embryo  to  which  it  gives 
birth,  in  so  far  as  this  can  be  made  out  by  ob¬ 
servation  and  dissection,  particularly  among 


the  more  perfect  animals  with  blood,  appears  to 
be  perfected  by  four  principal  degrees  or  proc¬ 
esses,  which  we  reduce  to  as  many  orders,  in 
harmony  with  the  various  epochs  in  generation; 
and  we  shall  demonstrate  that  what  transpires 
in  the  egg  also  takes  place  in  every  conception 
or  seed. 

The  first  process  is  that  of  the  primogenial 
and  genital  part,  viz.^  the  blood  with  its  recep¬ 
tacles,  in  other  words,  the  heart  and  its  vessels. 

And  this  part  is  first  engendered  for  two 
principal  reasons:  ist,  because  it  is  the  principal 
part  which  uses  all  the  rest  as  instruments,  and 
for  whose  sake  the  other  parts  are  formed;  and, 
2d,  because  it  is  the  prime  genital  part,  the 
origin  and  author  of  the  rest.  The  part,  in  a 
word,  in  which  inhere  both  the  principle  whence 
motion  is  derived,  and  the  end  of  that  motion, 
is  obviously  father  and  sovereign. 

In  the  generation  of  this  first  part,  which  in 
the  egg  is  accomplished  in  the  course  of  the 
fourth  day,  although  I  have  not  been  able  to 
observe  any  order  or  sequence,  inasmuch  as  the 
whole  of  its  elements — the  blood,  the  vessels, 
and  the  pulsating  vesicles — appear  simultane¬ 
ously,  I  have  nevertheless  imagined,  as  I  have 
said,  that  the  blood  exists  before  the  pulse,  be¬ 
cause,  according  to  nature’s  laws,  it  must  be 
antecedent  to  its  receptacles.  For  the  substance 
and  structure  of  the  heart,  namely,  the  conical 
mass  with  its  auricles  and  ventricles,  as  they  are 
produced  long  subsequently  along  with  the 
other  viscera,  so  must  they  be  referred  to  the 
same  class  of  parts  as  these,  namely,  the  third. 

In  the  production  of  the  circulating  system 
the  veins  are  sooner  seen  than  the  arteries;  such 
at  least  is  our  conclusion. 

The  second  process,  which  begins  after  the 
fourth  day,  is  indicated  by  a  certain  concres¬ 
cence,  which  I  designate  vermiculum — worm  or 
maggot;  for  it  has  the  life  and  obscure  motions 
of  a  maggot;  and  as  it  concretes  into  a  mucous 
matter,  it  divides  into  two  parts,  the  larger  and 
superior  of  which  is  seen  to  be  conglobed,  and 
divided,  as  it  were,  into  thin  vesicles — the 
brain,  the  cerebellum,  and  the  two  eyes;  the 
less,  again,  constituting  the  carina,  arises  over 
the  vena  cava  and  extends  in  the  line  of  its 
direction. 

In  the  genesis  of  the  head,  the  eyes  are  first 
perceived;  by  and  by  a  white  point  makes  its 
appearance  in  the  situation  of  the  beak,  and  the 
slime  drying  around  it,  it  becomes  invested 
with  a  membrane. 

The  outline  of  the  rest  of  the  body  follows 
about  the  same  period.  First,  from  the  carina 


450  WILLIAM 

something  like  the  sides  of  a  ship  are  seen  to 
arise;  the  parts  having  an  uniform  consistence 
in  the  beginning,  but  the  ribs  being  afterwards 
prefigured  by  means  of  extremely  fine  white 
lines.  The  instruments  of  locomotion  next  arise 
—  the  legs  and  wings;  and  the  carina  and  the 
extremities  adnate  to  it  are  then  distinguished 
into  muscles,  bones,  and  articulations. 

These  two  rudiments  of  the  head  and  trunk 
appear  simultaneously,  but  as  they  grow  and 
adv'ance  to  perfection  subsequently,  the  trunk 
increases  and  acquires  its  shape  much  more 
speedily  than  the  head;  so  that  this,  which  in 
the  first  instance  exceeded  the  whole  trunk  in 
size,  is  now  relatively  much  smaller.  And  the 
same  thing  occurs  in  regard  to  the  human 
embryo. 

The  same  disparity  also  takes  place  between 
the  trunk  and  the  extremities.  In  the  human 
embry^o,  from  the  time  when  it  is  not  longer 
than  the  nail  of  the  little  finger,  till  it  is  of  the 
size  of  a  frog  or  mouse,  the  arms  are  so  short 
that  the  extremities  of  the  fingers  could  not 
extend  across  the  breast,  and  the  legs  are  so 
short  that  were  they  reflected  on  the  abdomen 
they  would  not  reach  the  umbilicus. 

The  proportion  of  the  body  to  the  extremi¬ 
ties  in  children  after  their  birth  continues  ex¬ 
cessive  until  they  begin  to  stand  and  run.  In¬ 
fants,  therefore,  resemble  dwarfs  in  the  begin¬ 
ning,  and  they  creep  about  like  quadrupeds,  at¬ 
tempting  progressive  motion  with  the  assist¬ 
ance  of  all  their  extremities;  but  they  cannot 
stand  erect  until  the  length  of  the  leg  and  thigh 
together  exceeds  the  length  of  the  rest  of  the 
body.  And  so  it  happens,  that  when  they  first 
attempt  to  walk,  they  move  with  the  body 
prone,  like  the  quadruped,  and  can  scarcely 
rise  so  erect  as  the  common  dunghill  fowl. 

And  so  it  happens  that  among  adult  men  the 
long-legged — they  who  have  longer  legs,  and 
especially  longer  thighs — are  better  walkers, 
runners,  and  leapers  than  square-built,  compact 
men. 

In  this  second  process  many  actions  of  the 
formative  faculty  are  observ^ed  following  each 
other  in  regular  order  (in  the  same  way  as  we 
see  one  wheel  moving  another  in  automata^  and 
other  pieces  of  mechanism),  and  all  arising  from 
the  same  mucaginous  and  similar  matter.  Not 
indeed  in  the  manner  that  some  natural  philoso¬ 
phers  would  have  it  when  they  say  “that  like  is 
carried  to  its  like.”  We  are  rather  to  maintain 
that  parts  are  moved,  not  changing  their  places, 
but  remaining  and  undergoing  change  in  hard¬ 
ness,  softness,  colour,  &c.,  whence  the  diversi¬ 


HARVEY 

ties  between  similar  parts;  those  things  appear¬ 
ing  in  act  which  were  before  in  power}  The  ex¬ 
tremities,  spine,  and  rest  of  the  body,  namely, 
are  formed,  grow,  and  acquire  outline  and  com¬ 
plexion  together;  the  extremities,  comprising 
bones,  muscles,  tendons,  and  cartilages,  all  of 
which  on  their  first  appearance  were  similar 
and  homogeneous,  become  distinguished  in 
their  progress,  and,  connected  together,  com¬ 
pose  organs,  by  whose  mutual  continuity  the 
whole  body  is  constituted.  In  like  manner,  the 
membrane  growing  around  the  head,  the  brain 
is  composed,  and  the  lustrous  eyes  receive  their 
polish  out  of  a  perfectly  limpid  fluid. 

That  is  to  say.  Nature  sustains  and  augments 
the  several  parts  by  the  same  nourishment  with 
which  she  fashioned  them  at  first,  and  not,  as 
many  opine,  with  any  diversity  of  aliment  and 
particles  similar  to  each  particular  structure. 
As  she  is  increasing  the  mucaginous  mass  or 
maggot,  like  a  potter  she  first  divides  her  ma¬ 
terial,  and  then  indicates  the  head  and  trunk 
and  extremities;  like  a  painter,  she  first  sketches 
the  parts  in  outline,  and  then  fills  them  in  with 
colours;  or  like  the  shipbuilder,  who  first  lays 
down  his  keel  by  way  of  foundation,  and  upon 
this  raises  the  ribs  and  roof  or  deck:  even  as  he 
builds  his  vessel  does  Nature  fashion  the  trunk 
of  the  body  and  add  the  extremities.  And  in 
this  work  she  orders  all  the  variety  of  similar 
parts— the  bones,  cartilages,  membranes,  mus¬ 
cles,  tendons,  nerves,  &c.— from  the  same  pri¬ 
mary  jelly  or  mucus.  For  thick  filaments  are 
produced  in  the  first  instance,  and  these  by  and 
by  are  brought  to  resemble  cords;  then  they 
are  rendered  cartilaginous  and  spinous;  and, 
lastly,  they  are  hardened  and  concocted  into 
bones.  In  the  same  way  the  thicker  membrane 
which  invests  the  brain  is  first  cartilaginous  and 
then  bony,  whilst  the  thinner  membrane  mere¬ 
ly  consolidates  into  the  pericranium  and  integ¬ 
ument.  In  similar  order  flesh  and  nerve  from 
soft  mucus  are  confirmed  into  muscle,  tendon, 
and  ligament;  the  brain  and  cerebellum  arc  con¬ 
densed  out  of  a  perfectly  limpid  water  into  a 
firm  coagulum;  for  the  brain  of  infants,  before 
the  bones  of  the  head  have  closed,  is  soft  and 
diffluent,  and  has  no  greater  consistence  than 
the  curd  of  milk. 

The  third  process  is  that  of  the  viscera,  the 
formation  of  which  in  the  chick  takes  place 
after  the  trunk  is  cast  in  outline,  or  about  the 
sixth  or  seventh  day — the  liver,  lungs,  kidneys, 
cone  and  ventricles  of  the  heart,  and  intestines, 
all  become  visible  nearly  at  the  same  moment; 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  ii.  j. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


they  appear  to  arise  from  the  veins,  and  to  be 
connected  with  them  in  the  same  way  as  fungi 
grow  upon  the  bark  of  trees.  They  are,  as  I  have 
already  said,  gelatinous,  white,  and  bloodless, 
until  they  take  on  their  proper  functions.  The 
stomach  and  intestines  are  first  discovered  as 
white  and  tortuous  filaments  extending  length¬ 
wise  through  the  abdomen;  along  with  these 
the  mouth  appears,  from  which  a  continuous 
canal  extends  to  the  anus,  and  connects  the 
superior  with  the  inferior  parts.  The  organs  of 
generation  likewise  appear  about  the  same  time. 

Up  to  this  period  all  the  viscera,  the  intes¬ 
tines,  and  the  heart  itself  inclusive,  are  excluded 
from  the  cavities  of  the  body  and  hang  pendu¬ 
lous  without,  attached  as  it  were  to  the  veins. 
The  trunk  of  the  body  presents  itself,  in  fact, 
like  a  boat  undecked  or  a  house  without  a  roof, 
the  anterior  walls  of  the  thorax  and  abdomen 
not  being  yet  extant  to  close  these  cavities. 

But  as  soon  as  the  sternum  is  fashioned  the 
heart  enters  into  the  chest  as  into  a  dwelling 
which  it  had  built  and  arranged  for  itself;  and 
there,  like  the  tutelary  genius,  it  enters  on  the 
government  of  the  surrounding  mansion,  which 
it  inhabits  with  its  ministering  servants  the 
lungs.  The  liver  and  stomach  are  by  and  by  in¬ 
cluded  within  the  hypochondria,  and  the  intes¬ 
tines  are  finally  surrounded  by  the  abdominal 
parietes.  And  this  is  the  reason  wherefore  with¬ 
out  dissection  the  heart  can  no  longer  be  seen 
pulsating  in  the  hen’s  egg  after  the  tenth  day  of 
incubation. 

About  this  epoch  the  point  of  the  beak  and 
the  nails  appear  of  a  fine  white  colour;  a  quanti¬ 
ty  of  chylous  matter  presents  itself  in  the  stom¬ 
ach;  a  little  excrement  is  also  observed  in  the 
intestine,  and  the  liver  being  now  begun,  some 
greenish  bile  is  perceived;  facts  from  which  it 
clearly  appears  that  there  is  another  digestion 
and  preparation  of  nutriment  going  on  besides 
that  which  takes  place  by  the  branches  of  the 
umbilical  veins;  and  it  is  reasonable  matter  of 
doubt  how  the  bile,  the  excrementitious  matter 
of  the  second  digestion,  can  be  separated  by  the 
instrumentality  of  the  liver  from  the  other 
humours,  when  we  see  it  produced  at  the  same 
time  as  this  organ. 

In  the  order  now  indicated  are  the  internal 
organs  generated  universally;  in  all  the  animals 
which  I  have  dissected,  particularly  the  more 
perfect  ones,  and  man  himself,  I  have  found 
them  produced  in  the  same  manner:  in  these, 
in  the  course  of  the  second,  third,  and  fourth 
month,  the  heart,  liver,  lungs,  kidneys,  spleen, 
and  intestines  present  themselves  inchoate  and 


increasing,  and  all  alike  of  the  same  white  col¬ 
our  which  belongs  to  the  body  at  large.  Where¬ 
fore  these  early  days  are  not  improperly  spoken 
of  as  the  days  when  the  embryo  is  in  the  mil\; 
for  with  the  exception  of  the  veins,  particularly 
those  of  the  umbilicus,  everything  is  as  it  were 
spermatic  in  appearance. 

I  am  of  opinion  that  the  umbilical  arteries 
arise  after  the  veins  of  the  same  name,  because 
the  arteries  are  scarcely  to  be  discovered  in  the 
course  of  the  first  month,  and  take  their  rise 
from  the  branches  that  descend  to  either  lower 
extremity.  I  do  not  believe,  therefore,  that 
they  exist  until  that  part  of  the  body  whence 
they  proceed  is  formed.  The  umbilical  veins,  on 
the  contrary,  are  conspicuous  long  before  any 
part  of  the  body  is  begun. 

What  I  have  now  said  I  have  derived  from 
numerous  dissections  of  human  embryos  of  al¬ 
most  every  size;  for  I  have  had  them  for  inspec¬ 
tion  from  the  time  they  were  like  tadpoles,  till 
they  were  seven  or  eight  fingers’  breadth  in 
length,  and  from  thence  onwards  to  the  full 
time.  I  have  examined  them  more  particularly, 
however,  through  the  second,  third,  and  fourth 
months,  in  the  course  of  which  the  greatest 
number  of  changes  take  place,  and  the  order  of 
development  is  seen  with  greatest  clearness. 

In  the  human  embryo,  then,  of  the  age  of  two 
months,  what  we  have  spoken  of  as  taking 
place  in  the  “second  process,”  is  observed  to 
occur.  For  I  rather  think  that  during  the  first 
month  there  is  scarcely  anything  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  in  the  uterus — at  all  events,  I  have  never 
been  able  to  discover  anything.  But  the  first 
month  past,  I  have  repeatedly  seen  conceptions 
thrown  off,  and  similar  to  the  one  which  Hip¬ 
pocrates  mentions  as  having  been  voided  by  the 
female  pipe-player,  of  the  size  of  a  pheasant’s 
or  pigeon’s  egg.  Such  conceptions  resemble  an 
egg  without  its  shell;  they  are,  namely,  of  an 
oval  figure;  the  thicker  membrane  or  chorion 
with  which  they  are  surrounded,  however,  is 
seen  to  be  covered  with  a  white  mucor  exter¬ 
nally,  particularly  towards  the  larger  end;  in¬ 
ternally  it  is  smooth  and  shining,  and  is  filled 
with  limpid  and  sluggish  water — it  contains 
nothing  else. 

In  the  course  of  the  second  month  I  have  fre¬ 
quently  seen  an  ovum  of  this  description,  or 
somewhat  larger,  thrown  off  with  the  symp¬ 
toms  of  abortion,  viz.^  ichorous  lochia;  the  ovum 
being  sometimes  entire,  at  other  times  burst, 
and  covered  with  bloody  coagula.  Within  it 
was  smooth  and  slippery;  it  was  covered  with 
adhering  blood  without.  Its  form  was  that  which 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


452 

I  have  just  described.  In  some  of  these  aborted 
ova,  I  have  discovered  embryos,  in  others  I 
could  find  none.  The  embryo,  when  present, 
was  of  the  length  of  the  little  finger-nail,  and 
in  shape  like  a  little  frog,  save  that  the  head  was 
exceedingly  large  and  the  extremities  very 
short,  like  a  tadpole  in  the  month  of  June,  when 
it  gets  its  extremities,  loses  its  tail,  and  assumes 
the  form  of  a  frog.  The  whole  substance  was 
white,  and  so  soft  and  mucilaginous,  that  un¬ 
less  immersed  in  clear  water,  it  was  impossible 
to  handle  it.  The  face  was  the  same  as  that  of 
the  embryo  of  one  of  the  lower  animals — the 
dog  or  cat,  for  instance,  without  lips,  the  mouth 
gaping,  and  extending  from  ear  to  ear. 

Many  women,  whose  conceptions,  like  the 
wind  eggs  of  fowls,  are  barren  and  without  an 
embryo,  miscarry  in  the  third  month. 

I  have  occasionally  examined  aborted  ova  of 
this  age,  of  the  size  of  a  goose’s  egg,  which  con¬ 
tained  embryos  distinct  in  all  their  parts,  but 
misshapen.  The  head,  eyes,  and  extremities 
were  distinct,  but  the  muscles  were  indistinct; 
there  were  no  bones,  but  certain  white  lines  in 
their  situations,  and  as  it  seemed,  soft  cartilages. 
The  substance  of  the  heart  was  extremely  white, 
and  consisted  of  two  ventricles  of  like  size  and 
thickness  of  walls,  forming  a  cone  with  a  double 
apex,  which  might  be  compared  to  a  small  twin- 
kernel  nut.  The  liver  was  very  small  and  of  the 
general  white  colour.  Through  the  whole  of 
this  time,  i.e.,  during  the  first  three  months, 
there  is  scarcely  any  appearance  of  a  placenta 
or  uterine  cake. 

In  every  conception  of  this  description  I  have 
seen,  I  have  always  found  a  surrounding  mem¬ 
brane  containing  a  large  quantity  of  watery 
fluid,  between  which  and  the  body  of  the  em¬ 
bryo,  suspended  by  its  middle  by  means  of  a 
long  and  twisted  umbilical  cord,  there  is  such 
disproportion,  that  it  is  impossible  to  regard 
this  liquid  as  either  sweat  or  urine;  it  seems  far 
more  probable  that  like  the  colliquament  in  the 
hen’s  egg,  it  is  a  fluid  destined  by  nature  for  the 
nourishment  of  the  foetus.  Nor  was  there  any 
indication  to  be  discovered  of  these  concep¬ 
tions  or  ova  having  been  connected  with  the 
uterus;  there  was  only  on  the  external  surface 
of  their  larger  extremity  a  greater  appearance 
of  thickening  and  wrinkling,  as  if  the  rudiments 
of  the  future  placenta  had  existed  there. 

These  conceptions,  therefore,  appear  to  me 
in  the  light  of  ova,  which  are  merely  cherished 
within  the  uterus,  and,  like  the  egg  in  the  uter¬ 
us  of  the  fowl,  grow  by  their  own  inherent 
powers. 


In  the  fourth  month,  however,  it  is  wonder¬ 
ful  to  find  what  rapid  strides  the  foetus  has 
made;  from  the  length  of  the  thumb  it  has  now 
grown  to  be  a  span  long.  All  the  members,  too, 
are  distinct  and  are  tinged  with  blood;  the  bones 
and  muscles  can  be  distinguished;  there  are  ves¬ 
tiges  of  the  nails,  and  the  foetus  now  begins  to 
move  lustily.  The  head,  however,  is  excessively 
large;  the  face  without  lips,  cheeks,  and  nose; 
the  gape  of  the  mouth  is  enormous,  and  the 
tongue  lies  in  its  middle;  the  eyes  are  small, 
without  lids  to  cover  them;  the  middle  integu¬ 
ment  of  the  regions  of  the  forehead  and  sinciput 
is  not  yet  cartilaginous,  far  less  bony;  but  the 
occiput  is  somewhat  firm  and  in  some  sort  carti¬ 
laginous,  indicating  that  the  skull  already  be¬ 
gins  to  acquire  solidity. 

The  organs  of  generation  have  now  made 
their  appearance,  but  the  testes  are  contained 
within  the  abdomen,  in  the  situation  of  the  fe¬ 
male  uterus,  the  scrotum  still  remaining  empty. 
The  female  organs  are  yet  imperfect,  and  the 
uterus  with  its  tubes  resembles  the  two-horned 
uterus  of  the  lamb. 

The  placenta,  of  larger  size,  and  now  attached 
to  the  uterus,  comprises  nearly  one  half  of  the 
entire  conception,  and  presented  itself  to  my 
eye  as  a  fleshy  or  fungous  excrescence  of  the 
womb,  so  firmly  was  its  gibbous  portion  con¬ 
nected  all  around  with  the  uterine  walls,  which 
had  now  grown  to  greater  thickness.  The 
branches  of  the  umbilical  vessels  struck  into  the 
placenta  like  the  roots  of  a  tree  into  the  ground, 
and  by  their  means  was  the  conception  now, 
for  the  first  time,  connected  with  the  uterus. 

The  brain  presented  itself  as  a  large  and  soft 
coagulum,  full  of  ample  vessels.  The  ventricles 
of  the  heart  were  of  equal  capacity,  and  their 
walls  of  the  same  thickness.  In  the  thorax,  and 
covered  by  the  ribs,  three  cavities,  nearly  of  the 
same  dimensions,  were  perceived;  of  these  the 
lowest  was  occupied  by  the  lungs,  which  are 
full  of  blood,  and  of  the  same  colour  as  the  liver 
and  kidneys;  the  middle  cavity  was  filled  by 
the  heart  and  pericardium;  the  superior  cavity, 
again,  was  possessed  by  the  gland  called  the 
thymus,  which  is  now  of  very  ample  size. 

In  the  stomach  there  was  some  chyle  discov¬ 
ered,  not  very  different  in  character  from  the 
fluid  in  which  the  embryo  swam.  It  also  con¬ 
tained  some  white  curdled  matter,  not  unlike 
the  mucous  sordes  which  the  nurse  washes  par¬ 
ticularly  from  between  the  folds  of  the  skin  of 
new-born  infants.  In  the  upper  part  of  the  in¬ 
testines  there  was  a  small  quantity  of  excre- 
mentitious  or  chylous  matter;  the  lower  bowels 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


contained  meconium.  In  the  urinary  bladder 
there  was  urine,  and  in  the  gall  bladder  bile. 
The  intestinum  coecum,  that  appendix  of  the 
colon,  was  empty  as  in  the  adult,  and  appar¬ 
ently  superfluous,  not  as  in  the  lower  animals — 
the  hog,  horse,  hare — constituting,  as  it  were, 
another  stomach.  The  omentum,  or  apron, 
floated  over  the  intestines  at  large  like  a  thin 
and  transparent  veil  or  cloud. 

The  kidneys  at  this  epoch  are  not  yet  formed 
into  a  smooth  and  continuous  rounded  mass,  as 
in  the  adult,  but  are  compacted  of  numerous 
smaller  masses,  as  we  see  them  in  the  calf  and 
sturgeon,  as  if  there  were  a  renal  globule  or  nip¬ 
ple  placed  at  the  extremity  of  each  division  of 
the  ureter,  from  the  orifice  of  which  the  urine 
distilled.  Over  the  kidneys  two  bodies,  first 
observed  by  Eustachius,  are  discovered,  very 
abundantly  supplied  with  blood,  so  that  their 
veins,  which  anatomists  designate  as  venae  adi- 
posae,  are  not  much  smaller  than  the  emulgents 
themselves.  The  liver  and  spleen,  according  to 
their  several  proportions,  are  equally  full  of 
blood. 

I  may  here  observe,  by  the  way,  that  in  every 
strong  and  healthy  human  foetus  we  every¬ 
where  discover  milk;  it  is  particularly  abundant 
in  the  thymus  gland,  though  it  is  also  found  in 
the  pancreas,  through  the  whole  of  the  mesen¬ 
tery,  and  in  certain  lacteal  veins  and  glands,  as 
it  seems,  situated  between  the  divisions  of  the 
mesenteric  vessels.  Moreover,  it  can  be  pressed 
and  indeed  sometimes  flows  spontaneously  from 
the  breasts  of  newly-born  infants,  and  nurses 
imagine  that  this  is  beneficial  to  the  infant. 

And  it  clearly  appears  that  this  fluid,  which 
abounds  in  the  ovum,  is  no  excrementitious 
matter  thrown  off  by  the  embryo,  nothing  like 
urine  or  sweat,  because  its  relative  quantity  is 
diminished  as  the  period  of  parturition  ap¬ 
proaches,  when  the  foetus  is,  of  course,  larger, 
and,  as  it  consumes  a  greater  quantity  of  nutri¬ 
ment,  accumulates  excrementitious  matter  more 
abundantly  than  it  did  in  the  first  months  of 
pregnancy.  Let  it  be  added,  that  the  bladder  is 
at  this  time  distended  with  urine.  For  my  own 
part  I  have  never  been  able  to  discover  that 
conduit  for  the  urine,  from  the  bladder  to  the 
umbilicus,  which  anatomists  describe  under  the 
name  of  urachus;  I  have,  on  the  contrary,  fre¬ 
quently  seen  urine  escaping  by  the  penis,  but 
never  by  any  urachus,  when  the  bladder  was 
pressed  upon  with  the  hand. 

So  much  for  what  I  have  observed  with  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  order  of  the  parts  in  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  human  foetus. 


In  the  fourth  and  last  process  the  parts  of  the 
lowest  state  and  order  are  produced,  those, 
namely,  that  do  not  exist  as  needful  to  the  being 
or  to  the  maintenance  of  the  individual,  but 
only  as  defences  against  external  injury,  as 
ornaments,  or  as  weapons  of  offence. 

The  outermost  part  of  all,  the  skin,  with  its 
several  appendages,  cuticle,  hair,  wool,  feath¬ 
ers,  scales,  shells,  claws,  hooves,  and  other  items 
of  the  same  description,  may  be  regarded  as  the 
principal  means  of  defence  or  protection.  And 
it  is  well  devised  by  Nature,  who,  indeed,  never 
does  aught  amiss,  that  these  parts  are  the  last 
to  be  engendered,  inasmuch  as  they  could  never 
be  of  use  or  avail  as  defences  until  the  animal 
was  born.  The  common  domestic  pullet  is, 
therefore,  born  covered  with  down  only,  not 
with  feathers,  like  certain  other  birds  which 
have  to  be  speedily  prepared  for  flight,  because 
it  has  to  seek  its  food  on  foot,  not  on  the  wing, 
and  by  active  running  about  hither  and  thither. 
In  like  manner  the  young  of  ducks  and  geese, 
which  feed  swimming,  have  their  feathers  and 
wings  perfected  at  a  later  period  than  their  feet 
and  legs.  It  is  otherwise  with  swallows,  how¬ 
ever,  which  have  to  fly  sooner  than  to  walk,  be¬ 
cause  they  feed  on  the  wing. 

The  down  of  the  pullet  begins  to  appear  after 
the  fourteenth  day,  the  foetus  being  already 
perfect  in  all  its  parts.  When  the  feathers  first 
show  themselves,  they  are  in  the  guise  of  points 
within  the  skin,  but  by  and  by  the  feathers 
project,  like  plants  from  the  ground,  increase 
in  length,  become  unfolded,  invest  the  whole 
body,  and  protect  it  against  the  inclemencies 
of  the  atmosphere. 

Feathers  differ  from  quills  in  form,  use,  place 
of  growth,  and  order  of  production.  The  pullet 
is  feathered  before  it  has  any  quills,  for  the 
quill-feathers  only  grow  in  the  wings  and  tail, 
and  also  spring  more  deeply,  from  the  very 
lowest  part  of  the  integument,  or  even  from 
the  periosteum,  and  serve  essentially  as  instru¬ 
ments  of  motion;  the  feathers  again  arise  super¬ 
ficially  from  the  skin,  and  are  everywhere  pres¬ 
ent  as  means  of  protection. 

“Nails,  hair,  horn,  and  the  like,”  says  Aris¬ 
totle,^  “are  engendered  from  the  skin;  whence 
it  happens  that  they  change  colour  with  the 
skin;  for  the  white  and  black  and  particoloured 
are  so  in  consequence  of  the  colour  of  the  skin 
whence  they  arise.”  In  the  bird,  however,  this 
is  not  so;  for  whatever  the  colour  of  the  feath¬ 
ers,  the  skin  is  still  never  otherwise  than  of  one 
tint,  viz.^  white.  And  then  the  same  feather  or 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  ii.  4. 


454  WILLIAM 

quill  is  frequently  seen  of  ditlerent  and  often 
brilliant  colours  in  diflerent  parts  for  the  orna¬ 
ment  of  the  creature. 

In  the  human  foetus  the  skin  and  all  the  parts 
connected  with  it  are  in  like  manner  perfected 
the  last  of  all.  In  the  earlier  periods,  conse¬ 
quently,  we  find  neither  lips,  cheeks,  external 
ears,  eyelids,  nor  nose;  and  the  last  part  to  grow 
together  is  the  upper  lip  in  the  course  of  the 
middle  line  of  the  body. 

Man  comes  into  the  world  naked  and  un¬ 
armed,  as  if  Nature  had  destined  him  fora  social 
creature,  and  ordained  him  to  live  under  equi¬ 
table  laws  and  in  peace;  as  if  she  had  desired 
that  he  should  be  guided  by  reason  rather  than 
be  driven  by  force;  therefore  did  she  endow 
him  with  understanding,  and  furnish  him  with 
hands,  that  he  might  himself  contrive  what  was 
necessar)^  to  his  clothing  and  protection.  To 
those  animals  to  which  nature  has  given  vast 
strength,  she  has  also  presented  weapons  in  har¬ 
mony  with  their  powers;  to  those  that  are  not 
thus  vigorous,  she  has  given  ingenuity,  cun¬ 
ning,  and  singular  dexterity  in  avoiding  injury. 

Ornaments  of  all  kinds,  such  as  tufts,  crests, 
combs,  wattles,  brilliant  plumage,  and  the  like, 
of  which  some  vain  creatures  seem  not  a  little 
proud,  to  say  nothing  of  such  offensive  weapons 
as  teeth,  horns,  spurs,  and  other  implements 
employed  in  combat,  are  more  frequently  and 
remarkably  conferred  upon  the  male  than  the 
female.  And  it  is  not  uninteresting  to  remark, 
that  many  of  these  ornaments  or  weapons  are 
most  conspicuous  in  the  male  at  that  epoch 
when  the  females  come  into  season,  and  burn 
with  desire  of  engendering.  And  whilst  in  the 
young  they  are  still  absent,  in  the  aged  they 
also  fail  as  being  no  longer  wanted. 

Our  common  cock,  whose  pugnacious  quali¬ 
ties  are  well  known,  so  soon  as  he  comes  to  his 
strength  and  is  possessed  of  the  faculty  of  en¬ 
gendering,  is  distinguished  by  his  spurs,  and 
ornamented  with  his  comb  and  beautiful  feath¬ 
ers,  by  which  he  charms  his  mates  to  the  rites  of 
Venus,  and  is  furnished  for  the  combat  with 
other  males,  the  subject  of  dispute  being  no 
empty  or  vainglorious  matter,  but  the  perpet¬ 
uation  of  the  stock  in  this  line  or  in  that;  as  if 
nature  had  intended  that  he  who  could  best 
defend  himself  and  his,  should  be  preferred  to 
others  for  the  continuance  of  the  kind.  And  in¬ 
deed  all  animals  which  are  better  furnished 
with  weapons  of  offence,  and  more  warlike  than 
others,  fall  out  and  fight,  either  in  defence  of 
their  young,  of  their  nests  or  dens,  or  of  their 
prey;  but  more  than  all  for  the  possession  of 


HARVEY 

their  lemales.  Once  vanquished,  they  yield  up 
possession  of  these,  lay  aside  their  strut  and 
haughty  demeanour,  and,  crestfallen  and  sub¬ 
missive,  they  seem  to  consume  with  grief;  the 
victor,  on  the  contrary,  who  has  gained  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  females  by  his  prowess,  exults  and 
boastfully  proclaims  the  glory  of  his  conquest. 

Nor  is  this  ornamenting  anything  adventi¬ 
tious  and  for  a  season  only;  it  is  a  lasting  and 
special  gift  of  Nature,  who  has  not  been  studious 
to  deck  out  animals,  and  especially  birds  only, 
but  has  also  thrown  an  infinite  variety  of  beau¬ 
tiful  dyes  over  the  lowly  and  insensate  herbs 
and  flowers. 

EXERCISE  57.  Of  certain  paradoxes  and  problems 
to  be  considered  in  connexion  with  this  subject 

Thus  far  have  we  spoken  of  the  order  of  gen¬ 
eration,  whereby  the  differences  between  those 
creatures  that  are  engendered  by  metamorpho¬ 
sis  and  those  that  are  developed  by  epigenesis, 
as  well  as  between  those  that  are  said  to  proceed 
from  a  worm  and  those  that  arise  from  an  egg, 
have  been  made  to  appear.  The  latter  are  partly 
incorporated  from  a  prepared  matter,  and  are 
nourished  and  increased  from  a  certain  remain¬ 
ing  matter;  the  former  are  incorporated  from 
the  whole  of  the  matter  present;  the  latter  grow 
and  are  formed  simultaneously,  and  after  their 
birth  continue  to  wax  in  size  and  finally  attain 
maturity;  the  former  increase  at  once,  and  from 
a  grub  or  caterpillar  grow  into  an  aurelia,  and 
are  then  produced,  consummately  formed,  as 
butterflies,  moths,  and  the  like.  Wherefore 
Aristotle,  as  Fabricius^  observ'es:  “As  he  assigns 
a  sort  of  twofold  nature  to  the  egg,  and  a  two¬ 
fold  egg  in  this  kind,  so  does  he  assert  a  twofold 
action  and  a  twofold  animal  engendered.  For,” 
he  proceeds,  “from  the  first  eggs,  which  are  the 
primordia  of  generation,  a  worm  is  constantly 
produced;  viz. :  from  the  eggs  of  flies,  ants,  bees, 
silkworms,  &c.,  in  which  some  fluid  is  contained, 
and  from  the  whole  of  which  fluid  the  worm  is 
engendered;  but  from  the  second  eggs,  formed 
by  the  worms  themselves,  butterflies  are  engen¬ 
dered  and  disclosed,  viz.:  flying  animals  con¬ 
tained  in  a  shell,  or  follicle,  or  egg,  which  shell 
giving  way  the  winged  creature  escapes;  pre¬ 
cisely  as  Aristotle^  has  it  where  he  speaks  of  the 
egg  of  the  locust.”  Finally,  whilst  the  higher 
animals  pi-oduced  from  eggs  are  perfected  by  a 
succession  of  parts,  the  lower  creatures  that 
arise  in  this  way,  or  that  are  formed  by  meta¬ 
morphosis,  are  produced  at  one  effort,  as  it  were, 

^  Fabricius,  op.  cit.y  p.  46. 

2  History  of  Animals^  v.  28. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


and  entire.  And  in  the  same  way  are  engen¬ 
dered  both  those  creatures  that  are  said  to  arise 
spontaneously,  by  chance  or  accident,  and  de¬ 
rive  their  first  matter  or  take  their  origin  from 
putrefaction,  filth,  excrement,  dew,  or  the  parts 
of  plants  and  animals,  as  well  as  those  that  arise 
congenerately  from  the  semen  of  animals.  Be¬ 
cause  this  is  common  to  all  living  creatures, 
viz,:  that  they  derive  their  origin  either  from 
semen  or  eggs,  whether  this  semen  have  pro¬ 
ceeded  from  others  of  the  same  kind,  or  have 
come  by  chance  or  something  else.  For  what 
sometimes  happens  in  art  occasionally  occurs  in 
nature  also;  those  things,  namely,  take  place  by 
chance  or  accident  which  otherwise  are  brought 
about  by  art.  Of  this  Aristotle^  quotes  health  as 
an  illustration.  And  the  thing  is  not  different  as 
respects  the  generation,  in  so  far  as  it  is  from 
seed,  of  certain  animals:  their  semina  are  either 
present  by  accident,  or  they  proceed  from  an 
univocal  agent  of  the  same  kind.  For  even  in 
fortuitous  semina  there  is  an  inherent  motive 
principle  of  generation,  which  procreates  from 
itself  and  of  itself;  and  this  is  the  same  as  that 
which  is  found  in  the  semina  of  congenerative 
animals, — a  power,  to  wit,  of  forming  a  living 
creature.  But  of  this  matter  we  shall  have  more 
to  say  shortly. 

From  what  has  just  been  said,  however,  sev¬ 
eral  paradoxes  present  themselves  for  considera¬ 
tion.  For  when  we  see  the  cicatricula  enlarging 
in  the  egg,  the  colliquament  concocted  and  pre¬ 
pared,  and  a  variety  of  other  particulars  all 
tending,  not  without  foresight,  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  embryo,  before  the  first  rudiment 
or  the  merest  particle  of  this  is  conspicuous, 
what  should  hinder  us  from  believing  that  the 
calidum  innatum  and  the  vegetative  soul  of  the 
chick  are  in  existence  before  the  chick  itself.^ 
For  what  is  competent  to  produce  the  effects 
and  acts  of  life,  except  their  efficient  cause  and 
principle,  heat,  namely,  and  the  faculty  of  the 
vegetative  soul.?^  Therefore  it  would  seem  that 
the  soul  was  not  the  act  of  the  organic  body 
possessing  life  in  potential  for  we  regard  the 
chick  with  its  appropriate  form  as  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  such  an  act.  But  where  can  we  sup¬ 
pose  the  form  and  vital  principle  of  the  chick 
to  inhere  save  in  the  chick  itself  unless  indeed 
we  admitted  a  separation  of  forms  and  con¬ 
ceded  a  certain  metamorphosis. 

Now  this  appears  most  obviously  where  the 
same  animal  lives,  as  Aristotle  has  it,  by  or  un¬ 
der  a  succession  of  forms,  for  example,  a  cater¬ 
pillar,  a  chrysalis,  a  butterfly.  For  it  is  of  neces- 

^  Metaphysics^  vii.  9. 


sity  the  same  efficient,  nutrient,  and  conserva¬ 
tive  principle  that  possesses  each  of  these,  al¬ 
though  under  different  forms;  unless  we  allow 
that  there  is  one  vital  principle  in  the  youth, 
another  in  the  man,  a  third  in  the  aged  indi¬ 
vidual,  or  maintain  that  the  forms  of  the  grub 
and  caterpillar  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  silk¬ 
worm  and  butterfly.  Aristotle  has  entered  very 
fully  into  this  subject,  and  we  shall  ourselves 
have  more  to  say  on  it  immediately. 

It  appears  further  paradoxical  to  maintain 
that  the  blood  is  produced,  and  moves  to  and 
fro,  and  is  imbued  with  vital  spirits,  before  any 
sanguiferous  or  locomotive  organs  are  in  exist¬ 
ence.  Neither  is  it  less  new  and  unheard-of  to 
assert  that  sensation  and  motion  belong  to  the 
foetus  before  the  brain  is  formed;  for  the  foetus 
moves,  contracting  and  unfolding  itself,  when 
there  is  nothing  more  than  a  little  limpid  water 
in  the  place  of  the  brain. 

Moreover,  the  body  is  nourished  and  increases 
before  the  organs  appropriated  to  digestion, 
viz.,  the  stomach  and  abdominal  viscera,  are 
formed.  Sanguification,  too,  which  is  entitled 
the  second  digestion,  is  perfect  before  the  first, 
or  chylification,  which  takes  place  in  the  stom¬ 
ach,  is  begun.  The  excrementitious  products  of 
the  first  and  second  digestions,  namely,  excre¬ 
ment  in  the  intestines,  urine  and  bile  in  the 
urinary  and  gall  bladder,  are  contemporaneous 
with  the  existence  of  the  concocting  organs 
themselves.  Lastly,  not  only  is  there  a  soul  or 
vital  principle  present  in  the  vegetative  part, 
but  even  before  this  there  is  inherent  mind, 
foresight,  and  understanding,  which  from  the 
very  commencement  to  the  being  and  perfect 
formation  of  the  chick,  dispose  and  order  and 
take  up  all  things  requisite,  moulding  them  in 
the  new  being,  with  consummate  art,  into  the 
form  and  likeness  of  its  parents. 

In  reference  to  this  subject  of  family  likeness, 
we  may  be  permitted  to  inquire  as  to  the  reason 
why  the  offspring  should  at  one  time  bear  a 
stronger  resemblance  to  the  father,  at  another 
to  the  mother,  and,  at  a  third,  to  progenitors, 
both  maternal  and  paternal,  farther  removed  ? 
particularly  in  cases  where  at  one  bout,  and  at 
the  same  moment,  several  ova  are  fecundated. 
And  this  too  is  a  remarkable  fact,  that  virtues 
and  vices,  marks  and  moles,  and  even  particular 
dispositions  to  disease  are  transmitted  by  par¬ 
ents  to  their  offspring;  and  that  while  some  in¬ 
herit  in  this  way,  all  do  not.  Among  our  poultry 
some  are  courageous,  and  pugnaciously  inclined, 
and  will  sooner  die  than  yield  and  flee  from  an 
adversary^  their  descendants,  once  or  twice  re- 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


456 

moved,  however,  unless  they  have  come  of 
equally  well-bred  parents,  gradually  lose  this 
quality;  according  to  the  adage,  “the  brave  are 
begotten  by  the  brave.”  In  various  other  species 
of  animals,  and  particularly  in  the  human  fam¬ 
ily,  a  certain  nobility  of  race  is  observed;  nu¬ 
merous  qualities,  in  fact,  both  of  mind  and 
body,  are  derived  by  hereditary  descent. 

I  have  frequently  wondered  how  it  should 
happen  that  the  offspring,  mixed  in  so  many 
particulars  of  its  structure  or  constitution,  with 
the  stamp  of  both  parents  so  obviously  upon  it, 
in  so  many  parts,  should  still  escape  all  mixture 
in  the  organs  of  generation;  that  it  should  so 
uniformly  prove  either  male  or  female,  so  very 
rarely  an  hermaphrodite. 

Lastly,  many  things  are  present  before  they 
appear,  and  some  are  begun  among  the  very 
first  which  are  completed  among  the  very  last, 
such  as  the  eyes,  the  organs  of  generation,  and 
the  beak. 

Several  doubts  and  difficulties  have  thence 
arisen  as  to  the  principality  and  relative  dignity 
of  the  several  members,  in  which  they  who  are 
fond  of  such  things  have  displayed  their  inge¬ 
nuity.  Among  the  number:  whether  the  heart 
gives  life  and  virtue  to  the  blood;  or,  rather, 
the  blood  to  the  heart.  Whether  the  blood  be 
extant  for  the  sake  of  the  body  as  matter,  nour¬ 
ishment,  and  instrument;  or,  on  the  contrary, 
the  body  and  its  parts  are  the  cause  of  the  blood, 
and  constituted  for  the  sake  of  the  vital  prin¬ 
ciple  which  especially  inheres  in  it.  In  like  man¬ 
ner,  whether  the  auricles  or  the  ventricles  of 
the  heart  are  the  chief,  the  auricles  being  the 
first  to  live  and  pulsate,  the  last  to  die.  Further, 
whether  the  left  ventricle,  which  in  man  is  of 
greater  length,  and  is  also  surrounded  with 
thicker  and  more  fleshy  walls,  and  is  regarded 
as  the  source  of  the  spirits,  be  hotter,  more  spir- 
itous,  excitable,  and  excellent,  than  the  right, 
which  contains  a  larger  quantity  of  blood,  and 
is  the  last  to  become  unstrung  by  death;  in 
which  the  blood  of  the  dying  accumulates,  con¬ 
geals,  and  is  deprived  of  life  and  spirit;  to  which, 
moreover,  as  to  a  fountain  head,  the  first  um¬ 
bilical  veins  bring  their  blood,  and  from  which 
they  themselves  derive  their  origin. 

So  much  appears  from  careful  observ^ation  of 
the  order  observed  in  the  production  of  the 
parts,  and  certain  other  points  that  follow  as 
deductions  from  these,  and  do  not  a  little  mili¬ 
tate  against  the  commonly  received  physio¬ 
logical  doctrines,  viz.:  since  it  is  manifest  that 
sensation  and  motion  exist  before  the  brain,  all 
sensation  and  motion  do  not  proceed  from  the 


brain;  from  our  history  it  is  clearly  ascertained 
that  sense  and  movement  inhere  in  the  very 
first  drop  of  blood  produced  in  the  egg,  before 
there  is  a  vestige  of  the  body.  The  first  scaffold¬ 
ing  or  rudiment  of  the  body,  too,  which  we 
have  said  is  merely  mucilaginous,  before  any  of 
the  extremities  are  visible,  and  when  the  brain 
is  nothing  more  than  a  limpid  fluid,  if  lightly 
pricked,  will  move  obscurely,  will  contract  and 
twist  itself  like  a  worm  or  caterpillar,  so  that  it 
is  very  evidently  possessed  of  sensation. 

There  are  yet  other  arguments  deduced  from 
sense  and  motion  whence  we  should  infer  that 
the  brain  was  not  so  much  the  first  principle  of 
the  body,  in  the  way  the  medical  writers  main¬ 
tain,  as  the  heart,  agreeably  to  Aristotle’s  view. 

The  motions  and  actions  which  physicians 
style  natural y  because  they  take  place  involun¬ 
tarily,  and  we  can  neither  prevent  nor  moder¬ 
ate,  accelerate  nor  retard  them  by  our  will,  and 
they  therefore  do  not  depend  on  the  brain,  still 
do  not  occur  entirely  without  causing  sensation, 
but  proclaim  themselves  subject  to  sense,  inas¬ 
much  as  they  are  aroused,  called  forth,  and 
changed  thereby.  When  the  heart,  for  example, 
is  affected  with  palpitation,  tremor,  lipothymia, 
syncope,  and  with  great  variety  in  the  extent, 
rapidity,  and  order  or  rhythm  of  its  pulsations, 
we  do  not  hesitate  to  ascribe  these  to  morbific 
causes  implicating,  deranging  its  sensation.  For 
whatever  by  its  divers  movementsstrives-against 
irritations  and  troubles  must  necessarily  be  en¬ 
dowed  with  sensation. 

The  stomach  and  bowels,  disturbed  by  the 
presence  of  vitiated  humours,  are  affected  with 
ructus,  flatus,  vomiting,  and  diarrhoea;  and  as 
it  lies  not  in  our  power  either  to  provoke  or  to 
restrain  their  motions,  neither  are  we  aware  of 
any  sensation  dependent  on  the  brain  which 
should  arouse  the  parts  in  question  to  motions 
of  the  kind. 

It  is  truly  wonderful  to  observe  the  effect  of 
taking  a  solution  of  antimony,  which  we  neither 
distinguish  by  the  taste,  nor  find  any  inconven¬ 
ience  from,  whether  in  the  swallowing  or  the 
rejection.  Nevertheless  there  is  a  certain  dis¬ 
criminating  sense  in  the  stomach  which  distin¬ 
guishes  what  is  hurtful  from  what  is  useful,  and 
by  which  vomiting  is  induced. 

Nay,  the  flesh  itself  readily  distinguishes  a 
poisoned  wound  from  one  that  is  not  poisoned, 
and  on  receipt  of  the  former  contracts  and  con¬ 
denses  itself,  whereby  phlegmonous  tumours 
are  produced,  as  we  find  in  connexion  with  the 
stings  of  bees,  gnats,  and  spiders. 

I  have  myself,  for  experiment’s  sake,  occa- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


sionally  pricked  my  hand  with  a  clean  needle, 
and  then  having  rubbed  the  same  needle  on  the 
teeth  of  a  spider,  I  have  pricked  my  hand  in 
another  place.  I  could  not  by  my  simple  sensa¬ 
tion  perceive  any  difference  between  the  two 
punctures;  nevertheless  there  was  a  capacity  in 
the  skin  to  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other; 
for  the  part  pricked  with  the  envenomed  needle 
immediately  contracted  into  a  tubercle,  and  by 
and  by  became  red,  and  hot,  and  inflamed,  as  if 
it  collected  and  girded  itself  up  for  a  contest 
with  the  poison  for  its  overthrow. 

The  sensations  which  accompany  affections 
of  the  uterus,  such  as  twisting,  decubitus,  pro¬ 
lapse,  ascent,  suffocation,  &c.,  and  other  incon¬ 
veniences  and  irritations,  do  not  depend  on  the 
brain  or  on  common  sensation;  yet  neither  are 
these  to  be  presumed  as  happening  without  all 
consciousness.  For  that  which  is  wholly  with¬ 
out  sense  is  not  seen  to  be  irritated  by  any 
means,  neither  can  it  be  stimulated  to  motion 
or  action  of  any  kind.  Nor  have  we  any  other 
means  of  distinguishing  between  an  animate 
and  sentient  thing  and  one  that  is  dead  and 
senseless  than  the  motion  excited  by  some  other 
irritating  cause  or  thing,  which  as  it  incessantly 
follows,  so  does  it  also  argue  sensation. 

But  we  shall  have  an  opportunity  of  speaking 
further  of  this  matter  when  we  discuss  the  ac¬ 
tions  and  uses  of  the  brain.  Respect  for  our 
predecessors  and  for  antiquity  at  large  inclines 
us  to  defend  their  conclusions  to  the  extent  that 
love  of  truth  will  allow.  Nor  do  I  think  it  be¬ 
coming  in  us  to  neglect  and  make  little  of  their 
labours  and  conclusions  who  bore  the  torch 
that  has  lighted  us  to  the  shrine  of  philosophy. 
I  am,  therefore,  of  opinion  that  we  should  con¬ 
clude  in  this  way :  we  have  consciousness  in  our¬ 
selves  of  five  principal  senses,  by  which  we 
judge  of  external  objects;  but  we  do  not  feel 
with  the  same  sense  by  means  of  which  we  are 
conscious  that  we  feel — seeing  with  our  eyes, 
we  still  do  not  know  by  them  that  we  see,  but 
by  another  sense  or  sensitive  organ,  namely, 
the  internal  common  sensation  or  common 
sensorium,  by  which  we  examine  those  things 
that  reach  us  through  each  of  the  external  sen- 
soria,  and  distinguish  that  which  is  white  from 
that  which  is  sweet  or  hard.  Now  this  sensorium 
commune  to  which  the  species  or  impressions 
of  all  the  external  instruments  of  sensation  are 
referred,  is  obviously  the  brain,  which  along 
with  its  nerves  and  the  external  organs  annexed, 
is  held  and  esteemed  to  be  the  adequate  instru¬ 
ment  of  sensation.  And  this  brain  is  like  a  sensi¬ 
tive  root  to  which  a  variety  of  fibres  tend,  one 


of  which  sees,  another  hears,  a  third  touches, 
and  a  fourth  and  a  fifth  smell  and  taste. 

But  as  there  are  some  actions  and  motions 
the  government  or  direction  of  which  is  not 
dependent  on  the  brain,  and  which  are  there¬ 
fore  called  natural^  so  also  is  it  to  be  concluded 
that  there  is  a  certain  sense  or  form  of  touch 
which  is  not  referred  to  the  common  sensorium, 
nor  in  any  way  communicated  to  the  brain,  so 
that  we  do  not  perceive  by  this  sense  that  we 
feel;  but,  as  happens  to  those  who  are  deranged 
in  mind,  or  who  are  agitated  to  such  a  degree 
by  violent  passion  that  they  feel  no  pain,  and 
pay  no  regard  to  the  impressions  made  on  their 
senses,  so  must  we  believe  it  to  be  with  this 
sense,  which  we  therefore  distinguish  from  the 
proper  animal  sense.  Now  such  a  sense  do  we 
observe  in  zoophytes  or  plant-animals,  in 
sponges,  the  sensitive  plant,  &c. 

Wherefore,  as  many  animals  are  endowed 
with  both  sense  and  motion  without  having  a 
common  sensorium  or  brain,  such  as  earth¬ 
worms,  caterpillars  of  various  kinds,  chrysa¬ 
lides,  &c.,  so  also  do  certain  natural  actions 
take  place  in  the  embryo  and  even  in  ourselves 
without  the  agency  of  the  brain,  and  a  certain 
sensation  takes  place  without  consciousness. 
And  as  medical  writers  teach  that  the  natural 
differ  from  the  animal  actions,  so  by  parity  of 
reason  does  the  natural  sense  of  touch  differ 
from  the  animal  sense  of  touch — it  constitutes, 
in  a  word,  another  species  of  touch;  and  whilst 
the  one  is  communicated  to  the  common  sen¬ 
sorium,  the  other  is  not  so  communicated. 

Further,  it  is  one  thing  for  a  muscle  to  be 
contracted  and  moved,  and  another  for  it  by 
regulated  contractions  and  relaxations  to  per¬ 
form  any  movement,  such  as  progression  or 
prehension.  The  muscles  or  organs  of  motion, 
when  affected  with  spasms  or  convulsions  from 
an  irritating  cause,  are  assuredly  moved  no 
otherwise  than  the  decapitated  cock  or  hen, 
which  is  agitated  with  many  convulsive  move¬ 
ments  of  its  legs  and  wings,  but  all  confused  and 
without  a  purpose,  because  the  controlling 
power  of  the  brain  has  been  taken  away — com¬ 
mon  sensation  has  disappeared,  under  the  con¬ 
trolling  influence  of  which  these  motions  were 
formerly  coordinated  to  progression  by  walking 
or  to  flight. 

We  therefore  conceive  the  fact  to  be  that  all 
the  natural  motions  proceed  from  the  power  of 
the  heart,  and  depend  on  it;  the  spontaneous 
motions,  however,  and  those  that  complete  any 
motion  which  physicians  entitle  an  animal  mo¬ 
tion,  cannot  be  performed  without  the  control- 


458  WILLIAM 

ling  influence  of  the  brain  and  common  sensa- 
tion.  For  inasmuch  as  by  this  common  sensa¬ 
tion  we  are  conscious  of  our  perceptions,  so  also 
are  we  conscious  that  we  move,  and  this  whether 
the  motion  be  regular  or  otherwise. 

We  have  an  excellent  example  of  both  of 
these  kinds  of  motion  in  respiration.  For  the 
lungs,  like  the  heart,  are  continually  carried  up¬ 
wards  and  downwards  by  a  natural  movement, 
and  are  excited  by  any  irritation  to  coughing 
and  more  frequent  action;  but  they  cannot 
form  and  regulate  the  voice,  nor  can  singing  be 
executed,  without  the  assistance,  and  in  some 
sort  the  command,  of  the  sensorium  commune. 

But  these  matters  will  be  more  fully  handled 

hen  we  come  to  speak  of  the  actions  and  uses 
of  the  brain,  and  to  consider  the  vital  principle 
or  soul.  So  much  we  have  thought  fit  to  say  by 
the  way,  that  we  might  show  the  respect  in 
which  we  hold  our  illustrious  teachers,  and  our 
anxiety  to  carry  them  along  with  us  in  our 
labours. 

EXERCISE  58.  Of  the  nutrition  of  the  chic\  in  ovo 

That  the  authority  of  the  ancients  is  not  to 
be  rashly  thrown  off  appears  in  this:  it  was  for¬ 
merly  current  doctrine,  though  many  at  the 
present-day,  Fabricius^  among  the  number,  re¬ 
ject  it  as  a  delusion  and  a  foolish  idea,  that  the 
embryo  sucked  in  its  mother’s  womb.  This  idea 
nevertheless  had  Democritus,  Epicurus,  and 
Hippocrates  for  its  supporters;  and  the  father 
of  physic  contends  for  it  on  two  principal 
grounds:  “Unless  the  foetus  sucked,’’  he  says,^ 
“how  should  excrements  be  formed.?^  or  how 
should  it  know  how  to  suck  immediately  after 
it  is  born.f^’’ 

Now,  whilst  in  other  instances  it  is  customary 
to  swear  by  the  bare  statement  of  this  ancient 
and  most  distinguished  writer,  his  ipse  dixit 
(duros  e</)7?)  sufficing,  because  he  here  makes 
an  assertion  contrary  to  the  commonly  received 
opinion,  Fabricius  not  only  denies  the  state¬ 
ment,  but  spurns  the  arguments  in  support  of 
his  conclusion.  We,  however,  leave  it  to  the 
judgment  of  skilful  anatomists  and  learned 
physicians  to  say  whether  our  observations  on 
the  generation  of  animals  do  not  proclaim  this 
opinion  of  Hippocrates  to  be  not  merely  prob¬ 
able,  but  even  necessary. 

All  admit  that  the  foetus  in  utero  swims  in  the 
midst  of  an  abundance  of  a  watery  fluid,  which 
in  our  history  of  the  egg  we  have  spoken  of  as 
the  colliquament,  this  fluid  modern  authorities 

'  De  form,  foetu,  pp.  19  and  134. 

^  De  earn,  et  de  nat.  pueri. 


HARVEY 

regard  as  the  sw  eat  and  excrement  of  the  foetus, 
and  ascribe  as  its  principal  use  the  protection  of 
the  uterus  against  injury  from  the  foetus  during 
any  violent  motion  of  the  mother  in  running  or 
leaping;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  defence  of 
the  foetus  from  injury  through  contact  with 
neighbouring  bones,  or  an  external  cause,  par¬ 
ticularly  during  the  period  wLen  its  limbs  are 
still  delicate  and  weak. 

Fabricius  ascribes  additional  uses  to  this  fluid, 
viz.,  “that  it  may  moisten  and  lubricate  all  the 
parts  around,  and  dispose  the  neck  of  the  uterus 
to  facile  and  speedy  dilatation  to  the  utmost 
extent;  and  all  this  is  not  less  assisted  by  that 
thick,  white,  excrementitious  matter  of  the 
third  digestion,  neglected  by  the  ancients,  which 
is  unctuous  and  oily,  and  further  prevents  the 
sweat,  which  may  occasionally  be  secreted  sharp 
and  salt  in  quality,  from  excoriating  the  tender 
body  of  the  foetus.’’^ 

I  readily  acknow  ledge  all  the  uses  indicated, 
viz.,  that  the  tender  foetus  may  be  secure  against 
all  sudden  and  violent  movements  of  the  mother, 
that  he  may  ride  safe  in  the  “bat’s  wrings,’’  as 
they  are  called,  and,  surrounded  with  an  abun¬ 
dance  of  water,  that  he  may  escape  coming  into 
contact  w  ith  his  mother’s  sides,  being  restrained 
by  the  retinacular  fluid  on  either  hand:  this 
circumambient  fluid  must  certainly  protect  the 
body  which  floats  in  its  middle  from  all  external 
injury.  But,  as  in  many  other  instances,  my 
observations  compel  me  here  to  be  of  a  different 
opinion  from  Fabricius.  In  the  first  place,  I  am 
by  no  means  satisfied  that  this  fluid  is  the  sweat 
of  the  foetus.  And  then  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
fluid  serves  those  important  purposes  in  parturi¬ 
tion  which  he  indicates;  and  much  less  that  it  is 
ever  so  sharp  and  saline  that  an  unctuous  cover¬ 
ing  was  requisite  to  protect  the  foetus  from  its 
erosive  effects,  particularly  in  those  cases  w'here 
there  is  already  a  thick  covering  of  w^ool,  or 
hair,  or  feathers.  The  fluid,  in  fact,  has  a  pleas¬ 
ant  taste,  like  that  of  watery  milk,  so  that  al¬ 
most  all  viviparous  animals  lap  it  up,  and  cleanse 
their  new^-born  progeny  by  licking  them  with 
their  tongues,  greedily  sw^allowing  the  fluid, 
though  none  of  them  w'as  ever  seen  to  touch 
any  of  the  excrements  of  their  young. 

Fabricius  spoke  of  this  fluid  as  saline  and 
acrimonious,  because  he  believed  it  to  be  sw  eat. 
But  what  inconvenience,  I  l>eseech  you,  were 
sweat  to  the  chick,  already  covered  with  its 
feathers? — if  indeed  anyone  ever  saw’ a  chicken 
sweat.  Nor  do  I  think  he  could  have  said  that 
the  use  of  this  fluid  in  the  egg  was,  by  its  mois- 

3  Op.  di.,  p.  137. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


tening  and  lubrifying  qualities,  to  facilitate  the 
birth  of  the  chick;  for  the  drier  and  older  the 
shell  of  the  egg,  the  more  friable  and  fragile  it 
becomes.  Finally,  were  it  the  sweat  of  the  em¬ 
bryo,  or  foetus,  it  ought  to  be  most  abundant 
nearest  the  period  of  parturition:  the  larger  the 
foetus  and  the  more  food  it  consumes,  the  more 
sweat  must  it  necessarily  secrete.  But  shortly 
before  the  exclusion  of  the  chick  from  the  egg, 
namely,  about  the  nineteenth  or  twentieth  day, 
there  is  none  of  the  fluid  to  be  seen,  because  as 
the  chick  grows  it  is  gradually  taken  up;  so  that 
if  the  thing  be  rightly  viewed,  the  fluid  in  ques¬ 
tion  ought  rather  to  be  regarded  as  nutriment 
than  as  excrement,  particularly  as  he  has  said 
that  the  chick  in  the  egg  breathes,  and  lets  its 
chirping  be  heard,  which  it  certainly  would  not 
do  were  it  surrounded  with  water. 

But  all  experienced  obstetricians  know  that 
the  watery  fluid  of  the  secundines  is  of  no  great 
use  either  in  lubricating  the  parts  or  in  facili¬ 
tating  the  progress  of  parturition  in  the  way 
Fabricius  would  have  it.  For  the  parts  sur¬ 
rounding  the  vulva  are  relaxed  of  themselves, 
and  by  a  kind  of  proper  maturity  at  the  full 
time,  without  any  assistance  from  the  uterine 
waters;  and  particularly  those  that  offer  the 
greatest  obstacles  to  the  advance  of  the  foetus, 
namely,  the  ossa  pubis  and  the  os  coccygis,  to 
which  the  attention  of  the  midwife  is  especially 
tlirected  in  assisting  the  woman  in  labour.  For 
midwives  are  much  less  studious  to  anoint  the 
soft  parts  with  any  emollient  salves,  lest  they 
tear,  than  careful  to  pull  the  os  coccygis  out¬ 
wards,  a  business  in  which,  if  the  fingers  do  not 
suffice,  they  have  recourse  to  the  uterine  specu¬ 
lum,  applied  by  the  hand  of  the  experienced 
surgeon,  an  instrument  having  three  sides  or 
branches,  one  of  which  bearing  on  the  os  coccy¬ 
gis,  the  other  two  on  the  ossa  pubis,  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  distension  is  effected  by  force.  For  the 
head  of  the  child  that  is  about  to  be  born,  when 
it  makes  the  turn,  and  is  forced  downwards,  re¬ 
laxes  and  opens  the  os  uteri;  but  coming  down 
he  will  stick  fast,  and  scarcely  be  brought  forth 
if  he  chance  to  abut  upon  the  point  of  the  os 
coccygis,  and  immediately  the  case  is  one  not 
without  danger  both  to  the  child  and  mother. 
But  nature’s  intention  was  obviously  to  relax 
and  soften  all  the  parts  concerned;  and  the  at¬ 
tendant  knows  that  when  the  uterine  orifice  is 
discovered  in  a  soft  and  lax  condition,  by  the 
finger  introduced,  it  is  an  infallible  sign  that 
the  delivery  is  at  hand  even  though  the  waters 
have  not  broken.  Indeed — and  I  do  not  speak 
without  experience — if  anything  remains  in  the 


uterus  for  expulsion,  either  after  delivery  or  at 
any  other  time,  and  the  uterus  makes  efforts  to 
get  rid  of  it,  the  orifice  both  descends  lower  and 
is  found  soft  and  relaxed.  If  the  uterine  orifice 
recedes,  and  is  found  somewhat  hard  after  de¬ 
livery,  it  is  a  sign  of  the  woman’s  restoration  to 
health. 

Taught  by  like  experience,  I  assert  that  the 
ossa  pubis  frequently  become  loosened  during 
labour,  their  cartilaginous  connexion  being 
softened,  and  the  whole  hypogastric  region  en¬ 
larged  in  the  most  miraculous  manner,  not, 
however,  by  any  pouring  out  of  watery  fluids, 
but  spontaneously,  as  ripe  fruit  gapes  that  the 
included  seed  may  find  an  exit.  The  degree  in 
which  the  coccyx  may  impede  delivery,  how¬ 
ever,  is  apparent  among  quadrupeds  having 
tails,  which  can  neither  bring  forth,  nor  even 
discharge  the  excrement  from  their  bowels,  un¬ 
less  the  tail  be  raised;  if  you  but  depress  the  tail 
with  your  hand,  you  prevent  the  exit  of  the 
dung. 

Moreover,  the  most  natural  labour  of  all  is 
held  to  be  that  in  which  the  foetus  and  after¬ 
birth,  the  waters  inclusive,  or  the  ovum,  is  ex¬ 
pelled  entire.  Now  if  the  membranes  have  not 
given  way,  and  the  waters  have  not  escaped,  it 
comes  to  pass  that  the  surrounding  parts  are 
more  than  usually  distended  and  dilated  by  the 
labour  pains,  in  consequence,  to  wit,  of  the  en¬ 
tire  and  tense  state  of  the  membranes,  by  which 
it  happens  that  the  foetus  is  produced  more 
speedily,  and  with  a  less  amount  of  effort,  al¬ 
though  with  more  suffering  to  the  mother.  In 
cases  of  this  kind  we  have  known  women  who 
were  suffering  much  in  their  travail  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  too  great  distension,  immensely 
relieved  by  the  rupture  of  the  membranes  and 
the  sudden  escape  of  the  waters,  the  laceration 
being  effected  either  with  the  nails  of  the  mid¬ 
wife  or  the  use  of  a  pair  of  forceps. 

Experienced  midwives  are  further  aware  that 
if  the  waters  come  away  before  the  orifice  of 
the  uterus  is  duly  dilated,  the  woman  is  apt  to 
have  a  lingering  time  and  a  more  difficult  de¬ 
livery,  contrary  to  Fabricius’s  notion  of  the 
waters  having  such  paramount  influence  in 
softening  and  lubricating  the  parts. 

Moreover,  that  the  fluid  which  we  have  called 
colliquament  is  not  the  sweat  of  the  foetus  is 
made  obvious,  both  from  the  history  of  the  egg 
and  of  the  uterogestation  of  other  animals:  it  is 
present  before  the  foetus  is  formed  in  any  way, 
before  there  is  a  trace  of  it  to  be  seen;  and  whilst 
it  is  still  extremely  small  and  entirely  gelatinous, 
the  quantity  of  water  present  is  very  great,  so 


460  WILLIAM 

that  it  seems  plainly  impossible  that  so  small  a 
body  should  produce  such  a  mass  of  excremen- 
titious  fluid. 

It  happens  besides  that  the  ramifications  of 
the  umbilical  veins  are  distributed  over  and 
terminate  upon  the  membrane  which  incloses 
this  fluid,  precisely  as  on  the  membranes  of  the 
albumen  and  yelk  of  the  egg,  a  circumstance 
from  which,  and  the  thing  being  viewed  as  it  is 
in  fact,  it  appears  to  be  clearly  proclaimed  that 
this  fluid  is  rather  to  be  regarded  as  food  than 
as  excrement. 

To  me,  therefore,  the  opinion  of  Hippocrates 
appears  more  probable  than  that  of  Fabricius 
and  other  anatomists,  who  look  on  this  liquid 
as  sweat,  and  believe  that  it  must  prove  detri¬ 
mental  to  the  foetus.  I  am  disposed,  I  say,  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  the  fluid  with  which  the  foetus  is  sur¬ 
rounded  may  serve  it  for  nourishment;  that  the 
thinner  and  purer  portions  of  it,  taken  up  by 
the  umbilical  veins,  may  serve  for  the  constitu¬ 
tion  and  increase  of  the  first  formed  parts  of  the 
embryo;  and  that  from  the  remainder  or  the 
milk,  taken  into  the  mouth  by  suction,  passed 
on  to  the  stomach  by  the  act  of  deglutition,  and 
there  digested  or  chylified,  and  finally  absorbed 
by  the  mesenteric  veins,  the  new  being  con¬ 
tinues  to  grow  and  be  nourished.  I  am  the  more 
disposed  to  take  this  view  from  certain  not  im¬ 
pertinent  arguments,  which  I  shall  proceed  to 
state. 

As  soon  as  the  embryo  acquires  a  certain  de¬ 
gree  of  perfection  it  moves  its  extremities,  and 
begins  to  prove  the  actions  of  the  organs  des¬ 
tined  to  locomotion.  Now  I  have  seen  the  chick 
in  ovo,  surrounded  with  liquid,  opening  its 
mouth,  and  any  fluid  that  thus  gained  access  to 
the  fauces  must  needs  have  been  swallowed;  for 
it  is  certain  that  whatever  passes  the  root  of  the 
tongue  and  gains  the  top  of  the  oesophagus, 
cannot  be  rejected  by  any  animal  with  a  less 
effort  than  that  of  vomiting.  This  fact  is  acted 
upon  every  day  by  veterinary  practitioners, 
who  in  administering  medicated  drinks  and 
pills  or  boluses  to  cattle,  seize  the  tongue,  and 
having  put  the  article  upon  its  root  beyond  the 
protuberant  part,  the  animal  cannot  do  other¬ 
wise  than  swallow  it.  And  if  we  make  the  ex¬ 
periment  ourselves,  we  find  that  a  pill  carried 
between  the  finger  and  thumb  as  far  as  the  root 
of  the  tongue  and  there  dropped,  immediately 
the  action  of  deglutition  is  excited,  and  unless 
vomiting  be  produced  the  pill  is  taken  down. 
If  the  embryo  swimming  in  the  fluid  in  ques¬ 
tion,  then,  do  but  open  his  mouth,  it  is  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary  that  the  fluid  must  reach  the 


HARVEY 

fauces;  and  if  the  creature  then  move  other 
muscles,  wherefore  should  we  not  believe  that 
he  also  uses  his  throat  in  its  appropriate  office 
and  swallows  the  fluid  ? 

It  is  further  quite  certain  that  in  the  crop  of 
the  chick — and  the  same  thing  occurs  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  stomach  of  other  embryos — there  is 
a  certain  matter  having  a  colour,  taste,  and  con¬ 
sistence,  very  similar  to  that  of  the  liquid  men¬ 
tioned,  and  some  of  it  in  the  stomach  digested 
to  a  certain  extent,  like  coagulated  milk;  and 
further,  whilst  we  discover  a  kind  of  chyle  in 
the  upper  intestines,  we  find  the  lower  lx)wels 
full  of  stercoraceous  excrements.  In  like  man¬ 
ner  we  perceive  the  large  intestines  of  the  foe¬ 
tuses  of  viviparous  animals  to  contain  excre¬ 
ments  of  the  same  description  as  those  that  dis¬ 
tend  them  when  they  feed  on  milk.  In  the 
sheep  and  other  bisulcated  animals  we  even 
find  scybala. 

Towards  the  seventeenth  day  we  find  dung 
very  obviously  near  the  anus  of  the  chick;  and 
shortly  before  the  extrusion  I  have  seen  the 
same  matter  expelled  and  contained  within  the 
membranes.  Volcher  Goiter,  a  careful  and  ex¬ 
perienced  dissector,  states  that  he  has  obser\'ed 
the  same  thing. 

Wherefore  should  we  doubt,  then,  that  the 
foetus  in  ntero  sucks,  and  that  chylopoiesis  goes 
on  in  its  stomach,  when  we  find  present  both 
the  principles  and  the  recrementitious  products 
of  digestion  } 

And  then,  when  we  find  the  bladder  both  of 
the  bile  and  the  urine  full  of  those  excrements 
of  the  second  digestion,  wherefore  should  we 
not  conclude  that  the  first  digestion,  or  chylo¬ 
poiesis,  has  preceded } 

The  embryo,  therefore,  seeks  for  and  sucks 
in  nourishment  by  the  mouth;  and  you  will 
readily  believe  that  he  does  so  if  you  rip  him 
from  his  mother’s  womb  and  instantly  put  a 
finger  in  his  mouth;  which  Hippocrates  thinks 
he  would  not  seize  had  he  not  previously  sucked 
whilst  in  the  womb.  For  we  are  accustomed  to 
see  young  infants  trying  various  motions,  mak¬ 
ing  experiments,  as  it  were,  approaching  ever>^- 
thing,  moving  their  limbs,  attempting  to  walk, 
and  uttering  sounds,  acts  all  of  which  when 
taught  by  repeated  experience,  they  afterwards 
come  to  execute  with  readiness  and  precision. 
But  the  foetus  so  soon  as  it  is  born,  aye,  before 
it  is  born,  will  suck;  doubtless  as  it  had  done  in 
the  uterus  long  before.  For  I  have  found  by  c.x- 
perience  that  the  child  delayed  in  the  birth, 
and  before  it  has  cried  or  breathed,  will  seize 
and  suck  a  finger  put  into  its  mouth.  A  new- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  461 


born  infant,  indeed,  is  more  expert  at  sucking 
than  an  adult,  or  than  he  is  himself  if  he  have 
but  lost  the  habit  for  a  few  days.  For  the  infant 
does  not  suck  by  squeezing  the  nipple  with  his 
lips  as  we  should,  and  by  suction  in  the  com¬ 
mon  acceptation;  he  rather  seems  as  if  he  would 
swallow  the  nipple,  drawing  it  wholly  into  his 
throat,  and  with  the  aid  of  his  tongue  and  pal¬ 
ate,  and  chewing,  as  it  were,  he  milks  his  mother 
with  more  art  and  dexterity  than  an  adult 
could  practise.  He  therefore  appears  to  have 
learned  that  by  long  custom,  and  before  he  saw 
the  light,  which  we  know  full  well  he  unlearns 
by  a  very  brief  discontinuance. 

These  and  other  observations  of  the  same 
kind  make  it  extremely  probable  that  the  chick 
in  ovo  is  nourished  in  a  twofold  manner,  namely, 
by  the  umbilical  and  by  the  mesenteric  veins. 
By  the  former  he  imbibes  a  nourishment  that 
is  well  nigh  perfectly  prepared,  whence  the 
first-formed  parts  are  engendered  and  aug¬ 
mented;  by  the  latter  he  receives  chyle  for  the 
structure  and  growth  of  the  other  remaining 
parts. 

But  the  reason  is  perhaps  obscure  why  the 
same  agent  should  perform  the  work  of  nutri¬ 
tion  by  means  of  the  same  matter  in  a  variety 
of  ways,  since  nature  does  nothing  in  vain.  We 
shall  therefore  endeavour  to  explain  this. 

What  is  taken  up  by  the  umbilical  veins  is 
the  purer  and  more  limpid  part;  and  the  rest  of 
the  colliquament  in  which  the  foetus  swims  is 
like  crude  milk,  or  milk  deprived  of  its  purer 
portion.  The  purer  part  does  not  require  any 
of  that  ulterior  concoction  of  which  the  re¬ 
mainder  stands  in  need;  and  to  undergo  which 
it  is  taken  into  the  stomach,  where  it  is  trans¬ 
muted  into  chyle.  Similar  to  this  is  the  crude 
and  watery  milk  which  is  found  in  the  breasts 
immediately  after  parturition.  The  liquefied 
albumen  of  the  egg,  and  the  crude  or  watery 
milk  of  the  mammae  seem  to  have  in  all  respects 
the  same  colour,  taste,  and  consistence.  For  the 
first  flow  of  milk  is  serous  and  watery,  and 
women  are  wont  to  express  water  from  their 
breasts  before  the  milk  comes  white,  concocted, 
and  perfect. 

Just  as  the  colliquament  found  in  the  crop  of 
the  chick  is  a  kind  of  crude  milk,  whilst  the 
same  fluid  discovered  in  the  stomach  is  con¬ 
cocted,  white,  and  curdled;  so  in  viviparous 
animals,  before  the  milk  is  concocted  in  the 
mammae,  a  kind  of  dewand  colliquament  makes 
its  appearance  there,  and  the  colliquament  only 
puts  on  the  semblance  of  milk  after  it  has  un¬ 
dergone  concoction  in  the  stomach.  And  so  it 


happens,  in  Aristotle’s  opinion,  that  the  first 
and  most  essential  parts  are  formed  out  of  the 
purer  and  thinner  portion  of  the  colliquament, 
and  are  increased  by  the  remaining  more  indif¬ 
ferent  portion  after  it  has  undergone  elabora¬ 
tion  by  a  new  digestion  in  the  stomach.  In  the 
same  way  are  the  other  less  important  parts  de¬ 
veloped  and  maintained.  Thus  has  nature,  like 
a  fond  and  indulgent  mother,  been  sedulous 
rather  to  provide  superfluity,  than  to  suffer  any 
scarcity  of  things  necessary.  Or  it  might  be  said 
to  be  in  conformity  with  reason  to  suppose  that 
the  foetus,  now  grown  more  perfect,  should  also 
be  nourished  in  a  more  perfect  manner,  by  the 
mouth,  to  wit,  and  by  a  more  perfect  kind  of 
aliment,  rendered  purer  by  having  undergone 
the  two  antecedent  digestions  and  been  thereby 
freed  from  the  two  kinds  of  excrementitious 
matter.  In  the  beginning  and  early  stages,  nour¬ 
ished  by  the  ramifications  of  the  umbilical 
veins,  it  leads  in  some  sort  the  life  of  a  plant; 
the  body  is  then  crude,  white,  and  imperfect; 
like  plants,  too,  it  is  motionless  and  impassive. 
As  soon,  however,  as  it  begins  by  the  mouth  to 
partake  of  the  same  aliment  further  elaborated, 
as  if  feeling  a  diviner  influence,  boasting  a  higher 
grade  of  vegetative  existence,  the  gelatinous 
mass  of  the  body  is  changed  into  flesh,  the  or¬ 
gans  of  motion  are  distinguished,  the  spirits  are 
perfected,  and  motion  begins;  nor  is  it  any 
longer  nourished  like  a  vegetable,  by  the  roots, 
but,  living  the  life  of  an  animal,  it  is  supported 
by  the  mouth. 

EXERCISE  59.  Of  the  uses  of  the  entire  egg 

Having  now  gone  through  the  several  changes 
and  processes  which  must  take  place  in  the 
hen’s  egg,  in  order  that  it  may  produce  a  chick, 
Fabricius  proceeds  to  consider  the  uses  of  the 
egg  at  large,  and  of  its  various  parts;  nor  does 
he  restrict  himself  to  the  hen’s  egg,  but  con¬ 
descends  upon  eggs  in  general.  Among  other 
things  he  inquires:  wherefore  some  eggs  are 
heterogeneous  and  composed  of  different  ele¬ 
ments;  and  others  are  homogeneous  and  simi¬ 
lar  }  such  as  the  eggs  of  insects,  and  those  crea¬ 
tures  that  are  engendered  from  the  whole  egg, 
viz.j  by  metamorphosis,  and  are  not  engen¬ 
dered  from  one  part  of  the  egg,  and  nourished 
by  another  part. 

I  have  no  purpose  myself  of  entering  on  a 
general  consideration  of  eggs  of  all  kinds  and 
descriptions;  I  have  not  yet  given  the  history 
of  all,  but  only  of  the  hen’s  egg;  so  that  I  shall 
here  limit  myself  to  a  survey  of  the  uses  of  the 
common  hen’s  egg,  keeping  in  view  the  end  of 


462  WILLIAM 

all  its  actions,  which  is  nothing  less  than  the 
production  and  completion  of  a  new  being,  as 
Fabricius  has  well  and  truly  saidd 

Among  the  points  having  reference  to  the 
whole  egg,  Fabricius  speaks  of  the  form,  dimen- 
sions,  and  number  of  eggs.  “The  figure  of  the 
egg  is  round,’’  he  says,^  “in  order  that  the  mass 
of  the  chick  may  be  stowed  in  the  smallest  pos¬ 
sible  space;  for  the  same  cause  that  God  made 
the  world  round,  namely,  that  it  might  em¬ 
brace  all  things;  and  it  is  from  this,  as  Galen 
conceives,  that  this  figure  is  always  felt  to  be 
most  agreeable  and  consonant  to  nature.  Fur¬ 
ther,  as  it  has  no  angles  exposed  to  injur)'  from 
without,  it  is,  therefore,  the  safest  figure,  and 
the  one  best  adapted  to  effect  the  exclusion  of 
the  chick.”  It  had  been  well  after  such  a  preface 
to  have  assigned  satisfactory  causes  why  hen’s 
eggs  are  not  spherical,  like  the  eggs  of  fishes, 
worms  and  frogs,  but  oblong  and  pointed;  to 
have  shown  what  there  is  in  them  which  hin¬ 
ders  the  presumed  perfection  of  figure.  Now  to 
me  the  form  of  the  egg  has  never  appeared  to 
have  aught  to  do  with  the  engenderment  of  the 
chick,  but  to  be  a  mere  accident;  and  to  this 
conclusion  I  come  the  rather  when  I  see  such 
diversities  in  the  shape  of  the  eggs  of  different 
hens.  They  vary,  in  short,  in  conformity  with 
the  variety  that  obtains  among  the  uteri  of  dif¬ 
ferent  fowls,  in  which,  as  in  moulds,  they  re¬ 
ceive  their  form. 

Aristotle,^  indeed,  says  that  the  longer-shaped 
eggs  produce  females,  the  rounder  males.  I  have 
not  made  any  experiments  upon  this  point  my¬ 
self.  But  Pliny^  asserts,  in  opposition  to  Aris¬ 
totle,  that  the  rounder  eggs  produce  females, 
the  others  males.  Now  were  there  any  certainty 
in  such  statements,  either  in  one  way  or  the 
other,  some  hens  would  always  produce  males, 
others  always  females,  inasmuch  as  the  eggs  of 
the  same  hen  are  in  many  instances  always  of 
one  figure,  namely,  either  much  rounded  or 
acutely  pointed.  Horace^  thought  that  the  ob¬ 
long  eggs,  as  being  the  more  perfect  and  better 
concocted,  and  therefore  the  better  flavoured, 
produced  males. 

1  willingly  pass  by  the  reasons  alleged  by 
Fabricius  for  the  form  of  eggs,  as  being  all 
irrelevant. 

The  size  of  an  egg  appears  to  bear  a  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  size  of  the  foetus  produced  from  it; 

^  Loc.  cit..,  p.  50. 

2  De  usti  part.^  x. 

8  History  of  Aniryialsy  vi.  2. 

^  Hist,  nat.y  x.  52. 

5  Pliny,  ibiti. 


HARVEY 

large  hens,  too,  certainly  lay  large  eggs.  The 
crocodile,  however,  lays  eggs  the  size  of  those 
of  the  goose;  nor  does  any  animal  attain  to 
larger  dimensions  from  a  smaller  beginning.  It 
would  seem,  too,  that  the  size  of  the  egg  and 
the  quantity  of  matter  it  contained  had  some 
connexion  with  its  fecundity,  inasmuch  as  the 
very  small  eggs  called  centenines  are  all  barren. 

The  number  of  eggs  serv^es  the  same  end  as 
abundance  of  conceptions  among  viviparous 
animals — they  secure  the  perpetuity  of  the  spe¬ 
cies.  Nature  appears  to  have  been  particularly 
careful  in  providing  a  numerous  offspring  to 
those  animals  which,  by  reason  of  their  pusillan¬ 
imity  or  bodily  weakness,  hardly  defend  them¬ 
selves  against  the  attacks  of  others;  she  has 
counterbalanced  the  shortness  of  their  own 
lives  by  the  number  of  their  progeny.  “Na¬ 
ture,”  says  Pliny,®  “has  made  the  timid  tribes 
among  birds  more  fruitful  than  the  bold  ones.” 
All  generation,  as  it  is  instituted  by  nature  for 
the  sake  of  perpetuating  species,  so  does  it  occur 
more  frequently  among  those  that  are  shorter- 
lived  and  more  obnoxious  to  external  injury 
lest  their  race  should  fail.  Birds  that  are  of 
stronger  make,  that  prey  upon  other  creatures, 
and  therefore  live  more  securely  and  for  longer 
terms  scarcely  lay  more  than  two  eggs  once  a 
year.  Pigeons,  turtle  and  ring-doves,  that  lay 
but  a  couple  of  eggs,  make  up  for  the  smallness 
of  the  number  by  the  frequency  of  laying,  for 
they  will  produce  young  as  often  as  ten  times 
in  the  course  of  a  year.  They,  therefore,  engen¬ 
der  greatly  although  they  do  not  produce  many 
at  a  time. 

EXERCISE  60.  Of  the  uses  of  theyel\and  albumen 

“An  egg,”  says  Fabricius,^  “properly  so  called, 
is  composed  of  many  parts,  because  it  is  the  or¬ 
gan  of  the  engenderer,  and  Galen  everywhere 
insists  on  the  constitution  of  an  organ  as  imply¬ 
ing  multiplicity  of  parts.”  But  this  view  leads 
us  to  ask  whether  every  egg  must  not  be  hetero¬ 
geneous,  seeing  that  ever)'  egg  is  organic }  And 
every  egg,  indeed,  even  that  of  the  fish  and  in¬ 
sect,  appears  to  be  composed  of  several  different 
parts— membranes,  coverings,  defences;  nor  is 
the  included  matter  by  any  means  without  di¬ 
versity  of  constitution  in  different  parts. 

Fabricius  agrees  further,  and  correctly,  with 
Galen,  when  he  says:  “Some  parts  of  the  egg 
are  the  chief  instruments  of  the  actions  that 
take  place  in  it,  others  may  be  styled  necessary 
— without  them  no  actions  could  take  place; 

6  Ibid. 

7  Op.  sup.  cit.y  p.  47. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  463 


others  exist  that  the  action  which  takes  place 
may  be  better  performed;  others,  in  fine,  are 
destined  for  the  safety  and  preservation  of  all 
of  these.”^  But  he  is  mistaken  when  he  says:  “If 
we  speak  of  the  prime  action,  which  is  the  gen¬ 
eration  of  the  chick,  the  chief  cause  of  this  is  the 
semen  and  the  chalazae,  these  two  being  the 
prime  cause  of  the  generation  of  the  chick,  the 
semen  being  the  efficient  cause,  the  chalaza  the 
matter  only.”  Now  according  to  the  opinion  of 
Aristotle,  it  must  be  allowed  that  that  which 
generates  is  included  in  the  egg;  but  Fabricius 
denies  that  the  semen  of  the  cock  is  contained 
in  the  egg. 

Nor  does  he  wander  less  wide  of  the  mark 
when  he  speaks  of  the  chalazae  as  the  matter 
from  which,  by  the  influence  of  the  semen  galli, 
the  chick  is  incorporated.  For  the  chick  is  not 
produced  either  from  one  or  the  other,  nor  yet 
from  both  of  the  chalazae,  as  we  have  shown  in 
our  history.  Neither  is  the  generation  of  the 
chick  effected  by  metamorphosis,  nor  by  any 
new  form  assumed  and  division  effected  in  the 
chalazae,  but  by  epigenesis,  in  the  manner  al¬ 
ready  explained.  Nor  are  the  chalazae  especially 
fecundated  by  the  semen  of  the  male  bird,  but 
the  cicatricula  rather,  or  the  part  which  we 
have  called  the  eye  of  the  egg,  from  which, 
when  it  enlarges,  the  colliquament  is  produced, 
in  and  from  which,  subsequently,  the  blood, 
the  veins,  and  the  pulsating  vesicles  proceed, 
after  which  the  whole  body  is  gradually  formed. 
Moreover,  on  his  own  admission,  the  semen  of 
the  cock  never  enters  the  uterus  of  the  hen,  and 
yet  it  fecundates  not  only  the  eggs  that  are  al¬ 
ready  formed,  but  others  that  are  yet  to  be 
produced. 

Fabricius  refers  the  albumen  and  vitellus  to 
the  second  action  of  the  egg,  which  is  the  nutri¬ 
tion  and  growth  of  the  chick.  “The  vitellus  and 
albumen,”  he  says,^  “are  in  quantity  commen¬ 
surate  with  the  perfect  performance  of  this  ac¬ 
tion,  and  with  the  due  development  and  growth 
of  the  chick.  The  shell  and  membranes  are, 
therefore,  the  safety  of  the  whole  of  the  egg  as 
well  as  the  security  of  its  action.  But  the  veins 
and  arteries  which  carry  nourishment  are  organs 
without  which  the  action  of  the  egg,  in  other 
words,  the  growth  and  nutrition  of  the  chick, 
would  not  take  place.”  It  is  uncertain,  how¬ 
ever,  whether  the  umbilical  vessels  of  the  em¬ 
bryo  or  the  veins  and  arteries  of  the  mother, 
whence  the  egg  is  increased,  are  here  to  be  un¬ 
derstood.  For  a  like  reason  the  uterus  and  in- 

^  Ibid.y  p.  48. 

^  Ibid,^  p.  48. 


cubation  ought  to  be  referred  to  this  last  class 
of  actions. 

We  have  to  do,  then,  with  the  two  fluids  of 
the  egg,  the  albumen  and  the  vitellus;  for  these, 
before  all  the  other  parts,  are  formed  for  the 
use  of  the  embryo,  and  in  them  is  the  second 
action  of  the  egg  especially  conspicuous. 

The  egg  of  the  common  hen  is  of  two  colours 
internally,  and  consists  of  two  fluids,  severally 
distinct,  separated  by  membranes,  and  in  all 
probability  of  different  natures,  and  therefore 
having  different  ends  to  serve,  inasmuch  as  they 
are  distinguished  by  different  extensions  of  the 
umbilical  veins,  one  of  them  proceeding  to  the 
white,  another  to  the  yelk.  “The  yelk  and  white 
of  the  egg  are  of  opposite  natures,”  says  Aris¬ 
totle,^  “not  only  in  colour,  but  also  in  power. 
For  the  yelk  is  congealed  by  cold;  the  white  is 
not  congealed,  but  is  rather  liquefied;  on  the 
contrary,  the  white  is  coagulated  by  heat,  the 
yelk  is  not  coagulated,  but  remains  soft,  unless 
it  be  overdone,  and  is  more  condensed  and 
dried  by  boiling  than  by  roasting.”  The  vitellus 
getting  heated  during  incubation,  is  rendered 
more  moist;  for  it  becomes  like  melted  wax  or 
tallow,  whereby  it  also  takes  up  more  room. 
For  as  the  embryo  grows,  the  albumen  is  gradu¬ 
ally  taken  up  and  becomes  inspissated;  but  the 
yelk,  even  when  the  foetus  has  attained  perfec¬ 
tion;  appears  scarcely  to  have  diminished  in 
size;  it  is  only  more  diffluent  and  moist,  even 
when  the  foetus  begins  to  have  its  abdomen 
closed  in. 

Aristotle  gives  the  following  reason  for  the 
diversity:  “Since  the  bird  cannot  perfect  her 
offspring  within  herself,  she  produces  it  along 
with  the  aliment  needful  to  its  growth  in  the 
egg.  Viviparous  animals  again  prepare  the  food 
(milk)  in  another  part  of  their  body,  namely, 
the  breasts.  Now  nature  has  done  the  same 
thing  in  the  egg;  but  otherwise  than  as  is  gen¬ 
erally  presumed,  and  as  Alcmaeon  Crotoniates 
states  it,  for  it  is  not  the  albumen  but  the  vitellus 
which  is  the  milk  of  the  egg.”^ 

For  as  the  foetus  of  a  viviparous  animal  draws 
its  nourishment  from  the  uterus  whilst  it  is  con¬ 
nected  with  its  mother,  like  a  plant  by  its  roots 
from  the  earth;  but  after  birth,  and  when  it  has 
escaped  from  the  womb,  sucks  milk  from  the 
breast,  and  thereby  continues  to  wax  in  size 
and  strength,  the  chick  finds  the  analogue  of 
both  kinds  of  food  in  the  egg.  So  that  whilst  in 
viviparous  animals  the  uterus  exists  within  the 
parent,  in  oviparous  the  parent  may  rather  be 

3  History  of  Animals,  vii.  2. 

4  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  HI.  2. 


464  WILLIAM 

said  to  exist  within  the  uterus  (the  egg).  For 
the  egg  is  a  kind  of  exposed  and  detached  uter¬ 
us,  and  in  it  are  included  in  some  sort  vicarious 
mammae.  The  chick  in  the  egg,  I  say,  is  first 
nourished  by  albumen,  but  afterwards,  when 
this  is  consumed,  by  the  yelk  or  by  milk.  The 
umbilical  vascular  connexion  with  the  albu¬ 
men,  therefore,  when  this  fluid  is  used  up,  with¬ 
ers  and  is  interrupted  when  the  abdomen  comes 
to  be  closed,  and  before  the  period  of  exclusion 
arrives,  so  that  it  leaves  no  trace  of  its  existence 
behind  it:  in  viviparous  animals,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  umbilical  cord  is  permanent  in  all  its 
parts  up  to  the  moment  of  birth.  The  other 
canal  that  extends  to  the  vitellus,  however,  is 
taken  up  along  with  this  matter  into  the  abdo¬ 
men,  where  being  stored,  it  serves  for  the  sup¬ 
port  of  the  delicate  foetus  until  its  beak  has  ac¬ 
quired  firmness  enough  to  seize  and  bruise  its 
food,  and  its  stomach  strength  sufficient  to 
comminute  and  digest  it;  just  as  the  young  of 
the  viviparous  animal  lives  upon  milk  from  the 
mammae  of  its  mother,  until  it  is  provided  with 
teeth  by  which  it  can  masticate  harder  food. 
For  the  vitellus  is  as  milk  to  the  chick,  as  has 
been  already  said;  and  the  bird’s  egg,  as  it  stands 
in  lieu  both  of  uterus  and  mammae,  is  furnished 
with  two  fluids  of  different  colours,  the  white 
and  the  yelk. 

All  admit  this  distinction  of  fluids.  But  I,  as  1 
have  already  said,  distinguish  two  albumens  in 
the  egg,  kept  separate  by  an  interposed  mem¬ 
brane,  the  more  external  of  which  embraces  the 
other  within  it,  in  the  same  way  as  the  yelk  is 
surrounded  by  the  albumen  in  general.  I  have 
also  insisted  on  the  diverse  nature  of  these  albu¬ 
mens;  distinguished  both  by  situation  and  their 
surrounding  membranes,  they  seem  in  like  man¬ 
ner  calculated  for  different  uses.  Both,  how¬ 
ever,  are  there  for  ends  of  nutrition,  the  outer¬ 
most,  as  that  to  which  the  branches  of  the  um¬ 
bilical  veins  are  earliest  distributed,  being  first 
consumed,  and  then  the  inner  and  thicker  por¬ 
tion;  last  of  all  the  vitellus  is  attacked,  and  by 
it  is  the  chick  nourished,  not  only  till  it  escapes 
from  the  shell  but  for  some  time  afterwards. 

But  upon  this  point  we  shall  have  more  to 
say  below,  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  the  foetuses  of  viviparous  animals 
are  developed,  and  at  the  same  time  demon¬ 
strate  that  these  all  derive  their  origin  from 
eggs,  and  live  by  a  twofold  albuminous  food  in 
the  womb.  One  of  these  is  thinner,  and  con¬ 
tained  within  the  ovum  or  conception;  the 
other  is  obtained  by  the  umbilical  vessels  from 
the  placenta  and  uterine  cotyledons.  The  fluid 


HARVEY 

of  the  ovum  resembles  a  dilute  albumen  in  col¬ 
our  and  consistence;  it  is  a  sluggish,  pellucid 
liquid,  in  all  respects  similar  to  that  which  we 
have  called  the  colliquament  of  the  egg,  in 
which  the  embryo  swims,  and  on  which  it  feeds 
by  the  mouth.  The  fluid  which  the  foetus  obtains 
from  the  uterine  placenta  by  the  aid  of  the  um¬ 
bilical  vessels  is  more  dense  and  mucaginous, 
like  the  inspissated  albumen.  Whence  it  clearly 
appears  that  the  foetus  in  utero  is  no  more  nour¬ 
ished  by  its  parent’s  blood  than  is  the  suckling 
afterwards,  or  the  chick  in  ovo;  but  that  it  is 
nourished  by  an  albuminous  matter  concocted 
in  the  placenta,  and  not  unlike  white  of  egg. 

Nor  is  the  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Prov¬ 
idence  less  useful  than  delightful  when  we  see 
Nature,  in  her  work  of  evolving  the  foetus,  fur¬ 
nishing  it  with  sustenance  adapted  to  its  vary¬ 
ing  ages  and  powers,  now  more  easy,  by  and  by 
more  difficult  of  digestion.  For  as  the  foetus  ac¬ 
quires  greater  powers  of  digesting,  so  is  it  sup¬ 
plied  with  food  that  is  successively  thicker  and 
harder.  And  the  same  thing  may  be  observed  in 
the  milk  of  animals  generally:  when  the  young 
creature  first  sees  the  light  the  milk  is  thinner 
and  more  easy  of  concoction;  but  in  the  course 
of  time,  and  with  increased  strength  in  the 
suckling,  it  becomes  thicker,  and  is  more  abun¬ 
dantly  stored  with  caseous  matter.  Those  flabby 
and  delicate  women,  therefore,  who  do  not 
nurse  their  own  children,  but  give  them  up  to 
the  breast  of  another,  consult  their  health  in¬ 
differently;  for  mercenary  nurses  being  for  the 
major  part  of  more  robust  and  hardy  frames, 
and  their  milk  consequently  thicker,  more 
caseous,  and  difficult  of  digestion,  it  frequently 
happens  that  milk  of  this  kind  given  to  the  in¬ 
fants  of  such  parents,  particularly  during  the 
time  of  teething,  is  not  well  borne,  but  gives 
rise  to  crudities  and  diarrhoeas,  to  griping,  vom¬ 
iting,  fever,  epilepsy,  and  other  formidable  dis¬ 
eases  of  the  like  nature. 

What  Fabricius  says,^  and  strives  to  bolster 
up  by  certain  reasonings,  of  the  chalazae  stand¬ 
ing  for  the  matter  of  the  chick,  we  have  already 
thrown  out  in  our  history,  and  at  the  same  time 
have  made  it  manifest  that  the  substance  of  the 
chick  and  its  first  rudiments  were  produced 
whilst  the  chalazae  were  still  entire  and  un¬ 
changed,  and  in  a  totally  different  situation. 

Neither  is  it  true,  as  he  states,  “that  the 
chalazae,  rendered  fruitful  by  the  semen  of  the 
cock,  stand  in  the  place  of  seed,  and  that  from 
them  the  chick  is  produced.”^  Nor  are  the  cha- 

^  Op.  cit.y  p.  34. 

2  Op,  Cit.y  p.  54. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  465 


lazae,  as  he  will  have  it,  “in  colour,  substance, 
and  bodily  properties  so  like  seed,  or  bear  so 
strong  a  resemblance  to  the  embryo  in  a  boiled 
egg,  that  we  may  rightly  conceive  all  the  parts 
designated  spermatic  to  be  thence  engendered.”^ 
I  am  rather  of  opinion  that  the  fluid  which  we 
have  called  colliquament,  or  the  thinner  por¬ 
tion  of  the  albumen  liquefied  and  concocted,  is 
to  be  regarded  as  of  the  nature  of  seed,  and,  if 
the  testimony  of  our  eyes  is  to  be  credited,  as  a 
substitute  for  it. 

The  observation  of  this  venerable  old  man  is 
therefore  unnecessary  when  he  says,  “As  the 
whole  animal  body  is  made  up  of  two  substances 
very  different  from  one  another,  and  even  of 
opposite  natures,  viz,^  hot  and  cold— among  the 
hot  parts  being  included  all  those  that  are  full 
of  blood  and  of  a  red  colour;  among  the  cold  all 
those  that  are  exsanguine  and  white — these  two 
orders  of  parts  doubtless  require  a  different  and 
yet  a  like  nourishment,  if  it  be  true  that  we  are 
nourished  by  the  same  things  of  which  we  are 
made.  The  spermatic,  white,  and  cold  parts, 
therefore,  require  white  and  cold  nourishment; 
the  sanguineous,  red,  and  hot  parts,  again,  de¬ 
mand  nourishment  that  is  red  and  hot.  And  so 
is  the  cold  white  of  the  egg  properly  held  to 
nourish  the  cold  and  white  parts  of  the  chick, 
and  the  hot  and  sanguine  yelk  regarded  as  a 
substitute  for  the  hot  and  purple  blood.  In  this 
way  do  all  the  animal  parts  obtain  nourishment 
suitable  and  convenient  for  them.”^  Now  we 
by  no  means  admit  that  the  two  fluids  or  mat¬ 
ters  of  the  egg  are  there  as  appropriate  means 
of  nourishment  for  different  orders  of  parts. 
For  we  have  already  said  that  the  heart,  lungs, 
kidneys,  liver,  spleen,  muscles,  bones,  liga¬ 
ments,  &c.,  &c.,  were  all  alike  and  indiscrimi¬ 
nately  white  and  bloodless  on  their  first  for¬ 
mation. 

Further,  on  the  preceding  view  of  Fabricius 
it  would  follow  that  the  heart,  lungs,  liver, 
spleen,  &c.,  were  not  spermatic  parts,  did  not 
originate  from  the  seed  (which  he,  however, 
will  by  no  means  allow),  inasmuch  as  they  too 
are  by  and  by  nourished  by  the  blood  and  grow 
out  of  it;  for  every  part  is  both  formed  and 
nourished  by  the  same  means,  and  nutrition  is 
nothing  more  than  the  substitution  of  a  like 
matter  in  the  room  of  that  which  is  lost. 

Nor  would  he  find  less  difiiculty  in  answering 
the  question:  how  it  happens  that  when  the 
albumen  in  the  egg  is  all  consumed,  the  cold 
and  white  parts,  such  as  the  bones,  ligaments, 

1  Ibid.,  p.  57. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  55. 


brain,  spinal  marrow,  &c.,  continue  to  be  nour¬ 
ished  and  to  grow  by  means  of  the  vitellus.?* 
which  to  these  must  be  nourishment  as  inap¬ 
propriate  as  albumen  to  the  hot,  red,  and  san¬ 
guine  parts. 

Adopting  the  views  commented  on,  indeed, 
we  should  be  compelled  to  admit  that  the  hot 
and  sanguineous  parts  were  the  last  to  be  pro¬ 
duced:  the  flesh  after  the  bones;  the  liver, 
spleen,  and  lungs  after  the  ligaments  and  intes¬ 
tinal  canal;  and  further,  that  the  cold  parts  of 
the  chick  must  come  together  and  attain  ma¬ 
turity,  the  white  being  all  the  while  consumed, 
and  the  hot  parts  be  engendered  subsequently, 
when  the  vitellus  fails  and  ceases  from  nourish¬ 
ing  them;  and  then  it  would  be  certain  that  all 
the  parts  could  not  take  their  rise  in  and  be  con¬ 
stituted  out  of  the  same  clear  liquid.  All  such 
conclusions,  however,  are  refuted  by  simple 
ocular  inspection. 

I  add  another  argument  to  those  already  sup¬ 
plied:  the  eggs  of  cartilaginous  fishes — skates, 
the  dog-fish,  &c. — are  of  two  colours;  their 
yelks  are  of  a  good  deep  colour;  nevertheless, 
all  the  parts  of  these  fishes  are  white,  bloodless, 
and  cold,  not  even  excepting  the  substance  of 
their  liver.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  seen  a  cer¬ 
tain  breed  of  fowls  of  large  size,  their  feathers 
Iblack,  their  flesh  well  supplied  with  blood,  their 
iver  red;  yet  were  the  yelks  of  the  eggs  of  these 
fowls — fruitful  eggs — of  the  palest  shade  of 
yellow,  not  deeper  than  the  tint  of  ripe  barley 
straw. 

Fabricius,  however,  seems  in  these  words  to 
retract  all  he  has  but  just  said:  “There  is  one 
thing  to  be  particularly  wondered  at  both  in 
the  yelk  and  the  white,  viz.,  that  neither  of 
them  being  blood,  they  are  still  so  near  to  the 
nature  of  blood  that  they  in  fact  differ  but  very 
slightly  from  it — there  is  but  little  wanting  to 
constitute  either  of  them  blood;  so  that  little 
labour  and  a  very  slight  concoction  suffice  to 
effect  the  change.  The  veins  and  arteries  dis¬ 
tributed  to  the  membranes  of  both  the  white 
and  yelk  are  consequently  seen  replete  with 
blood  at  all  times;  the  white  and  yelk  neverthe¬ 
less  continuing  possessed  of  their  own  proper 
nature,  though  either,  so  soon  as  it  is  imbibed 
by  the  vessels,  is  changed  into  blood,  so  closely 
do  they  approach  in  constitution  to  this  fluid.”® 

But  if  it  be  matter  of  certainty  that  blood 
exists  no  less  in  the  vessels  distributed  to  the 
albumen  than  in  those  sent  to  the  vitellus,  and 
that  both  of  these  fluids  are  so  closely  allied  to 
blood  in  their  nature,  and  turn  into  blood  so 
3  Op.  cit.,  p.  55. 


466  WILLIAM 

readily;  who,  I  beseech  you,  will  doubt  that  the 
blood,  and  all  the  parts  which  are  styled  san¬ 
guineous,  are  nourished  and  increased  through 
the  albumen  as  well  as  the  vitellus? 

Our  author,  however,  soon  contrives  a  sub¬ 
terfuge  from  this  conclusion:  “Although  all  this 
be  true,”  he  says,^  “still  must  we  conceive  that 
the  matter  which  is  imbibed  by  the  veins  from 
the  yelk  and  white  is  only  blood  in  the  same 
sense  as  the  chyle  in  the  mesenteric  veins,  in 
which  nothing  but  blood  is  ever  seen;  now  chyle 
is  but  the  shadow  of  blood,  and  is  first  perfected 
in  the  liver;  and  in  like  manner  the  matter 
taken  up  by  the  veins  from  the  white  and  yellow 
is  only  the  shadow  of  blood,”  &c.  Be  it  so;  but 
hiding  under  this  shadow,  he  does  not  answer 
the  question,  wherefore  the  blood  and  blood¬ 
like  parts  should  not,  for  the  reasons  cited,  be 
equally  well  nourished  by  the  albumen  as  by 
the  vitellus? 

flad  our  author,  in  like  manner,  asserted  that 
the  hotter  parts  are  rather  nourished  by  that 
blood  which  is  derived  from  the  vitellus  than 
by  that  attracted  from  the  albumen,  and  the 
colder  parts,  on  the  other  hand,  by  that  which 
is  derived  from  the  albumen,  I  should  not  my¬ 
self  have  been  much  disposed  to  gainsay  him. 

There  is  one  consideration  in  the  whole  ques¬ 
tion,  however,  which  is  sorely  against  him;  it  is 
this — how  is  the  blood  formed  in  the  egg?  by 
what  agent  is  either  white  or  yelk  turned  into 
blood  whilst  the  liver  is  not  yet  in  existence? 
For  in  the  egg,  at  all  events,  he  could  not  say 
that  the  blood  was  transfused  from  the  mother. 
He  says,  indeed,  “This  blood  is  produced  and 
concocted  in  the  veins  rather  than  in  the  liver; 
but  it  becomes  bone,  cartilage,  flesh,  &c.  in  the 
parts  themselves,  where  it  undergoes  exact  con¬ 
coction  and  assimilation.”  In  this  he  adds  noth¬ 
ing;  he  neither  tells  us  how  or  by  what  means 
perfect  blood  is  concocted  and  elaborated  in 
the  minute  veins  both  of  the  albumen  and  vitel¬ 
lus,  the  liver,  as  I  have  said,  not  having  yet 
come  into  existence — not  a  particle  of  any  part 
of  the  body,  in  fact,  having  yet  been  produced 
by  which  either  concoction  or  elaboration  might 
be  effected.  And  then,  forgetful  of  what  he  has 
previously  said,  viz,y  that  the  hot  and  hsematous 
parts  are  nourished  by  the  vitellus  and  the  cold 
and  anaemic  parts  by  the  albumen,  he  is  plainly 
in  contradiction  with  himself  when  he  admits 
that  the  same  blood  is  turned  into  bone,  carti¬ 
lage,  flesh,  and  all  other  parts. 

More  than  this,  Fabricius  has  slipped  the 
greatest  difficulty  of  all,  the  source  of  not  a 

1  Ibid, 


HARVEY 

little  doubt  and  debate  to  the  medical  mind, 
viz.,  how  the  liver  should  be  the  source  and 
artificer  of  the  blood,  seeing  that  this  fluid  not 
only  exists  in  the  egg  before  any  viscus  is  formed, 
but  that  all  medical  writers  teach  that  the  pa- 
renchymata  of  the  viscera  are  but  effusions  of 
blood  ?  Is  the  work  the  author  of  its  workman  ? 
If  the  parenchyma  of  the  liver  come  from  the 
blood,  how  can  it  be  the  cause  of  the  blood  ? 

What  follows  is  of  the  same  likelihood :  “There 
is  another  reason  wherefore  the  albumen  should 
be  separated  from  the  yelk,  namely,  that  the 
foetus  may  swim  in  it,  and  be  thus  supported, 
lest  tending  downwards  by  its  own  weight,  it 
should  incline  to  one  particular  part,  and  drag¬ 
ging,  should  break  the  vessels,  in  preventing 
which  the  viscidity  and  purity  of  the  albumen 
contribute  effectually.  For  did  the  foetus  grow 
amid  the  yelk,  it  might  readily  sink  to  the  bot¬ 
tom,  and  so  cause  laceration  of  that  body.”  Suf¬ 
ficiently  jejune!  For  what,  I  entreat,  can  the 
purity  of  the  albumen  contribute  to  the  sup¬ 
port  of  the  embryo  ?  Or  how  should  the  thinner 
albumen  sustain  it  better  than  the  thicker  and 
more  earthy  yelk?  Or  where  the  danger,  I  ask, 
of  its  sinking  down,  when  we  see  that  the  egg 
in  incubation  is  always  laid  on  its  side,  and  there 
is  nothing  to  fear  either  for  the  ascent  or  the 
descent  of  the  embryo?  It  is  indubitable,  in¬ 
deed,  that  not  only  does  the  embryo  of  the 
chick  float  in  the  egg,  but  that  the  embryo  of 
every  animal  during  its  formation  floats  in  the 
uterus;  this  however  takes  place  amidst  the 
fluid  which  we  have  called  colliquament,  and 
neither  in  the  albumen  nor  vitellus,  and  we 
have  elsewhere  given  the  reason  wherefore 
this  is  so. 

“Aristotle  informs  us,”  says  Fabricius,  “that 
the  vitellus  rises  to  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg 
when  the  chick  is  conceived;  and  this  because 
the  animal  is  incorporated  from  the  chalaza, 
which  adheres  to  the  vitellus;  whence  the  vitel¬ 
lus  which  was  in  the  middle  is  drawn  towards 
the  upper  wider  part  of  the  egg,  that  the  chick 
may  be  produced  where  the  natural  cavity  ex¬ 
ists,  which  is  so  indispensable  to  its  well-being.” 
The  chalaza,  however,  is  certainly  connected 
still  more  intimately  with  the  albumen  than 
with  the  yelk. 

My  mode  of  interpreting  the  ascent  in  ques¬ 
tion  is  this:  the  spot  or  cicatricula  conspicuous 
on  the  membrana  vitelli,  expands  under  the  in¬ 
fluence  of  the  spirituous  colliquament  engen¬ 
dered  within  it,  and  requiring  a  larger  space,  it 
tends  towards  the  blunt  end  of  the  egg.  The 
liquefied  portion  of  the  vitellus  and  albumen. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  467 


diluted  in  like  manner,  and  concocted  and  made 
more  spirituous,  swims  above  the  remaining 
crude  parts,  just  as  the  inferior  particles  of  water 
in  a  vessel,  when  heated,  rise  from  the  bottom 
to  the  top,  a  fact  which  every  medical  man 
must  have  observed  when  he  had  chanced  to 
put  a  measure  of  thick  and  turbid  urine  into  a 
bath  of  boiling  water,  in  which  case  the  upper 
part  first  becomes  clear  and  transparent.  An¬ 
other  example  will  make  this  matter  still  more 
plain.  There  is  an  instrument  familiar  to  almost 
everybody,  made  rather  for  amusement  than 
any  useful  purpose,  nearly  full  of  water,  on  the 
surface  of  which  float  a  number  of  hollow  glass 
beads  which  by  their  lightness  and  swimming 
together  support  a  variety  of  figures,  Cupids 
with  bows  and  quivers,  chariots  of  the  sun, 
centaurs  armed,  and  the  like,  which  would  else 
all  sink  to  the  bottom.  So  also  does  the  eye  of 
the  egg,  as  I  have  called  it,  or  first  colliquament, 
dilated  by  the  heat  of  the  incubating  fowl  and 
genital  virtue  inherent  in  the  egg,  expand,  and 
thereby  rendered  lighter,  rise  to  the  top,  when 
the  vitellus,  with  which  it  is  connected  follows. 
It  is  because  the  cicatricula,  formerly  situated 
on  the  side  of  the  vitellus,  now  tends  to  rise  di¬ 
rectly  upwards  that  the  thicker  albumen  is 
made  to  give  place,  and  the  chalazae  are  carried 
to  the  sides  of  the  egg. 

EXERCISE  61.  Of  the  uses  of  the  other  parts 
of  the  egg 

The  shell  is  hard  and  thick  that  it  may  serve 
as  a  defence  against  external  injury  to  the  fluids 
and  the  chick  it  includes.  It  is  brittle,  neverthe¬ 
less,  particularly  towards  the  blunt  end,  and  as 
the  time  of  the  chick’s  exclusion  draws  near, 
doubtless  that  the  birth  may  suffer  no  delay. 
The  shell  is  porous  also;  for  wh^n  an  egg,  partic¬ 
ularly  a  very  recent  one,  is  dressed  before  the 
fire,  it  sweats  through  its  pores.  Now  these  pores 
are  useful  for  ventilation;  they  permit  the  heat 
of  the  incubating  hen  to  penetrate  more  readily, 
and  the  chick  to  have  supplies  of  fresh  air;  for 
that  it  both  breathes  and  chirps  in  the  egg  be¬ 
fore  its  exclusion  is  most  certain. 

The  membranes  serve  to  include  the  fluids, 
and  therefore  are  they  present  in  the  same  num¬ 
ber  as  these,  and  therefore  is  the  colliquament 
also  invested,  as  soon  as  it  is  produced,  with 
a  tunica  propria,  which  Aristotle  refers  to  in 
these  words:  “A  membrane  covered  with  rami¬ 
fications  of  blood-vessels  already  surrounds  the 
clear  liquid,”^  &c.  But  the  exit  of  the  chick 
being  at  hand,  and  the  albumen  and  colliqua- 

^  History  of  Animals^  vi.  3. 


ment  being  entirely  consumed,  all  the  mem¬ 
branes,  except  that  which  surrounds  the  vitel¬ 
lus,  are  dried  up  and  disappear;  the  membrana 
vitelli,  on  the  contrary,  along  with  the  yelk,  is 
retracted  into  the  peritoneum  of  the  chick  and 
included  in  the  abdomen.  Of  the  membranes 
two  are  common  to  the  whole  egg,  which  they 
surround  immediately  under  the  shell;  the  rest 
belong,  one  to  the  albumen,  one  to  the  yelk, 
one  to  the  colliquament;  but  all  still  conduce  to 
the  preservation  and  separation  of  the  parts 
they  surround.  The  outer  of  the  two  common 
membranes  which  adheres  to  the  shell  is  the 
firmer,  that  it  may  take  no  injury  from  the 
shell;  the  inner  one  again  is  smooth  and  soft, 
that  it  may  not  hurt  the  fluids;  in  the  same 
way,  therefore,  as  the  meninges  of  the  brain 
protect  it  from  the  roughness  of  the  superin¬ 
cumbent  skull.  The  internal  membranes,  as  I 
have  said,  include  and  keep  separate  their  pe¬ 
culiar  fluids,  whence  they  are  extremely  thin, 
pellucid,  and  easily  torn. 

Fabricius  ascribes  great  eminence  and  dignity 
to  the  chalazae,  regarding  them  as  the  parts 
whence  the  chick  is  formed;  he,  however,  leaves 
the  spot  or  cicatricula  connected  with  the  mem¬ 
brana  vitelli  without  any  office  whatsoever, 
looking  on  it  merely  as  the  remains  of  the  pe¬ 
duncle  whence  the  vitellus  was  detached  from 
the  vitellarium  in  the  superior  uterus  of  the 
hen.  In  his  view  the  vitellus  formerly  obtained 
its  nourishment  either  by  this  peduncle  or  the 
vessels  passing  through  it;  but  when  detached, 
and  no  longer  nourished  by  the  hen,  a  simple 
trace  of  the  former  connexion  and  important 
function  alone  remains. 

I,  however,  am  of  opinion  that  the  uses  of 
the  chalazae  are  no  other  than  those  I  have  as¬ 
signed  them,  namely,  that  they  serve  as  poles 
to  the  microcosm  of  the  egg,  and  are  the  asso¬ 
ciation  of  all  the  membranes  convoluted  and 
twisted  together,  by  which  not  only  are  the 
several  fluids  kept  in  their  places,  but  also  in 
their  distinct  relative  positions.  But  I  have  ab¬ 
solute  assurance  that  the  spot  or  cicatricula  in 
question  is  of  the  very  highest  importance;  it  is 
the  part  in  which  the  calor  insitus  nestles;  where 
the  first  spark  of  the  vital  principle  is  kindled; 
for  the  sake  of  which,  in  a  word,  the  whole  of 
the  rest  of  the  fluids  and  all  the  membranes  of 
the  egg  are  contrived.  But  this  has  been  al¬ 
ready  insisted  on  above. 

Formerly,  indeed,  I  did  think  with  Fabricius 
that  this  cicatricula  was  the  remains  or  trace  of 
the  detached  peduncle;  but  I  afterwards  learned 
by  more  accurate  observation  that  this  was  not 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


468 

the  case;  that  the  peduncle,  by  which  the  vitel- 
lus  hangs,  was  infixed  in  no  such  limited  space 
as  we  find  it  in  apples  and  plums,  and  in  such  a 
way  as  would  have  given  rise  to  a  scar  on  its 
separation.  This  peduncle,  in  short,  expands 
like  a  tube  from  the  ovary  on  towards  the  viteL 
lus,  the  horizon  of  which  it  embraces  in  a  bipar¬ 
tite  semicircle,  not  otherwise  than  the  tunica 
conjunctiva  embraces  the  eye;  and  this  in  such- 
wise  that  the  superior  part  of  the  vitellus,  or 
the  hemisphere  which  regards  the  ovary,  is  al¬ 
most  free  from  any  contact  or  cohesion  with 
the  peduncle,  in  the  superior  part  of  the  cup  or 
hollow  of  which  nevertheless,  but  somewhat  to 
the  side,  the  spot  or  cicatricula  in  question  is 
placed.  The  peduncles  becoming  detached  from 
the  vitelli  can  therefore  in  no  way  be  said  to 
leave  any  trace  of  their  attachments  behind 
them.  Of  the  great  importance  of  this  spot  in 
generation  I  have  already  spoken  in  the  his¬ 
torical  portion  of  my  work. 

But  I  have  still,  always  following  my  old 
teacher  Fabricius  as  my  guide  on  the  way,  to 
treat  of  the  uses  of  the  cavity  in  the  blunt  end 
of  the  egg. 

Fabricius  enumerates  various  conveniences 
arising  from  this  cavity,  according  to  its  dimen¬ 
sions.  I  shall  be  brief  on  the  subject:  it  contains 
air,  and  is  therefore  useful  in  the  ventilation  of 
the  egg,  assisting  the  perspiration,  refrigeration, 
and  respiration,  and  finally  the  chirping  of  the 
chick.  Whence  this  cavity,  small  at  first,  is 
larger  by  and  by,  and  at  last  becomes  of  great 
size,  as  the  several  offices  mentioned  come  into 
play. 

Thus  far  have  we  spoken  of  the  generation  of 
the  egg  and  chick,  and  of  the  uses  of  the  several 
parts  of  the  egg;  and  to  the  type  exhibited  we 
have  referred  the  mode  of  generation  of  ovipa¬ 
rous  animals  in  general.  We  have  still  to  speak 
of  the  generation  of  viviparous  animals,  in 
doing  which  we  shall  as  before  refer  all  to  a 
single  familiarly  known  species. 

EXERCISE  62.  An  egg  is  the  common  origin 
of  all  animals 

“Animals,”  says  Aristotle,^  “have  this  in 
common  with  vegetables,  that  some  of  them 
arise  from  seed,  others  arise  spontaneously;  for 
as  plants  either  proceed  from  the  seed  of  other 
plants,  or  spring  up  spontaneously,  having  met 
with  some  primary  condition  fit  for  their  evolu¬ 
tion,  some  of  them  deriving  their  nourishment 
from  the  ground,  others  arising  from  and  living 
on  other  plants;  so  are  some  animals  engendered 

^  History  of  Animals^  v.  i. 


from  cognate  forms,  and  others  arise  spontane¬ 
ously,  no  kind  of  cognate  seed  having  preceded 
their  birth;  and  whilst  some  of  them  are  gen¬ 
erated  from  the  earth,  or  putrefying  vegetable 
matter,  like  so  many  insects,  others  are  pro¬ 
duced  in  animals  themselves  and  from  the  ex- 
crementitious  matters  of  their  parts.”  Now  the 
whole  of  these,  whether  they  arise  spontane¬ 
ously,  or  from  others,  or  in  others,  or  from  the 
parts  or  excrements  of  these,  have  this  in  com¬ 
mon,  that  they  are  engendered  from  some  prin¬ 
ciple  adequate  to  this  effect,  and  from  an  effi¬ 
cient  cause  inherent  in  the  same  principle.  In 
this  way,  therefore,  the  primordium  from  which 
and  by  which  they  arise  is  inherent  in  every 
animal.  Let  us  entitle  this  the  primordium  veg- 
etale  or  vegetative  incipience^  understanding  by 
this  a  certain  corporeal  something  having  life 
in  potential  or  a  certain  something  existing  per 
sey  which  is  capable  of  changing  into  a  vegeta¬ 
tive  form  under  the  agency  of  an  internal  prin¬ 
ciple.  Such  primordia  are  the  eggs  of  animals 
and  the  seeds  of  plants;  such  also  are  the  con¬ 
ceptions  of  viviparous  animals,  and  the  worm, 
as  Aristotle  calls  it,  whence  insects  proceed:  the 
primordia  of  different  living  things  consequent¬ 
ly  differ  from  one  another;  and  according  to 
their  diversities  are  the  modes  of  generation  of 
animals,  which  nevertheless  all  agree  in  this  one 
respect,  that  they  proceed  from  the  vegetal 
primordium  as  from  matter  endowed  with  the 
virtue  of  an  efficient  cause,  though  they  differ 
in  respect  of  the  primordium  which  either  bursts 
forth,  as  it  were,  spontaneously  and  by  chance, 
or  shows  itself  as  fruit  or  seed  from  something 
else  preceding  it.  Whence  some  animals  are 
spoken  of  as  spontaneously  produced,  others 
as  engendered  by  parents.  And  these  last  are 
again  distinguished  by  their  mode  of  birth,  for 
some  are  oviparous,  others  viviparous,  to  which 
Aristotle^  adds  a  vermiparous  class.  But  if  we 
take  the  thing  as  simple  sense  proclaims  it, 
there  are  only  two  kinds  of  birth,  inasmuch  as 
all  animals  engender  others  either  in  actu — vir¬ 
tually,  or  in  potentia — potentially.  Animals 
which  bring  forth  in  fact  and  virtually  are 
called  viviparous,  those  that  bring  forth  poten¬ 
tially  are  oviparous.  For  every  primordium  that 
lives  potentially,  we,  with  Fabricius,  think 
ought  to  be  called  an  egg,  and  we  make  no  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  worm  of  Aristotle  and  an 
egg,  both  because  to  the  eye  there  is  no  differ¬ 
ence,  and  because  the  identity  is  in  conformity 
with  reason.  For  the  vegetal  primordium  which 
lives  potentially  is  also  an  animal  potentially. 

^  History  of  Animals,  i.  5. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  469 


Nor  can  the  distinction  which  Aristotle  made 
between  the  egg  and  the  worm  be  admitted: 
for  he  defines  an  egg  to  be  that  “from  part  of 
which  an  animal  is  produced”;^  whilst  that,  he 
says  elsewhere,  “which  is  totally  changed,  and 
which  does  not  produce  an  animal  from  a  part 
only,  is  a  worm.”^  These  bodies,  however,  agree 
in  this,  that  they  are  both  inanimate  births,  and 
only  animals  potentially;  both,  consequently, 
are  eggs. 

And  then  Aristotle  himself,  whilst  he  speaks 
of  worms  in  one  place,  designates  them  by  the 
name  of  eggs  in  another.^  Treating  of  the  locust, 
he  says,  “its  eggs  become  spoiled  in  autumn 
when  the  season  is  wet”;^  and  again,  speaking 
of  the  grasshopper,  he  has  these  words:  “when 
the  little  worm  has  grown  in  the  earth  it  be¬ 
comes  a  matrix  of  grasshoppers  (tettigometrdf' \ 
and  immediately  afterwards,  “the  females  are 
sweeter  after  coitus,  for  then  they  are  full  of 
white  eggs.’* 

In  this  very  place,  indeed,  where  he  distin¬ 
guishes  between  an  egg  and  a  worm,  he  adds: 
“but  the  whole  of  this  tribe  of  worms,  when 
they  have  come  to  their  full  size,  are  changed 
in  some  sort  into  eggs;  for  their  shell  or  cover¬ 
ing  hardens,  and  they  become  motionless  for  a 
season,  a  circumstance  that  is  plainly  to  be  seen 
in  the  vermiculi  of  bees  and  wasps,  and  also  in 
caterpillars.”^  Everyone  indeed  may  observe 
that  the  primordia  of  spiders,  silkworms,  and 
the  like,  are  not  less  to  be  accounted  eggs  than 
those  of  the  Crustacea  and  mollusca,  and  almost 
all  fishes,  which  are  not  actually  animals,  but 
are  potentially  possessed  of  the  faculty  of  pro¬ 
ducing  them.  Since,  then,  those  creatures  that 
produce  actually  are  called  viviparous,  and 
those  that  produce  potentially  either  pass  with¬ 
out  any  general  distinguishing  title  or  are  called 
oviparous  and  particularly  as  such  productions 
are  vegetal  primordia,  analogous  to  the  seeds  of 
plants,  which  true  eggs  must  needs  be  held  to 
be,  the  conclusion  is  that  all  animals  are  either 
viviparous  or  oviparous. 

But  as  there  are  many  species  of  oviparous 
animals,  so  must  there  also  be  several  species  of 
eggs;  for  every  primordium  is  not  alike  fit  to 
receive  or  assume  every  variety  of  animal  form 
indifferently.  Though  we  admit,  therefore,  that 
eggs  in  a  general  sense  do  not  differ,  yet  when 
we  find  that  one  is  perfect,  another  imperfect, 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  in.  9, 

2  History  of  Animals^  i.  5. 

3  Ibid,^  V.  29. 

4  Ibid.y  V.  30. 

®  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  in.  9, 


it  is  obvious  that  they  differ  essentially  from 
one  another.  Perfect  eggs  are  such  as  are  com¬ 
pleted  in  the  uterus,  where  they  obtain  their 
due  dimensions  before  being  extruded;  of  this 
kind  are  the  eggs  of  birds.  Imperfect  eggs,  again, 
are  such  as  are  prematurely  excluded  before 
they  are  of  the  full  size,  but  increase  after  they 
are  laid ;  of  this  description  are  the  eggs  of  fishes, 
Crustacea  and  mollusca;  the  primordia  of  in¬ 
sects,  which  Aristotle  entitles  worms,  are  fur¬ 
ther  to  be  referred  to  this  class,  as  well  as  the 
primordia  of  those  animals  that  arise  sponta¬ 
neously. 

Moreover,  although  perfect  eggs  are  of  two 
colours,  in  other  words,  are  composed  of  albu¬ 
men  and  vitellus,  some  are  still  only  of  one 
hue,  and  consist  of  albumen  alone.  In  like  man¬ 
ner,  of  imperfect  eggs,  some  from  which  a  per¬ 
fect  animal  proceeds  are  properly  so  called; 
such  are  the  eggs  of  fishes;  others  are  improper¬ 
ly  so  styled,  they  engendering  an  imperfect 
animal,  namely,  a  worm,  grub,  or  caterpillar,  a 
kind  of  mean  between  a  perfect  and  an  imper¬ 
fect  egg,  which,  in  respect  of  the  egg  or  the 
primordium  itself,  is  an  animal  endowed  with 
sense  and  motion,  and  nourishing  itself;  but  in 
respect  of  a  fly,  moth  or  butterfly,  whose  pri¬ 
mordium  it  is  potentially,  it  is  as  a  creeping 
egg,  and  to  be  reputed  as  adequate  to  its  own 
growth;  of  this  description  is  the  caterpillar, 
which  having  at  length  completed  its  growth  is 
changed  into  a  chrysalis  or  perfect  egg,  and 
ceasing  from  motion,  it  is  like  an  egg,  an  animal 
potentially. 

In  the  same  way,  although  there  are  some 
eggs  from  the  whole  of  which  a  perfect  animal 
is  produced  by  metamorphosis,  without  being 
nourished  by  any  remains  of  the  substance  of 
the  egg,  but  forthwith  finds  food  for  itself 
abroad,  there  are  others  from  one  part  of  which 
the  embryo  is  produced,  and  from  the  remain¬ 
der  of  which  it  is  nourished — although,  I  re¬ 
peat,  there  are  such  differences  among  eggs, 
still,  if  we  be  permitted  to  conclude  on  the 
grounds  of  sense  and  analogy,  there  is  no  good 
reason  wherefore  those  that  Aristotle  calls 
worms  should  not  be  spoken  of  as  eggs;  inas¬ 
much  as  all  vegetal  principles  are  not  indeed 
animals  actually,  but  are  so  potentially,  are 
true  animal  seeds,  analogous  to  the  seeds  of 
vegetables,  as  we  have  already  demonstrated  in 
the  particular  instance  of  the  hen’s  egg.  All  ani¬ 
mals  are,  therefore,  either  viviparous  or  ovipa¬ 
rous,  inasmuch  as  they  all  either  produce  a  liv¬ 
ing  animal  in  fact,  or  an  egg,  rudiment,  or  pri¬ 
mordium,  which  is  an  animal  potentially. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


470 

The  generation  of  all  oviparous  animals  may 
therefore  be  referred  to  that  of  the  hen’s  egg  as 
a  type,  or  at  all  ev^ents  deduced  from  thence 
without  difliculty,  the  same  things  and  inci¬ 
dents  that  have  been  enumerated  in  connexion 
with  the  common  fowl  being  also  encountered 
in  all  other  oviparous  animals  whatsoev  er.  The 
various  particulars  in  which  they  difler  one 
from  another,  or  in  which  they  agree,  either 
generally,  or  specifically,  or  analogically,  will 
be  subsequently  treated  of  when  we  come  to 
speak  of  the  generation  of  insects  and  the  ani¬ 
mals  that  arise  equiv'ocally.  For  as  every  gener¬ 
ation  is  a  kind  of  way  leading  to  the  attainment 
of  an  animal  form,  as  one  race  of  animal  is  more 
or  less  like  or  unlike  another,  their  constituent 
parts  either  agreeing  or  disagreeing,  so  does  it 
liappen  in  respect  of  their  mode  of  generation. 
For  perfect  IS^ature,  always  harmonious  with 
herself  in  her  works,  has  instituted  similar  parts 
for  similar  ends  and  actions:  to  arrive  at  the 
same  results,  to  attain  the  same  forms,  she  has 
followed  the  same  path,  and  has  established  one 
and  the  same  method  in  the  business  of  genera¬ 
tion  universally. 

Wherefore  as  we  still  find  the  same  parts  in 
the  perfect  or  two-coloured  egg  of  every  bird, 
so  do  wne  also  observe  the  same  order  and  method 
pursued  in  the  generation  and  development  of 
their  embiy^os  as  we  have  seen  in  the  egg  of  the 
common  fowl.  And  so  also  are  the  same  things 
to  be  noted  in  the  eggs  of  serpents  and  of  rep¬ 
tiles,  or  oviparous  quadrupeds,  such  as  tortoises, 
frogs,  and  lizards,  from  all  the  perfect  two-col¬ 
oured  eggs  of  which  embryos  are  produced  and 
perfected  in  the  same  manner.  Nor  is  the  case 
very  different  in  regard  to  fishes.  But  of  the 
manner  in  which  spiders  and  the  Crustacea, 
such  as  shrimps  and  crabs,  and  the  mollusca, 
such  as  the  cuttlefish  and  calamary,  arise  from 
their  eggs;  of  the  conditions  also  upon  which 
worms  and  grubs  first  proceed  from  the  eggs 
of  insects,  which  afterwards  change  into  chrys¬ 
alides  or  aurelias,  as  if  they  reverted  anew  to 
the  state  of  eggs,  from  which  at  length  emerge 
Hies  or  butterflies — of  the  several  respects  in 
which  these  differ  in  their  mode  of  generation 
from  an  egg,  from  what  we  have  found  in  the 
hen’s  egg,  will  be  matter  for  remark  in  the 
proper  place. 

Although  all  eggs  consisting  of  yelk  and  white 
arc  not  produced  and  fecundated  in  the  same 
manner,  but  some  are  made  prolific  through 
the  intercourse  of  male  and  female,  and  others 
in  some  other  way  (as  of  fishes);  and  although 
there  is  some  difference  even  in  the  mode  in 


which  eggs  grow,  some  attaining  maturity  with¬ 
in  the  body  of  the  parent,  others  continuing  to 
be  nourished  and  to  grow  when  extruded,  there 
is  still  no  reason  why  an  embryo  should  not  be 
developed  in  the  same  precise  manner  in  every 
egg — always  understood  as  perfect — as  it  is  in 
the  egg  of  the  hen.  Wherefore  the  history  which 
has  been  given  of  the  evolution  of  the  chick 
from  the  hen’s  egg  may  be  regarded  as  applicable 
to  the  generation  of  all  other  oviparous  animals 
whatsoever,  as  well  as  to  the  inferences  or  con¬ 
clusions  which  may  be  deduced  from  thence. 

EXERCISE  63.  Of  the  generation  of  viviparous 
animals 

Thus  far  have  we  treated  mainly  of  the  gen¬ 
eration  of  oviparous  animals;  we  have  still  to 
speak  particularly  of  the  other  species  of  gen¬ 
eration,  the  viviparous,  to  wit,  in  which  many 
things  identical  with  those  we  have  noticed  in 
oviparous  generation  will  come  to  be  observed. 
These  we  have  reduced  into  order,  and  here  at 
length  present  for  consideration.  Even  the 
parts  that  appear  paradoxical  and  in  contradic¬ 
tion  with  the  current  views  of  generation  will, 
1  believe,  be  found  entirely  in  conformity  with 
truth. 

Among  viviparous  animals,  man,  the  most 
perfect  of  all  creatures,  occupies  the  foremost 
place;  after  him  come  our  ordinary  domestic 
animals,  of  which  some  are  soliped,  such  as  the 
horse  and  ass;  others  bisulcate,  as  the  ox,  goat, 
sheep,  deer,  and  hog;  others  digitate,  such  as 
the  dog,  cat,  rabbit,  mouse,  and  others  of  the 
same  description;  from  the  modes  of  whose 
generation  a  judgment  may  be  formed  of  that 
of  all  other  viviparous  animals.  Wherefore  I 
shall  propose  a  single  genus,  by  way  of  general 
example  or  type,  as  we  did  in  the  case  of  the 
oviparous  class;  this  made  familiar  to  us,  will 
serve  as  a  light  or  standard,  by  means  of  which 
all  the  others  may  be  judged  of  by  analogy. 

The  reasons  that  led  me  to  select  the  hen’s 
egg  as  the  measure  of  eggs  in  general  have  been 
already  given:  eggs  are  of  little  price,  and  are 
everywhere  to  be  obtained,  conditions  that 
permit  repeated  study,  and  enable  us  cheaply 
and  readily  to  test  the  truth  of  statements 
made  by  others. 

We  have  not  the  same  facilities  in  studying 
the  generation  of  viviparous  animals:  we  have 
rarely,  if  ever,  an  opportunity  of  dissecting  the 
human  uterus;  and  then  to  enter  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  experimentally  in  the  horse,  ox,  sheep, 
goat,  and  other  cattle,  would  be  attended  with 
immense  labour  and  no  small  expense;  dogs. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


cats,  rabbits,  and  the  like,  however,  will  supply 
those  with  subjects  who  are  desirous  of  putting 
to  the  test  of  experiment  the  matters  that  are 
to  be  delivered  by  us  in  this  place. 

Fabricius  of  Aquapendente,  as  if  every  con¬ 
ception  of  a  viviparous  animal  were  in  a  certain 
sense  an  egg,  begins  his  treatise  with  the  egg  as 
the  universal  example  of  generation;  and  among 
other  reasons  for  his  conclusions  assigns  this  in 
particular:  “Because  the  study  of  the  egg  has 
the  most  extensive  application,  the  greater 
number  of  animals  being  engendered  from 
eggs.”^  Now  we,  at  the  very  outset  of  our  ob¬ 
servations,  asserted  that  all  animals  were  in 
some  sort  produced  from  eggs.  For  even  on  the 
same  grounds,  and  in  the  same  manner  and  or¬ 
der  in  which  a  chick  is  engendered  and  devel¬ 
oped  from  an  egg,  is  the  embryo  of  viviparous 
animals  engendered  from  a  pre-existing  concep¬ 
tion.  Generation  in  both  is  one  and  identical  in 
kind;  the  origin  of  either  is  from  an  egg,  or  at 
least  from  something  that  by  analogy  is  held 
to  be  so.  An  egg  is,  as  already  said,  a  conception 
exposed  beyond  the  body  of  the  parent,  whence 
the  embryo  is  produced;  a  conception  is  an  egg 
remaining  within  the  body  of  the  parent  until 
the  foetus  has  acquired  the  requisite  perfection; 
in  everything  else  they  agree;  they  are  both 
alike  primordially  vegetables,  potentially  they 
are  animals.  Wherefore,  the  same  theorems  and 
conclusions,  though  they  may  appear  paradox¬ 
ical,  which  we  drew  from  the  history  of  the  egg, 
turn  out  to  be  equally  true  with  regard  to  the 
generation  of  animals  generally.  For  it  is  an  ad¬ 
mitted  fact  that  all  embryos,  even  those  of  man, 
are  procreated  from  some  conception  or  primor- 
dium.  Let  us,  therefore,  say  that  that  which  is 
called  primordium  among  things  arising  spon¬ 
taneously,  and  seed  among  plants,  is  an  egg 
among  oviparous  animals,  i,  <?.,  a  certain  cor¬ 
poreal  substance,  from  which,  through  the  mo¬ 
tions  and  efficacy  of  an  internal  principle,  a 
plant  or  an  animal  of  one  description  or  another 
is  produced;  but  the  prime  conception  in  vivip¬ 
arous  animals  is  of  the  same  precise  nature,  a 
fact  which  we  have  found  approved  both  by 
sense  and  reason. 

What  we  have  already  affirmed  of  the  egg, 
viz,^  that  it  was  the  sperma  or  seed  of  animals 
and  analogous  to  the  seeds  of  plants,  we  now 
affirm  of  the  conception,  which  is  indeed  the 
seed  of  an  animal,  and  therefore  also  properly 
called  ovum  or  egg.  Because  “a  true  seed,”  ac¬ 
cording  to  Aristotle,^  “is  that  which  derives  its 

^  De  form,  ovi  et  pulliy  i. 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  i.  i8. 


origin  from  the  intercourse  of  male  and  female, 
and  possesses  the  virtues  of  both;  such  as  is  the 
seed  of  all  vegetables,  and  of  some  animals,  in 
which  the  sexes  are  not  distinct,  and  is,  as  that 
which  is  first  mingled  from  male  and  female,  a 
kind  of  promiscuous  conception  or  animal;  for 
it  has  those  things  already  that  are  recognized 
of  both”;  i.  (?.,  matter  adapted  to  nourish  the 
foetus,  and  a  plastic  or  formative  and  effective 
virtue.  And  so  in  like  manner  is  a  conception 
the  fruit  of  the  intercourse  of  male  and  female, 
and  the  seed  of  the  future  embryo;  it  therefore 
does  not  differ  from  an  egg. 

“But  that  which  proceeds  from  the  generant 
is  the  cause  which  first  obtains  the  principle  of 
generation  (/.  ^.,  it  is  the  efficient  cause),  and 
ought  to  be  called  the  geniture,”^  not  the  seed, 
as  is  commonly  done  both  by  the  vulgar  and 
philosophers  at  the  present  time;  because  it  has 
not  that  which  is  required  of  both  the  concur¬ 
ring  agents,  neither  is  it  analogous  to  the  seeds 
of  plants.  But  whatever  possesses  this,  and  cor¬ 
responds  to  the  seeds  of  vegetables,  that  too  is 
rightly  entitled  egg  and  conception. 

Further,  the  definition  of  an  egg,  as  given  by 
Aristotle,  is  perfectly  applicable  to  a  concep¬ 
tion:  “An  egg,”  he  says,  “is  that,  the  principal 
part  of  which  goes  to  constitute  an  animal,  the 
remainder  to  nourish  the  animal  so  consti¬ 
tuted.”^  Now  the  same  thing  is  common  to  a 
conception,  as  shall  be  made  to  appear  visibly 
from  the  dissection  of  viviparous  animals. 

Moreover,  as  the  chick  is  excluded  from  the 
egg  under  the  influence  of  warmth  derived 
from  the  incubating  hen  or  obtained  in  any 
other  way,  even  so  is  the  foetus  produced  from 
the  conception  in  the  uterus  under  the  genial 
warmth  of  the  mother’s  body.  In  few  words,  I 
say,  that  what  oviparous  animals  supply  by 
their  breast  and  incubation,  viviparous  animals 
afford  by  their  uterus  and  internal  embrace. 
For  the  rest,  in  all  that  respects  the  develop¬ 
ment,  the  embryo  is  produced  from  the  con¬ 
ception  in  the  same  manner  and  order  as  the 
chick  from  the  egg,  with  this  single  difference, 
that  whatever  is  required  for  the  formation  and 
growth  of  the  chick  is  present  in  the  egg,  whilst 
the  conception,  after  the  formation  of  the  em¬ 
bryo,  derives  from  the  uterus  of  the  mother 
whatever  more  is  requisite  to  its  increase,  by 
which  it  continues  to  grow  in  common  with  the 
foetus.  The  egg,  on  the  contrary,  becomes  more 
and  more  empty  as  the  chick  increases;  the 
nutriment  that  was  laid  up  in  it  is  diminished; 

^Ibid. 

History  of  Animalsy  i.  5, 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


472 

nor  does  the  chick  receive  aught  in  the  shape  of 
new  aliment  from  the  mother;  whilst  the  foetus 
of  viviparous  animals  has  a  continued  supply, 
and  when  born,  moreover,  continues  to  live 
upon  its  mother’s  milk.  The  eggs  of  fishes,  how¬ 
ever,  increase  through  nourishment  obtained 
from  without;  and  insects  and  crustaceous  and 
molluscous  animals  have  eggs  that  enlarge  after 
their  extrusion.  Yet  are  not  these  called  eggs 
the  less  on  this  account,  nor,  indeed,  are  they 
therefore  any  the  less  eggs.  In  like  manner  the 
conception  is  appropriately  designated  by  the 
name  of  ovum  or  egg,  although  it  requires  and 
procures  from  without  the  variety  of  aliment 
that  is  needful  to  its  growth. 

Fabricius  gives  this  reason  for  some  animals 
being  oviparous,  for  all  not  producing  living 
offspring:  “It  is,”  he  says,  “that  eggs  detained 
in  the  uterus  till  they  had  produced  their  chicks 
would  interfere  with  the  flight  of  birds,  and 
weigh  them  down  by  their  weight.”  Serpents 
would  also  be  hindered  in  their  alternate  zig¬ 
zag  movements  by  a  multitude  of  eggs  in  the 
abdomen.  In  the  body  of  tortoises,  with  their 
hard  and  girding  shell,  there  is  no  room  for  any 
store  or  increase  of  eggs;  nor  would  the  abdo¬ 
men  of  fishes  suffice  for  the  multitude  of  eggs 
they  must  spawn  were  these  to  grow  to  any 
size.  It  was,  therefore,  matter  of  necessity  that 
those  creatures  should  lay  their  eggs  imperfect. 
It  seems  most  natural  that  an  animal  should  re¬ 
tain  and  cherish  its  conception  in  its  interior 
until  the  foetus  it  produces  has  come  to  matu¬ 
rity;  but  Nature  sees  herself  compelled,  as  it 
were,  occasionally  to  permit  the  premature 
birth  of  various  eggs,  and  to  provide  them, 
without  the  body  of  the  parent,  with  the  nour¬ 
ishment  they  require  for  their  complete  de¬ 
velopment.  As  to  everything  that  refers  to  the 
evolution  of  the  foetus,  all  animals  are  engen¬ 
dered  from  an  oviform  primordium;  I  say  ovi¬ 
form,  not  as  meaning  that  it  has  the  precise 
configuration  of  an  egg,  but  the  nature  and 
constitution  of  one;  this  being  common  in  gen¬ 
eration,  that  the  vegetal  primordium  whence 
the  foetus  is  produced,  including  the  nature  of 
an  egg,  corresponding  in  its  proportions  to  the 
seed  of  a  plant,  pre-exists.  In  all  vegetal  pri- 
mordia,  consequently,  whether  eggs,  or  having 
the  form  of  eggs,  there  are  inherent  the  nature 
and  conditions  of  an  egg,  properties  which  the 
seeds  of  plants  have  in  common  with  the  eggs 
of  animals.  The  primordium  of  any  animal, 
whatsoever,  is  therefore  called  seed  and  fruit; 
and  in  like  manner  the  seed  of  every  plant  is 
spoken  of  as  a  kind  of  conception  or  egg. 


And  this  is  the  reason  why  Aristotle  says: 
“Animals  that  engender  internally  have  some¬ 
thing  formed  in  the  fashion  of  an  egg  after  their 
first  conception:  there  is  a  fluid  contained  with¬ 
in  a  delicate  membrane,  like  an  egg  without  the 
shell.  And  this  is  the  cause  why  the  disorders  of 
the  conception,  which  are  apt  to  occur  in  the 
early  period,  are  called  discharges.”^  Such  a 
discharge  is  particularly  observed  among  women 
when  they  miscarry  in  the  course  of  the  first 
or  second  month.  I  have  repeatedly  seen  such 
ova  aborted  at  this  time;  and  such  was  the  one 
which  Hippocrates  has  described  as  having 
been  thrown  off  by  the  female  pipe-player  in 
consequence  of  a  fall. 

In  the  uterus  of  all  animals  there  is,  conse¬ 
quently,  present  a  prime  conception  or  primor¬ 
dium,  which,  on  Aristotle’s  testimony,  “is  like 
an  egg  surrounded  with  a  membrane  from  which 
the  shell  had  been  removed. ’’^  This  fact  will  ap¬ 
pear  still  more  plainly  from  what  is  about  to  be 
said.  Meantime  let  us  conclude  with  the  philos¬ 
opher,  “that  all  living  creatures,  whether  they 
swim,  or  walk,  or  fly,  and  whether  they  come 
into  the  world  with  the  form  of  an  animal  or  of 
an  egg,  are  engendered  in  the  same  manner.” 

EXERCISE  64.  The  generation  of  viviparous  ani¬ 
mals  in  general  is  illustrated from  the  history  of  that 
of  the  hind  and  doe,  and  the  reason  of  this  selection 

It  was  customary  with  his  Serene  Majesty, 
King  Charles,  after  he  had  come  to  man’s  es¬ 
tate,  to  take  the  diversion  of  hunting  almost 
every  week,  both  for  the  sake  of  finding  relaxa¬ 
tion  from  graver  cares,  and  for  his  health;  the 
chase  was  principally  the  buck  and  doe,  and  no 
prince  in  the  world  had  greater  herds  of  deer, 
either  wandering  in  freedom  through  the  wilds 
and  forests,  or  kept  in  parks  and  chases  for  this 
purpose.  The  game  during  the  three  summer 
months  was  the  buck,  then  fat  and  in  season; 
and  in  the  autumn  and  winter,  for  the  same 
length  of  time,  the  doe.  This  gave  me  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  dissecting  numbers  of  these  animals 
almost  every  day  during  the  whole  of  the  sea¬ 
son  when  they  were  rutting,  taking  the  male, 
and  falling  with  young;  I  had  occasion,  so  often 
as  I  desired  it,  to  examine  and  study  all  the 
parts,  particularly  those  dedicated  to  the  offices 
of  generation. 

1  shall  therefore  consider  the  generation  of 
viviparous  animals  in  general,  from  the  particu¬ 
lar  history  of  the  hind  and  doe,  as  the  instance 
most  convenient  to  me;  and,  as  I  have  done 

*  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  iii.  9. 

2  History  of  Animals,  vii.  7. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


above,  in  speaking  of  oviparous  generation, 
where  I  have  referred  everything  to  the  com¬ 
mon  fowl,  so  shall  I  here,  in  discussing  vivipa¬ 
rous  generation,  refer  all  to  the  fallow  deer  and 
roe.  In  taking  this  course,  I  am  not  moved  by 
the  same  reasons  as  I  was  in  reference  to  the 
hen’s  egg;  but  because  the  great  prince,  whose 
physician  I  was,  besides  taking  much  pleasure 
in  such  inquiries,  and  not  disdaining  to  bear 
witness  to  my  discoveries,  was  pleased  in  his 
kindness  and  munificence  to  order  me  an  abun¬ 
dant  supply  of  these  animals  and  repeated  op¬ 
portunities  of  examining  their  bodies. 

I  therefore  propose  to  give  the  history  of  gen¬ 
eration  in  the  hind  and  doe  as  I  have  observed 
it  during  a  long  series  of  years,  and  as  most  fa¬ 
miliar  to  me,  believing  that  from  thence  some¬ 
thing  certain  in  reference  to  the  generation  of 
other  viviparous  animals  may  be  concluded.  In 
giving  a  faithful  narrative  of  this  history,  I  shall 
not  abstain  in  its  course  from  introducing  par¬ 
ticulars  worthy  of  note  that  have  either  been 
observed  accidentally  and  by  the  way,  or  that 
are  the  result  of  particular  dissections  instituted 
for  the  purpose  of  arriving  at  conclusions,  the 
subjects  of  these  having  been  other  bisulcated, 
hoofed,  or  multungulated  animals,  or,  finally, 
man  himself.  We  shall  give  a  simple  narrative 
of  the  series  of  formations  of  the  foetus,  follow¬ 
ing  the  footsteps  of  nature  in  the  process. 

EXERCISE  65.  Of  the  uterus  of  the  hind  and  doe 

About  to  treat  of  the  generation  of  the  hind 
and  doe,  our  first  business  will  be  to  speak  of  the 
place  where  it  proceeds,  or  of  the  uterus,  as  we 
have  done  above,  in  giving  the  history  of  the 
common  fowl,  by  which  all  that  follows  will  be 
more  easily  and  readily  understood.  And  his¬ 
tory  has  this  great  pre-eminence  over  fable, 
that  it  narrates  the  events  which  transpired  in 
certain  places  at  certain  times,  and  therefore 
leads  us  to  knowledge  by  a  safe  and  assured  way. 

Now  that  we  may  have  a  clearer  idea  of  the 
uterus  of  the  hind,  I  shall  describe  both  its  ex¬ 
ternal  and  internal  structure,  following  the 
uterus  of  the  human  female  as  my  guide.  For 
man  is  the  most  consummate  of  creatures,  and 
has  therefore  the  genital  as  well  as  all  other 
parts  in  higher  perfection  than  any  other  ani¬ 
mal.  The  parts  of  the  female  uterus  consequent¬ 
ly  present  themselves  with  great  distinctness, 
and  by  reason  of  the  industry  of  anatomists  in 
this  direction  are  believed  to  be  particularly 
well  known  to  us. 

We  meet  with  many  things  in  the  uterus  of 
deer  which  we  encounter  in  the  uterus  of  the 


human  female;  and  we  also  observe  several  that 
differ.  In  the  vulva  or  os  externum  we  find 
neither  labia,  nor  clitoris,  nor  nymphae,  but 
only  two  openings,  one  for  the  urine,  adjacent 
to  the  pecten,  or  os  pubis,  the  other  the  vagina, 
lying  between  the  meatus  urinarius  and  the 
anus.  A  cuticular  or  membranous  fold,  such  as 
we  have  noted  in  the  hen,  stretching  down¬ 
wards  from  the  anus,  acts  as  a  velabrum,  sup¬ 
plies  the  place  of  nymphae  and  labia  pudendi, 
and  guards  against  injury  from  without.  This 
velabrum  must  be  somewhat  retracted  by  the 
female  when  she  copulates,  or  at  all  events  must 
be  raised  by  the  penis  of  the  male  as  it  enters 
the  vulva. 

The  symphysis  pubis  being  divided  in  deer, 
and  the  legs  widely  separated,  the  urinary  blad¬ 
der,  the  vagina  which  is  entered  by  the  penis 
of  the  buck,  and  the  cervix  uteri,  are  all  seen  in 
their  relative  situations,  not  otherwise  than 
they  are  in  women;  the  ligamenta  suspensoria, 
with  the  veins,  arteries,  and  testicles,  as  they 
are  called,  also  come  into  sight;  the  cornua  of 
the  uterus  in  these  creatures  are  also  more  re¬ 
markable  than  any  other  part  of  this  organ. 

As  for  the  vessels  called  vasa  praeparantia  and 
vasa  deferentia  seu  ejaculantia,  you  will  dis¬ 
cover  nothing  of  the  kind  here,  nor  indeed  in 
any  other  female  animal  that  I  am  aware  of. 
The  anatomists  who  believe  that  women  emit  a 
seminal  fluid  sub  coitu  have  been  too  eager  in 
their  search  after  such  vessels;  for  in  some  they 
are  not  met  with  at  all,  and  where  they  do  oc¬ 
cur  they  never  present  themselves  with  any¬ 
thing  of  uniformity  of  character.  Wherefore  it 
seems  most  likely  that  women  do  not  emit  any 
semen  sub  coitu ^  which  is  in  conformity  as  I 
have  said  with  what  the  greater  number  of 
women  state.  And  although  some  of  warmer 
temperament  shed  a  fluid  in  the  sexual  em¬ 
brace,  still  that  this  is  fruitful  semen,  or  is  a 
necessary  requisite  to  conception,  I  do  not  be¬ 
lieve;  for  many  women  conceive  without  hav¬ 
ing  any  emission  of  the  kind,  and  some  even 
without  any  kind  of  pleasurable  sensation  what¬ 
soever.  But  of  these  things  more  in  another 
place. 

The  vulva,  or  vagina  uteri,  which  extends 
from  the  os  externum  to  the  inner  orifice  of  the 
uterus,  is  situated  in  the  hind,  as  well  as  in  the 
human  female,  between  the  urinary  bladder 
and  the  intestinum  rectum,  and  corresponds  in 
length,  width,  and  general  dimensions,  with 
the  penis  of  the  male.  When  this  part  is  laid 
open  it  is  found  occupied  lengthwise  by  rugse 
and  furrows,  admitting  of  ready  distension,  and 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


474 

lubricated  with  a  sluggish  fluid.  At  its  bottom 
we  observe  a  very  narrow  and  small  orifice,  the 
commencement  of  the  cervix  uteri,  by  which 
w  hatever  is  propelled  outwards  from  the  cavity 
of  the  uterus  must  pass.  This  is  the  correspond¬ 
ing  orifice  to  that  which  medical  men  assert  is 
so  firmly  closed  and  sealed  up  in  the  pregnant 
woman  and  virgin,  that  it  will  not  even  admit 
the  point  of  a  probe  or  fine  needle. 

The  os  uteri  is  followed  by  the  cervix  or  proc¬ 
ess,  which  is  much  longer  and  rounder  than  in 
woman,  and  also  more  fibrous,  thicker,  and 
ner\’ous;  it  extends  from  the  bottom  of  the  va¬ 
gina  to  the  body  of  the  uterus.  If  this  cervix 
uteri  be  divided  longitudinally,  you  perceive 
not  only  its  external  orifice  at  the  bottom  of 
*ihe  vagina,  its  surface  in  close  contact,  and  so 
firmly  agglutinated  that  not  even  air  blown  in¬ 
to  the  vagina  will  penetrate  the  cavity  of  the 
uterus,  but  five  other  similar  constrictions 
placed  in  regular  order,  firmly  cont  rac ted  against 
the  entrance  of  any  foreign  body  and  sealed 
with  gelatinous  mucus;  just  as  we  find  the  nar¬ 
row  orifice  of  the  woman’s  uterus  plugged  with 
a  yellowish  glutinous  mass.  A  like  constriction 
of  parts,  all  firmly  closed,  and  precluding  all 
possibility  of  entrance,  Fabricius  has  found  in 
the  uterine  neck  of  the  sheep,  sow,  and  goat.  In 
the  deer  there  are  very  distinctly  five  of  these 
constrictions,  or  so  many  orifices  of  the  uterus 
constricted  and  conglutinated,  which  may  all 
justly  be  looked  upon  as  so  many  barriers  against 
the  entrance  of  anything  from  without.  Such 
particular  care  has  nature  taken,  that  if  the  first 
barrier  were  forced  by  any  cause  or  violence, 
the  second  should  still  stand  good,  and  so  the 
third,  and  the  fourth,  and  the  fifth,  determined 
apparently  that  nothing  should  enter.  A  probe 
pushed  from  within  outwards,  however,  from  the 
cavity  of  the  uterus  towards  the  vagina,  passes 
through  readily.  A  way  had  to  be  left  open  for 
the  escape  of  flatus,  menstrual  blood,  and  other 
excreted  fluids;  but  even  the  smallest  and  most 
subtile  things,  air,  for  instance,  and  the  seminal 
fluid  are  precluded  all  access  from  without. 

In  all  animals  this  uterine  orifice  is  found 
obstructed  or  plugged  up  in  the  same  way  as  it 
is  wont  to  be  in  women,  among  whom  wc  have 
sometimes  known  the  outlet  so  much  constricted 
that  the  menses,  lochia,  and  other  humours 
were  retained  in  the  womb,  and  became  the 
exciting  cause  of  most  severe  hysterical  symp¬ 
toms.  In  such  cases  it  became  necessary  to  con¬ 
trive  a  suitable  instrument  with  which  the  os 
uteri  being  opened,  the  matters  that  stagnated 
within  were  discharged,  when  all  the  accidents 


disappeared.  By  this  contrivance  injections 
could  also  be  thrown  into  the  cavity  of  the 
uterus,  and  by  means  of  these  I  have  cured  in¬ 
ternal  ulcers  of  the  womb,  and  have  occasion¬ 
ally  even  found  a  remedy  for  barrenness. 

The  cavity  of  the  uterus  in  the  deer  is  ex¬ 
tremely  small,  and  the  thickness  of  its  walls  not 
great;  the  body  of  the  womb  in  these  animals 
is,  in  fact,  but  a  kind  of  vestibule,  or  ante-room, 
in  the  cavity  of  which  a  passage  opens  to  the 
right  and  left  into  either  cornu. 

For  the  parts  are  different  in  almost  all  ani¬ 
mals  from  what  they  are  in  woman,  in  whom 
the  principal  part  of  the  uterus  is  its  body,  and 
the  cervix  and  cornua  are  mere  appendices, 
that  scarcely  attract  attention.  The  neck  is 
short;  the  cornua  are  slender  round  processes 
extending  from  the  fundus  uteri  like  a  couple  of 
tubes,  which  anatomists  indeed  commonly  speak 
of  as  the  vasa  ejaculatoria.  In  the  deer,  how¬ 
ever,  as  in  all  other  quadrupeds,  except  the  ape 
and  the  solipeds,  the  chief  organ  of  generation 
is  not  the  body  but  the  horns  of  the  uterus.  In 
the  human  female  and  the  solipedia,  the  uterus 
is  the  place  of  conception,  in  all  the  rest  the 
conception  is  perfected  in  the  cornua;  and  this 
is  the  reason  why  writers  so  commonly  speak 
of  the  cornua  uteri  in  the  lower  animals  under 
the  simple  name  of  the  uterus,  saying  that  the 
uterus  in  certain  animals  is  bipartite,  whilst  in 
others  it  is  not,  understanding  by  the  word 
uterus  the  place  in  which  conception  takes 
place,  this  in  the  majority  of  viviparous  and 
especially  of  multiparous  animals  being  the  cor¬ 
nua,  to  which,  moreover,  all  the  arteries  and 
veins  distributed  to  the  organs  of  generation  are 
sent.  We  shall,  therefore,  in  treating  of  the  his¬ 
tory  of  generation  in  the  deer  employ  the  words 
uterus  and  horns  of  the  uterus  promiscuously. 

In  the  human  female,  as  I  have  said,  the  two 
tubes  that  arise  near  the  cervix  uteri  and  there 
perforate  its  cavity  have  no  analogy  to  the  parts 
generally  called  cornua,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
in  the  mind  of  some  anatomists,  to  the  vasa 
spermatica.  By  others  again  they  are  called  the 
spiramenta  uteri — the  breathing  tubes  of  the 
uterus;  and  by  others  still  they  are  called  the 
vasa  deferentia  seu  reservantia,  as  if  they  were 
of  the  same  nature  as  the  canals  so  designated  in 
the  male;  whilst  they  in  fact  correspond  to  the 
cornua  of  the  uterus  in  other  animals,  as  most 
clearly  appears  from  their  situation,  connexion, 
length,  perforation,  general  resemblance,  and 
also  office.  For  as  many  of  the  lower  animals 
regularly  conceive  in  the  cornua  uteri,  so  do 
women  occasionally  carry  their  conceptions  in 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


the  cornu,  or  this  tube,  as  the  learned  Riolanus^ 
has  shown  from  the  observations  of  others,  and 
as  we  ourselves  have  found  it  with  our  own  eyes. 

These  cornua  terminate  in  a  common  cavity 
which,  as  stated,  forms  a  kind  of  porch  or  vesti¬ 
bule  to  the  uterus,  and  corresponds  in  the  deer 
to  the  neck  of  the  womb  in  women;  in  the  same 
way  as  the  tubes  in  question  in  the  human  fe¬ 
male  correspond  to  the  cornua  uteri  in  the  deer. 
Now  this  name  of  cornua  has  been  derived  from 
the  resemblance  of  the  parts  to  the  horns  of  an 
animal;  and  in  the  same  way  as  the  horns  of  a 
goat  or  ram  are  ample  at  the  base,  arched  and 
protuberant  in  front,  and  bent-in  behind,  so 
are  these  horns  of  the  uterus  in  the  hind  and  doe 
capacious  inferiorly,  and  taper  gradually  off 
superiorly,  as  they  are  reflected  towards  the 
spine.  Further,  as  the  horns  of  the  animal  are 
unequally  tuberculated  and  uneven  in  front, 
but  smooth  behind,  so  are  the  horns  of  the 
uterus  tuberculated,  as  it  were,  and  uneven, 
through  the  presence  of  cells,  something  like 
those  of  the  colon,  inferiorly  and  anteriorly; 
but  superiorly,  and  on  the  aspect  towards  the 
spine,  they  are  continuous  and  smooth,  and 
present  themselves  secured  and  bound  down  by 
a  ligamentous  band;  they  at  the  same  time 
gradually  decrease  in  size  like  horns.  Did  one 
take  a  piece  of  empty  intestine,  such  as  is  used 
for  making  sausages,  and  drawing  a  tape  through 
it,  tied  this  on  one  side,  he  would  have  it  puck¬ 
ered  and  constricted  on  that  side,  and  thrown 
into  cells  similar  to  those  of  the  colon  on  the 
opposite  side.  Such  is  the  structure  of  the  cor¬ 
nua  of  the  uterus  in  the  hind  and  doe.  In  other 
animals  it  is  different;  for  there  the  cells  are 
either  much  larger,  or  they  are  entirely  want¬ 
ing.  The  cells  of  the  cornua  uteri  of  the  hind 
and  doe,  however,  are  not  all  of  the  same  size; 
the  first  that  is  met  with  is  much  larger  than 
any  of  the  others;  and  here  it  is  that  the  concep¬ 
tion  is  generally  lodged. 

As  the  uterus,  tubes,  or  cornua,  and  other 
parts  appertaining  in  the  human  female  are 
connected  with  the  pubes,  spine,  and  surround¬ 
ing  structures  by  the  medium  of  broad  and 
fleshy  membranes,  by  suspensory  bands,  as  it 
were,  which  anatomists  have  designated  by  the 
name  of  bats’  wings,  because  they  have  found 
that  the  uterus  suspended  in  this  way  resem¬ 
bled  a  bat  with  its  wings  expanded,  so  also  are 
the  cornua  uteri,  together  with  the  testes  [ova¬ 
ries],  on  either  side,  and  all  the  uterine  vessels, 
connected  with  the  neighbouring  parts,  partic¬ 
ularly  with  the  spine,  by  means  of  a  firm  mem- 

^  Anthropologiay  ii.  34. 


brane,  within  the  folds  of  which  are  suspended 
all  the  parts  that  have  been  mentioned,  and 
which  serves  the  same  office  with  reference  to 
these  uterine  structures  as  the  mesentery  docs 
to  the  intestines,  and  the  mesometrium  to  the 
uterus  of  the  fowl.  In  the  same  way,  too,  as  the 
mesenteric  arteries  and  veins  are  distributed  to 
the  intestines  through  the  mesentery,  are  the 
uterine  vessels  distributed  to  the  uterus  through 
the  membrane  in  question;  in  which  also  cer¬ 
tain  vessels  and  glands  are  perceived  on  either 
side,  which  by  anatomists  are  generally  desig¬ 
nated  the  testicles  [the  ovaries]. 

The  substance  of  the  horns  of  the  uterus  in 
the  hind  and  doe  is  skinny  or  fleshy,  like  the 
coats  of  the  intestines,  and  has  a  few  very  mi¬ 
nute  veins  ramified  over  it.  This  substance  you 
may  in  anatomical  fashion  divide  into  several 
layers,  and  note  different  courses  of  its  com¬ 
ponent  fibres,  fitting  them  to  perform  the  sev¬ 
eral  motions  and  actions  required,  retention, 
namely,  and  expulsion.  I  have  myself  frequent¬ 
ly  seen  these  cornua  moving  like  earthworms, 
or  in  the  manner  in  which  the  intestines  may  at 
any  time  be  observed,  twisting  themselves  with 
an  undulatory  motion,  on  laying  open  the  ab¬ 
domen  of  a  recently  slaughtered  animal,  by 
which  they  move  on  the  chyle  and  excrements 
to  inferior  portions  of  the  gut,  as  if  they  were 
surrounded  and  compressed  with  a  ring  forced 
over  them,  or  were  stripped  between  the  fingers. 

The  uterine  veins,  as  in  woman,  all  arise  from 
the  vena  cava,  near  the  emulgents;  the  arteries 
(and  this  also  is  common  to  the  deer  and  the 
human  subject)  arise  from  the  crural  branches 
of  the  descending  aorta.  And  as  in  the  pregnant 
woman  the  uterine  vessels  are  relatively  larger 
and  more  numerous  than  in  any  other  part  of 
the  body,  this  is  likewise  the  case  in  the  preg¬ 
nant  hind  and  doe.  The  arteries,  however,  con¬ 
trary  to  the  arrangement  in  other  parts  of  the 
body,  are  much  more  numerous  than  the  veins; 
and  air  blown  into  them  makes  its  way  into  the 
neighbouring  veins,  although  the  arteries  cannot 
be  inflated  in  their  turn  by  blowing  into  the 
veins.  This  fact  I  also  find  mentioned  by  Master 
Riolanus;  and  it  is  a  cogent  argument  for  the 
circulation  of  the  blood  discovered  by  me;  for 
he  clearly  proves  that  whilst  there  is  a  passage 
from  the  arteries  into  the  veins,  there  is  none 
backwards  from  the  veins  into  the  arteries.  The 
arteries  are  more  numerous  than  the  veins,  be¬ 
cause  a  large  supply  of  nourishment  being  re¬ 
quired  for  the  foetus,  it  is  only  what  is  left  un¬ 
used  that  has  to  be  returned  by  the  latter 
channels. 


476  WILLIAM 

In  the  deer  as  well  as  in  the  sheep,  goat,  and 
bisulcate  animals  generally,  we  find  testicles; 
but  these  are  mere  little  glands,  which  rather 
correspond  in  their  proportions  to  the  prostate 
or  mesenteric  glands,  the  use  of  which  is  to 
establish  divarications  for  the  veins,  and  to  store 
up  a  fluid  for  lubricating  the  parts,  rather  than 
forsecretingsemen,  concocting  it  into  fecundity, 
and  shedding  it  at  the  time  of  intercourse.  I  am 
myself  especially  moved  to  adopt  this  opinion, 
as  well  by  numerous  reasons  which  will  be  ad¬ 
duced  elsewhere,  as  by  the  fact  that  in  the  rut¬ 
ting  season,  when  the  testes  of  the  buck  and 
hart  enlarge  and  are  replete  with  semen,  and 
the  cornua  of  the  uterus  of  the  hind  and  doe  are 
greatly  changed,  the  female  testicles,  as  they 
are  called,  whether  they  be  examined  before  or 
after  intercourse,  neither  swell  nor  vary  from 
their  usual  condition;  they  show  no  trace  of 
being  of  the  slightest  use  either  in  the  business 
of  intercourse  or  in  that  of  generation. 

It  is  surprising  what  a  quantity  of  seminal 
fluid  is  found  in  the  vesiculae  seminales  and  tes¬ 
ticles  of  moles  and  the  larger  kinds  of  mice  at 
the  season  of  intercourse;  this  circumstance  cor¬ 
responds  with  what  we  have  already  noticed  in 
the  cock,  and  the  great  change  perceptible  in  the 
organs  of  generation  of  both  sexes;  nevertheless, 
the  glands,  which  are  regarded  as  the  female  tes¬ 
tes,  continue  all  the  while  unchanged  and  with¬ 
out  departure  from  their  pristine  appearance. 

All  that  has  now  been  said  of  the  uterus  and 
its  horns  in  hinds  and  does  applies  in  major  part 
to  viviparous  animals  in  general,  but  not  to  the 
human  female,  inasmuch  as  she  conceives  in  the 
body  of  the  uterus,  but  all  these,  with  the  ex¬ 
ception  of  the  horse  and  ass,  in  the  horns  of  the 
organ;  and  even  the  horse  and  ass,  although 
they  appear  to  carry  their  fruit  in  the  uterus, 
still  is  xht  place  oi  the  conception  in  them  rather 
of  the  nature  of  an  uterine  horn  than  the  uter¬ 
ine  body.  For  the  place  here  is  not  bipartite 
indeed,  but  it  is  oblong,  and  different  from  the 
human  uterus  both  in  its  situation,  connex¬ 
ions,  structure,  and  substance;  it  bears  a  greater 
affinity  to  the  superior  uterus  or  uterine  process 
of  the  fowl,  where  the  egg  grows  and  becomes 
surrounded  with  the  albumen,  than  to  the 
uterus  of  the  woman. 

EXERCISE  66.  Of  the  intercourse  of  the  hind 
and  doe 

So  much  for  the  account  of  the  uterus  of  the 
female  deer,  where  we  have  spoken  briefly  upon 
all  that  seemed  necessary  to  the  history  of  gen¬ 
eration,  viz.,  the  place  of  conception,  and  the 


HARVEY 

parts  instituted  for  its  sake.  We  have  still  to 
speak  of  the  action  and  office  of  this  place,  in 
other  words,  of  intercourse  and  conception. 

The  hind  and  doe  admit  the  male  at  one  and 
only  one  particular  season  of  the  year,  namely, 
in  the  middle  of  September,  after  the  Feast  of 
the  Holy  Cross;  and  they  bring  forth  after  the 
middle  of  June,  about  the  Feast  of  St.  John  the 
Baptist  (24th  June).  They,  therefore,  go  with 
young  about  nine  months,  not  eight,  as  Pliny 
says;^  with  us,  at  all  events,  they  produce  in  the 
ninth  month  after  they  have  taken  the  buck. 

At  the  rutting  season  the  bucks  herd  with 
the  does;  at  other  times  they  keep  severally 
apart,  the  males,  particularly  the  older  ones,  as¬ 
sociating  together,  and  the  females  and  younger 
males  trooping  and  feeding  in  company.  The 
rutting  season  lasts  for  a  whole  month,  and  it 
begins  later  if  the  weather  have  been  dry,  earlier 
if  it  have  been  wet.  In  Spain,  as  I  am  informed, 
the  deer  are  hardly  in  rut  before  the  beginning 
of  October,  wet  weather  not  usually  setting  in 
there  until  this  time;  but  with  us  the  rutting 
season  rarely  continues  beyond  the  middle  of 
October. 

At  this  time  deer  are  rendered  savage  by  de¬ 
sire,  so  that  they  will  attack  both  dogs  and  men, 
although  at  other  seasons  they  are  so  timid  and 
peaceable,  and  immediately  betake  themselves 
to  flight  on  the  barking  of  even  the  smallest  dog. 

Every  male  knows  all  his  own  females,  nor 
will  he  suffer  any  one  of  them  to  wander  from 
his  herd:  with  a  run  he  speedily  drives  back  any 
straggler;  he  walks  jealously  from  time  to  time 
among  his  wives;  looks  circumspectly  about 
him,  and  the  careful  guardian  of  his  own,  he 
shows  himself  the  watchful  sentinel.  If  a  strange 
doe  commit  any  offence,  he  does  not  pursue 
her  very  eagerly,  but  rather  suffers  her  to  get 
away;  but  if  another  buck  approach  he  instant¬ 
ly  runs  to  meet  him,  and  gives  him  battle  with 
his  antlers. 

The  hind  and  doe  are  held  among  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  chaster  animals;  they  suffer  the  ad¬ 
dresses  of  the  male  reluctantly,  who,  like  the 
bull,  mounts  with  violence,  and  unless  forced 
or  tired  out,  they  resist  him;  which  disinclina¬ 
tion  of  the  females  appears  also  to  be  the  reason 
of  their  herding  together,  and  confining  them¬ 
selves  to  their  own  males,  who  are  always  the 
older  and  better  armed;  for  when  any  strange 
male  approaches  them  they  immediately  take 
to  flight,  and  seek  refuge  in  their  own  herd,  and 
protection  to  their  chastity,  as  it  seems,  from 
their  proper  husband. 

1  Hist,  nat„  viii.  32. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


If  a  younger  male  finds  a  female  straying 
alone,  he  immediately  pursues  her,  and  when 
she  is  worn  out  and  unable  to  fly  farther  he 
mounts  and  forces  her  to  his  pleasure. 

The  males  all  provide  themselves  what  are 
called  rutting  places;  that  is  to  say,  they  dig  a 
trench,  or  they  take  their  stand  upon  an  accliv¬ 
ity,  whither  they  compel  their  females  to  come 
in  turn.  The  female  that  is  to  be  leapt  stands 
with  her  hind  feet  in  the  trench  prepared  for 
the  purpose,  stooping  or  lowering  her  haunches 
somewhat,  if  need  be;  by  which  the  male  is  en¬ 
abled,  pressing  forward  upon  her  in  the  same 
way  as  a  bull,  to  strike  her,  in  technical  lan¬ 
guage,  and  finish  the  business  of  copulation  at 
one  assaults 

Old  and  sturdy  bucks  have  a  considerable 
number  of  does  in  their  herds,  as  many  as 
ten,  and  even  fifteen;  younger  and  weaker 
males  have  fewer.  Keepers  say  that  the  doe 
is  sated  with  two,  or  at  most  with  three  leaps; 
once  she  has  conceived  she  admits  the  male  no 
more. 

The  lust  of  the  male  cools  when  he  has  served 
his  females;  he  becomes  shyer,  and  much  leaner; 
he  deserts  his  herd  and  roams  alone,  and  feeds 
greedily  to  repair  his  wasted  strength,  nor  does 
he  afterwards  approach  a  female  for  a  whole 
year. 

When  the  male  is  capable  of  intercourse  the 
hair  on  his  throat  and  neck  grows  black,  and 
the  extremity  of  the  prepuce  becomes  of  the 
same  colour,  and  stinks  abominably.  The  fe¬ 
males  take  the  male  but  rarely,  and  only  in  the 
night  or  in  dusky  places,  which  are,  therefore, 
always  chosen  by  the  males  for  their  connubial 
pleasures.  When  two  stags  engage  in  battle,  as 
frequently  happens,  the  vanquished  yields  pos¬ 
session  of  his  females  to  the  victor. 

EXERCISE  67.  Of  the  constitution  or  change  that 

takes  place  in  the  uterus  of  the  deer  in  the  course  of 

the  month  of  September 

We  now  come  to  the  changes  that  take  place 
in  the  genital  parts  of  the  female  after  inter¬ 
course,  and  to  the  conception  itself.  In  the 
month  of  September,  then,  when  the  female 
deer  first  comes  in  season,  her  cornua  uteri, 
uterus,  or  place  of  conception,  grows  somewhat 
more  fleshy  and  thick,  softer  also,  and  more 
tender.  In  the  interior  of  either  cornu,  at  that 
part,  namely,  which  looks  drawn  together  by  a 
band,  and  is  turned  towards  the  spine,  we  ob¬ 
serve,  protruding  in  regular  succession,  five  car¬ 
uncles,  soft  warts,  or  papillae.  The  first  of  these 
is  larger  than  any  of  the  others,  and  each  in  suc¬ 


cession  is  smaller  than  the  one  before  it,  just  as 
the  cornua  themselves  become  smaller  and 
smaller  towards  their  termination.  Some  of  the 
caruncles  grow  to  the  thickness  of  the  largest 
finger,  and  look  like  proud  flesh;  some  are 
white,  others  of  a  deeper  red. 

From  the  26th  to  the  28th  of  September,  and 
also  subsequently,  in  the  month  of  October, 
the  uterus  becomes  thicker,  and  the  carunculae 
mentioned  come  to  resemble  the  nipples  of  the 
woman’s  breast:  you  might  fancy  them  ready 
to  pour  out  milk.  Having  removed  their  apex 
that  I  might  examine  their  internal  structure,  I 
found  them  made  up  of  innumerable  white 
points  compacted  together,  like  so  many  bris¬ 
tles  erect,  and  connected  by  means  of  a  certain 
mucous  viscidity;  compressed  between  the  fore 
finger  and  thumb,  from  the  base  upwards,  a 
minute  drop  of  blood  oozed  out  from  each 
point,  a  fact  which  led  me,  after  further  inves¬ 
tigation,  to  conclude  that  they  were  entirely 
made  up  of  the  capillary  branches  of  arteries. 

During  the  season  of  intercourse,  therefore, 
the  uterine  vessels,  particularly  the  arteries,  are 
observed  to  be  more  numerous  and  of  larger 
size;  although  the  parts  called  the  female  testes, 
as  I  have  said  above,  are  neither  larger  nor  more 
highly  gorged  with  blood  than  before,  and  do 
not  appear  to  be  altered  in  any  way  from  their 
former  state. 

The  inner  aspect  of  the  uterus  or  cornua 
uteri,  where  it  is  puckered  into  cells,  is  as  smooth 
and  soft  as  the  ventricles  of  the  brain,  or  the 
glans  penis  within  the  prepuce.  Nothing,  how¬ 
ever,  can  be  discovered  there — neither  the  se¬ 
men  of  the  male,  nor  aught  else  having  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  conception— during  the  whole  of 
the  months  of  September  and  October,  although 
I  have  instituted  repeated  dissections  with  a 
view  of  examining  the  conception  at  this  pe¬ 
riod.  The  males  have  been  doing  their  duty  all 
the  while;  nevertheless,  reiterated  dissection 
shows  nothing.  This  is  the  conclusion  to  which 
I  have  come,  after  many  years  of  observation.  I 
have  only  occasionally  found  the  five  caruncles 
so  close  together  that  they  formed  a  kind 
of  continuous  protuberance  into  the  interior 
of  the  uterus.  But  when,  after  repeated  in¬ 
spections,  I  still  found  nothing  moie  in  the 
uterus,  I  began  to  doubt,  and  to  ask  myself 
whether  the  semen  of  the  male  could  by  any 
possibility  make  its  way — by  attraction  or  in¬ 
jection — to  the  seat  of  the  conception?  And 
repeated  examination  led  me  to  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  none  of  the  semen  whatsoever  reached 
this  seat. 


478  WILLIAM 

EXERCISE  68.  Of  what  taJ^s  place  in  the  month  of 
October 

Repeated  dissections  performed  in  the  course 
of  the  month  of  October,  both  before  the  rut¬ 
ting  season  was  over  and  after  it  had  passed, 
never  enabled  me  to  discover  any  blood  or  se¬ 
men,  or  a  trace  of  anything  else,  either  in  the 
body  of  the  uterus  or  in  its  cornua.  The  uterus 
was  only  a  little  larger,  and  somewhat  thicker; 
and  the  caruncles  were  more  tumid  and  florid, 
and,  when  strongly  pressed  with  the  finger,  dis¬ 
charged  small  drops  of  blood,  much  in  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  a  little  water}^  milk  can  be  squeezed 
from  the  nipples  of  a  woman  in  the  fourth 
month  of  her  pregnancy.  In  one  or  two  does, 
indeed,  I  found  a  green  and  ichorous  matter, 
like  an  abscess,  filling  the  cavity  of  the  uterus, 
which  was  preternaturally  extenuated;  in  other 
respects  these  animals  were  healthy,  and  in  as 
good  condition  as  others  which  I  examined  at 
the  same  time. 

Towards  the  end  of  October  and  beginning 
of  November,  the  rutting  season  being  now 
ended,  and  the  females  separating  themselves 
from  the  males,  the  uterus  begins  (in  some  soon¬ 
er,  in  others  later)  to  shrink  in  size,  and  the 
walls  ofjts  internal  cavity,  inflated  in  appear¬ 
ance,  to  bulge  out;  for  where  the  cells  existed 
formerly  there  are  now  certain  globular  masses 
projecting  internally,  which  nearly  fill  the  whole 
cavity,  by  which  the  sides  are  brought  into  mu¬ 
tual  contact,  and  almost  agglutinated,  as  it 
seems,  so  that  there  is  no  interv^al  between 
them.  Even  as  we  have  seen  the  lips  of  boys 
who,  in  robbing  a  hive,  had  been  stung  in  the 
mouth,  swollen  and  enlarged,  so  that  the  oral 
aperture  was  much  contracted,  even  so  does  the 
internal  surface  of  the  uterus  in  the  doe  enlarge, 
and  become  filled  with  a  soft  and  pulpy  sub¬ 
stance,  like  the  matter  of  the  brain,  that  fills  its 
cavity  and  involves  the  caruncles,  which,  though 
not  larger  than  before,  look  whiter,  and  as  if 
they  had  been  steeped  in  hot  water,  much  as 
the  nurse’s  nipple  appears  immediately  after 
the  infant  has  quitted  it.  And  now  I  have  not 
found  it  possible  by  any  compression  to  force 
blood  out  of  the  caruncles  as  before. 

Nothing  can  be  softer,  smoother,  more  deli¬ 
cate,  than  the  inner  aspect  of  the  uterus  thus 
raised  into  tubers.  It  rivals  the  ventricles  of  the 
brain  in  softness,  so  that  without  the  informa¬ 
tion  of  the  eye  we  should  scarcely  perceive  by 
the  finger  that  we  were  touching  any  thing.  When 
the  abdomen  is  laid  open  immediately  after  the 
death  of  the  animal,  I  have  frequently  seen  the 


HARVEY 

uterus  affected  with  a  wavy  and  creeping  mo¬ 
tion,  such  as  is  perceived  in  the  lower  part  of  a 
slug  or  snail  whilst  it  is  moving,  as  if  the  uterus 
were  an  animal  within  an  animal,  and  possessed 
a  proper  and  independent  motion.  I  have  fre¬ 
quently  observed  a  movement  of  the  same  kind 
as  that  just  described  in  the  intestines,  whilst 
engaged  in  vivisections;  and  indeed  such  a  mo¬ 
tion  can  both  be  seen  and  felt  in  the  bodies  of 
dogs  and  rabbits  whilst  they  are  alive  and  un¬ 
injured.  1  have  also  observed  a  corresponding 
motion  in  the  testes  and  scrotum  of  men;  and  I 
have  even  known  women  upon  whom,  in  their 
eagerness  for  offspring,  such  palpitations  have 
imposed.  But  whether  the  uterus  in  hysterical 
females,  by  ascending,  descending,  and  twist¬ 
ing,  experiences  any  such  motion  or  not,  1  can¬ 
not  take  upon  me  to  declare;  and  whether  the 
brain,  in  its  actions  and  conceptions,  moves  in 
anything  of  a  similar  manner  or  not,  though  a 
point  difficult  of  investigation,  I  am  inclined  to 
look  upon  as  one  by  no  means  unworthy  of 
being  attempted. 

Shortly  afterwards,  the  tubercular  elevations 
of  the  inner  surface  of  the  uterus  that  have 
been  mentioned  begin  to  shrink;  it  is  as  if,  los¬ 
ing  a  quantity  of  moisture,  they  became  less 
plump.  In  some  instances,  indeed,  though  rare¬ 
ly,  I  have  observed  something  like  purulent 
matter  adhering  to  them,  such  as  is  usually  seen 
on  the  surface  of  wounds  and  ulcers  when  they 
are  digested,  as  it  is  said,  they  pour  out  smooth 
and  homogeneous  pus.  When  I  first  saw  this 
matter,  1  doubted  whether  it  was  the  semen  of 
the  male  or  not,  or  a  substance  concocted  from 
its  purer  portion.  But  as  it  was  only  in  exceed¬ 
ingly  rare  instances  that  1  met  with  such  mat¬ 
ter,  and  as  twenty  days  had  then  passed  since 
the  doe  had  had  any  intercourse  with  the  buck, 
and  further,  as  the  matter  was  not  viscid  and 
tenacious,  or  spumous,  such  as  the  seminal  fluid 
presents  itself  to  us,  but  rather  friable,  puru¬ 
lent  looking,  and  inclining  to  yellow,  I  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  it  was  the  effect  of  accident, 
a  sweat  or  exudation  in  consequence  of  violent 
exercise  previous  to  death;  just  as  in  a  catarrh 
the  thinner  defluxion  of  the  nose  is  by  and  by 
changed  into  a  thicker  mucus. 

Having  frequently  shown  this  alteration  in 
the  uterus  to  his  majesty  the  king  as  the  first 
indication  of  pregnancy,  and  satisfied  him  at 
the  same  time  that  there  was  nothing  in  the 
shape  of  semen  or  conception  to  be  found  in  the 
cavity  of  the  organ,  and  he  had  spoken  of  this 
as  an  extraordinary  fact  to  several  about  him,  a 
discussion  at  length  arose :  the  keepers  and  hunts- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


men  asserted  at  first  that  it  was  but  an  argu¬ 
ment  of  a  tardy  conception  occasioned  by  the 
want  of  rain.  But  by  and  by,  when  they  saw 
the  rutting  season  pass  away,  I  still  continuing 
to  maintain  that  things  were  in  the  same  state, 
they  began  to  say  that  I  was  both  deceived  my¬ 
self  and  had  misled  the  king,  and  that  there 
must  of  necessity  be  something  of  the  concep¬ 
tion  to  be  found  in  the  uterus.  These  men,  how¬ 
ever,  when  I  got  them  to  bring  their  own  eyes 
to  the  inquiry,  soon  gave  up  the  point.  The 
physicians,  nevertheless,  held  it  among  their 
aSvpara — their  impossibilities — that  any  con¬ 
ception  should  ever  be  formed  without  the 
presence  of  the  semen  masculinum,  or  some 
trace  remaining  of  a  fertile  intercourse  within 
the  cavity  of  the  womb. 

That  this  important  question  might  be  the 
more  satisfactorily  settled  in  all  time  to  come, 
his  highness  the  king  ordered  about  a  dozen  does 
to  be  separated  from  the  bucks  towards  the 
beginning  of  October,  and  secluded  in  the  in¬ 
closure,  which  is  called  the  course,  at  Hampton 
Court,  because  the  animal  placed  there  has  no 
means  of  escape  from  the  dogs  let  loose  upon  it. 
Now  that  no  one  might  say  the  animals  thus 
secluded  retained  any  of  the  semen  received 
from  the  last  connexions  with  the  male,  I  dis¬ 
sected  several  of  them  before  the  rutting  season 
had  passed,  and  ascertained  that  no  seminal 
fluid  remained  in  the  uterus,  although  the  oth¬ 
ers  were  found  to  be  pregnant  in  consequence 
of  the  preceding  intercourse — impregnated  by 
a  kind  of  contagion  as  it  appears — and  duly 
produced  their  fawns  at  the  proper  time. 

In  the  dog,  rabbit,  and  several  other  animals, 
I  have  found  nothing  in  the  uterus  for  several 
days  after  intercourse.  I  therefore  regard  it  as 
demonstrated  that  after  fertile  intercourse 
among  viviparous  as  well  as  oviparous  animals, 
there  are  no  remains  in  the  uterus  either  of  the 
semen  of  the  male  or  female  emitted  in  the  act, 
nothing  produced  by  any  mixture  of  these  two 
fluids,  as  medical  writers  maintain,  nothing  of 
the  menstrual  blood  present  as  “matter”  in  the 
way  Aristotle  will  have  it;  in  a  word,  that  there 
is  not  necessarily  even  a  trace  of  the  conception 
to  be  seen  immediately  after  a  fruitful  union  of 
the  sexes.  It  is  not  true,  consequently,  that  in  a 
prolific  connexion  there  must  be  any  prepared 
matter  in  the  uterus  which  the  semen  mascu¬ 
linum,  acting  as  a  coagulating  agent,  should 
congeal,  concoct,  and  fashion,  or  bring  into  a 
positive  generative  act,  or,  by  drying  its  outer 
surface,  include  in  membranes.  Nothing  cer¬ 
tainly  is  to  be  seen  within  the  uterus  of  the  doe 


for  a  great  number  of  days,  namely,  from  the 
middle  of  September  up  to  the  12th  of  No¬ 
vember. 

It  appears,  moreover,  that  all  females  do  not 
shed  seminal  fluid  into  the  uterus  during  inter¬ 
course;  that  there  is  no  trace  either  of  seminal 
fluid  or  menstrual  blood  in  the  uterus  of  the 
hind  or  doe,  and  many  other  viviparous  ani¬ 
mals.  But  as  to  what  it  is  which  is  shed  by  wom¬ 
en  of  warmer  temperament  no  less  than  by  men 
during  intercourse,  accompanied  with  failure  of 
the  powers  and  voluptuous  sensations;  whether 
it  be  necessary  to  fecundation,  whether  it  come 
from  the  testes  femininae,  and  whether  it  be 
semen  and  prolific,  is  discussed  by  us  elsewhere. 

And  whilst  I  speak  of  these  matters,  let  gentle 
minds  forgive  me,  if,  recalling  the  irreparable 
injuries  I  have  suffered,  I  here  give  vent  to  a 
sigh.  This  is  the  cause  of  my  sorrow:  whilst  in 
attendance  on  his  majesty  the  king  during  our 
late  troubles  and  more  than  civil  wars,  not  only 
with  the  permission  but  by  command  of  the 
Parliament,  certain  rapacious  hands  stripped 
not  only  my  house  of  all  its  furniture,  but  what 
is  subject  of  far  greater  regret  with  me,  my 
enemies  abstracted  from  my  museum  the  fruits 
of  many  years  of  toil.  Whence  it  has  come  to 
pass  that  many  observations,  particularly  on 
the  generation  of  insects,  have  perished,  with 
detriment,  I  venture  to  say,  to  the  republic  of 
letters. 

EXERCISE  69.  0/ what  ta^es  place  in  the  uterus  of 
the  doe  during  the  month  of  November 

Taught  by  the  experience  of  many  years  I 
can  state  truly  that  it  is  from  the  12th  to  the 
14th  of  November  that  I  first  discover  any¬ 
thing  which  belongs  to  the  future  offspring  in 
the  uterus  of  the  hind. 

I  remember,  indeed,  that  in  the  year  of  grace 
1633,  the  signs  of  conception,  or  the  commence¬ 
ments  of  the  embryos,  made  their  appearance 
somewhat  earlier;  because  the  weather  was  then 
cloudy  and  wet.  In  does,  too,  which  have  rutted 
six  or  seven  days  sooner  than  hinds,  I  have  al¬ 
ways  discovered  something  of  the  future  foetus 
about  the  8th  or  9th  of  November.  What  this 
is  and  how  it  is  begun  I  shall  proceed  to  state. 

A  little  before  anything  is  perceptible,  the 
substance  of  the  uterus  or  its  horns  appears  less 
than  it  was  before  the  animals  began  to  rut,  the 
white  caruncles  are  more  flaccid,  as  I  have  said, 
and  the  protuberances  of  the  internal  coat  sub¬ 
side  somewhat,  and  are  corrugated  and  look 
moist.  For  about  the  date  above  mentioned 
certain  mucous  filaments  like  spiders’  webs  are 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


480 

observ^ed  drawn  from  the  extremities,  or  su¬ 
perior  angles  of  the  cornua  through  the  middle 
of  either,  and  also  through  the  body  of  the 
uterus.  These  filaments  becoming  conjoined 
present  themselves  as  a  membranous  and  gelati¬ 
nous  tunic  or  empty  sac.  Even  as  the  plexus  cho- 
roides  is  extended  through  the  ventricles  of  the 
brain,  is  this  oblong  sac  produced  through  the 
whole  of  either  horn  and  the  intervening  cavity 
of  the  uterus,  insinuating  itself  between  the 
wrinkles  of  the  flabby  internal  tunic,  and  send¬ 
ing  delicate  fibres  among  the  afore -mentioned 
rounded  protuberances,  being  nearly  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  pia  mater  dips  between  the 
convolutions  of  the  brain. 

Within  a  day  or  two  this  sac  becomes  filled 
with  a  clear,  watery,  sluggish  albuminous  mat¬ 
ter,  and  now  presents  itself  as  a  long-shaped 
pudding  full  of  fluid.  It  adheres  by  its  external 
glutinous  matter  to  the  containing  walls  of  the 
uterus,  but  so  that  it  is  still  easily  separated 
from  these;  for  if  it  be  taken  hold  of  cautiously 
in  the  strait  of  the  uterus,  where  it  is  constricted 
in  its  course,  it  can  be  drawn  entire  out  of  either 
horn. 

The  conception  arrived  at  this  stage  removed 
entire,  presents  itself  with  the  figure  of  a  wallet 
or  double  pudding;  externally,  it  is  covered 
with  a  purulent-looking  matter;  internally,  it  is 
smooth,  and  contains  in  its  cavity  a  viscid  fluid 
not  unlike  the  thinner  white  of  egg. 

This  is  the  conception  of  the  hind  and  doe  in 
its  first  stage.  And  since  it  has  now  the  nature 
and  state  of  an  egg,  and  the  definition  given  by 
Aristotle  of  an  egg  is  applicable  to  it,  namely: 
“A  body  from  one  part  of  which  an  animal  is 
produced,  the  remainder  serving  as  nourish¬ 
ment  to  that  which  is  engendered”;^  and  fur¬ 
ther,  as  it  is  the  primordium  of  the  future  foe¬ 
tus,  it  is  therefore  called  the  ovum,  or  egg  of 
the  animal,  in  conformity  with  that  passage  of 
the  philosopher  where  he  says:  “Those  animals 
which  engender  internally  have  a  certain  ovi¬ 
form  body  produced  after  the  first  conception. 
For  a  humour  is  included  within  a  delicate 
membrane,  such  as  that  which  you  find  under 
the  shell  in  the  egg  of  the  hen;  wherefore  the 
blightings  of  conceptions  that  are  apt  to  take 
place  about  this  period  are  called  fluxes.”^  This 
conception,  therefore,  as  we  have  already  said 
of  the  egg,  is  the  true  sperma  or  seed,  compris¬ 
ing  the  virtue  of  both  sexes  in  itself,  and  is  anal¬ 
ogous  to  the  seed  of  the  vegetable.  So  that  Aris- 

^  History  of  Animals^  i.  5;  On  the  Generation  of 
Animals,  ii.  9. 

2  On  the  Generation  of  Animals,  iii.  9. 


totle,  describing  the  first  conception  of  women, 
says  that  it  is  “covered  with  a  membrane  like 
an  egg  from  which  the  shell  has  been  removed” 
such  as  Hippocrates  describes  as  having  been 
passed  by  the  female  pipe-player.  And  I  have 
myself  frequently  seen  such  ova,  of  the  size  of 
pigeons’  eggs,  and  containing  no  foetus,  dis¬ 
charged  by  women  about  the  second  month 
after  conception;  when  the  ovum  was  of  the 
size  of  a  pheasant’s  or  hen’s  egg,  the  embryo 
could  be  made  out,  the  size  of  the  little  finger¬ 
nail,  floating  within  it.  But  the  membrane  sur¬ 
rounding  the  conception  has  not  yet  acquired 
any  annexed  placenta;  neither  is  it  connected 
with  the  uterus;  there  is  only  at  its  upper  and 
blunter  part  a  kind  of  delicate  mossy  or  woolly 
covering  which  stands  for  the  rudiments  of  the 
future  placenta.  The  inner  aspect  is  smooth  and 
polished,  and  covered  with  numerous  ramifica¬ 
tions  of  the  umbilical  vessels.  In  the  third  month 
this  ovum  exceeds  a  goose’s  egg  in  size,  and  in¬ 
cludes  a  perfect  embryo  of  the  length  of  two 
fingers’  breadths.  In  the  fourth  month  it  is 
larger  than  an  ostrich’s  egg.  All  these  things  I 
have  noted  in  the  numerous  careful  dissections 
of  aborted  ova  which  I  have  made. 

In  the  way  above  indicated  do  the  hind  and 
doe,  affected  by  a  kind  of  contagion,  finally 
conceive  and  produce  primordia,  of  the  nature 
of  eggs,  or  the  seeds  of  plants,  or  the  fruit  of 
trees,  although  for  a  whole  month  and  more 
they  had  exhibited  nothing  in  the  uterus,  the 
conception  being  perfected  about  the  i8th,  at 
furthest  the  21st  of  November,  and  having  its 
seat  now  in  the  right,  now  in  the  left  horn,  occa¬ 
sionally  in  both  at  once.  The  ovum  at  this  time 
is  full  of  a  colliquate  matter,  transparent,  crys¬ 
talline,  similar  to  that  fluid  which  in  the  hen’s 
egg  we  have  called  the  colliquament  or  eye,  of 
far  greater  purity  than  that  fluid  in  which  the 
embryo  by  and  by  floats,  and  contained  within 
a  proper  tunic  of  extreme  tenuity,  and  orbicular 
in  form.  In  the  middle  of  the  ovum,  vascular 
ramifications  and  the  punctum  saliens — the 
first  or  rudimentary  particle  of  the  foetus — and 
nothing  else,  are  clearly  to  be  perceived.  This  is 
the  first  genital  part,  which,  once  constituted, 
is  not  only  already  possessed  by  the  vegetative, 
but  also  by  the  motive  soul;  and  from  this  are 
all  the  other  parts  of  the  foetus,  each  in  its  or¬ 
der,  generated,  fashioned,  disposed,  and  en¬ 
dowed  with  life,  almost  in  the  same  manner  as 
we  have  described  the  chick  to  be  produced 
from  the  colliquament  of  the  egg. 

Both  of  the  humours  mentioned  are  present 
3  History  of  Animals,  vii.  7. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  481 


in  the  conceptions  of  all  viviparous  animals, 
and  are  regarded  by  many  as  the  excrements  of 
the  foetus — one  the  urine,  the  other  the  sweat, 
although  neither  of  them  has  any  unpleasant 
taste,  and  they  are  always  and  at  all  periods 
present  in  conceptions,  even  before  a  particle 
of  the  foetus  has  been  produced. 

Of  the  membranes  investing  the  two  fluids, 
of  which  there  are  only  two,  the  outer  is  called 
the  chorion,  the  inner  the  amnion.  The  chorion 
includes  the  whole  conception,  and  extends  in¬ 
to  either  cornu;  the  amnion  swimming  in  the 
midst  of  the  liquid  of  the  former,  is  found  in 
one  of  the  horns  only,  except  in  the  cases  where 
there  is  a  twin  conception,  when  there  is  an 
amnion  present  in  each  of  them;  just  as  in  a 
twin-fraught  egg  there  are  two  colliquaments. 
Where  there  are  two  foetuses  consequently, 
both  are  contained  in  one  common  conception, 
in  one  egg,  as  it  were,  with  its  two  separate  col¬ 
lections  of  crystalline  fluid  included.  If  you  in¬ 
cise  the  external  membrane  at  any  point,  the 
more  turbid  fluid  which  it  contains  immedi¬ 
ately  escapes  from  either  horn  of  the  uterus; 
but  the  crystalline  liquid  in  the  interior  of  the 
amnion  does  not  escape  at  the  same  time  unless 
the  membrane  have  been  simultaneously  im¬ 
plicated. 

The  vein  which  is  first  discerned  in  the  crys¬ 
talline  fluid  within  the  amnion  takes  its  rise 
from  the  punctum  saliens,  and  assumes  the  na¬ 
ture  and  duty  of  an  umbilical  vessel;  increasing 
by  degrees  it  expands  into  various  ramifications 
distributed  through  the  colliquament,  so  that 
it  seems  certain  that  the  nourishment  is  in  the 
first  instance  derived  from  the  colliquament 
alone  in  which  the  foetus  swims. 

I  have  exhibited  to  his  Serene  Highness  the 
King,  this  point  still  palpitating  in  the  uterus 
laid  open;  it  was  extremely  minute  indeed,  and 
without  the  advantage  of  the  sun's  light  falling 
upon  it  from  the  side,  its  tremulous  motions 
were  not  to  be  perceived. 

When  the  ovum  with  the  colliquament  en¬ 
tire  was  placed  in  a  silver  or  pewter  basin  filled 
with  tepid  water,  the  punctum  saliens  became 
beautifully  distinct  to  the  spectators.  In  the 
course  of  the  next  ensuing  days,  a  mucilage  or 
jelly,  like  a  tiny  worm,  and  having  the  shape 
of  a  maggot,  is  found  to  be  added;  this  is  the 
rudiment  of  the  future  body.  It  is  divided  into 
two  parts,  one  of  which  is  the  head,  the  other 
the  trunk,  precisely  in  the  same  way  as  we  have 
already  seen  it  in  the  generation  of  the  chick  in 
ovo.  The  spine,  like  a  keel,  is  somewhat  bent; 
the  head  is  indifferently  made  up  of  three  small 


vesicles  or  globules,  and  swimming  in  transpar¬ 
ent  water  grows  amain,  and  by  degrees  assumes 
its  proper  shape.  There  is  only  this  to  be  ob¬ 
served,  that  the  eye  in  embryos  of  oviparous 
animals  is  much  larger  and  more  conspicuous 
than  that  of  viviparous  animals. 

After  the  26th  of  November  the  foetus  is  seen 
with  its  body  nearly  perfect,  in  one  case  in  the 
right  in  another  in  the  left  horn  of  the  uterus; 
in  twin  cases  in  both  horns. 

At  this  time,  too,  the  male  embryo  is  readily 
distinguishable  from  the  female  by  means  of 
the  organs  of  generation.  These  parts  are  also 
very  conspicuous  in  the  human  embryo,  and 
make  their  appearance  at  the  same  time  as  the 
trachea. 

Males  and  females  are  met  with  indifferently 
in  the  right  and  left  horn  of  the  uterus.  I  have, 
however,  more  frequently  found  females  in  the 
right,  males  in  the  left  horn;  and  I  have  made 
the  same  observation  in  does  that  carried  twins, 
as  well  as  in  the  sheep.  It  is  certain,  therefore, 
that  the  right  or  left  side  has  no  appropriate 
virtue  in  conferring  sex;  neither  is  the  uterus, 
nor  yet  the  mother  herself,  the  fashioner  or 
framer  of  the  foetus,  any  more  than  the  hen  is 
of  the  pullet  in  the  egg  which  she  incubates.  In 
the  same  way  as  the  pullet  is  formed  and  fash¬ 
ioned  in  the  egg  by  an  internal  and  inherent 
agent,  is  the  foetal  form  produced  from  the 
uterine  ovum  of  the  hind  and  doe. 

It  is  indeed  matter  of  astonishment  to  find  a 
foetus  formed  and  perfected  within  the  amnion 
in  so  short  a  space  of  time  after  the  first  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  blood  and  punctum  saliens.  On  or 
about  the  19th  or  20th  day  of  November  this 
punctum  first  becomes  visible;  on  the  21st  the 
shapeless  vermiculus  or  maggot  that  is  to  form 
the  body  of  the  future  animal  is  perceived ;  and 
in  the  course  of  from  six  to  seven  days  after¬ 
wards  a  foetus  so  perfect  in  all  its  parts  is  seen, 
that  a  male  can  be  distinguished  from  a  female 
by  the  organs  of  generation,  and  the  feet  are 
formed,  the  hooves  being  cleft,  the  whole  hav¬ 
ing  a  mucous  consistency  and  a  pale  yellowish 
colour. 

The  substance  of  the  uterus  begins  to  be  ex¬ 
tenuated  immediately  after  the  appearance  of 
the  embryo;  contrary  to  what  takes  place  in 
the  human  female,  whose  uterus  grows  every 
day  thicker  and  fleshier  with  the  advancing 
growth  of  the  foetus.  In  the  hind  and  doe,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  more  the  embryo  augments 
the  more  do  the  cornua  of  the  uterus  assimilate 
themselves  to  the  intestines;  that  horn  in  par¬ 
ticular  in  which  the  foetus  is  contained  looks 


482  WILLIAM 

like  a  bag  or  pouch,  and  exceeds  the  opposite 
one  in  dimensions. 

The  ovum  or  conception,  thus  far  advanced, 
and  with  its  included  foetus  perfectly  distinct, 
has  still  contracted  no  adhesions  to  its  mother’s 
sides:  the  whole  can  most  readily  be  withdrawn 
from  the  uterus,  as  I  have  ascertained  with  an 
ovum  which  contained  a  foetus  nearly  the  length 
of  the  thumb.  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  the 
foetus  up  to  this  period  has  been  nourished  by 
the  albumen  alone  that  is  contained  within  the 
conception;  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  ascer¬ 
tained  the  process  to  go  on  within  the  hen’s  egg. 
The  mouths  of  the  umbilical  veins  are  lost  and 
obliterated  between  the  albumen  and  neigh¬ 
bouring  humours  of  the  conception  and  their 
containing  membranes;  but  nowhere  is  there  as 
yet  any  connexion  with  the  uterus,  although 
by  these  veins  alone  is  nourishment  supplied  to 
the  embryo.  And  as  in  the  egg  the  ramifications 
of  the  veins  are  first  sent  to  the  colliquament 
(in  the  same  way  as  the  roots  of  trees  penetrate 
the  ground)  and  afterwards  take  their  course  to 
the  external  tunic  called  the  chorion,  whereon, 
for  the  sake  of  the  nourishment,  they  are  dis¬ 
persed  in  an  infinity  of  ramifications  through 
the  albuminous  fluid  contained  within  the  outer 
membrane,  so  have  I  observed  veins  in  the  cho¬ 
rion  of  a  human  abortion;  and  Aristotle  also 
states  “that  membrane  to  be  crowded  with 
veins. 

If  the  foetus  be  single  its  umbilical  vessels  are 
distributed  to  both  horns,  and  a  few  twigs  are 
also  sent  to  the  intervening  body  of  the  uterus; 
but  if  the  conception  be  double,  one  in  either 
horn,  each  sends  its  umbilical  vessels  to  its  own 
horn  alone;  the  embryo  in  the  right  horn  de¬ 
riving  nourishment  from  the  right  part  of  the 
conception,  that  in  the  left  from  the  left  por¬ 
tion  of  the  same.  In  other  respects  the  twin- 
conception  here  is  precisely  similar  to  the  twin- 
conception  of  the  egg. 

Towards  the  end  of  November,  then,  all  the 
parts  are  clearly  and  distinctly  to  be  distin¬ 
guished,  and  the  foetus  is  now  of  the  size  of  a 
large  bean  or  nutmeg;  its  occiput  is  prominent, 
as  in  the  chick,  but  its  eyes  are  smaller;  the 
mouth  extends  from  ear  to  ear,  the  cheeks  and 
lips,  as  consisting  of  membranous  parts,  being 
perfected  at  a  very  late  period.  In  the  foetuses 
of  all  animals,  indeed,  that  of  man  inclusive,  the 
oral  aperture  without  lips  or  cheeks  is  seen 
stretching  from  ear  to  ear;  and  this  is  the  reason, 
unless  I  much  mistake,  why  so  many  are  born 
with  the  upper  lip  divided  as  it  is  in  the  hare 

^  History  of  Animalsy  vii.  7. 


HARVEY 

and  camel,  whence  the  common  name  of  hare¬ 
lip  for  the  deformity.  In  the  development  of 
the  human  foetus  the  upper  lip  only  coalesces  in 
the  middle  line  at  a  very  late  period. 

I  have  frequently  put  a  foetus  the  size  of  a 
large  bean,  swimming  in  its  extremely  pure 
nutritive  fluid  within  the  transparent  amnion, 
into  a  silver  basin  filled  with  the  clearest  water, 
and  have  noted  these  particulars  as  most  worthy 
of  observation:  the  brain  of  somewhat  greater 
consistency  than  white  of  egg,  like  milk  mod 
erately  coagulated,  and  of  an  irregular  shape, 
and  without  any  covering  of  skull,  is  contained 
within  a  general  investing  membrane.  The  cer¬ 
ebellum  projects  in  a  peak,  as  in  the  chick.  The 
conical  mass  of  the  heart  is  of  a  white  colour, 
and  all  the  other  viscera,  the  liver  inclusive,  are 
white  and  spermatic-looking.  The  trunk  of  the 
umbilical  veins  arises  from  the  heart,  and  pass¬ 
ing  the  convexity  of  the  liver,  perforates  the 
trunk  of  the  vena  portae,  whence,  advancing  a 
little  and  subdividing  into  a  great  number  of 
branches,  it  is  distributed  to  the  colliquament 
and  tunica  choroidea  in  innumerable  fine  fila¬ 
ments.  The  sides  of  the  body  ascend  on  either 
hand  from  the  spine,  so  that  the  thorax  presents 
itself  in  the  guise  of  a  boat  or  small  vessel,  up  to 
the  period  at  which  the  heart  and  lungs  are  in¬ 
cluded  within  its  area,  precisely  and  in  all  re¬ 
spects  as  we  have  seen  it  in  the  development  of 
the  chick.  The  heart,  intestines,  and  other  vis¬ 
cera,  are  very  conspicuous,  and  present  them¬ 
selves  as  appendages  of  the  body,  until  the  tho¬ 
rax  and  abdomen  being  drawn  around  them, 
and  the  roof,  as  it  were,  put  on  the  building, 
they  are  concealed  within  the  compages  of  these 
cavities.  At  this  time  the  sides  both  of  the  tho¬ 
rax  and  abdomen  are  white,  gela»^inous,  and  ap¬ 
parently  identical  in  structure,  save  that  a  num¬ 
ber  of  slender  white  lines  are  perceived  in  the 
walls  of  the  thorax,  as  indications  of  the  future 
ribs,  whereby  a  distinction  is  here  made  be¬ 
tween  the  bony  and  fleshy  compages  of  the 
cavity. 

I  have  also  occasionally  observed  in  concep¬ 
tions  of  the  sheep,  which  were  sometimes  twin, 
sometimes  single,  of  corresponding  age  and 
about  a  finger’s  breadth  in  length,  that  the  form 
of  the  embryo  resembled  a  small  lizard  of  the 
size  of  a  wasp  or  caterpillar;  the  spine  being 
curved  into  a  circle,  and  the  head  almost  in 
contact  with  the  tail.  In  the  double  conceptions 
both  were  of  the  same  size,  as  if  produced  at 
once  and  simultaneously ;  each  floated  distinctly 
w'ithin  the  fluid  of  its  owm  amnion;  but  although 
one  lay  in  the  right,  the  other  in  the  left  horn 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  483 


of  the  uterus,  they  were  still  both  included  in 
the  same  double  sac  or  wallet,  both  belonged  to 
the  same  ovum,  and  were  surrounded  by  the 
same  common  external  fluid.  The  mouth  was 
large,  but  the  eyes  were  mere  points,  so  that 
they  could  scarcely  be  seen,  very  different, 
therefore,  from  what  occurs  among  birds.  The 
viscera  in  these  embryos  were  also  pendulous 
without  the  body,  not  yet  inclosed  within  the 
appropriate  cavities.  The  outer  membrane  or 
chorion  adhered  in  no  way  to  the  uterus,  so 
that  the  entire  conception  was  readily  removed. 
Within  the  substance  of  the  chorion  innumer¬ 
able  branches  of  the  umbilical  vessels  were  con¬ 
spicuous,  but  having  no  connexion  whatsoever 
with  the  walls  of  the  uterus;  a  circumstance  to 
which  allusion  has  already  been  made  in  the 
case  of  the  deer;  the  distribution  was  in  fact 
very  much  as  we  have  found  it  on  the  external 
tunic  of  the  hen’s  egg.  There  were  but  two  hu¬ 
mours,  and  the  same  number  of  containing  tu¬ 
nics,  of  which  the  chorion  extending  through 
both  cornua,  and  full  of  a  more  turbid  fluid, 
gave  general  configuration  to  the  ovum  or  con¬ 
ception.  The  tunica  amnios  again  is  almost  in¬ 
visible,  like  the  tunica  arachnoides  of  the  eye, 
and  embraces  the  crystalline  humour  in  which 
the  embryo  floats. 

The  fluid  of  the  amnion  was,  in  proportion, 
but  a  hundredth,  or  shall  I  say  a  thousandth,  to 
that  of  the  chorion;  although  the  crystalline 
humour  of  the  amnion  was  still  in  such  quantity 
that  no  one  could  reasonably  imagine  it  to  be 
the  sweat  of  the  very  small  embryo  that  floated 
within  it.  It  was,  further,  extremely  limpid, 
and  seemed  to  be  without  anything  like  bad 
taste  or  smell.  It  was,  as  we  have  already  ob¬ 
served  of  the  deer,  in  all  respects  like  watery 
milk,  and  had  none  of  the  obnoxious  qualities 
of  an  excrement.  I  add,  that  if  this  fluid  were  of 
an  excrementitious  nature  it  ought  to  increase 
in  quantity  with  the  growth  of  the  foetus.  But 
I  have  found  precisely  the  opposite  of  this  to 
obtain  in  the  conception  of  the  ewe,  so  that 
shortly  before  she  lambs  there  is  scarce  a  drop 
of  the  fluid  in  question  remaining.  I  am,  there¬ 
fore,  rather  inclined  to  regard  it  as  aliment  than 
as  excrement. 

The  internal  tunic  of  the  uterus  of  the  ewe 
is  covered  with  caruncles  innumerable,  as  the 
heavens  are  with  stars.  These  are  not  unlike 
crabs’  eyes,  and  I  have  called  them  by  this 
name;  but  they  are  smaller,  like  pendulous 
warts,  glandular  and  white,  sticking  within  the 
coats  of  the  uterus,  and  somewhat  excavated 
towards  the  conception;  otherwise  than  in  the 


deer,  consequently,  in  which  the  caruncles  cor¬ 
responding  to  these  rather  project  towards  the 
embryo.  These  caruncles  are  gorged  with  blood, 
and  their  inner  surface,  where  they  regard  the 
conception,  is  perceived  to  be  beset  with  black 
sanguineous  points.  The  umbilical  vessels  of  the 
embryo  were  not  yet  connected  with  these  car¬ 
uncles,  nor  did  the  conception  itself  adhere  to 
the  uterus. 

I  find  nothing  of  an  allantois,  of  which  some¬ 
thing  has  been  said  as  a  tunic  distinct  from  the 
chorion,  in  the  conception  of  the  ewe.  At  a 
later  period,  indeed,  when  the  embryo  is  larger, 
when  the  ovum  or  conception  has  contracted 
adhesions  with  the  uterus,  and  the  umbilical 
vessels  have  penetrated  the  caruncles,  the  cho¬ 
rion  extends  farther,  and  at  its  extremities  on 
either  side,  and  as  it  were  in  a  couple  of  appen¬ 
dices,  there  is  a  certain  fluid  of  a  yellow  colour, 
which  you  might  call  excrementitious,  kept 
separate  and  distinct. 

The  human  conception  scarcely  differs  in  any 
respect  from  an  egg  during  the  first  months  of 
pregnancy.  I  have  observed  a  clear  fluid,  like 
the  more  liquid  white  of  an  egg,  to  be  included 
within  an  extremely  delicate  membrane.  At 
this  time  the  placenta  had  not  yet  appeared, 
and  the  entire  conception  was  of  the  size  of  a 
pigeon’s,  or  perhaps  a  pheasant’s  egg.  The  em¬ 
bryo  itself,  of  the  length  of  the  little  finger-nail, 
and  having  the  form  of  a  small  frog,  was  con¬ 
spicuous  enough.  The  body  was  broad,  the  oral 
aperture  widely  cleft,  the  legs  and  arms  like  the 
stalks  of  flowers  just  risen  above  the  ground, 
the  occiput  prominent,  or  rather  forming  a 
vesicle  appended  to  the  rest  of  the  head,  such 
as  we  have  described  the  rudiments  of  the  fu¬ 
ture  cerebellum  in  the  chick. 

In  another  human  conception  of  about  the 
fiftieth  day,  the  ovum  was  as  large  as  a  hen’s  or 
a  turkey’s  egg.  The  embryo  was  as  long  as  a 
large  bean,  the  head  of  very  large  relative  di¬ 
mensions,  and  dominated  by  the  cerebellum  as 
by  a  kind  of  crest.  The  brain  itself  was  of  the 
consistence  of  curdled  milk.  Instead  of  a  cra¬ 
nium  there  was  a  coriaceous  membrane,  in  some 
places  cartilaginous,  and  divided  down  the  fore¬ 
head  to  the  roots  of  the  nostrils;  the  face  looked 
like  the  muzzle  of  a  dog.  There  were  no  ex¬ 
ternal  ears,  nor  any  nose,  yet  could  the  rudi¬ 
ments  of  the  trachea  passing  down  to  the  lungs, 
and  those  of  the  penis,  be  detected.  The  two 
auricles  of  the  heart  presented  themselves  like 
eyes,  of  a  black  colour. 

In  the  body  of  a  woman  who  died  of  fever  I 
found  an  hermaphrodite  embryo  nearly  of  the 


484  WILLIAM 

same  size.  The  pudendum  was  like  that  of  the 
rabbit,  the  labia  standing  for  prepuce,  the  nym- 
phae  for  glans.  In  the  upper  part  the  root  of  the 
penis  was  also  apparent,  and  on  either  side  for 
the  testicle  there  was  the  lax  skin  of  the  scro¬ 
tum.  The  uterus  was  extremely  diminutive, 
and  in  figure  like  that  of  the  ewe  or  mole,  with 
two  horns.  And  as  the  prostate  glands  are  situ¬ 
ated  near  the  penis  of  the  boy,  so  were  the  tes¬ 
ticles  (ovaries)  of  visible  dimensions,  seen  ad¬ 
jacent  to  these  cornua.  Externally  considered, 
the  sex  seemed  that  of  the  male;  internally, 
however,  it  was  rather  that  of  the  female.  The 
uterus  of  the  mother  was  of  great  size,  having 
the  urinary  bladder  connected  with  it  as  an  ap¬ 
pendage.  In  the  embryo,  on  the  contrary,  the 
bladder  was  large  with  the  uterus  of  very  small 
dimensions  attached  to  it. 

All  the  human  ova  that  have  been  described 
above  were,  like  those  of  the  ewe,  shaggy  ex¬ 
ternally,  and  besmeared  with  a  kind  of  gela¬ 
tine,  or  glutinous  matter.  At  this  epoch,  too, 
there  was  neither  any  placenta  apparent,  nor 
any  visible  connexion  with  the  uterus;  neither 
was  there  any  implantation  into  the  substance 
of  the  uterus  of  the  umbilical  vessels  scattered 
over  the  surface  of  the  conception  itself. 

As  in  the  deer,  so  in  the  sheep,  goat,  and  other 
bisulcated  animals,  do  we  find  more  than  one 
foetus  in  the  same  conception,  just  as  in  twin- 
fraught  eggs  we  find  two  chicks  surrounded  by 
the  same  albumen.  But  in  the  dog,  rabbit,  hog, 
and  other  viviparous  animals  that  produce  a 
considerable  number  at  a  litter,  the  thing  is 
otherwise.  In  these  each  foetus  has  two  hu¬ 
mours,  these  being  severally  surrounded  with 
their  proper  membranes. 

In  the  bitch  there  are  a  number  of  knots  or 
constrictions  along  the  whole  course  of  either 
cornu  of  the  uterus,  between  each  of  which  the 
appropriate  humours  and  a  single  embryo  are 
contained.  In  the  hare  and  rabbit  we  observe 
a  number  of  balls,  like  the  eggs  of  serpents,  so 
xhat  the  horns  of  the  uterus  look  like  a  pair  of 
bracelets  composed  of  so  many  amber  beads 
strung  upon  a  thread.  The  conception  of  the 
hare  bears  a  strong  resemblance  to  an  acorn,  the 
placenta  embracing  the  embryo  like  a  cup,  and 
the  humours  inclosed  in  their  membranes  de¬ 
pending  like  the  gland  or  nut. 

EXERCISE  70.  Of  the  conception  of  the  deer  in  the 
course  of  the  month  of  December 

In  the  beginning  of  December  the  foetus  is 
seen  larger,  every  way  more  perfect,  and  the 
length  of  the  finger.  The  heart  and  other  viscera 


HARVEY 

which  formerly  hung  externally  are  now  con¬ 
cealed  within  the  cavities  of  the  body,  so  that 
they  can  no  longer  be  seen  without  dissection. 

The  conception,  or  ovum,  by  the  medium  of 
the  five  caruncles  which  we  have  already  spoken 
of  as  present  in  either  cornu,  is  now  in  connex¬ 
ion  with  the  uterus  at  an  equal  number  of 
points;  still  the  union  is  not  so  strong  but  that  a 
very  slight  rather  than  a  great  effort  suffices  to 
break  it.  When  the  conception  is  detached,  we 
perceive  points  or  depressions  on  the  surface  of 
the  chorion  at  the  places  where  the  adhesions 
to  the  uterus  had  existed,  these  spots  being  fur¬ 
ther  covered  with  a  certain  viscid  and  wrinkled 
matter,  as  if  this  had  been  the  bond  of  union 
between  the  mother  and  the  ovum.  Thus  have 
we  the  nature  and  use  of  these  caruncles  made 
known  to  us:  seen  in  the  first  instance  as  fungi 
or  excrescences  growing  from  the  sides  of  the 
uterus,  they  are  now  recognized  in  connexion 
with  the  conception,  as  standing  instead  of  the 
placenta  or  uterine  cake  in  the  human  subject, 
and  performing  the  same  office.  These  caruncles 
are  in  fact  but  as  so  many  nipples,  whence  the 
embryo  by  means  of  its  umbilical  vessels  re¬ 
ceives  the  nourishment  that  is  supplied  by  the 
mother,  as  shall  be  clearly  shown  by  what  is  to 
follow. 

The  size  and  capacity  of  the  uterus,  by  which 
name  we  understand  the  cornua,  or  place  occu¬ 
pied  by  the  conception,  is  increased  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  growth  of  the  embryo;  in  suchwise, 
however,  that  the  horn  in  which  the  foetus  is 
lodged  is  larger  than  the  other. 

The  conception  or  ovum  is  single,  whether 
one  or  several  embryos  are  evolved  from  it; 
and  it  extends,  as  already  said,  into  both  of  the 
horns,  so  that  it  presents  itself  with  the  shape 
of  a  double  pudding,  or  rather  of  a  single  pud¬ 
ding  having  a  constriction  in  its  middle.  Pro¬ 
ceeding  rounded  and  slender  from  the  upper 
extremity  of  one  of  the  horns,  the  conception 
gradually  enlarges,  and  is  produced  into  that 
common  cavity  which  in  the  human  female  is 
called  the  uterus  or  matrix  (because,  by  con¬ 
ceiving  and  cherishing  her  offspring  in  this 
place  the  woman  is  made  a  mother);  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  deer,  passing  through  a  kind  of 
isthmus  in  the  body  of  the  uterus,  is  narrowed; 
but  by  and  by,  escaping  into  the  other  cornu,  it 
there  expands  at  first,  but  anon  contracts  again, 
and  finally  ends  as  it  began  in  a  tapering  ex¬ 
tremity.  The  whole  conception,  therefore,  taken 
out  entire,  resembles  a  wallet  filled  with  water 
on  either  side;  and  hence  the  chorion  is  also 
called  allantois,  because  the  conception  in  the 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  485 


lower  animals,  such  as  the  deer,  looks  like  an 
intestine  inflated,  or  stuffed  and  tied  in  the 
middle. 

In  the  embryo  anatomized  at  this  period 
every  internal  part  is  seen  distinct  and  perfect; 
particularly  the  stomach,  intestines,  heart,  kid¬ 
neys,  and  lungs,  which,  divided  into  lobes,  but 
having  the  proper  form  of  the  organs,  look 
bloody.  The  colour  of  the  lungs  is  deeper  than 
it  is  in  those  foetuses  that  have  breathed,  be¬ 
cause  the  lungs,  dilated  by  the  act  of  respira¬ 
tion,  assume  a  whiter  tint.  And  by  this  indica¬ 
tion  is  it  known  whether  a  mother  has  brought 
forth  a  living  or  dead  child;  in  the  former  case 
the  colour  of  the  lungs  is  changed,  and  the 
change  remains  though  the  infant  have  died 
immediately  afterwards. 

In  the  female  foetus  the  testes — improperly 
so  called — are  seen  situated  near  the  kidneys  at 
the  extremities  of  the  cornua  uteri  on  either 
side;  they  are  relatively  of  larger  size  than  in 
the  adult,  and,  like  the  caruncles  of  the  uterus, 
look  white. 

In  the  stomach  of  the  foetus  there  is  a  watery 
fluid  contained,  not  unlike  that  in  which  it 
swims,  but  somewhat  more  turbid  or  less  trans¬ 
parent.  It  resembles  the  milk  that  begins  to  be 
secreted  in  the  breasts  of  pregnant  women  about 
the  fourth  or  fifth  month  of  pregnancy,  and 
may  be  pressed  out  of  the  nipples,  or  it  is  like 
the  drink  which  we  call  white  posset. 

In  the  small  intestines  there  is  an  abundance 
of  chyle  concocted  from  the  same  matter;  in 
the  colon  greenish  faeces  and  scybala  begin  to 
appear. 

I  do  not  find  the  urachus  perforate;  neither 
do  I  perceive  any  difference  between  the  tunica 
allantoides  or  allantois,  which  is  said  to  contain 
urine,  and  the  chorion.  Neither  do  I  detect  any 
urine  in  the  secundines,  but  only  in  the  bladder, 
where  indeed  it  is  present  in  large  quantity. 
The  bladder,  of  an  oblong  form,  is  situated  be¬ 
tween  the  umbilical  arteries  as  they  proceed 
from  the  bifurcation  of  the  descending  aorta. 

The  liver  is  rudely  sketched  and  almost  shape¬ 
less,  as  if  it  were  a  mere  accidental  part;  it  looks 
like  a  red  coloured  mass  of  extravasated  blood. 
The  brain,  with  some  pretensions  to  regularity 
of  outline,  is  contained  within  the  dura  mater. 
The  eyes  are  concealed  under  the  eyelids,  which 
are  as  firmly  glued  together  as  we  find  them  in 
puppies  for  some  short  time  after  birth,  so  that 
I  found  it  scarcely  possible  to  separate  them  and 
open  the  eyes.  The  breast-bones  and  ribs  have  a 
certain  degree  of  firmness,  and  the  colour  of  the 
muscles  changes  from  white  to  blood  red. 


By  the  great  number  of  dissections  which  I 
performed  in  the  course  of  this  month,  I  was 
every  day  confirmed  in  my  opinion  that  the 
carunculae  of  the  uterus  perform  the  office  of 
the  placenta;  they  are  at  this  time  found  of  a 
reddish  colour,  turgid,  and  of  the  size  of  wal¬ 
nuts.  The  conception,  which  had  previously 
adhered  to  the  caruncles  by  the  medium  of 
mucor  or  glutinous  matter  only,  now  sends  the 
branches  of  its  umbilical  vessels  into  them,  as 
plants  send  their  roots  into  the  ground,  by 
which  it  is  fastened  and  may  be  said  to  grow  to 
the  uterus. 

About  the  end  of  December  the  foetus  is  a 
span  long,  and  I  have  seen  it  moving  lustily  and 
kicking;  opening  and  shutting  its  mouth;  the 
heart,  inclosed  in  the  pericardium,  when  ex¬ 
posed,  was  found  pulsating  strongly  and  visibly; 
its  ventricles,  however,  were  still  uniform,  of 
equal  amplitude  of  cavity  and  thickness  of 
parietes;  and  each  ending  in  a  separate  apex, 
they  form  together  a  double-pointed  cone. 
Occasionally,  I  have  seen  the  fluid  contained  in 
the  auricles  of  the  heart,  which  at  this  time  pre¬ 
sent  themselves  as  ample  sacs  filled  with  blood, 
continuing  to  pulsate  for  some  short  time  after 
the  ventricles  themselves  had  left  off  con¬ 
tracting. 

The  internal  organs,  all  of  which  had  lately 
become  perfect,  were  now  larger  and  more  con¬ 
spicuous.  The  skull  was  partly  cartilaginous, 
partly  osseous.  The  hooves  were  yellowish,  flex¬ 
ible,  and  soft,  resembling  those  of  the  adult  ani¬ 
mal  softened  in  hot  water.  The  uterine  carun¬ 
cles,  of  great  magnitude  and  like  immense  fun¬ 
gi,  extended  over  the  whole  cavity  of  the  uterus, 
and  plainly  performed  the  office  of  placentae, 
for  numerous  and  ample  branches  of  the  um¬ 
bilical  vessels  penetrated  their  substance  there 
to  imbibe  nutritive  matter  for  the  growth  of 
the  embryo.  As  in  the  foetus  after  birth,  the 
chyle  is  now  carried  by  the  mesenteric  veins  to 
the  porta  of  the  liver. 

Where  there  is  a  single  foetus  the  umbilical 
vessels  are  distributed  to  the  whole  of  the  car¬ 
unculae,  both  those  of  the  horn  where  the  foetus 
is  lodged  and  those  of  the  opposite  horn;  where 
there  is  a  pair  of  embryos  formed,  the  umbilical 
vessels  of  each  only  extend  to  the  caruncles  of 
the  horn  appropriated  to  it. 

The  smaller  umbilical  veins  in  tending  towards 
the  foetus,  form  larger  and  larger  trunks  by 
coalescing,  until  at  length  two  great  canals  are 
formed,  which  in  conjunction  pour  their  blood 
into  the  vena  cava  and  vena  portae.  But  the 
umbilical  arteries,  which  arise  from  the  division 


486  WILLIAM 

of  the  descending  aorta,  form  two  trunks  of 
small  size,  not  remarkable  save  for  their  pulse: 
proceeding  to  the  boundary  of  the  conception, 
in  other  words,  to  the  conjunction  of  the  pla¬ 
centa  or  carunculae  with  the  ramifications  of 
the  umbilical  veins,  they  first  divide  into  nu¬ 
merous  capillary  twigs,  and  then  are  lost  in 
others  that  are  invisible. 

As  the  extremities  of  the  umbilical  veins 
within  the  uterus  terminate  in  the  caruncles,  so 
the  uterine  vessels  on  the  outside,  which  are 
large  and  numerous,  and  bring  the  blood  from 
the  mother  towards  the  uterus,  by  means  of  the 
vessels  of  the  suspensory  ligaments,  terminate 
externally  on  the  caruncles.  It  is  to  be  noted, 
also,  that  the  internal  vessels  are  almost  all 
veins;  the  external  vessels,  again,  are  in  many 
instances  branches  of  arteries.  In  the  placenta 
of  the  woman,  if  it  be  carefully  examined  im¬ 
mediately  after  delivery,  a  much  larger  num¬ 
ber  of  arteries  than  of  veins,  and  these  of  larger 
size,  will  be  found  dispersed  on  every  side  in 
innumerable  subdivisions  to  the  very  edge  of 
the  mass.  In  the  same  kind  of  spongy  paren¬ 
chyma  of  the  spleen,  the  number  of  the  arteries 
is  also  greater  than  that  of  the  veins. 

The  exterior  uterine  vessels  run  to  the  uterus, 
as  I  have  said,  not  to  the  ovaries  {testiciili)  situ¬ 
ated  in  the  suspensory  ligament,  as  some  sup¬ 
pose. 

I  have  remarked  an  admirable  instance  of  the 
skill  of  nature,  in  the  bulge  or  convexity  of  the 
caruncles  turned  towards  the  conception:  a 
quantity  of  white  and  mucilaginous  matter  is 
discovered  in  a  number  of  cavities,  cotyledor.'^, 
or  little  cups;  these  are  all  as  full  of  this  matter 
as  we  ever  see  waxen  cells  full  of  honey;  now 
this  matter,  in  colour,  consistency,  and  taste,  is 
extremely  like  white  of  egg.  On  tearing  the  con¬ 
ception  away  from  the  caruncles,  you  will  per¬ 
ceive  numbers  of  suckers  or  capillary  branches 
of  the  umbilical  veins,  looking  like  lengthened 
filaments,  extracted  at  the  same  time  from 
every  one  of  the  cotyledons  and  pits,  and  from 
amidst  their  mucilaginous  contents;  very  much 
as  we  see  the  delicate  filaments  of  the  roots  of 
herbs  following  the  stem  when  it  is  pulled  out 
of  the  ground. 

It  is  clearly  ascertained  from  this  that  the  ex¬ 
tremities  of  the  umbilical  vessels  are  not  con¬ 
joined  by  any  anastomosis  with  the  extremities 
of  the  uterine  vessels;  that  they  do  not  imbibe 
any  blood  from  them,  but  that  they  end  and 
are  obliterated  in  that  mucilaginous  matter, 
and  from  it  take  up  their  nourishment,  nearly 
in  the  same  way  as  at  an  earlier  period  they  had 


HARVEY 

sought  for  aliment  from  the  albuminous  hu¬ 
mour  contained  within  the  membranes  of  the 
conception.  In  the  same  manner,  consequently, 
as  the  chiek  in  ovo  is  nourished  by  the  white  of 
the  egg  through  its  umbilical  vessels,  is  the  foe¬ 
tus  of  the  hind  and  doe  nourished  by  a  similar 
albuminous  matter  laid  up  in  these  cells,  and 
not  directly  from  the  blood  of  the  mother. 

These  carunculae  might  therefore  with  pro¬ 
priety  be  called  the  uterine  liver,  or  the  uterine 
mammae,  seeing  that  they  are  organs  adapted 
for  the  preparation  and  concoction  of  that  albu¬ 
minous  aliment,  and  fitting  it  for  absorption  by 
the  veins.  In  those  viviparous  animals  conse¬ 
quently  that  have  neither  caruncles  nor  pla¬ 
centae,  as  the  horse  and  the  hog,  the  foetus  is 
nourished  up  to  the  moment  of  its  birth  by- 
fluids  contained  within  the  conception  or  ovum ; 
nor  has  the  ovum  in  these  animals  at  any  time  a 
connexion  with  the  uterus. 

From  all  of  what  precedes  it  is  manifest  that 
in  both  the  classes  of  viviparous  animals  alluded 
to,  those,  namely,  that  are  provided  with  car¬ 
unculae  or  cotyledons,  and  those  that  want 
them,  and  perhaps  in  viviparous  animals  gen¬ 
erally,  the  foetus  in  utero  is  not  nourished  other¬ 
wise  than  the  chick  in  ovo;  the  nutritive  mat¬ 
ter,  the  albumen,  being  of  the  same  identical 
kind  in  all.  As  in  the  egg  the  terminations  of  the 
umbilical  vessels  are  in  the  white  and  yelk,  so 
in  the  hind  and  doe,  and  other  animals  fur¬ 
nished  with  uterine  cotyledons  like  them,  the 
final  distributions  of  the  umbilical  vessels  are 
sent  to  the  humours  that  are  included  within 
the  conception  or  ovum,  and  to  the  albumen 
that  is  stored  in  the  cotyledons,  or  cup-like  cav¬ 
ities  of  the  carunculae,  where  they  open  and 
end.  And  this  is  further  obvious  from  the  fact 
of  the  extremities  of  the  umbilical  vessels,  when 
they  are  drawn  out  of  the  afore-mentioned 
mucor,  looking  completely  white;  a  certain 
proof  that  they  absorb  this  mucilage  liquefied 
only,  and  not  blood.  The  same  arrangement 
may  very  readily  be  observed  to  obtain  in  the 
egg. 

The  human  placenta  is  rendered  uneven  on 
its  convex  surface,  and  where  it  adheres  to  the 
uterus,  by  a  number  of  tuberous  projections, 
and  it  seems  indeed  to  adhere  to  the  uterus  by 
means  of  these;  it  is  not  consequently  attached 
at  every  point,  but  at  those  places  only  where 
the  vessels  pierce  it  in  search  of  nourishment, 
and  at  those  where,  in  consequence  of  this  ar¬ 
rangement,  an  appearance  as  if  of  vessels  broken 
short  off  is  perceived.  But  whether  the  extremi¬ 
ties  of  these  vessels  suck  up  blood  from  the 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  487 


uterus,  or  rather  a  certain  concocted  matter  of 
the  nature  of  albumen,  as  I  have  described  the 
thing  in  the  hind  and  doe,  I  have  not  yet 
ascertained. 

Finally,  that  the  truth  just  announced  may 
be  still  more  fully  confirmed,  it  is  found  that 
by  compressing  the  uterine  caruncles  between 
the  fingers,  about  a  spoonful  of  the  nutritive 
fluid  in  question  may  be  obtained  from  each 
of  them,  as  from  a  nipple,  unmixed  with  blood, 
which  is  not  obtained  even  with  forcible  pres¬ 
sure.  Moreover,  the  caruncle  thus  milked  and 
emptied,  like  a  compressed  sponge,  contracts 
and  becomes  flaccid,  and  is  seen  to  be  pierced 
with  a  great  number  of  holes.  From  every¬ 
thing,  therefore,  it  appears  that  these  caruncles 
are  uterine  mammae,  or  fountains  and  recep¬ 
tacles  of  nutritive  albumen. 

The  month  of  December  at  an  end,  the  car¬ 
uncles  adhere  less  firmly  to  the  uterus  than  be¬ 
fore,  and  a  small  matter  suffices  to  detach  them. 
The  larger  the  foetus  grows,  indeed,  the  nearer 
it  is  to  its  term,  the  more  readily  are  the  car¬ 
uncles  detached  from  the  uterus,  so  that,  like 
ripe  fruit  from  the  tree,  they  slip  at  length  from 
the  uterus  of  themselves,  and  as  if  they  had 
formed  an  original  element  in  the  conception. 

Separated  from  the  uterus  you  may  perceive 
in  the  prints  which  they  leave  points  pouring 
out  blood;  these  are  the  arteries  that  entered 
them.  But  if  you  now  detach  the  conception 
from  the  caruncles,  no  blood  is  effused;  none 
escapes,  save  from  the  ends  of  the  vessels  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  the  conception,  although  it  does 
seem  more  consonant  with  reason  to  suppose 
that  blood  should  be  shed  from  the  caruncles 
than  from  the  conception  when  they  are  for¬ 
cibly  separated.  For,  as  the  caruncles  or  coty¬ 
ledons  have  an  abundance  of  uterine  branches 
distributed  to  them,  and  they  are  generally  be¬ 
lieved  to  receive  blood  for  the  nourishment  of 
the  foetus,  we  should  expect  that  they  would 
appear  replete  with  blood.  Nevertheless,  as  I 
have  said,  they  yield  no  blood  either  under 
milking  or  compression,  and  the  reason  of  this 
is  that  they  contain  albumen  rather  than  blood, 
and  rather  store  up  than  prepare  this  matter.  It 
seems  manifest,  therefore,  that  the  foetus  in 
ntero  is  not  nourished  by  its  mother’s  blood, 
but  by  this  albuminous  fluid  duly  elaborated. 
It  may  even  be  perhaps  that  the  adult  animal 
is  not  nourished  immediately  by  the  blood,  but 
rather  by  something  mixed  with  the  blood, 
which  serves  as  the  ultimate  aliment;  as  may 
perhaps  be  more  particularly  shown  in  our 
Physiology  and  particular  treatise  on  the  blood. 


The  truth  of  that  passage  of  Hippocrates 
where  it  said  that  “those  whose  acetabula  or 
cotyledons  are  full  of  mucor,  abort,”^  has  al¬ 
ways  been  suspected  by  me;  for  this  is  no  excre- 
mentitious  matter  or  cause  of  miscarriage,  but 
nourishment  and  a  source  of  life.  But  Hippoc¬ 
rates,  by  the  word  acetabula,  perhaps,  under¬ 
stood  something  else  than  the  parts  so  called  in 
the  uterus  of  the  lower  animals,  for  they  are 
wanting  in  women;  nor  does  the  placenta  in  the 
human  subject  contain  any  collections  of  albu¬ 
minous  matter  in  distinct  cavities. 

Modern  medical  writers,  following  the  Ara¬ 
bians,  speak  of  three  nutritious  humours — dew, 
gluten,  and  cambium;  these  Fernelius  desig¬ 
nates  nutritious  juices;  as  if  he  had  wished  to 
imply  that  the  parts  of  our  bodies  were  not  im¬ 
mediately  nourished  by  the  blood  as  ultimate 
nutriment,  but  by  these  secondary  juices.  The 
first  of  them,  like  dew,  bathes  all  the  minutest 
particles  of  the  body  on  every  side:  this  fluid, 
become  thicker  by  an  ulterior  concoction,  and 
adhering  to  the  parts,  is  called  gluten;  finally, 
altered  and  assimilated  by  the  proper  virtue  of 
the  part,  it  is  called  cambium. 

He  who  espoused  such  views  might  designate 
the  matter  which  is  contained  in  the  cotyle- 
donous  cavities  of  the  deer  as  gluten  or  nutri¬ 
tious  albumen,  and  maintain  that  as  the  ulti¬ 
mate  nourishment  destined  for  each  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  parts  of  the  foetus  it  was  analogous  to 
the  albumen  or  vitellus  of  the  egg.  For  as  we 
but  lately  stated,  with  Aristotle,  that  the  yelk 
of  the  egg  was  analogous  to  milk,  so  do  we  think 
.  it  not  unreasonable  to  assert  that  the  matter 
lodged  in  the  cotyledons,  or  acetabula  of  the 
uterine  placenta,  stands  instead  of  milk  to  the 
foetus  so  long  as  it  remains  in  the  uterus;  in  this 
way  the  caruncles  approve  themselves  a  kind  of 
internal  mammae,  the  nutritive  matter  of  which, 
transferred  at  the  period  of  parturition  to  the 
proper  mammae,  there  assumes  the  nature  of 
milk,  an  arrangement  by  which  the  foetus  is 
seen  to  be  nourished  with  the  same  food  after 
it  has  begun  its  independent  existence,  as  it  was 
whilst  it  lodged  in  the  uterus.  Between  the  two- 
coloured  eggs  of  oviparous  animals,  consequent¬ 
ly,  or  the  eggs  that  consist  of  a  white  and  a  yelk, 
and  the  ova  or  conceptions  of  viviparous  ani¬ 
mals,  there  is  only  this  difference,  that  in  the 
former  the  vitellus  (which  is  a  secondary  nutri¬ 
tive  matter)  is  prepared  within  the  egg,  and  at 
the  period  of  birth,  being  stored  within  the  ab¬ 
domen  of  the  young  creature,  serves  it  as  food; 

^  On  the  Nature  of  Diseases  Common  to  Women;  see 
also  Aphorisms^  v.  45. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


488 

whilst  in  the  latter,  the  nutritive  juice  is  laid  up 
within  acetabula,  and  after  birth  is  transferred 
to  the  mammae;  so  that  the  chick  is  nourished 
with  milk  inclosed  in  its  interior,  whilst  the 
foetus  of  the  viviparous  animal  draws  its  nour¬ 
ishment  from  the  breasts  of  its  mother. 

In  the  months  of  January,  February,  &c.,  as 
nothing  new  or  worthy  of  note  occurs  which 
has  not  been  already  mentioned,  (more  than 
the  growth  of  the  hair,  teeth,  horns,  &c.)  but 
the  parts  only  grow  larger  without  reference  to 
the  process  of  generation,  it  seems  unnecessary 
to  say  more  upon  such  points  at  present. 

I  have  frequently  examined  the  conceptions 
of  sheep  during  the  same  interv’als.  These  I  find, 
as  in  the  deer,  extending  into  both  horns  of  the 
uterus,  and  presenting  the  figure  of  a  wallet  or 
double  sausage.  In  several  of  them  I  found  two 
foetuses;  in  others  only  one:  they  were  without 
a  trace  of  wool  on  the  surface,  and  the  eyelids 
were  so  closely  glued  together  that  they  could 
not  be  opened;  the  hooves,  however,  were  pres¬ 
ent.  Where  there  were  two  embryos  they  were 
contained  in  the  opposite  horns  of  the  uterus, 
and  without  any  regard  to  sex  with  reference  to 
the  right  or  left  horn,  the  male  being  sometimes 
in  the  right,  sometimes  in  the  left,  and  the  fe¬ 
male  the  same;  both,  however,  were,  in  every 
instance,  included  within  one  and  the  same 
common  external  membrane  or  chorion.  The 
extreme  ends  of  this  membrane  were  stained 
on  either  hand  with  a  yellow  or  bilious  excre¬ 
ment,  and  appeared  to  contain  something  tur¬ 
bid  or  excrementitious  in  their  interior. 

Many  caruncles,  or  miniature  placentas  of 
different  sizes,  were  discovered,  and  otherwise 
disposed  than  in  the  hind  and  doe.  In  the  sheep 
they  look  like  rounded  fungi  with  the  foot¬ 
stalks  broken  off,  and  are  contained  in  the  coats 
of  the  uterus;  their  rounded  or  convex  aspects 
are  turned  to  the  uterus  (a  circumstance,  by 
the  way,  common  to  the  cow  and  sheep),  their 
concave  aspects,  which  are  the  smooth  ones, 
being  turned  towards  the  foetus.  The  larger 
branches  of  the  vessels  are  also  distributed  to 
the  concave  portion,  as  in  the  human  placenta. 
The  branches  in  extension  of  the  umbilical  ves¬ 
sels  connected  with  the  caruncles,  grow  pretty 
firmly  into  them,  so  that  when  I  attempted  to 
separate  them,  the  rounded  portion  was  rather 
torn  from  the  interior  of  the  uterus  than  from 
the  ovum  or  conception;  different,  consequent¬ 
ly,  from  what  we  observed  in  the  deer,  where 
the  chorion  was  readily  detached  from  the  coty¬ 
ledons  of  the  caruncles,  and  where  the  con¬ 
vexity  of  the  caruncle,  connected  with  the 


conception,  is  separable,  whilst  the  concavity, 
or  rather  the  pedicle  or  root,  is  firmly  adherent 
to  the  uterus.  In  other  respects  the  function 
seems  to  be  the  same  in  both  cases;  in  both  the 
same  acetabula  are  discovered,  and  the  same 
viscid  and  albuminous  mucus  can  be  pressed 
out  in  both,  as  it  can  also  in  the  cow. 

In  the  conception  that  contains  a  single  foe¬ 
tus,  the  umbilical  vessels  are  distributed  to  the 
whole  of  the  caruncles  of  either  horn;  but  the 
one  in  which  the  foetus  itself  is  contained,  swim¬ 
ming  in  its  crystalline  fluid  within  the  amnion, 
is  larger  than  the  other.  In  the  cases  where  there 
are  two  foetuses  present,  each  has  its  own  sepa¬ 
rate  or  appropriate  caruncles,  and  does  not  send 
its  umbilical  vessels  in  quest  of  nourishment  be¬ 
yond  the  cornu  in  which  it  is  lodged. 

In  male  foetuses,  the  testes  contained  in  the 
scrotum,  of  large  size  for  the  age,  hang  exter¬ 
nally.  Female  foetuses,  again,  have  their  dugs 
in  the  same  situation,  furnished  with  nipples 
like  the  breasts  of  women. 

In  the  compound  stomach  of  the  foetus,  name¬ 
ly  the  omasus  and  abomasus,  a  clear  fluid  is  dis¬ 
covered,  similar  to  that  in  which  it  floats;  the 
two  liquids  agreeing  obviously  in  smell,  taste, 
and  consistency.  There  is  also  a  quantity  of 
chyle  in  the  upper  part  of  the  intestinal  tube; 
in  the  inferior  portion  a  greenish-coloured  ex¬ 
crement  and  scybala,  such  as  we  find  when  the 
animal  is  feeding  on  grass.  The  liver  is  discov¬ 
ered  of  considerable  size,  the  gall-bladder  of  an 
oblong  shape,  and  in  some  cases  empty. 

In  so  far  as  the  order  in  which  the  several 
parts  are  produced  is  concerned,  we  have  still 
found  the  same  rule  to  be  observed  in  the  hind 
and  doe  as  in  the  egg,  and  we  believe  that  the 
same  law  obtains  among  viviparous  animals 
generally. 

EXERCISE  71.  Of  the  innate  heat 

As  frequent  mention  is  made  in  the  preced¬ 
ing  pages  of  the  calidum  innaturn^  or  innate 
heat,  I  have  determined  to  say  a  few  words 
here,  by  way  of  dessert,  both  on  that  subject 
and  on  the  humidum  prvnigenhim^  or  radical 
moisture,  to  which  I  am  all  the  more  inclined 
because  I  observ^e  that  many  pride  themselves 
upon  the  use  of  these  terms  without,  as  I  appre¬ 
hend,  rightly  understanding  their  meaning. 
There  is,  in  fact,  no  occasion  for  searching  after 
spirits  foreign  to,  or  distinct  from,  the  blood; 
to  evoke  heat  from  another  source;  to  bring 
gods  upon  the  scene,  and  to  encumber  philoso¬ 
phy  with  any  fanciful  conceits;  what  we  are 
wont  to  derive  from  the  stars  is  in  truth  pro- 


ANIMAL  GENERATION  489 


duced  at  home:  the  blood  is  the  only  calidum 
innatum,  or  first  engendered  animal  heat;  a 
fact  which  so  clearly  appears  from  our  observa¬ 
tions  on  animal  reproduction,  particularly  of 
the  chick  from  the  egg,  that  it  seems  super¬ 
fluous  to  multiply  illustrations. 

There  is,  indeed,  nothing  in  the  animal  body 
older  or  more  excellent  than  the  blood;  nor  are 
the  spirits  which  are  distinguished  from  the 
blood  at  any  time  found  distinct  from  it;  for 
the  blood  without  heat  or  spirit  is  no  longer 
blood,  but  cruor  or  gore.  “The  blood,”  says 
Aristotle,  “is  hot  in  a  certain  manner,  in  that, 
namely,  in  virtue  of  which  it  exists  as  blood — 
just  as  we  speak  of  hot-water  under  a  single 
term;  as  subject,  however,  and  in  itself  finally, 
blood  is  blood,  it  is  not  hot:  so  that  as  blood  is 
in  a  certain  way  hot  per  se,  so  is  it  also  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  way  not  hot  per  se:  heat  is  in  its  essence  or 
nature,  in  the  same  way  as  whiteness  is  in  the 
essence  of  a  white  man;  but  where  blood  is  by 
affection  or  passion,  it  is  not  hot  per  se"'^ 

We  physicians  at  this  time  designate  that  as 
spirit  which  Hippocrates  called  impetiim faciens, 
or  moving  power;  implying  by  this  whatever 
attempts  aught  by  its  own  proper  effort,  and 
causes  motion  with  rapidity  and  force,  or  in¬ 
duces  action  of  any  kind;  in  this  sense  we  are 
accustomed  to  speak  of  spirit  of  wine,  spirit  of 
vitriol,  &c.  And  therefore  it  is  that  physicians 
admit  as  many  spirits  as  there  are  principal  parts 
or  operations  of  the  body,  viz.,  animal,  vital, 
natural,  visual,  auditory,  concoctive,  genera¬ 
tive,  implanted,  influent,  &c.  &c.  But  the  blood 
is  the  first  produced  and  most  principal  part  of 
the  body,  endowed  with  each  and  all  of  these 
virtues,  possessed  of  powers  of  action  beyond  all 
the  rest,  and  therefore,  /car’  e^oxv^ — in  virtue 
of  its  pre-eminence,  meriting  the  title  of  spirit. 

Scaliger,  Fernelius,  and  others,  giving  less  re¬ 
gard  to  the  admirable  qualities  of  the  blood, 
have  imagined  other  spirits  of  an  aerial  or  ethe¬ 
real  nature,  or  composed  of  an  ethereal  or  ele¬ 
mentary  matter,  a  something  more  excellent 
and  divine  than  the  innate  heat,  the  immediate 
instrument  of  the  soul,  fitted  for  all  the  highest 
duties.  Now  their  principal  motive  for  this  was 
the  consideration  that  the  blood,  as  composed 
of  elements,  could  have  no  power  of  action  be¬ 
yond  these  elements  or  the  bodies  compounded 
of  them.  They  have,  therefore,  feigned  or  im¬ 
agined  a  spirit,  different  from  the  ingenerate 
heat,  of  celestial  origin  and  nature;  a  body  of 
perfect  simplicity,  most  subtile,  attenuated, 
mobile,  rapid,  lucid,  ethereal,  participant  in  the 

^  On  the  Parts  of  Animals^  ii.  3. 


qualities  of  the  quintessence.  They  have  not, 
however,  anywhere  demonstrated  the  actual 
existence  of  such  a  spirit,  or  that  it  was  superior 
to  the  elements  in  its  powers  of  action,  or  in¬ 
deed  that  it  could  accomplish  more  than  the 
blood  by  itself.  We,  for  our  own  part,  who  use 
our  simple  senses  in  studying  natural  things, 
have  been  unable  anywhere  to  find  anything  of 
the  sort.  Neither  are  there  any  cavities  for  the 
production  and  preservation  of  such  spirits, 
either  in  fact  or  presumed  by  their  authors. 
Fernelius,  indeed,  has  these  words:  “He  who 
has  not  yet  completely  mastered  the  matter 
and  state  of  the  ingenerate  heat,  let  him  cast  an 
eye  upon  the  structure  of  the  body,  and  turn  to 
the  arteries,  and  contemplate  the  sinuses  of  the 
heart  and  the  ventricles  of  the  brain.  When  he 
observes  them  empty,  containing  next  to  no 
fluid,  and  yet  feels  that  he  must  own  such  parts 
not  made  in  vain,  or  without  a  design,  he  will 
soon,  I  conceive,  be  brought  to  conclude  that 
an  extremely  subtile  aura  or  vapour  fills  them 
during  the  life  of  the  animal,  and  which,  as 
being  of  extreme  lightness,  vanished  insensibly 
when  the  creature  died.  It  is  for  the  sake  of 
cherishing  this  aura  that  by  inspiration  we  take 
in  air,  which  not  only  serves  for  the  refrigera¬ 
tion  of  the  body,  by  a  business  that  might  be 
otherwise  accomplished,  but  further  supplies  a 
kind  of  nourishment.”^ 

But  we  maintain  that  so  long  as  an  animal 
lives,  the  cavities  of  the  heart  and  the  arteries 
are  filled  with  blood.  We  further  believe  the 
ventricles  of  the  brain  to  be  indifferently  fitted 
for  any  so  excellent  office,  and  that  they  are 
rather  formed  for  secreting  some  excrementi- 
tious  matter.  What  shall  we  say,  too,  when  we 
find  the  brain  of  many  animals  unfurnished 
with  ventricles?  And  supposing  it  were  true 
that  any  kind  of  air  or  vapour  was  found  there, 
seeing  that  all  nature  abhors  a  vacuum,  still  it 
does  not  seem  over  probable  that  it  should  be 
of  heavenly  origin  and  possessed  of  such  super¬ 
lative  virtues.  But  what  we  admire  most  of  all 
is  that  a  spirit,  the  native  of  the  skies,  and  en¬ 
dowed  with  such  admirable  qualities,  should  be 
nourished  by  our  common  and  elementary  air; 
especially  when  we  see  it  maintained  that  the 
elements  can  do  nothing  that  is  beyond  their 
natural  powers. 

It  is  admitted,  moreover,  that  the  spirits  are 
in  a  perpetual  state  of  flux,  and  most  readily 
dissipated  and  corrupted;  nor  indeed  can  they 
endure  for  an  instant  unless  renovated  by  due 
supplies  of  their  appropriate  nutriment — they 

^  Physiologia^  iv.  2. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


490 

as  much  require  incessant  nourishing  as  the 
primum  vivens,  or  first  animate  atom  of  the 
body.  What  occasion  is  there,  then,  I  ask,  for 
this  extraneous  inmate,  for  this  ethereal  heat.'^ 
when  the  blood  is  competent  to  perform  all  the 
offices  ascribed  to  it,  and  the  spirits  cannot  sep¬ 
arate  from  the  blood  even  by  a  hair’s  breadth 
without  destruction;  without  the  blood,  in¬ 
deed,  the  spirits  can  neither  move  nor  pene¬ 
trate  anywhere  as  distinct  and  independent 
matters.  .\nd  whether  they  are  engendered  and 
are  fed  and  increased,  as  some  suppose,  from  the 
thinner  part  of  the  blood,  or  from  the  primi- 
genial  moisture,  as  others  imagine,  all  still  con¬ 
fess  that  they  are  nowhere  to  be  found  apart 
from  the  blood,  but  are  inseparably  connected 
with  it  as  the  aliment  that  sustains  them,  even 
as  the  flame  of  a  lamp  or  candle  is  inseparably 
connected  with  the  oil  or  tallow  that  feeds  it. 
The  tenuity,  subtilty,  mobility,  &c.  of  the  spir¬ 
its,  therefore,  bring  no  kind  of  advantage  more 
than  the  blood,  which  it  seems  they  constantly 
accompany,  already  possesses.  The  blood  con¬ 
sequently  suffices,  and  is  adequate  to  be  the 
immediate  instrument  of  the  soul,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  every^where  present,  and  moves  hither  and 
thither  with  the  greatest  rapidity.  Nor  can  it 
be  admitted  that  there  are  any  other  bodies  or 
qualities  of  a  spiritual  and  incorporeal  nature, 
or  any  more  divine  kinds  of  heat,  such  as  light, 
as  Caesar  Cremoninus,^  a  great  adept  in  the 
Aristotelian  philosophy,  strenuously  contends 
against  Albertus  that  there  are. 

If  it  be  said  that  these  spirits  reside  in  the 
primigenial  moisture  as  in  their  ultimate  ali¬ 
ment,  and  flow  from  thence  through  the  whole 
body  to  nourish  its  several  parts,  they  propound 
a  simple  impossibility,  viz.,  that  the  ingenerate 
heat,  that  primigenial  element  of  the  body, 
nourished  itself,  yet  serves  for  the  nourishment 
of  the  body  at  large.  Upon  such  grounds  the 
thing  nourished  and  the  thing  that  nourishes 
would  be  one  and  the  same,  and  itself  would 
both  nourish  and  be  nourished;  which  could  in 
no  way  be  effected;  inasmuch  as  it  is  by  no 
means  probable  that  the  nourishment  should 
ever  be  mixed  with  the  thing  nourished,  for 
things  mixed  must  have  equal  powers  and  mu¬ 
tually  act  on  one  another;  and,  according  to 
Aristotle’s  dictum,  “where  there  is  nutrition, 
there  there  is  no  mixture.”  But  as  nutrition 
takes  place  everywhere,  the  nutriment  is  one 
thing,  and  that  which  is  nourished  by  it  is  an¬ 
other,  and  it  is  altogether  indispensable  that 
the  one  pass  into  the  other. 

^  Dictator  VII. 


But  as  it  is  thought  that  the  spirits,  and  the 
ultimate  or  primigenial  aliment,  or  something 
else,  is  contained  in  animals,  which  acts  in  a 
greater  degree  than  the  blood  above  the  forces 
of  the  elements,  we  are  not  sufficiently  informed 
what  is  understood  by  the  expression,  “acting 
above  the  forces  of  the  elements”;  neither  are 
Aristotle’s  words  rightly  interpreted  where  he 
says,  “every  virtue  or  faculty  of  the  soul  ap¬ 
pears  to  partake  of  another  body  more  divine 
than  those  which  are  called  elements.  .  .  .  For 
there  is  in  ever)^  seed  a  certain  something  which 
causes  it  to  be  fruitful,  viz.,  what  is  called  heat, 
and  that  not  fire  or  any  faculty  of  the  kind,  but 
a  spirit  such  as  is  contained  in  semen  and  frothy 
bodies;  and  the  nature  inherent  in  that  spirit  is 
responsive  in  its  proportions  to  the  element  of 
the  stars.  Wherefore  fire  engenders  no  animal; 
neither  is  anything  seen  to  be  constituted  of 
the  dense,  or  moist,  or  dry.  But  the  heat  of  the 
sun  and  of  animals,  and  not  only  that  which  is 
stored  up  in  semen,  but  even  that  of  any  excre- 
mentitious  matter,  although  diverse  in  nature, 
still  contains  a  vital  principle.  For  the  rest,  it  is 
obvious  from  this  that  the  heat  contained  in 
animals  is  not  fire,  neither  does  it  derive  its 
origin  from  fire.”-  Now  I  maintain  the  same 
things  of  the  innate  heat  and  the  blood;  I  say 
that  they  are  not  fire,  and  neither  do  they  de¬ 
rive  their  origin  from  fire.  They  rather  share 
the  nature  of  some  other,  and  that  a  more  di¬ 
vine  body  or  substance.  They  act  by  no  faculty 
or  property  of  the  elements;  but  as  there  is  a 
something  inherent  in  the  semen  which  makes 
it  prolific,  and  as,  in  producing  an  animal,  it 
surpasses  the  power  of  the  elements — as  it  is  a 
spirit,  namely,  and  the  inherent  nature  of  that 
spirit  corresponds  to  the  essence  of  the  stars — 
so  is  there  a  spirit,  or  certain  force,  inherent  in 
the  blood,  acting  superiorly  to  the  powers  of 
the  elements,  very  conspicuously  displayed  in 
the  nutrition  and  preservation  of  the  several 
parts  of  the  animal  body;  and  the  nature,  yea, 
the  soul  in  this  spirit  and  blood,  is  identical  with 
the  essence  of  the  stars.  That  the  heat  of  the 
blood  of  animals  during  their  lifetime,  there¬ 
fore,  is  neither  fire,  nor  derived  from  fire,  is 
manifest,  and  indeed  is  clearly  demonstrated 
by  our  observ^ations. 

But  that  this  may  be  made  still  more  certain 
let  me  be  permitted  to  digress  a  little  from  my 
subject,  and,  in  a  few  words,  to  show  what  is 
meant  by  the  word  “spirit,”  and  what  by  the 
phrases  “superior  in  action  to  the  forces  of  the 
elements,”  “to  have  the  properties  of  another 

2  On  the  Generation  of  Animals^  ir.  3. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


body,  and  that  more  divine  than  those  bodies 
which  are  called  elements,”  and  “the  nature  in¬ 
herent  in  this  spirit  which  answers  to  the  essence 
of  the  stars/* 

We  have  already  had  occasion  to  say  some¬ 
thing  both  of  the  nature  of  “spirit”  and  “the 
vital  principle,”  and  we  shall  here  enter  into 
the  subject  at  greater  length.  There  are  three 
bodies — simple  bodies — which  seem  especially 
entitled  to  receive  the  name,  at  all  events,  to 
perform  the  office  of  “spirit,”  viz.,  fire,  air,  and 
water,  each  of  which,  by  reason  of  its  ceaseless 
flux  and  motion,  expressed  by  the  words  flame, 
wand,  and  flood,  appears  to  have  the  properties 
of  life,  or  of  some  other  body.  Flame  is  the  flow 
of  fire,  wind  the  flow  of  air,  stream  or  flood  the 
flow  of  water.  Flame,  like  an  animal,  is  self¬ 
motive,  self-nutrient,  self-augmentative,  and  is 
the  symbol  of  our  life.  It  is  therefore  that  it  is 
so  universally  brought  into  requisition  in  re¬ 
ligious  ceremonies:  it  was  guarded  by  priestesses 
and  virgins  in  the  temples  of  Apollo  and  Vesta 
as  a  sacred  thing,  and  from  the  remotest  antiq¬ 
uity  has  been  held  worthy  of  divine  worship  by 
the  Persians  and  other  ancient  nations;  as  if 
God  were  most  conspicuous  in  flame,  and  spoke 
to  us  from  fire  as  He  did  to  Moses  of  old.  Air  is 
also  appropriately  spoken  of  as  “spirit,”  having 
received  the  title  from  the  act  of  respiration. 
Aristotle  himself  admits,  “that  there  is  a  kind 
of  life,  and  birth,  and  death  of  the  winds.”^ 
Finally,  we  speak  of  a  running  stream  as  “living 
w^ater.” 

These  three,  therefore,  inasmuch  as  they 
have  a  kind  of  life,  appear  to  act  superiorly  to 
the  forces  of  the  element,  and  to  share  in  a  more 
divine  nature;  they  were,  therefore,  placed 
among  the  number  of  the  divinities  by  the 
heathen.  When  any  excellent  work  or  process 
appeared,  surpassing  the  powers  of  the  naked 
elements,  it  was  held  as  proceeding  from  some 
more  divine  agent.  “To  act  with  powder  superior 
to  the  powers  of  the  elements,”  therefore,  and, 
on  that  account,  “to  share  in  the  properties  of 
some  more  divine  thing,  which  does  not  derive 
its  origin  from  the  elements,”  appear  to  have 
the  same  signification. 

The  blood,  in  like  manner,  “acts  w  ith  powers 
superior  to  the  powers  of  the  elements”  in  the 
fact  of  its  existence,  in  the  forms  of  primordial 
and  innate  heat,  in  semen  and  spirit,  and  its 
producing  all  the  other  parts  of  the  body  in 
succession;  proceeding  at  all  times  with  such 
foresight  and  understanding,  and  with  definite 
ends  in  view,  as  if  it  employed  reasoning  in  its 

^  On  ihe  Generation  of  Animals^  iv.  lo.  chapter. 


acts.  Now  this  it  does  not,  in  so  far  as  it  is  ele¬ 
mentary,  and  as  deriving  its  origin  from  fire, 
but  in  so  far  as  it  is  possessed  of  plastic  powers 
and  endowed  with  the  gift  of  the  vegetative 
soul,  as  it  is  the  primordial  and  innate  heat,  and 
the  immediate  and  competent  instrument  of 
life.  AljLia,  to  ^cjotikov  tov  av6po)Tov:  The 
blood  is  the  living  principle  of  man,  says  Suidas; 
and  the  same  thing  is  true  of  all  animals;  an 
opinion  which  Virgil  seems  to  have  wished  to 
express  when  he  says: 

Una  eademque  via  sanguisqiie  animusque 
sequuntiir. 

And  by  one  path  the  blood  and  life  flow’ed 
out. 

The  blood,  therefore,  by  reason  of  its  admir¬ 
able  properties  and  powers,  is  “spirit.”  It  is 
also  celestial;  for  nature,  the  soul,  that  which 
answers  to  the  essence  of  the  stars,  is  the  inmate 
of  the  spirit,  in  other  words,  it  is  something 
analogous  to  heaven,  the  instrument  of  heaven, 
vicarious  of  heaven. 

In  this  way  all  natural  bodies  fall  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  under  a  twofold  point  of  views  viz., 
either  as  they  are  specially  regarded,  and  are 
comprehended  within  the  limits  of  their  own 
proper  nature,  or  are  viewed  as  the  instruments 
of  some  more  noble  agent  and  superior  pow'er. 
For  as  regards  their  peculiar  powders,  there  is, 
perhaps,  no  doubt  but  that  all  things  subject 
to  generation  by  birth,  and  to  death  and  decay, 
derive  their  origin  from  the  elements,  and  per¬ 
form  their  offices  agreeably  to  their  proper 
standard;  but  in  so  far  as  they  are  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  a  more  excellent  agent,  and  are  gov¬ 
erned  by  that,  not  acting  of  their  own  proper 
nature,  but  by  the  regimen  of  another;  there¬ 
fore  is  it,  therein  is  it,  that  they  seem  to  par¬ 
ticipate  with  another  and  more  divine  body, 
and  to  surpass  the  powers  of  the  ordinary 
elements. 

In  the  same  way,  too,  is  the  blood  the  animal 
heat,  in  so  far,  namely,  as  it  is  governed  in  its 
actions  by  the  soul;  for  it  is  celestial  as  subser¬ 
vient  to  heaven;  and  divine,  because  it  is  the 
instrument  of  God  the  great  and  good.  But  this 
we  have  already  spoken  of  above,  where  we 
have  showm  that  male  and  female  were  the  in¬ 
struments  of  the  sun,  heaven,  and  Supreme 
Preserver,  when  they  served  for  the  generation 
of  the  more  perfect  animals. 

The  inferior  w^orld,  according  to  Aristotle,  is 
so  continuous  and  connected  with  the  superior 
orbits,  that  all  its  motions  and  changes  appear 
to  take  their  rise  and  to  receive  direction  from 


492  WILLIAM 

thence.  In  that  world,  indeed,  which  the  Greeks 
called  K6o-/ios  from  its  order  and  beauty,  in¬ 
ferior  and  corruptible  things  wait  upon  superior 
and  incorruptible  things;  but  all  are  still  sub¬ 
servient  to  the  will  of  the  supreme,  omnipotent, 
and  eternal  Creator. 

They,  therefore,  who  think  that  nothing 
composed  of  the  elements  can  show  powers  of 
action  superior  to  the  forces  exercised  by  these, 
unless  they  at  the  same  time  partake  of  some 
other  and  more  divine  body,  and  on  this  ground 
conceive  the  spirits  they  evoke  as  constituted 
partly  of  the  elements,  partly  of  a  certain  ethe¬ 
real  and  celestial  substance — these  persons,  I 
say,  appear  to  me  to  reason  indifferently.  In  the 
first  place  you  will  scarcely  find  any  elementary 
body  which  in  acting  does  not  exceed  its  proper 
powers:  air  and  water,  the  winds  and  the  ocean, 
when  they  waft  navies  to  either  India  and  round 
this  globe,  and  often  by  opposite  courses,  when 
they  grind,  bake,  dig,  pump,  saw  timber,  sus¬ 
tain  fire,  support  some  things,  overwhelm  oth¬ 
ers,  and  suffice  for  an  infinite  variety  of  other 
and  most  admirable  offices — who  shall  say  that 
they  do  not  surpass  the  powers  of  the  elements  ? 
In  like  manner  what  does  not  fire  accomplish  ? 
in  the  kitchen,  in  the  furnace,  in  the  labora¬ 
tory,  softening,  hardening,  melting,  subliming, 
changing,  in  an  infinite  variety  of  ways!  What 
shall  we  say  of  it  when  we  see  iron  itself  pro¬ 
duced  by  its  agency? — iron  “that  breaks  the 
stubborn  soil,  and  shakes  the  earth  with  war!” — 
iron  that  in  the  magnet  (to  which  Thales  there¬ 
fore  ascribed  a  soul)  attracts  other  iron,  “sub¬ 
dues  all  other  things,  and  seeks  besides  I  know 
not  what  inane,”  as  Pliny^  says;  for  the  steel 
needle  only  rubbed  with  the  loadstone  still 
steadily  points  to  the  great  cardinal  points;  and 
when  our  clocks  constantly  indicate  the  hours 
of  the  day  and  night— shall  we  not  admit  that 
all  of  these  partake  of  something  else,  and  that 
of  a  more  divine  nature,  than  the  elements? 
And  if  in  the  domain  and  rule  of  nature  so  many 
excellent  operations  are  daily  effected  surpass¬ 
ing  the  powers  of  the  things  themselves,  what 
shall  we  not  think  possible  within  the  pale  and 
regimen  of  nature,  of  which  all  art  is  but  imita¬ 
tion?  And  if,  as  ministers  of  man,  they  effect 
such  admirable  ends,  what,  I  ask,  may  we  not 
expect  of  them,  when  they  are  instruments  in 
the  hand  of  God  ? 

We  must,  therefore,  make  the  distinction 
and  say,  that  whilst  no  primary  agent  or  prime 
efficient  produces  effects  beyond  its  powers, 
every  instrumental  agent  may  exceed  its  own 

'  Hist.  nat.  xxxvi.  i6. 


HARVEY 

proper  powers  in  action;  for  it  acts  not  merely 
by  its  own  virtue,  but  by  the  virtue  of  a  su¬ 
perior  efficient. 

They,  consequently,  who  refuse  such  remark¬ 
able  faculties  to  the  blood,  and  go  to  heaven  to 
fetch  down  I  know  not  what  spirits,  to  which 
they  ascribe  these  divine  virtues,  cannot  know, 
or  at  all  events,  cannot  consider  that  the  process 
of  generation,  and  even  of  nutrition,  which  in¬ 
deed  is  a  kind  of  generation,  for  the  sake  of 
which  they  are  so  lavish  of  admirable  proper¬ 
ties,  surpasses  the  powers  of  those  very  spirits 
themselves,  nor  of  the  spirits  only,  but  of  the 
vegetative,  aye,  even  the  sensitive,  and  I  will 
venture  to  add,  the  rational  soul.  Powers,  did 
I  say?  It  far  exceeds  even  any  estimate  we  can 
form  of  the  rational  soul;  for  the  nature  of  gen¬ 
eration,  and  the  order  that  prevails  in  it,  are 
truly  admirable  and  divine,  beyond  all  that 
thought  can  conceive  or  understanding  com¬ 
prehend. 

That  it  may,  however,  more  clearly  appear 
that  the  remarkable  virtues  which  the  learned 
attribute  to  the  spirits  and  the  innate  heat  be¬ 
long  to  the  blood  alone,  besides  what  has  al¬ 
ready  been  spoken  of  as  conspicuous  in  the  egg 
before  any  trace  of  the  embryo  appears,  as  well 
as  in  the  perfect  and  adult  foetus,  the  few  fol¬ 
lowing  observations  are  made  by  way  of  further 
illustration,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  diligent  in¬ 
quirer.  The  blood  considered  absolutely  and  by 
itself,  without  the  veins,  in  so  far  as  it  is  an  ele¬ 
mentary  fluid,  and  composed  of  several  parts — 
of  thin  and  serous  particles,  and  of  thick  and 
concrete  particles  called  cruor — possesses  but 
few,  and  these  not  very  obvious  virtues.  Con¬ 
tained  within  the  veins,  however,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  an  integral  part  of  the  body,  and  is  ani¬ 
mated,  regenerative,  and  the  immediate  instru¬ 
ment  and  principal  seat  of  the  soul,  inasmuch, 
moreover,  as  it  seems  to  partake  of  the  nature 
of  another  more  divine  body,  and  is  transfused 
by  divine  animal  heat,  it  obtains  remarkable 
and  most  excellent  powers,  and  is  analogous  to 
the  essence  of  the  stars.  In  so  far  as  it  is  spirit, 
it  is  the  hearth,  the  Vesta,  the  household  di¬ 
vinity,  the  innate  heat,  the  sun  of  the  micro¬ 
cosm,  the  fire  of  Plato;  not  because  like  com¬ 
mon  fire  it  lightens,  burns,  and  destroys,  but 
because  by  a  vague  and  incessant  motion  it  pre¬ 
serves,  nourishes,  and  aggrandizes  itself.  It  fur¬ 
ther  deserves  the  name  of  spirit,  inasmuch  as  it 
is  radical  moisture,  at  once  the  ultimate  and  the 
proximate  and  the  primary  aliment,  more  abun¬ 
dant  than  all  the  other  parts;  preparing  for  and 
administering  to  these  the  same  nutriment  with 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


which  itself  is  fed,  ceaselessly  permeating  the 
whole  body,  cherishing  and  keeping  alive  the 
parts  which  it  has  fashioned  and  added  to  itself, 
not  otherwise  assuredly  than  the  superior  stars, 
the  sun  and  moon  especially,  in  maintaining 
their  own  proper  orbits,  continually  vivify  the 
stars  that  are  beneath  them. 

Since  the  blood  acts,  then,  with  forces  su¬ 
perior  to  the  forces  of  the  elements,  and  exerts 
its  influence  through  these  forces  or  virtues, 
and  is  the  instrument  of  the  Great  Workman, 
no  one  can  ever  sufficiently  extol  its  admirable, 
its  divine  faculties.  In  the  first  place,  and  espe¬ 
cially,  it  is  possessed  by  a  soul  which  is  not  only 
vegetative,  but  sensitive  and  motive  also;  it 
penetrates  everywhere  and  is  ubiquitous;  ab¬ 
stracted,  the  soul  or  the  life  too  is  gone,  so  that 
the  blood  does  not  seem  to  differ  in  any  respect 
from  the  soul  or  the  life  itself  {anima);  at  all 
events,  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  substance 
whose  act  is  the  soul  or  the  life.  Such,  I  say,  is 
the  soul,  which  is  neither  wholly  corporeal  nor 
yet  wholly  incorporeal;  which  is  derived  in  part 
from  abroad,  and  is  partly  produced  at  home; 
which  in  one  way  is  part  of  the  body,  but  in 
another  way  is  the  beginning  and  cause  of  all 
that  is  contained  in  the  animal  body,  viz.,  nutri¬ 
tion,  sense,  and  motion,  and  consequently  of 
life  and  of  death  alike;  for  whatever  is  nour¬ 
ished,  is  itself  vivified,  and  vice  versa.  In  like  man¬ 
ner,  that  which  is  abundantly  nourished  in¬ 
creases;  what  is  not  sufficiently  supplied  shrinks; 
what  is  perfectly  nourished  preserves  its  health; 
what  is  not  perfectly  nourished  falls  into  dis¬ 
ease.  The  blood,  therefore,  even  as  the  soul,  is 
to  be  regarded  as  the  cause  and  author  of  youth 
and  old  age,  of  sleep  and  waking,  and  also  of 
respiration;  all  the  more  and  especially  as  the 
first  instrument  in  natural  things  contains  the 
internal  moving  cause  within  itself.  It  therefore 
comes  to  the  same  thing,  whether  we  say  that 
the  soul  and  the  blood,  or  the  blood  with  the 
soul,  or  the  soul  with  the  blood,  performs  all 
the  acts  in  the  animal  organism. 

We  are  too  much  in  the  habit,  neglecting 
things,  of  worshipping  specious  names.  The 
word  blood,  signifying  a  substance,  which  we 
have  before  our  eyes,  and  can  touch,  has  noth¬ 
ing  of  grandiloquence  about  it;  but  before  such 
titles  as  spirits,  and  calidum  innatum  or  innate 
heat,  we  stand  agape.  But  the  mask  removed, 
as  the  error  disappears,  so  does  the  idle  admira¬ 
tion.  The  celebrated  stone,  so  much  vaunted 
for  its  virtues  by  Pipinus  to  Migaldus,  seems  to 
have  filled  not  only  them  but  also  Thuanus,  an 
excellent  historian,  with  wonder  and  admira¬ 


tion.  Let  me  be  allowed  to  append  the  riddle: 
“Lately,”  says  he,  “there  was  brought  from  the 
East  Indies  to  our  king  a  stone,  which  we  have 
seen,  wonderfully  radiant  with  light  and  efful¬ 
gence,  the  whole  of  which,  as  if  burning  and  in 
flames,  was  resplendent  with  an  incredible  bril¬ 
liancy  of  light.  Tossed  hither  and  thither,  it 
filled  the  ambient  air  with  beams  that  were 
scarcely  bearable  by  any  eyes.  It  was  also  ex¬ 
tremely  impatient  of  the  earth;  if  you  essayed 
to  cover  it,  it  forthwith  and  of  itself  burst  forth 
with  violence,  and  mounted  on  high.  No  man 
could  by  any  art  contain  or  inclose  it  in  any 
confined  place;  on  the  contrary,  it  appears  to 
delight  in  free  and  spacious  places.  It  is  of  the 
highest  purity,  of  the  greatest  brightness,  and 
is  without  stain  or  blemish.  It  has  no  certain 
shape,  but  a  shape  uncertain  and  changing  every 
moment.  Of  the  most  consummate  beauty,  it 
suffers  no  one  to  touch  it;  and  if  you  persist  too 
long  or  obstinately,  it  will  do  you  injury,  as  I 
have  observed  it  repeatedly  to  do  in  no  trifling 
measure.  If  anything  be  by  chance  taken  from 
it  by  persevering  efforts,  it  is  (strange  to  say) 
made  nothing  less  thereby.  Its  custodier  adds 
further,  that  its  virtues  and  powers  are  useful 
in  a  great  variety  of  ways,  and  even — especially 
to  kings — indispensably  necessary;  but  these  he 
declines  to  reveal  without 'being  first  paid  a 
large  reward.”  The  author  might  have  added 
of  this  stone  that  it  was  neither  hard  nor  soft, 
and  exhibited  a  variety  of  forms  and  colours, 
and  had  a  singular  trick  of  trembling  and  palpi¬ 
tating,  and  like  an  animal — although  itself  in¬ 
animate — consumed  a  large  quantity  of  food 
every  day  for  its  nutrition  or  sustenance.  Fur¬ 
ther,  that  he  had  heard  from  men  worthy  of 
credit,  that  this  stone  had  formerly  fallen  from 
heaven  to  earth;  that  it  was  the  frequent  cause 
of  thunder  and  lightning,  and  was  still  occa¬ 
sionally  engendered  from  the  solar  beams  re¬ 
fracted  through  water. 

Who  would  not  admire  so  remarkable  a  stone, 
or  believe  that  it  acted  with  a  force  superior  to 
the  forces  of  the  elements,  that  it  participated 
in  the  nature  of  another  body,  and  possessed  an 
ethereal  spirit?  especially  when  he  found  that 
it  responded  in  its  proportions  to  the  essence  of 
the  sun.  But  with  Fernelius^  for  CEdipus,  we 
find  the  whole  enigma  resolving  itself  into 
“Flame.” 

In  the  same  way,  did  I  paint  the  blood  under 
the  garb  of  a  fable,  and  gave  it  the  title  of  the 
philosopher’s  stone,  and  propose  all  its  wonder¬ 
ful  faculties  and  operations  in  enigmatical  lan- 

^  De  abdit.  rer.  caus.,  n.  27. 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


494 

guage,  many  would  doubtless  think  a  great 
deal  of  it;  they  would  readily  believe  that  it 
could  act  with  powers  superior  to  those  of  the 
elements,  and  they  would  not  unwillingly  allow 
it  to  be  possessed  of  another  and  more  divine 
body. 

EXERCISE  72.  Of  the  primigenial  moisture 

We  have  now  dignified  the  blood  with  the 
title  of  the  innate  heat;  with  like  propriety,  we 
believe,  that  the  fluid  which  we  have  called  the 
crystalline  colliquament,  from  which  the  fcetus 
and  its  parts  primarily  and  immediately  arise, 
may  be  designated  the  radical  and  primigenial 
moisture.  There  is  certainly  nothing  in  the  gen¬ 
eration  of  animals  to  which  this  title  can  with 
better  right  be  given. 

We  call  this  the  radical  moisture,  because 
from  it  arises  the  first  particle  of  the  embryo, 
the  blood,  to  wit;  and  all  the  other  posthumous 
parts  arise  from  it  as  from  a  root;  and  they  are 
procreated  and  nourished,  and  grow  and  are 
preserved  by  the  same  matter. 

We  also  call  it  primigenial,  because  it  is  first 
engendered  in  every  animal  organism,  and  is, 
as  it  were,  the  foundation  of  the  rest,  as  may  be 
seen  in  the  egg,  in  which  it  presents  itself  after 
a  brief  period  of  incubation,  as  the  first  work  of 
the  inherent  fecundity  and  reproductive  power. 

This  fluid  is  also  the  most  simple,  pure,  and 
unadulterated  body,  in  which  all  the  parts  of 
the  pullet  are  present  potentially,  though  none 
of  them  are  there  actually.  It  appears  that  na¬ 
ture  has  conceded  to  it  the  same  qualities  which 
are  usually  ascribed  to  first  matter  common  to 
all  things,  viz.,  that  potentially  it  be  capable  of 
assuming  all  forms,  but  have  itself  no  form  in 
fact.  So  the  crystalline  humour  of  the  eye,  in 
order  that  it  might  be  susceptible  of  all  colours, 
is  itself  colourless;  and  in  like  manner  are  the 
media  or  organs  of  each  of  the  senses  destitute 
of  all  the  other  qualities  of  sensible  things:  the 
organs  of  smelling  and  hearing,  and  the  air  which 
ministers  to  them,  are  without  smell  and  sound; 
the  saliva  of  the  tongue  and  mouth  is  also 
tasteless. 

And  it  is  upon  this  argument  that  they  main¬ 
ly  rely  who  maintain  the  possibility  of  an  in¬ 
corporeal  intellect,  viz.,  because  it  is  susceptible 
of  all  forms  without  matter;  and  as  the  hand  is 
called  the  “instrument  of  instruments,”  so  is 
the  intellect  called  “the  form  of  forms,”  being 
itself  immaterial  and  wholly  without  form;  it  is, 
therefore,  said  to  be  possible  or  potential,  but 
not  passible. 

This  fluid,  or  one  analogous  to  it,  appears  also 


to  be  the  ultimate  aliment  from  which  .Aristotle 
taught  that  the  semen,  or  geniture,  as  he  calls 
it,  is  produced.^  I  say  the  ultimate  aliment, 
called  dew  by  the  Arabians,  with  which  all  the 
parts  of  the  body  are  bathed  and  moistened. 
For  in  the  same  way  as  this  dew,  by  ulterior 
condensation  and  adhesion,  becomes  alible  glu¬ 
ten  and  cambium,  whence  the  parts  of  the  body 
are  constituted,  so,  mutatis  mutandis^  in  the 
commencement  of  generation  and  nutrition, 
from  gluten  liquefied  and  rendered  thinner  is 
formed  the  nutritious  dew:  from  the  white  of 
the  egg  is  produced  the  colliquament  under  dis¬ 
cussion,  the  radical  moisture  and  primigenial 
dew.  The  thing  indeed  is  identical  in  either  in¬ 
stance,  if  any  credit  be  accorded  to  our  observa¬ 
tions;  and  in  fact  neither  philosophers  nor  phy¬ 
sicians  deny  that  an  animal  is  nourished  by  the 
same  matter  out  of  which  it  is  formed,  and  is 
increased  by  that  from  which  it  was  engen¬ 
dered.  The  nutritious  dew,  therefore,  differs 
from  the  colliquament  or  primigenial  moisture 
only  in  the  relation  of  prior  and  posterior;  the 
one  is  concocted  and  prepared  by  the  parents, 
the  other  by  the  embryo  itself,  both  juices, 
however,  being  the  proximate  and  immediate 
aliment  of  animals;  not  indeed  “first  and  sec¬ 
ond,”  according  to  that  dictum,  contraria  ex 
contrariisf  but  ultimate,  as  I  have  said,  and  as 
Aristotle  himself  admonishes  us,  according  to 
that  other  dictum,  ''similia  ex  similibus  augerif 
“like  is  necessarily  increased  by  its  like.”  There 
is  in  either  fluid  a  proximate  force,  in  virtue  of 
which,  no  obstacles  intervening,  it  will  pass 
spontaneously,  or  by  the  law  of  nature,  into 
every  part  of  the  animal  body. 

Such  being  the  state  of  the  question,  it  is 
obvious  that  all  controversy  about  the  matter 
of  animals  and  their  nourishment  may  be  settled 
without  difficulty.  For  as  some  believe  that  the 
semen  or  matter  emitted  in  intercourse  is  taken 
up  from  every  part  of  the  body,  so  do  they  de¬ 
rive  from  this  the  resemblance  of  the  offspring 
to  the  parents.  Aristotle  has  these  words: 
“Against  the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  it  may  be 
said  that  as  they  avow  the  semen  to  be  a  deriva¬ 
tive  from  all  parts  else,  we  believe  the  semen  to 
be  disposed  of  itself  to  form  part;  and 

whilst  they  call  it  a  colliquament,  we  are  rather 
inclined  to  regard  it  as  an  excrement”  (he  had, 
however,  said  shortly  before  that  he  entitled 
excrement  the  remains  of  the  nourishment,  and 
colliquament  that  which  is  secreted  from  the 
growth  by  a  preternatural  resolution);  “for 
that  which  arrives  last,  and  is  the  excrement  of 

^  On  the  Generation  of  Animalsy  i.  t8;  iv.  i. 


ANIMAL  GENERATION 


what  is  final,  is  in  all  probability  of  the  same 
nature;  in  the  same  way  as  painters  have  very 
commonly  some  remains  of  colours,  which  are 
identical  with  those  they  have  applied  upon 
their  canvass;  but  anything  that  is  consuming 
and  melting  away  is  corrupt  and  degenerate. 
Another  argument  that  the  seminal  fluid  is  not 
a  colliquament,  but  an  excrement,  is  this:  that 
animals  of  larger  growth  are  less  prolific,  smaller 
creatures  more  fruitful.  Now  there  must  be  a 
larger  quantity  of  colliquament  in  larger  than 
in  smaller  animals,  but  less  excrement;  for  as 
there  must  be  a  large  consumption  of  nourish¬ 
ment  in  a  large  body,  so  must  there  be  a  small 
production  of  excrement.  Further,  there  is  no 
place  provided  by  nature  for  receiving  and 
storing  colliquament;  it  flows  off  by  the  way 
that  is  most  open  to  it;  but  there  are  receptacles 
for  all  the  natural  excrements — the  bowels  for 
the  dry  excrements,  the  bladder  for  the  moist; 
the  stomach  for  matters  useful;  the  genital  or¬ 
gans,  the  uterus,  the  mammae  for  seminal  matter 
*— in  which  several  places  they  collect  and  run 
together.”  After  this  he  goes  on  by  a  variety  of 
arguments  to  prove  that  the  seminal  matter 
from  which  the  foetus  is  formed  is  the  same  as 
that  which  is  prepared  for  the  nutrition  of  the 
parts  at  large.  As  if,  should  one  require  some 
pigment  from  a  painter,  he  certainly  would  not 
go  to  scrape  off  what  he  had  already  laid  on  his 
canvass,  but  would  supply  the  demand  from  his 
store,  or  from  what  he  had  over  from  his  work, 
which  was  still  of  the  same  nature  as  that  which 
he  might  have  taken  away  from  his  picture.  So 
and  in  like  manner  the  excrement  of  the  ulti¬ 
mate  nutriment,  or  the  remainder  of  the  gluten 
and  dew,  is  carried  to  the  genital  organs  and 
there  deposited;  and  this  view  is  most  accordant 
with  the  production  of  eggs  by  the  hen. 

The  medical  writers,  too,  who  hold  all  the 
parts  to  be  originally  formed  from  the  spermatic 
fluid,  and  consequently  speak  of  these  under 
the  name  of  spermatic  parts,  say  that  the  semen 
is  formed  from  the  ultimate  nourishment,  which 
with  Aristotle  they  believe  to  be  the  blood, 
being  produced  by  the  virtue  of  the  genital 
organs,  and  constituting  the  “matter”  of  the 
foetus.  Now  it  is  obvious  enough  that  the  egg  is 
produced  by  the  mother  and  her  ultimate  nu¬ 
triment,  the  nutritious  dew,  to  wit.  That  clear 
part  of  the  egg,  therefore,  that  primigenial,  or 
rather  antegenial  colliquament,  is  more  truly  to 
be  reputed  the  semen  of  the  cock,  although  it 
is  not  projected  in  the  act  of  intercourse,  but  is 
prepared  before  intercourse,  or  is  gathered  to¬ 
gether  after  this,  as  happens  in  many  animals, 


and  as  will  perhaps  be  stated  more  at  length  hy 
and  by,  because  the  geniture  of  the  male,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Aristotle,  coagulates. 

When  I  see,  therefore,  all  the  parts  formed 
and  increasing  from  this  one  moisture,  as  “mat¬ 
ter,”  and  from  a  primitive  root,  and  the  rea¬ 
sons  already  given  combine  in  persuading  us 
that  this  ought  to  be  so,  I  can  scarcely  refrain 
from  taunting  and  pushing  to  extremity  the 
followers  of  Empedocles  and  Hippocrates,  who 
believed  all  similar  bodies  to  be  engendered  as 
mixtures  by  association  of  the  four  contrary 
elements,  and  to  become  corrupted  by  their 
disjunction;  nor  should  I  less  spare  Democritus 
and  the  Epicurean  school  that  succeeded  him, 
who  compose  all  things  of  congregations  of 
atoms  of  diverse  figure.  Because  it  was  an  error 
of  theirs  in  former  times,  as  it  is  a  vulgar  error 
at  the  present  day,  to  believe  that  all  similar 
bodies  are  engendered  from  diverse  or  hetero¬ 
geneous  matters.  For  on  this  footing,  nothing 
even  to  the  lynx’s  eye  would  be  similar,  one, 
the  same,  and  continuous;  the  unity  would  be 
apparent  only,  a  kind  of  congeries  or  heap — a 
congregation  or  collection  of  extremely  small 
bodies;  nor  would  generation  differ  in  any  re¬ 
spect  from  an  aggregation  and  arrangement  of 
particles. 

But  neither  in  the  production  of  animals,  nor 
in  the  generation  of  any  other  “similar”  body 
(whether  it  were  of  animal  parts,  or  of  plants, 
stones,  minerals,  &c.),  have  I  ever  been  able  to 
observe  any  congregation  of  such  a  kind,  or  any 
divers  miscibles  pre-existing  for  union  in  the 
work  of  reproduction.  For  neither,  in  so  far  at 
least  as  I  have  had  power  to  perceive,  or  as  rea¬ 
son  will  carry  me,  have  I  ever  been  able  to  trace 
any  “similar”  parts,  such  as  membranes,  flesh, 
fibres,  cartilage,  bone,  &c.,  produced  in  such 
order,  or  as  co-existent,  that  from  these,  as  the 
elements  of  animal  bodies,  conjoined  organs  or 
limbs,  and  finally,  the  entire  animal,  should  be 
compounded.  But,  as  has  been  already  said,  the 
first  rudiment  of  the  body  is  a  mere  homoge¬ 
neous  and  pulpy  jelly,  not  unlike  a  concrete 
mass  of  spermatic  fluid;  and  from  this,  under 
the  law  of  generation,  altered,  and  at  the  same 
time  split  or  multifariously  divided,  as  by  a 
divine  fiat,  from  an  inorganic  an  organic  mass 
results;  this  is  made  bone,  this  muscle  or  nerve, 
this  a  receptacle  for  excrementitious  matter, 
&c.;  from  a  similar  a  dissimilar  is  produced;  out 
of  one  thing  of  the  same  nature  several  of  di¬ 
verse  and  contrary  natures;  and  all  this  by  no 
transposition  or  local  movement,  as  a  congrega¬ 
tion  of  similar  particles,  or  a  separation  of  heter- 


WILLIAM  HARVEY 


496 

ogeneous  particles  is  effected  under  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  heat,  but  rather  by  the  segregation  of 
homogeneous  than  the  union  of  heterogeneous 
particles. 

And  I  believe  that  the  same  thing  takes  place 
in  all  generation,  so  that  similar  bodies  have  no 
mixed  elements  prior  to  themselves,  but  rather 
exist  before  their  elements  (these,  according  to 
Empedocles  and  Aristotle,  being  fire,  air,  earth, 
and  water;  according  to  chemists,  salt,  sulphur, 
and  mercury;  according  to  Democritus,  certain 
atoms),  as  being  naturally  more  perfect  than 
these.  There  are,  I  say,  both  mixed  and  com¬ 
pound  bodies  prior  to  any  of  the  so  called  ele¬ 
ments,  into  which  they  are  resolved,  or  in  which 
they  end.  They  are  resolved,  namely,  into  these 
elements  according  to  reason  rather  than  in 
fact.  The  so-called  elements,  therefore,  are  not 
prior  to  those  things  that  are  engendered,  or 
that  originate,  but  are  posterior  rather — they 
are  relics  or  remainders  rather  than  principles. 
Neither  Aristotle  himself  nor  anyone  else  has 
ever  demonstrated  the  separate  existence  of  the 
elements  in  the  nature  of  things,  or  that  they 
were  the  principles  of  “similar”  bodies. 

The  philosopher,^  indeed,  when  he  proceeds 
to  prove  that  there  are  elements,  still  seems  un¬ 
certain  whether  the  conclusion  ought  to  be  that 
they  exist  in  esse,  or  only  in  posse;  he  is  of  opin¬ 
ion  that  in  natural  things  they  are  present  in 
power  rather  than  in  action;  and  therefore  does 
he  assert,  from  the  division,  separation,  and 
solution  of  things,  that  there  are  elements.  It  is, 
however,  an  argument  of  no  great  cogency  to 
say  that  natural  bodies  are  primarily  produced 
or  composed  of  those  things  into  which  they 
are  ultimately  resolved;  for  upon  this  principle 
some  things  would  come  out  composed  of  glass, 
ashes,  and  smoke,  into  which  we  see  them  finally 

^  On  the  Heavens,  iii.  3  .• 


reduced  by  fire;  and  as  artificial  distillation 
clearly  shows  that  a  great  variety  of  vapours 
and  waters  of  different  species  can  be  drawn 
from  so  many  different  bodies,  the  number  of 
elements  would  have  to  be  increased  to  infinity. 
Nor  has  any  one  among  the  philosophers  said 
that  the  bodies  which,  dissolved  by  art,  are  held 
pure  and  indivisible  in  their  species,  are  elements 
of  greater  simplicity  than  the  air,  water,  and 
earth,  which  we  perceive  by  our  senses,  which 
we  are  familiar  with  through  our  eyes. 

Nor,  to  conclude,  do  we  see  aught  in  the 
shape  of  miscible  matter  naturally  engendered 
from  fire;  and  it  is  perhaps  impossible  that  it 
should  be  so,  since  fire,  like  that  which  is  alive, 
is  in  a  perpetual  state  of  fluxion,  and  seeks  for 
food  by  which  it  may  be  nourished  and  kept  in 
being;  in  conformity  with  the  words  of  Aris¬ 
totle,  that  “Fire  is  only  nourished,  and  is  espe¬ 
cially  remarkable  in  this.”^  But  what  is  nour¬ 
ished  cannot  itself  be  mingled  with  its  nutri¬ 
ment.  Whence  it  follows  that  it  is  impossible 
fire  should  be  miscible.  For  mixture,  according 
to  Aristotle,  is  the  union  of  altered  miscibles,  in 
which  one  thing  is  not  transformed  into  an¬ 
other,  but  two  things,  severally  active  and  pas¬ 
sive,  into  a  third  thing.  Generation,  however, 
especially  generation  by  metamorphosis,  is  the 
distribution  of  one  similar  thing  having  under¬ 
gone  change  into  several  others.  Nor  are  mixed 
similar  bodies  said  to  be  generated  from  the  ele¬ 
ments,  but  to  be  constituted  by  them  in  some 
certain  way,  solvent  forces  residing  in  them  at 
the  same  time. 

These  considerations,  however,  properly  be¬ 
long  to  the  section  of  Physiology,  which  treats 
of  the  elements  and  temperaments,  where  if 
will  be  our  business  to  speak  of  them  more  at 
large. 

^  On  Generation  and  Corruption,  ii.  8. 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.  S.  A. 


_  ^5^5 

^E  THJE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3  ^ 

*?5^ 


^7^ 


:Si^ 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


^1^ 


^53? 


3»^ 


THjE  great  ideas,  Volumes  2  and  3  ^ 

5^ 


^5^ 


^E 

^E 


^E 


s^ 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


?3?- 


53^ 


i3^ 

?3g- 

s?- 


$3?- 


55^ 


^  •'-^  *3^  *3^  •■- 


S^55^53J^;^^«^j3H3?5^53«^v3^5^v3^S^53?73^j3^i3?^»3?53?j3^53^53^53^53?53^i3?v3^s3^j^v3^5^j5W 


