GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  gg 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 


5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 


10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


11.  EUCLID 

ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 


13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 


16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 


17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 


23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 


24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


2 


SFT^?^ 


3TW?^ 


SFWPT^ 


SF75T«r 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 


29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 


31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 


32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 


34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 


35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 


36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 


37.  FIELDING 


38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 


39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 


43.  AMERICAN  STATE 
PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 


44.  BOSWELL 


45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 


46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 


50.  MARX 
ENGELS 


51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


H 

H 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2012 


http://archive.org/details/philosophyofrigh46hege 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


46. 

HEGEL 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  JosephJ.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


The  Philosophy  of  Right 


The  Philosophy  of  History 


BY  GEORG  WILHELM  FRIEDRICH  HEGEL 


William  Benton,  Publisher 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 

CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  •  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  •  SYDNEY  •  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


The  Philosophy  of  Right,  translated  by  T.  M.  Knox, 
is  reprinted  by  arrangement  with  Oxford  University  Press 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 

The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

*952 

by  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-third  Printing,  1980 
Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10352 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Georg  Wilhelm  Friedrich  Hegel,  1770-1831 


Hegel  was  born  at  Stuttgart,  August  27,  1770, 
the  oldest  child  of  a  minor  state  official.  His 
achievement  at  the  local  grammar  school  and 
gymnasium  was  not  remarkable.  A  journal 
from  that  time  contains  evidence  of  interest  in 
history,  Greek  and  Latin  literature,  and  theol¬ 
ogy,  and  he  then  began  his  lifelong  habit  of 
making  copious  extracts  from  his  reading  which 
he  annotated  and  arranged  alphabetically.  At 
the  age  of  eighteen  he  entered  the  University  of 
Tubingen  as  a  student  of  theology.  But  he 
showed  little  aptitude  for  theology;  his  sermons 
were  a  failure,  and  he  found  more  congenial 
reading  in  the  classics.  The  certificate  which  he 
received  in  1793  commended  his  excellent  tal¬ 
ents  but  declared  that  his  industry  and  knowl¬ 
edge  were  mediocre,  his  speaking  poor,  and  that 
he  was  particularly  deficient  in  philosophy.  He 
seems  to  have  profited  most  from  the  compan¬ 
ionship  of  his  friends,  notably  Holderlin  and 
Schelling,  with  whom  he  read  Kant  and  Plato. 

On  leaving  Tubingen,  Hegel  became  a  tutor 
in  a  private  family,  as  had  Kant  and  Fichte  be¬ 
fore  him.  He  held  such  a  position  first  at  Bern 
(1793-1796)  and  then  at  Frankfurt  (1797- 
1800).  From  the  years  when  he  was  a  tutor 
there  remains  a  large  number  of  manuscripts, 
in  various  stages  of  completion  and  of  varying 
importance,  but  all  indicative  of  a  great  deal  of 
study.  During  his  residence  in  Switzerland  he 
wrote  a  life  of  Jesus,  a  critique  of  positive  reli¬ 
gion,  and  several  studies  in  the  history  of  re¬ 
ligion.  Later  his  attention  turned  to  questions 
of  economics  and  government,  and  he  left  writ¬ 
ings  on  the  reform  of  the  Prussian  land  laws,  a 
commentary  on  James  Steuart’s  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  and  other  studies  of  similar  character 
which  have  since  been  published.  In  1800  he 
produced  a  sketch  which  is  generally  regarded 
as  the  first  systematic  statement  of  his  philoso¬ 
phy. 

In  1799  his  father  died,  and  a  small  inherit¬ 
ance  offered  Hegel  a  brief  period  of  independ¬ 
ence.  He  wrote  to  Schelling,  who  was  already  on 
the  way  to  fame,  asking  him  to  suggest  a  suit¬ 
able  town  for  a  brief  period  of  studious  with¬ 


drawal,  specifying,  among  other  requirements, 
“a  good  beer.”  Expressing  his  joy  at  the  recent 
successes  of  his  friend  in  the  academic  world, 
he  confessed  that  he  too  had  ambitions :  “The 
ideal  of  my  youth  has  necessarily  taken  a  reflec¬ 
tive  form  and  been  transformed  into  a  system. 
Now  I  am  asking  myself,  while  still  busy  with 
this  task,  how  can  I  return  to  influencing  the 
life  of  mankind?”  Schelling’s  answer  must  have 
been  enthusiastic,  for  Hegel  abandoned  his  plans 
for  a  quiet  vacation  and  joined  him  at  Jena  al¬ 
most  immediately.  Here  he  became  a  Privat- 
do cent  at  the  university,  after  he  had  presented 
as  his  qualifying  dissertation  a  treatise  On  the 
Orbits  of  the  Planets.  In  the  winter  of  1801  his 
lectures,  delivered  in  the  late  afternoon  and  at¬ 
tended  by  eleven  students,  dealt  with  logic  and 
metaphysics;  succeeding  series  in  later  years, 
somewhat  better  attended,  were  devoted  to  a 
“system  of  speculative  philosophy,”  the  history 
of  philosophy,  pure  mathematics,  and  other  top¬ 
ics.  Before  Schelling’s  departure  from  Jena,  in 
1803,  he  and  Hegel  collaborated  in  the  publica¬ 
tion  of  the  Journal  of  Critical  Philosophy. 

Although  Hegel  appeared  at  first  as  a  fol¬ 
lower  of  Schelling,  his  own  views  rapidly  be¬ 
came  distinct  and  he  set  about  preparing  a  sys¬ 
tematic  exposition.  In  the  preface  to  his  first 
important  work,  The  Phenomenology  of  Spirit, 
he  went  to  some  length  to  make  a  kind  of  dis¬ 
avowal  of  Schelling’s  position.  It  was  while  he 
was  engaged  in  the  details  of  publication  of  this 
work  that  his  academic  career  was  brought 
abruptly  to  a  close  by  the  Napoleonic  campaign 
culminating  in  the  battle  of  Jena  in  the  autumn 
of  1806.  In  a  letter  written  to  a  friend  on  the 
day  before  the  battle,  after  expressing  anxiety 
regarding  the  fate  of  his  manuscripts  then  on 
the  way  to  the  printer,  he  spoke  of  seeing  Na¬ 
poleon  :  “I  saw  the  Emperor — that  world-soul — 
ride  through  the  town  to  reconnoitre.  It  is  in¬ 
deed  a  strange  feeling  to  see  such  a  person,  who 
here,  from  a  single  point,  sitting  on  his  horse, 
reaches  over  and  masters  the  wTorld!” 

The  Phenomenology  of  Spirit  appeared  in 
1807  despite  the  wTar,  but  Hegel  himself  wTas  at 


v 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


loose  ends.  For  a  time  (1807-1808)  he  edited 
the  Bamberger  Zeitung,  but  finding  journalism 
distasteful,  he  accepted  a  position  as  headmas¬ 
ter  of  the  Aegidien- gymnasium  at  Nuremberg, 
where  he  remained  until  1816.  In  1811  he  mar¬ 
ried.  Two  volumes  of  his  Science  of  Logic  were 
published  in  1812,  and  a  third  in  1816,  and  he 
was  offered  professorships  at  Erlangen,  Heidel¬ 
berg,  and  Berlin.  He  accepted  the  invitation  to 
Heidelberg,  but  after  the  publication  of  his 
Encyclopedia  of  the  Philosophical  Sciences  in 
1817,  the  offer  of  Berlin  was  renewed  and  ac¬ 
cepted,  and  he  occupied  the  chair  vacant  since 
the  death  of  Fichte. 

The  thirteen  years  of  Hegel’s  professorship 
at  the  University  of  Berlin  (1818-1831)  brought 
him  to  the  summit  of  his  career  and  made  him 
the  recognized  leader  of  philosophic  thought  in 
Germany.  With  every  year  his  personal  prestige 
and  following  increased,  until  his  name  was 
linked  with  that  of  Goethe  by  his  more  enthusi¬ 
astic  disciples.  In  1821  he  published  The  Philos¬ 
ophy  of  Right ,  the  last  of  the  large  works  pub¬ 


lished  in  his  lifetime.  His  lectures  on  aesthetics, 
the  philosophy  of  religion,  the  philosophy  of 
history,  and  the  history  of  philosophy  were  con¬ 
stantly  revised  and  improved  and  finally  pub¬ 
lished  after  his  death.  In  1830  he  became  rector 
of  the  university  and  was  decorated  by  Fred¬ 
erick  William  III  of  Prussia. 

On  the  7th  of  November,  1831,  Hegel  finished 
the  preface  to  a  second  edition  of  his  Logic.  In 
closing  he  recalled  the  legend  that  Plato  revised 
the  Republic  seven  times,  and  remarked  that, 
despite  this  illustrious  example,  “the  writer 
must  content  himself  with  what  he  has  been  al¬ 
lowed  to  achieve  under  the  pressure  of  circum¬ 
stances,  the  unavoidable  waste  caused  by  the 
extent  and  many-sidedness  of  the  interests  of 
the  time,  and  the  haunting  doubt  whether,  amid 
the  loud  clamor  of  the  day  and  the  deafening 
babble  of  opinion  .  .  .  there  is  left  any  room  for 
sympathy  with  the  passionless  stillness  of  a 
science  of  pure  thought.”  Seven  days  later  he 
died  of  cholera,  and  was  buried,  as  he  had 
wished,  between  Fichte  and  Solger. 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT,  Page  i 

Translated  with  Notes  by  T.  M.  Knox 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY,  Page  153 

Translated  by  J.  Sibree 


CONTENTS:  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


Biographical  Note  v 

Abbreviations  x 

Preface  i 

INTRODUCTION 

Concept  of  the  Philosophy  of  Right, 
of  the  Will,  Freedom,  and  Right  9 

FIRST  PART 

Abstract  Right  21 

I.  Property  22 

A.  Taking  Possession  25 

B.  Use  of  the  Thing  27 

C.  Alienation  of  Property  28 

II.  Contract  31 

III.  Wrong  34 

A.  N on-malicious  Wrong  35 

B.  Fraud  35 

C.  Coercion  and  Crime  35 

SECOND  PART 

Morality  40 

I.  Purpose  and  Responsibility  42 

II.  Intention  and  Welfare  43 

III.  Good  and  Conscience  45 

THIRD  PART 

Ethical  Life  55 

I.  The  Family  58 

A.  Marriage  58 


B.  The  Family  Capital  60 

C.  The  Education  of  Children  and  the 

Dissolution  of  the  Family  61 

II.  Civil  Society  64 

A.  The  System  of  Needs  65 

(a)  The  Kind  of  Need  and  Satisfac¬ 
tion  66 

( f3 )  The  Kind  of  Work  67 

(y)  Capital  and  Class-Divisions  67 

B.  The  Administration  of  Justice  69 

(a)  Right  as  Law  70 

(ft)  Law  determinately  existent  71 

(y)  The  Court  of  Justice  72 

C.  The  Police  and  the  Corporation  75 

(a)  Police  75 

( f3 )  The  Corporation  78 

III.  The  State  80 

A.  Constitutional  Law  82 

1.  The  Constitution  {on  its  internal 

side  only)  89 

(a)  The  Crown  92 

(p)  The  Executive  97 

(y)  The  Legislature  99 

2.  Sovereignty  vis-a-vis  foreign 

states  106 

B.  International  Law  108 

C.  World  History  no 

Additions  to  Hegel’s  Philosophy  of 

Right  1 1 5 


IX 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Aesthetic . 

Hegel’s  Works 

= Hegel's  Philosophy  of  Fine  Art,  translated  by  F.  P.  B.  Osmas- 
ton,  4  vols.,  London,  1916. 

Enc . 

Hegels  e.  R . 

—  Encyclopaedia  of  the  Philosophical  Sciences. 

—  Hegels  eigenhandige  Randbemerkungen  zu  seiner  Rechtsphil- 

osophie,  hrsg.  von  G.  Lasson,  Leipzig,  1930. 

History  of  Philosophy  . 

=  Hegel's  History  of  Philosophy,  translated  by  E.  S.  Haldane, 
3  vols.,  London,  1892. 

Phenomenology  .  .  . 

=  He  gel's  Phenomenology  of  Mind,  translated  by  Sir  J.  B.  Bail- 
lie,  2nd  edn.,  London,  1931. 

Philosophy  of  History  . 

=  Hegel's  Philosophy  of  History,  translated  by  J.  Sibree, 
pp.  153-369  in  this  volume. 

Philosophy  of  Religion  . 

=  Hegel's  Philosophy  of  Religion,  translated  by  the  Rev.  E.  B. 
Speirs  and  J.  Burdon  Sanderson,  3  vols.,  London,  1895. 

Science  of  Logic  .  .  . 

=  Hegel's  Science  of  Logic,  translated  by  W.  H.  Johnston  and  L. 
G.  Struthers,  2.  vols.,  London,  1929. 

Werke1  or* . 

—  Hegels  samtliche  Werke,  neu  hrsg.  von  H.  Glockner,  Stuttgart, 
1927  ff.The  pagination  quoted  is  that  of  the  original  edition, 
which  is  given  in  the  margin  of  Glockner’s  reprint. 

Editions  and  Translations  of  the  Philosophy  of  Right 


Bolland . 

—Hegels  Grundlinien  der  Philosophie  des  Rechts,  hrsg.  von  G.  J. 
P.  J.  Bolland,  Leyden,  1902. 

Gans . 

=  Hegels  samtliche  Werke,  vol.  viii,  Berlin,  1st  edn.  1833,  3rd 
edn.  1854. 

Lasson . 

=  Hegels  Grundlinien  der  Philosophie  des  Rechts,  neu  hrsg.  von 
G.  Lasson,  2nd  edn.,  Leipzig,  1921. 

Messineo . 

—Hegel:  Lineamenti  di  filosofia  del  diritto,  tradotti  da  Francesco 
Messineo,  Bari,  1913. 

Sterrett  . 

—  The  Ethics  of  Hegel,  translated  selections  from  his  Rechts- 
philosophie,  with  an  introduction  by  J.  Macbride  Sterrett, 
D.D.,  Boston,  1893. 

Science  of  Knowledge  .  . 

Other  Works 

=Fichte's  Science  of  Knowledge  ( Wissenschaftslehre ),  trans¬ 
lated  by  A.  E.  Kroeger,  London,  1889. 

Science  of  Rights .... 

=Fichte's  Science  of  Rights  ( Grundlage  des  Naturrechts) ,  trans¬ 
lated  by  A.  E.  Kroeger,  London,  1889.  References  to  num¬ 
bered  sections  are  omitted  in  Kroeger’s  translation,  and  they 
are  inserted  here  from  J.  G.  Fichte,  Werke,  hrsg.  von  F. 
Medicus,  Leipzig,  1908,  vol.  ii. 

Philosophy  of  Law  .  .  . 

=  Kant's  Philosophy  of  Law  (the  Science  of  Right  in  vol.  42  of 
this  set,  pp.  395-458),  translated  by  W.  Hastie. 

Kant's  Theory  of  Ethics  . 

—Kant's  Theory  of  Ethics,  translated  by  T.  K.  Abbott,  6th  edn., 

London,  1923. 

In  quoting  from  translations  of  Hegel,  the  translator  in  his  Notes  has  made  modifications 
here  and  there  in  order  to  bring  the  terminology  into  accordance  with  that  used  here. 


X 


PREFACE 


The  immediate  inducement  to  publish  this  man¬ 
ual  is  the  need  for  putting  into  the  hands  of  my 
audience  a  text -book  for  the  lectures  on  the  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  Right  which  I  deliver  in  the  course 
of  my  professional  duties.  This  compendium  is 
an  enlarged  and  especially  a  more  systematic  ex¬ 
position  of  the  same  fundamental  concepts  which 
in  relation  to  this  part  of  philosophy  are  already 
contained  in  a  book  of  mine  designed  previously 
for  my  lectures — the  Encyclopaedia  of  Philo¬ 
sophical  Sciences  (Heidelberg,  1817).1 

But  this  manual  was  to  appear  in  print  and 
therefore  it  now  comes  before  the  general  pub¬ 
lic  ;  and  this  was  my  inducement  to  amplify  here 
a  good  many  of  the  Remarks  which  were  pri¬ 
marily  meant  in  a  brief  compass  to  indicate  ideas 
akin  to  my  argument  or  at  variance  with  it,  fur¬ 
ther  inferences  from  it,  and  the  like, i.e. material 
which  would  receive  its  requisite  elucidation  in 
my  lectures.  The  object  of  amplifying  them  here 
was  to  clarify  occasionally  the  more  abstract 
parts  of  the  text  and  to  take  a  more  comprehen¬ 
sive  glance  at  current  ideas  widely  disseminated 
at  the  present  time.  Hence  the  result  has  been  a 
number  of  Remarks  rather  more  extensive  than 
is  usually  consistent  with  the  style  and  aim  of  a 
compendium.  Apart  from  that,  however,  a  com¬ 
pendium  proper  has  as  its  subject-matter  what 
is  taken  to  be  the  closed  circle  of  a  science ;  and 
what  is  appropriate  in  it,  except  perhaps  for  a 
small  addition  here  and  there,  is  principally  the 
assembly  and  arrangement  of  the  essential  fac¬ 
tors  in  a  content  which  has  long  been  familiar 
and  accepted,  just  as  the  form  in  which  it  is 
arranged  has  its  rules  and  artifices  which  have 
long  been  settled.  Philosophical  manuals  are  per¬ 
haps  not  now  expected  to  conform  to  such  a  pat¬ 
tern,  for  it  is  supposed  that  what  philosophy  puts 
together  is  a  work  as  ephemeral  as  Penelope’s 
web,  one  which  must  be  begun  afresh  every 
morning. 

I  need  hardly  say  that  the  chief  difference  be¬ 
tween  this  manual  and  an  ordinary  compendium 
lies  in  the  method  which  constitutes  their  guid- 

1  Where  Hegel  has  cited  in  the  Philosophy  of  Right 
paragraphs  of  the  first  edition,  the  translator  has  ap¬ 
pended  in  square  brackets  references  to  the  correspond¬ 
ing  passages  of  the  third  edition. 


ing  principle.  But  in  this  book  I  am  presuppos¬ 
ing  that  philosophy’s  mode  of  progression  from 
one  topic  to  another  and  its  mode  of  scientific 
proof — this  whole  speculative  way  of  knowing 
— is  essentially  distinct  from  any  other  way  of 
knowing.  It  is  only  insight  into  the  necessity  of 
such  a  difference  that  can  rescue  philosophy 
from  the  shameful  decay  in  which  it  is  immersed 
at  the  present  time.  It  is  true  that  the  forms  and 
rules  of  the  old  logic,  of  definition,  classifica¬ 
tion,  and  syllogism,  which  include  the  rules  of 
discursive  thinking,  have  become  recognized  as 
inadequate  for  speculative  science;  or  rather 
their  inadequacy  has  not  been  recognized;  it  has 
only  been  felt,  and  then  these  rules  have  been 
thrown  off  as  if  they  were  mere  fetters  in  order 
to  allow  the  heart,  the  imagination,  and  casual 
intuition  to  say  what  they  pleased.  And  since 
reflection  and  connexions  of  thought  have  after 
all  to  come  on  the  scene  as  well,  there  is  an  un¬ 
conscious  relapse  into  the  despised  method  of 
commonplace  deduction  and  argumentation. 

Since  I  have  fully  expounded  the  nature  of 
speculative  knowing  in  my  Science  of  Logic,2  in 
this  manual  I  have  only  added  an  explanatory 
note  here  and  there  about  procedure  and  meth¬ 
od.  In  dealing  with  a  topic  which  is  concrete 
and  intrinsically  of  so  varied  a  character,  I  have 
omitted  to  bring  out  and  demonstrate  the  chain 
of  logical  argument  in  each  and  every  detail. 
For  one  thing,  to  have  done  this  might  have 
been  regarded  as  superfluous  where  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  philosophical  method  is  presupposed ; 
for  another,  it  will  be  obvious  from  the  work  it¬ 
self  that  the  whole,  like  the  formation  of  its 
parts,  rests  on  the  logical  spirit.  It  is  also  from 
this  point  of  view  above  all  that  I  should  like 
my  book  to  be  taken  and  judged.  What  we  have 
to  do  with  here  is  philosophical  science ,  and  in 
such  science  content  is  essentially  bound  up 
with  form. 

We  may  of  course  hear  from  those  who  seem 
to  be  taking  a  profound  view  that  the  form  is 
something  external  and  indifferent  to  the  sub¬ 
ject-matter,  that  the  latter  alone  is  important; 
further,  the  task  of  a  writer,  especially  a  writer 

aCf.  Kant,  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,  p.  196. — Ed. 


I 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


on  philosophy,  may  be  said  to  lie  in  the  discov¬ 
ery  of  truth,  the  statement  of  truth,  the  dissemi¬ 
nation  of  truth  and  sound  concepts.  But  if  we 
consider  how  this  task  is  as  a  rule  actually  dis¬ 
charged,  what  we  find  in  the  first  place  is  that 
the  same  old  stew  is  continually  warmed  up 
again  and  again  and  served  round  to  everybody 
— a  task  that  will  even  be  meritorious  in  educat¬ 
ing  and  stimulating  men’s  hearts,  though  it  might 
preferably  be  regarded  as  the  superfluous  la¬ 
bour  of  a  busybody — “They  have  Moses  and  the 
Prophets,  let  them  hear  them.”  In  particular,  we 
have  ample  opportunity  to  marvel  at  the  pre¬ 
tentious  tone  recognizable  in  these  busybodies 
when  they  talk  as  if  the  world  had  wanted  for 
nothing  except  their  energetic  dissemination  of 
truths,  or  as  if  their  rechauffe  were  productive 
of  new  and  unheard-of  truths  and  was  to  be 
specially  taken  to  heart  before  everything  else 
“to-day”  and  every  day.  But  in  this  situation  we 
also  find  one  party  giving  out  truths  of  this  sort 
only  to  have  them  dislodged  and  brushed  aside 
by  truths  of  just  the  same  sort  purveyed  by 
other  parties.  In  this  press  of  truths,  there  is 
something  neither  new  nor  old  but  perennial; 
yet  how  else  is  this  to  be  lifted  out  of  these  re¬ 
flections  which  oscillate  from  this  to  that  with¬ 
out  method,  how  else  is  it  to  be  separated  from 
them  and  proved,  if  not  by  philosophic  science? 

After  all,  the  truth  about  Right,  Ethics,  and 
the  state  is  as  old  as  its  public  recognition  and 
formulation  in  the  law  of  the  land,  in  the  moral¬ 
ity  of  everyday  life,  and  in  religion.  What  more 
does  this  truth  require — since  the  thinking  mind 
is  not  content  to  possess  it  in  this  ready  fashion? 
It  requires  to  be  grasped  in  thought  as  well ;  the 
content  which  is  already  rational  in  principle 
must  win  the  form  of  rationality  and  so  appear 
well-founded  to  untrammelled  thinking.  Such 
thinking  does  not  remain  stationary  at  the  given, 
whether  the  given  beupheldby  the  external  posi¬ 
tive  authority  of  the  state  or  the  consensus 
hominum,  or  by  the  authority  of  inward  feeling 
and  emotion  and  by  the  “witness  of  the  spirit” 
which  directly  concurs  with  it.  On  the  contrary, 
thought  which  is  free  starts  out  from  itself  and 
thereupon  claims  to  know  itself  as  united  in  its 
innermost  being  with  the  truth. 

The  unsophisticated  heart  takes  the  simple 
line  of  adhering  with  trustful  conviction  to  what 
is  publicly  accepted  as  true  and  then  building  on 
this  firm  foundation  its  conduct  and  its  set  posi¬ 
tion  in  life.  Against  this  simple  line  of  conduct 
there  may  at  once  be  raised  the  alleged  difficulty 
of  how  it  is  possible,  in  an  infinite  variety  of 
opinions,  to  distinguish  and  discover  what  is 


universally  recognized  and  valid.  This  perplexity 
may  at  first  sight  be  taken  for  a  right  and  really 
serious  attitude  to  the  thing,  but  in  fact  those 
who  boast  of  this  perplexity  are  in  the  position 
of  not  being  able  to  see  the  wood  for  the  trees; 
the  only  perplexity  and  difficulty  they  are  in  is 
one  of  their  own  making.  Indeed,  this  perplexity 
and  difficulty  of  theirs  is  proof  rather  that  they 
want  as  the  substance  of  the  right  and  the  eth¬ 
ical  not  what  is  universally  recognized  and  valid, 
but  something  else.  If  they  had  been  serious 
with  what  is  universally  accepted  instead  of 
busying  themselves  with  the  vanity  and  particu¬ 
larity  of  opinions  and  things,  they  would  have 
clung  to  what  is  substantively  right,  namely  to 
the  commands  of  the  ethical  order  and  the  state, 
and  would  have  regulated  their  lives  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  these. 

A  more  serious  difficulty  arises,  however, 
from  the  fact  that  man  thinks  and  tries  to  find 
in  thinking  both  his  freedom  and  the  basis  of 
ethical  life.  But  however  lofty,  however  divine, 
the  right  of  thought  may  be,  it  is  perverted  into 
wrong  if  it  is  only  this  [opining]  which  passes 
for  thinking  and  if  thinking  knows  itself  to  be 
free  only  when  it  diverges  from  what  is  univer¬ 
sally  recognized  and  valid  and  when  it  has  dis¬ 
covered  how  to  invent  for  itself  some  particular 
character. 

At  the  present  time,  the  idea  that  freedom  of 
thought,  and  of  mind  generally,  evinces  itself 
only  in  divergence  from,  indeed  in  hostility  to, 
what  is  publicly  recognized,  might  seem  to  be 
most  firmly  rooted  in  connexion  with  the  state, 
and  it  is  chiefly  for  this  reason  that  a  philosophy 
of  the  state  might  seem  essentially  to  have  the 
task  of  discovering  and  promulgating  still  an¬ 
other  theory,  and  a  special  and  original  one  at 
that.  In  examining  this  idea  and  the  activity  in 
conformity  with  it,  we  might  suppose  that  no 
state  or  constitution  had  ever  existed  in  the 
world  at  all  or  was  even  in  being  at  the  present 
time,  but  that  nowadays — and  this  “nowadays” 
lasts  for  ever — we  had  to  start  all  over  again 
from  the  beginning,  and  that  the  ethical  world 
had  just  been  waiting  for  such  present-day  proj¬ 
ects,  proofs,  and  investigations.  So  far  as  na¬ 
ture  is  concerned,  people  grant  that  it  is  nature 
as  it  is  which  philosophy  has  to  bring  within  its 
ken,  that  the  philosopher’s  stone  lies  concealed 
somewhere,  somewhere  within  nature  itself,  that 
nature  is  inherently  rational,  and  that  what 
knowledge  has  to  investigate  and  grasp  in  con¬ 
cepts  is  this  actual  reason  present  in  it;  not  the 
formations  and  accidents  evident  to  the  super¬ 
ficial  observer,  but  nature’s  eternal  harmony,  its 


PREFACE 


harmony,  however,  in  the  sense  of  the  law  and 
essence  immanent  within  it.  The  ethical  world, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  state  (i.e.  reason  as  it 
actualizes  itself  in  the  element  of  self-conscious¬ 
ness),  is  not  allowed  to  enjoy  the  good  fortune 
which  springs  from  the  fact  that  it  is  reason 
which  has  achieved  power  and  mastery  within 
that  element  and  which  maintains  itself  and  has 
its  home  there.  [A.]1  The  universe  of  mind  is  sup¬ 
posed  rather  to  be  left  to  the  mercy  of  chance 
and  caprice,  to  be  God-forsaken,  and  the  result 
is  that  if  the  ethical  world  is  Godless,  truth  lies 
outside  it,  and  at  the  same  time,  since  even  so 
reason  is  supposed  to  be  in  it  as  well,  truth  be¬ 
comes  nothing  but  a  problem.  But  it  is  this  also 
that  is  to  authorize,  nay  to  oblige,  every  thinker 
to  take  his  own  road,  though  not  in  search  of  the 
philosopher’s  stone,  for  he  is  saved  this  search 
by  the  philosophizing  of  our  contemporaries, 
and  everyone  nowadays  is  assured  that  he  has 
this  stone  in  his  grasp  as  his  birthright.  Now 
admittedly  it  is  the  case  that  those  who  live 
their  lives  in  the  state  as  it  actually  exists  here 
and  now  and  find  satisfaction  there  for  their 
knowledge  and  volition  (and  of  these  there  are 
many,  more  in  fact  than  think  or  know  it,  be¬ 
cause  ultimately  this  is  the  position  of  every¬ 
body),  or  those  at  any  rate  who  consciously  find 
their  satisfaction  in  the  state,  laugh  at  these 
operations  and  affirmations  and  regard  them  as 
an  empty  game,  sometimes  rather  funny,  some¬ 
times  rather  serious,  now  amusing,  now  danger¬ 
ous.  Thus  this  restless  activity  of  empty  reflec¬ 
tion,  together  with  its  popularity  and  the  wel¬ 
come  it  has  received,  would  be  a  thing  on  its 
own,  developing  in  privacy  in  its  own  way,  were 
it  not  that  it  is  philosophy  itself  which  has 
earned  all  kinds  of  scorn  and  discredit  by  its  in¬ 
dulgence  in  this  occupation.  The  worst  of  these 
kinds  of  scorn  is  this,  that,  as  I  said  just  now, 
everyone  is  convinced  that  his  mere  birthright 
puts  him  in  a  position  to  pass  judgement  on  phi¬ 
losophy  in  general  and  to  condemn  it.  No  other 
art  or  science  is  subjected  to  this  last  degree  of 
scorn,  to  the  supposition  that  we  are  masters  of 
it  without  ado. 

In  fact,  what  we  have  seen  recent  philosophi¬ 
cal  publications  proclaiming  with  the  maximum 
of  pretension  about  the  state  has  really  justified 
anybody  who  cared  to  busy  himself  with  the  sub¬ 
ject  in  this  conviction  that  he  could  manufacture 
a  philosophy  of  this  kind  himself  without  ado 
and  so  give  himself  proof  of  his  possession  of  phi¬ 
losophy.  Besides,  this  self-styled  “philosophy” 

1  [A.]  Additions  (PP.  1 15-150),  culled  from  notes 
taken  at  Hegel’s  lectures  by  Edward  Gans, 


has  expressly  stated  that  “truth  itself  cannot  be 
known,”  that  that  only  is  true  which  each  individ¬ 
ual  allows  to  rise  out  of  his  heart,  emotion,  and 
inspiration  about  ethical  institutions,  especially 
about  the  state,  the  government,  and  the  consti¬ 
tution.  In  this  connexion  what  a  lot  of  flattery 
has  been  talked,  especially  to  the  young!  Cer¬ 
tainly  the  young  have  listened  to  it  willingly 
enough.  “He  giveth  to  his  own  in  sleep”  has  been 
applied  to  science  and  hence  every  sleeper  has 
numbered  himself  among  the  elect,  but  the  con¬ 
cepts  he  has  acquired  in  sleep  are  themselves  of 
course  only  the  wares  of  sleep. 

A  ringleader  of  these  hosts  of  superficiality,  of 
these  self-styled  “philosophers,”  Herr  Fries,2  did 
not  blush,  on  the  occasion  of  a  public  festival 8 
which  has  become  notorious,  to  express  the  fol¬ 
lowing  ideas  in  a  speech  on  “The  state  and  the 
constitution”:  “In  the  people  ruled  by  a  genuine 
communal  spirit,  life  for  the  discharge  of  all 
public  business  would  come  from  below,  from 
the  people  itself ;  living  associations,  indissolubly 
united  by  the  holy  chain  of  friendship,  would  be 
dedicated  to  every  single  project  of  popular  edu¬ 
cation  and  popular  service,”  and  so  on.  This  is 
the  quintessence  of  shallow  thinking,  to  base 
philosophic  science  not  on  the  development  of 
thought  and  the  concept  but  on  immediate  sense- 
perception  and  the  play  of  fancy;  to  take  the 
rich  inward  articulation  of  ethical  life,  i.e.  the 
state,  the  architectonic  of  that  life’s  rationality 
— which  sets  determinate  limits  to  the  different 
circles  of  public  life  and  their  rights,  uses  the 
strict  accuracy  of  measurement  which  holds  to¬ 
gether  every  pillar,  arch,  and  buttress  and  there¬ 
by  produces  the  strength  of  the  whole  out  of 
the  harmony  of  the  parts — to  take  this  struc¬ 
ture  and  confound  the  completed  fabric  in  the 
broth  of  “heart,  friendship,  and  inspiration.”  Ac¬ 
cording  to  a  view  of  thiskind,  the  world  of  ethics 
(Epicurus,  holding  a  similar  view,  would  have 
said  the  “world  in  general”)  should  be  given  over 
— as  in  fact  of  course  it  is  not — to  the  subjec¬ 
tive  accident  of  opinion  and  caprice.  By  the  sim¬ 
ple  family  remedy  of  ascribing  to  feeling  the  la¬ 
bour,  the  more  than  millenary  labour,  of  reason 
and  its  intellect,  all  the  trouble  of  rational  insight 
and  knowledge  directed  by  speculative  thinking 
is  of  course  saved.  On  this  point,  Goethe’s 
Mephistopheles,  a  good  authority!,  says  some- 

2 1  have  borne  witness  before  to  the  superficiality  of 
his  philosophy — see  Science  of  Logic  (Nuremberg,  1812), 
Introduction,  p.  xvii  [Eng.  tr.  vol.  i,  p.  63]. 

3  See  Paragraph  126  and  Remark  (d)  to  Paragraph 
140.  Note  that  Hegel  subjoins  to  many  of  his  paragraphs 
explanatory  notes  which  are  here  printed  in  smaller  type 
and  referred  to  throughout  as  “remarks’’  in  order  to 
distinguish  them  from  the  translators  “Notes.” — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


thing  like  this,  a  quotation  I  have  used  else¬ 
where1  already:  “Do  but  despise  intellect  and 
knowledge,  the  highest  of  all  man’s  gifts,  and 
thou  hast  surrendered  thyself  to  the  devil  and  to 
perdition  art  doomed.”  The  next  thing  is  that 
such  sentiments  assume  even  the  guise  of  piety, 
for  this  bustling  activity  has  used  any  and  every 
expedient  in  its  endeavour  to  give  itself  author¬ 
ity,  With  godliness  and  the  Bible,  however,  it 
has  arrogated  to  itself  the  highest  of  justifica¬ 
tions  for  despising  the  ethical  order  and  the  ob¬ 
jectivity  of  law,  since  it  is  piety  too  which  en¬ 
velops  in  the  simpler  intuition  of  feeling  the 
truth  which  is  articulated  in  the  world  into  an 
organic  realm.  But  if  it  is  piety  of  the  right  sort, 
it  sheds  the  form  of  this  emotional  region  so 
soon  as  it  leaves  the  inner  life,  enters  upon  the 
daylight  of  the  Idea’s  development  and  revealed 
riches,  and  brings  with  it,  out  of  its  inner  wor¬ 
ship  of  God,  reverence  for  law  and  for  an  abso¬ 
lute  truth  exalted  above  the  subjective  form  of 
feeling. 

The  particular  form  of  guilty  conscience  re¬ 
vealed  by  the  type  of  eloquence  in  which  such 
superficiality  flaunts  itself  may  be  brought  to 
your  attention  here  and  above  all  if  you  notice 
that  when  it  is  furthest  from  mind,  superficiality 
speaks  most  of  mind,  when  its  talk  is  the  most 
tedious  dead-and-alive  stuff,  its  favourite  words 
are  “life”  and  “vitalize,”  and  when  it  gives  evi¬ 
dence  of  the  pure  selfishness  of  baseless  pride, 
the  word  most  on  its  lips  is  “people.”  But  the 
special  mark  which  it  carries  on  its  brow  is  the 
hatred  of  law.  Right  and  ethics,  and  the  actual 
world  of  justice  and  ethical  life,  are  understood 
through  thoughts ;  through  thoughts  they  are  in¬ 
vested  with  a  rational  form,  i.e.  with  universality 
and  determinacy.  This  form  is  law;  and  this  it 
is  which  the  feeling  that  stipulates  for  its  own 
whim,  the  conscience  that  places  right  in  subjec¬ 
tive  conviction,  has  reason  to  regard  as  its  chief 
foe.  The  formal  character  of  the  right  as  a  duty 
and  a  law  it  feels  as  the  letter,  cold  and  dead,  as 
a  shackle;  for  it  does  not  recognize  itself  in  the 
law  and  so  does  not  recognize  itself  as  free  there, 
because  law  is  the  reason  of  the  thing,  and  rea¬ 
son  refuses  to  allow  feeling  to  warm  itself  at  its 
own  private  hearth.  Hence  law,  as  I  have  re¬ 
marked  somewhere 2  in  the  course  of  this  text¬ 
book,  is  par  excellence  the  shibboleth  which 
marks  out  these  false  friends  and  comrades  of 
what  they  call  the  “people.” 

At  the  present  time,  the  pettifoggery  of  ca¬ 
price  has  usurped  the  name  of  philosophy  and 

1  Cf.  Goethe,  Faust ,  I.  iv.  322-3,  337-8. — Ed. 

2  In  the  footnote  to  Paragraph  258 _ Ed. 


succeeded  in  giving  a  wide  public  the  opinion 
that  such  triflings  are  philosophy.  The  result  of 
this  is  that  it  has  now  become  almost  a  disgrace 
to  go  on  speaking  in  philosophical  terms  about 
the  nature  of  the  state,  and  law-abiding  men 
cannot  be  blamed  if  they  become  impatient  so 
soon  as  they  hear  mention  of  a  philosophical 
science  of  the  state.  Still  less  is  it  a  matter  for 
surprise  that  governments  have  at  last  directed 
their  attention  to  this  kind  of  philosophy,  since, 
apart  from  anything  else,  philosophy  with  us  is 
not,  as  it  was  with  the  Greeks  for  instance,  pur¬ 
sued  in  private  like  an  art,  but  has  an  existence 
in  the  open,  in  contact  with  the  public,  and  espe¬ 
cially,  or  even  only,  in  the  service  of  the  state. 
Governments  have  proved  their  trust  in  their 
scholars  who  have  made  philosophy  their  chosen 
field  by  leaving  entirely  to  them  the  construc¬ 
tion  and  contents  of  philosophy — though  here 
and  there,  if  you  like,  it  may  not  have  been  so 
much  confidence  that  has  been  shown  as  indiffer¬ 
ence  to  learning  itself,  and  professorial  chairs  of 
philosophy  have  been  retained  only  as  a  tradi¬ 
tion  (in  France,  for  instance,  to  the  best  of  my 
knowledge,  chairs  of  metaphysics  at  least  have 
been  allowed  to  lapse).  Their  confidence,  how¬ 
ever,  has  very  often  been  ill  repaid,  or  alterna¬ 
tively,  if  you  preferred  to  see  indifference,  you 
would  have  to  regard  the  result,  the  decay  of 
thorough  knowledge,  as  the  penalty  of  this  in¬ 
difference.  Prima  facie,  superficiality  seems  to 
be  extremely  accommodating,  one  might  say,  at 
least  in  relation  to  public  peace  and  order,  be¬ 
cause  it  fails  to  touch  or  even  to  guess  at  the 
substance  of  the  things;  no  action,  or  at  least 
no  police  action,3  would  thus  have  been  taken 
against  it  in  the  first  instance,  had  it  not  been 
that  there  still  existed  in  the  state  a  need  for  a 
deeper  education  and  insight,  a  need  which  the 
state  required  philosophical  science  to  satisfy. 
On  the  other  hand,  superficial  thinking  about  the 
ethical  order,  about  right  and  duty  in  general, 
starts  automatically  from  the  maxims  which 
constitute  superficiality  in  this  sphere,  i.e.  from 
the  principles  of  the  Sophists  which  are  so  clear¬ 
ly  outlined  for  our  information  in  Plato.4  What 
is  right  these  principles  locate  in  subjective 
aims  and  opinions,  in  subjective  feeling  and  par¬ 
ticular  conviction,  and  from  them  there  follows 
the  ruin  of  the  inner  ethical  life  and  a  good 
conscience,  of  love  and  right  dealing  between 
private  persons,  no  less  than  the  ruin  of  public 
order  and  the  law  of  the  land.  The  significance 

3  See  Paragraphs  231-49. — Ed. 

4  Cf.  Plato,  Protagoras  and  Republic,  493  ff.,  where 
the  sophist  is  contrasted  with  the  true  philosopher. — Ed. 


PREFACE 


which  such  phenomena  must  acquire  for  gov¬ 
ernments  is  not  likely  to  suffer  any  diminution 
as  a  result  of  the  pretentiousness  which  has  used 
that  very  grant  of  confidence  and  the  authority 
of  a  professorial  chair  to  support  the  demand 
that  the  state  should  uphold  and  give  scope  to 
what  corrupts  the  ultimate  source  of  achieve¬ 
ment,  namely  universal  principles,  and  so  even 
to  the  defiance  of  the  state  as  if  such  defiance 
were  what  it  deserved.  “If  God  gives  a  man  an 
office,  he  also  gives  him  brains”  is  an  old  joke 
which  in  these  days  surely  no  one  will  take 
wholly  in  earnest. 

In  the  fresh  importance  which  circumstances 
have  led  governments  to  attach  to  the  character 
of  philosophical  work,  there  is  one  element  which 
we  cannot  fail  to  notice;  this  is  the  protection 
and  support  which  the  study  of  philosophy  now 
seems  to  have  come  to  need  in  several  other  di¬ 
rections.  Think  of  the  numerous  publications  in 
the  field  of  the  positive  sciences,  as  well  as  edify¬ 
ing  religious  works  and  vague  literature  of  other 
kinds,  which  reveal  to  their  readers  the  contempt 
for  philosophy  I  have  already  mentioned,  in  that, 
although  the  thought  in  them  is  immature  to  the 
last  degree  and  philosophy  is  entirely  alien  to 
them,  they  treat  it  as  something  over  and  done 
with.  More  than  this,  they  expressly  rail  against 
it  and  pronounce  its  content,  namely  the  specu¬ 
lative  knowledge  of  God,  nature,  and  mind,  the 
knowledge  of  truth,  to  be  a  foolish  and  even  sin¬ 
ful  presumptuousness,  while  reason,  and  again 
reason,  and  reason  repeated  ad  infinitum  is  ar¬ 
raigned,  disparaged,  and  condemned.  At  the  very 
least  such  writings  reveal  to  us  that,  to  a  majority 
of  those  engaged  in  activities  supposedly  scien¬ 
tific,  the  claims  of  the  concept  are  an  embarrass¬ 
ment  which  none  the  less  they  cannot  escape.  I 
venture  to  say  that  anyone  with  such  phenomena 
before  him  may  very  well  begin  to  think  that,  if 
they  alone  are  considered,  tradition  is  now  neith¬ 
er  worthy  of  respect  nor  sufficient  to  secure  for 
the  study  of  philosophy  either  tolerance  or  exist¬ 
ence  as  a  public  institution.1  The  arrogant  dec¬ 
lamations  current  in  our  time  against  philosophy 
present  the  singular  spectacle,  on  the  one  hand  of 

1 1  came  across  a  similar  view  in  a  letter  of  Joh.  von 
Muller  ( Werke ,  Part  vii,  p.  57).  In  talking  of  the  state 
of  Rome  in  1803  when  the  city  was  under  French  con¬ 
trol,  he  says:  “Asked  how  the  public  educational  insti¬ 
tutions  were  faring,  a  professor  replied  On  les  tolhe 
comme  les  bordels.”  The  so-called  “Doctrine  of  Reason.” 
logic  namely,  we  can  indeed  still  hear  recommended, 
perhaps  with  the  conviction  that  it  is  such  a  dry  and 
profitless  science  that  nobody  will  busy  himself  with  it, 
or  that  if  here  and  there  a  man  does  take  it  up,  he  will 
thereby  acquire  mere  empty  formulae,  unproductive  and 
innocuous,  and  that  therefore  in  either  case  the  recom¬ 
mendation  will  do  no  harm,  even  if  it  does  no  good. 


deriving  their  justification  from  the  superficial¬ 
ity  to  which  that  study  has  been  degraded,  and. 
on  the  other,  of  being  themselves  rooted  in  this 
element  against  which  they  turn  so  ungratefully. 
For  by  pronouncing  the  knowledge  of  truth  a 
wild-goose  chase,  this  self-styled  philosophizing 
has  reduced  all  thoughts  and  all  topics  to  the 
same  level,  just  as  the  despotism  of  the  Roman 
Empire  abolished  the  distinction  between  free 
men  and  slaves,  virtue  and  vice,  honour  and  dis¬ 
honour,  learning  and  ignorance.  The  result  of  this 
levelling  process  is  that  the  concepts  of  what  is 
true,  the  laws  of  ethics,  likewise  become  noth¬ 
ing  more  than  opinions  and  subjective  convic¬ 
tions.  The  maxims  of  the  worst  of  criminals, 
since  they  too  are  convictions,  are  put  on  the 
same  level  of  value  as  those  laws;  and  at  the 
same  time  any  object,  however  sorry,  however 
accidental,  any  material  however  insipid,  is  put 
on  the  same  level  of  value  as  what  constitutes 
the  interest  of  all  thinking  men  and  the  bonds 
of  the  ethical  world. 

It  is  therefore  to  be  taken  as  a  piece  of  hick 
for  philosophic  science — though  in  actual  fact, 
as  I  have  said,  it  is  the  necessity  of  the  thing — 
that  this  philosophizing  which  like  an  exercise 
in  scholasticism  might  have  continued  to  spin  its 
web  in  seclusion,  has  now  been  put  into  closer 
touch  and  so  into  open  variance  with  actuality, 
in  which  the  principles  of  rights  and  duties  are 
a  serious  matter,  and  which  lives  in  the  light  of 
its  consciousness  of  these. 

It  is  just  this  placing  of  philosophy  in  the  ac¬ 
tual  world  which  meets  with  misunderstandings, 
and  so  I  revert  to  what  I  have  said  before,  name¬ 
ly  that,  since  philosophy  is  the  exploration  of 
the  rational,  it  is  for  that  very  reason  the  appre¬ 
hension  of  the  present  and  the  actual,  not  the 
erection  of  a  beyond,  supposed  to  exist,  God 
knows  where,  or  rather  which  exists,  and  we  can 
perfectly  well  say  where,  namely  in  the  error  of 
a  one-sided,  empty,  ratiocination.  In  the  course 
of  this  book,2 1  have  remarked  that  even  Plato’s 
Republic,  which  passes  proverbially  as  an  empty 
ideal,  is  in  essence  nothing  but  an  interpretation 
of  the  nature  of  Greek  ethical  life.  Plato  was 
conscious  that  there  was  breaking  into  that  life 
in  his  own  time  a  deeper  principle  which  could 
appear  in  it  directly  only  as  a  longing  still  un¬ 
satisfied,  and  so  only  as  something  corruptive. 
To  combat  it,  he  needs  must  have  sought  aid 
from  that  very  longing  itself.  But  this  aid  had  to 
come  from  on  High  and  all  that  Plato  could  do 
was  to  seek  it  in  the  first  place  in  a  particular  ex¬ 
ternal  form  of  that  same  Greek  ethical  life.  By 
2  In  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  185. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


that  means  he  thought  to  master  this  corruptive 
invader,  and  thereby  he  did  fatal  injury  to  the 
deeper  impulse  which  underlay  it,  namely  free 
infinite  personality.  Still,  his  genius  is  proved  by 
the  fact  that  the  principle  on  which  the  distinc¬ 
tive  character  of  his  Idea  of  the  state  turns  is 
precisely  the  pivot  on  which  the  impending 
world  revolution  turned  at  that  time.1 

117/(7/  is  rational  is  actual  and  what  is  actual 
is  rational*  On  this  conviction  the  plain  man 
like  the  philosopher  takes  his  stand,  and  from 
it  philosophy  starts  in  its  study  of  the  universe 
of  mind  as  well  as  the  universe  of  nature.  If  re¬ 
flection,  feeling,  or  whatever  form  subjective 
consciousness  may  take,  looks  upon  the  present 
as  something  vacuous  and  looks  beyond  it  with 
the  eyes  of  superior  wisdom,  it  finds  itself  in  a 
vacuum,  and  because  it  is  actual  only  in  the 
present,  it  is  itself  mere  vacuity.  If  on  the  other 
hand  the  Idea  passes  for  “only  an  Idea,”  for 
something  represented  in  an  opinion,  philosophy 
rejects  such  a  view  and  shows  that  nothing  is 
actual  except  the  Idea.  Once  that  is  granted,  the 
great  thing  is  to  apprehend  in  the  show  of  the 
temporal  and  transient  the  substance  which  is 
immanent  and  the  eternal  which  is  present.  For 
since  rationality  (which  is  synonymous  with  the 
Idea)  enters  upon  external  existence  simultane¬ 
ously  with  its  actualization,  it  emerges  with  an 
infinite  wealth  of  forms,  shapes,  and  appear¬ 
ances.  Around  its  heart  it  throws  a  motley  cover¬ 
ing  with  which  consciousness  is  at  home  to  be¬ 
gin  with,  a  covering  which  the  concept  has  first 
to  penetrate  before  it  can  find  the  inward  pulse 
and  feel  it  still  beating  in  the  outward  appear¬ 
ances.  But  the  infinite  variety  of  circumstance 
which  is  developed  in  this  externality  by  the 
light  of  the  essence  glinting  in  it — this  endless 
material  and  its  organization — this  is  not  the 
subject  matter  of  philosophy.  To  touch  this  at 
all  would  be  to  meddle  with  things  to  which  phi¬ 
losophy  is  unsuited;  on  such  topics  it  may  save 
itself  the  trouble  of  giving  good  advice.  Plato  3 
might  have  omitted  his  recommendation  to 
nurses  to  keep  on  the  move  with  infants  and  to 
rock  them  continually  in  their  arms.  And  Fichte 
too  need  not  have  carried  what  has  been  called 
the  “construction”  of  his  passport  regulations 
to  such  a  pitch  of  perfection  as  to  require  sus¬ 
pects  not  merely  to  sign  their  passports  but  to 
have  their  likenesses  painted  on  them.  Along 

'See  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  140.  See  Paragraphs 
1S5  and  206.  “Free  infinite  personality” — See  Para¬ 
graphs  5,  2i,  and  35. — En. 

51  See  the  Addition  to  Paragraph  270  and  the  closing 
pages  of  the  Philosophy  of  History. —  Ed. 

8  Cf.  Plato,  Lmvs,  vii.  7S9. — Ed. 


such  tracks  all  trace  of  philosophy  is  lost,  and 
such  super-erudition  it  can  the  more  readily  dis¬ 
claim  since  its  attitude  to  this  infinite  multitude 
of  topics  should  of  course  be  most  liberal.  In 
adopting  this  attitude,philosophic science  shows 
itself  to  be  poles  apart  from  the  hatred  with 
which  the  folly  of  superior  wisdom  regards  a 
vast  number  of  affairs  and  institutions,  a  hatred 
in  which  pettiness  takes  the  greatest  delight  be¬ 
cause  only  by  venting  it  does  it  attain  a  feeling 
of  its  self-hood. 

This  book,  then,  containing  as  it  does  the 
science  of  the  state,  is  to  be  nothing  other  than 
the  endeavour  to  apprehend  and  portray  the 
state  as  something  inherently  rational.  As  a  work 
of  philosophy,  it  must  be  poles  apart  from  an  at¬ 
tempt  to  construct  a  state  as  it  ought  to  be.  The 
instruction  which  it  may  contain  cannot  consist 
in  teaching  the  state  what  it  ought  to  be;  it  can 
only  show  how  the  state,  the  ethical  universe,  is 
to  be  understood. 

’I\oi*  'P6\os  l\oi>  Kal  rb  ir^Xrjfia. 

Hie  Rhodus,  hie  saltus. 

To  comprehend  what  is,  this  is  the  task  of  philos¬ 
ophy,  because  what  is,  is  reason.  Whatever  hap¬ 
pens,  every  individual  is  a  child  of  his  time;  so 
philosophy  too  is  its  own  time  apprehended  in 
thoughts.4  It  is  just  as  absurd  to  fancy  that  a  phi¬ 
losophy  can  transcend  its  contemporary  world 
as  it  is  to  fancy  that  an  individual  can  overleap 
his  own  age,  jump  over  Rhodes.  If  his  theory 
really  goes  beyond  the  world  as  it  is  and  builds 
an  ideal  one  as  it  ought  to  be,  that  world  exists 
indeed,  but  only  in  his  opinions,  an  unsubstan¬ 
tial  element  where  anything  you  please  may,  in 
fancy,  be  built. 

With  hardly  an  alteration,  the  proverb  just 
quoted  would  run : 

Here  is  the  rose,  dance  thou  here. 

What  lies  between  reason  as  self-conscious  mind 
and  reason  as  an  actual  world  before  our  eyes, 
what  separates  the  former  from  the  latter  and 
prevents  it  from  finding  satisfaction  in  the  lat¬ 
ter,  is  the  fetter  of  some  abstraction  or  other 
which  has  not  been  liberated  [and  so  trans¬ 
formed]  into  the  concept.  To  recognize  reason 
as  the  rose  in  the  cross  of  the  present  and  there¬ 
by  to  enjoy  the  present,  this  is  the  rational  in¬ 
sight  which  reconciles  us  to  the  actual,  the  rec¬ 
onciliation  which  philosophy  affords  to  those  in 
whom  there  has  once  arisen  an  inner  voice  bid¬ 
ding  them  to  comprehend,  not  only  to  dwell  in 
what  is  substantive  while  still  retaining  subjec- 

4  Cf.  Bacon.  Novum  Orgatiutn,  i.  $4. — Ed. 


PREFACE 


tive  freedom,  but  also  to  possess  subjective  free¬ 
dom  while  standing  not  in  anything  particular 
and  accidental  but  in  what  exists  absolutely. 

It  is  this  too  which  constitutes  the  more  con¬ 
crete  meaning  of  what  was  described  above1 
rather  abstractly  as  the  unity  of  form  and  con¬ 
tent;  for  form  in  its  most  concrete  signification 
is  reason  as  speculative  knowing,  and  content  is 
reason  as  the  substantial  essence  of  actuality, 
whether  ethical  or  natural.  The  known  identity 
of  these  two  is  the  philosophical  Idea.  It  is  a 
sheer  obstinacy,  the  obstinacy  which  does  hon¬ 
our  to  mankind,  to  refuse  to  recognize  in  convic¬ 
tion  anything  not  ratified  by  thought.  This  ob¬ 
stinacy  is  the  characteristic  of  ourepoch, besides 
being  the  principle  peculiar  to  Protestantism. 
What  Luther 2  initiated  as  faith  in  feeling  and  in 
the  witness  of  the  spirit,  is  precisely  what  spirit, 
since  become  more  mature,  has  striven  to  ap¬ 
prehend  in  the  concept  in  order  to  free  and 
so  to  find  itself  in  the  world  as  it  exists  to-day. 
The  saying  has  become  famous  that  “a  half¬ 
philosophy  leads  away  from  God” — and  it  is 
the  same  half -philosophy  that  locates  knowledge 
in  an  “approximation”  to  truth3 — “while  true 
philosophy  leads  to  God” ;  and  the  same  is  true 
of  philosophy  and  the  state.  Just  as  reason  is 
not  content  with  an  approximation  which,  as 
something  “neither  cold  nor  hot,”  it  will  “spue 
out  of  its  mouth,”  so  it  is  just  as  little  con¬ 
tent  with  the  cold  despair  which  submits  to 
the  view  that  in  this  earthly  life  things  are 
truly  bad  or  at  best  only  tolerable,  though  here 

1  See  p.  i. — Ed. 

2  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  270. — Ed. 

3Cf.  Kant,  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  194. — Ed. 


they  cannot  be  improved  and  that  this  is  the 
only  reflection  which  can  keep  us  at  peace 
with  the  world.  There  is  less  chill  in  the  peace 
with  the  world  which  knowledge  supplies. 

One  word  more  about  giving  instruction  as  to 
what  the  world  ought  to  be.  Philosophy  in  any 
case  always  comes  on  the  scene  too  late  to  give 
it.  As  the  thought  of  the  world,  it  appears  only 
when  actuality  is  already  there  cut  and  dried 
after  its  process  of  formation  has  been  com¬ 
pleted.  The  teaching  of  the  concept,  which  is 
also  history’s  inescapable  lesson,  is  that  it  is  only 
when  actuality  is  mature  that  the  ideal  first  ap¬ 
pears  over  against  the  real  and  that  the  ideal 
apprehends  this  same  real  world  in  its  substance 
and  builds  it  up  for  itself  into  the  shape  of  an 
intellectual  realm.  When  philosophy  paints  its 
grey  in  grey,4  then  has  a  shape  of  life  grown  old. 
By  philosophy’s  grey  in  grey  it  cannot  be  re¬ 
juvenated  but  only  understood.  The  owl  of 
Minerva  spreads  its  wings  only  with  the  falling 
of  the  dusk. 

But  it  is  time  to  close  this  preface.  After  all, 
as  a  preface,  its  only  business  has  been  to  make 
some  external  and  subjective  remarks  about  the 
standpoint  of  the  book  it  introduces.  If  a  topic 
is  to  be  discussed  philosophically,  it  spurns  any 
but  a  scientific  and  objective  treatment,  and  so 
too  if  criticisms  of  the  author  take  any  form 
other  than  a  scientific  discussion  of  the  thing 
itself,  they  can  count  only  as  a  personal  epilogue 
and  as  capricious  assertion,  and  he  must  treat 
them  with  indifference. 

Berlin,  June  25th,  1820. 

4  Cf.  Goethe,  Faust,  Part  I.  11.  2039-40. — Ed. 


■ 


INTRODUCTION 

[Concept  of  the  Philosophy  of  Right,  of  the  Will,  Freedom,  and  Right.] 


1.  The  subject-matter  of  the  philosophical  sci¬ 
ence  of  right  is  the  Idea  of  right,  i.e.  the  concept 
of  right  together  with  the  actualization  of  that 
concept. 

Philosophy  has  to  do  with  Ideas,  and  therefore  not 
with  what  are  commonly  dubbed  “mere  concepts.” 
On  the  contrary,  it  exposes  such  concepts  as  one¬ 
sided  and  false,  while  showing  at  the  same  time  that 
it  is  the  concept  alone  (not  the  mere  abstract  cate¬ 
gory  of  the  understanding  which  we  often  hear  called 
by  the  name)  which  has  actuality,  and  further  that 
it  gives  this  actuality  to  itself.  All  else,  apart  from 
this  actuality  established  through  the  working  of 
the  concept  itself,  is  ephemeral  existence,  external 
contingency,  opinion,  unsubstantial  appearance,  fal¬ 
sity,  illusion,  and  so  forth.  The  shapes  which  the 
concept  assumes  in  the  course  of  its  actualization 
are  indispensable  for  the  knowledge  of  the  concept 
itself.  They  are  the  second  essential  moment  of  the 
Idea,  in  distinction  from  the  first,  i.e.  from  its  form, 
from  its  mode  of  being  as  concept  alone.1  [A.] 

2.  The  science  of  right  is  a  section  of  philoso¬ 
phy.  Consequently,  its  task  is  to  develop  the 
Idea — the  Idea  being  the  rational  factor  in  any 
object  of  study — out  of  the  concept,  or,  what  is 
the  same  thing,  to  look  on  at  the  proper  imma¬ 
nent  development  of  the  thing  itself.  As  a  section, 
it  has  a  definite  starting-point,  i.e.  the  result  and 
the  truth  of  what  has  preceded,  and  it  is  what 
has  preceded  which  constitutes  the  so-called 
“proof”  of  the  starting-point.  Hence  the  concept 
of  right,  so  far  as  its  coming  to  be  is  concerned, 
falls  outside  the  science  of  right;  it  is  to  be  taken 
up  here  as  given  and  its  deduction  is  presup¬ 
posed.2 

According  to  the  abstract,  non-philosophical,  meth¬ 
od  of  the  sciences,  the  first  thing  sought  and  de¬ 
manded  is  a  definition,  or  at  any  rate  this  demand 
is  made  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  external  form 
of  scientific  procedure.  (But  the  science  of  positive 
law  at  least  cannot  be  very  intimately  concerned 
with  definitions  since  it  begins  in  the  first  place  by 
stating  what  is  legal,  i.e.  what  the  particular  legal 
provisions  are,  and  for  this  reason  the  warning  has 

1  See  Paragraph  32. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraphs  29  and  4. — Ed. 


been  given:  omnis  definitio  in  jure  civili  periculosa .3 
In  fact,  the  more  disconnected  and  inherently  con¬ 
tradictory  are  the  provisions  giving  determinate 
character  to  a  right,  the  less  are  any  definitions  in  its 
field  possible,  for  definitions  should  be  stated  in  uni¬ 
versal  terms,  while  to  use  these  immediately  exposes 
in  all  its  nakedness  what  contradicts  them — the 
wrong  in  this  instance.  Thus  in  Roman  law,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  there  could  be  no  definition  of  “man,”  since 
“slave”  could  not  be  brought  under  it — the  very 
status  of  slave  indeed  is  an  outrage  on  the  conception 
of  man;  it  would  appear  just  as  hazardous  to  at¬ 
tempt  a  definition  of  “property”  and  “proprietor” 
in  many  cases.)  But  the  deduction  of  the  definition 
is  derived,  it  may  be,  from  etymology,  or  especially 
by  abstraction  from  particular  cases,  so  that  it  is 
based  on  human  feelings  and  ideas.  The  correctness 
of  the  definition  is  then  made  to  lie  in  its  correspond¬ 
ence  with  current  ideas.  This  method  neglects  what 
is  all-essential  for  science — i.e.  in  respect  of  content, 
the  absolute  necessity  of  the  thing  (right,  in  this  in¬ 
stance),  and,  in  respect  of  form,  the  nature  of  the 
concept. 

The  truth  is  that  in  philosophical  knowledge  the 
necessity  of  a  concept  is  the  principal  thing;  and  the 
process  of  its  production  as  a  result  is  its  proof  and 
deduction.  Then,  once  its  content  has  been  shown 
in  this  way  to  be  necessary  on  its  own  account,  the 
second  step  is  to  look  round  for  what  corresponds  to 
it  in  our  ideas  and  language.  But  this  concept  as  it 
actually  is  in  its  truth  not  only  may  be  different 
from  our  common  idea  of  it,  but  in  fact  must  be 
different  from  it  in  form  and  outline.  If,  however, 
the  common  idea  of  it  is  not  false  in  content  also, 
the  concept  may  be  exhibited  as  implied  in  it  and  as 
essentially  present  in  it.  In  other  words,  the  common 
idea  may  be  raised  to  assume  the  form  of  the  con¬ 
cept.  But  the  common  idea  is  so  far  from  being  the 
standard  or  criterion  of  the  concept  (which  is  nec¬ 
essary  and  true  on  its  own  account)  that  it  must 
rather  derive  its  truth  from  the  latter,  adjust  itself  to 
it,  and  recognize  its  own  nature  by  its  aid. 

But  while  the  above-mentioned  abstract  way  of 
knowing  with  its  formal  definitions,  syllogisms, 
proofs,  and  the  like,  is  more  or  less  a  thing  of  the 
past,  still  it  is  a  poor  substitute  which  a  different 
artifice  has  provided,  namely  to  adopt  and  uphold 
Ideas  in  general  (and  in  particular  the  Idea  of  right 
and  its  further  specifications)  as  immediate  “facts  of 

3  “In  civil  law,  definition  is  always  hazardous.” — Ed. 


9 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


consciousness”  and  to  make  into  the  source  of  right 
our  natural  or  our  worked  up  feelings  and  the  in¬ 
spirations  of  our  own  hearts.  This  method  may  be 
the  handiest  of  all,  but  it  is  also  the  most  unphilo- 
sophical — not  to  mention  here  other  aspects  of  such 
an  outlook,  which  has  a  direct  bearing  on  action  and 
not  simply  on  knowledge.1  While  the  old  method, 
abstract  as  it  is,  does  at  least  insist  on  the  form  of 
the  concept  in  its  definition  and  the  form  of  neces¬ 
sary  knowledge  in  its  demonstration,  the  artifice  of 
feeling  and  immediate  awareness  elevates  into  a 
guiding  principle  the  subjectivity,  contingency,  and 
arbitrariness  of  sapience.  What  constitutes  scientific 
procedure  in  philosophy  is  expounded  in  philosophi¬ 
cal  logic  and  is  here  presupposed.2  [A.] 

3.  Right  is  positive3  in  general  (a)  when  it  has 
the  form  of  being  valid  in  a  particular  state,  and 
this  legal  authority  is  the  guiding  principle  for 
the  knowledge  of  right  in  this  positive  form,  i.e. 
for  the  science  of  positive  law.  ( b )  Right  in  this 
positive  form  acquires  a  positive  element  in  its 
content 

(a)  through  the  particular  national  character 
of  a  people,  its  stage  of  historical  development, 
and  the  whole  complex  of  relations  connected 
with  the  necessities  of  nature; 4 

Q 3 )  because  a  system  of  positive  law  must  nec¬ 
essarily  involve  the  application  of  the  universal 
concept  to  particular,  externally  given,  char¬ 
acteristics  of  objects  and  cases.6  This  applica¬ 
tion  lies  outside  speculative  thought  and  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  the  concept,  and  is  the  subsump¬ 
tion  by  the  Understanding  [of  the  particular 
under  the  universal] ; 

(y)  through  the  finally  detailed  provisions  req¬ 
uisite  for  actually  pronouncing  judgement  in 
court. 

If  inclination,  caprice,  and  the  sentiments  of  the 
heart  are  set  up  in  opposition  to  positive  right  and 
the  laws,  philosophy  at  least  cannot  recognize  au¬ 
thorities  of  that  sort. — That  force  and  tyranny  may 
be  an  element  in  law  is  accidental  to  law  and  has 
nothing  to  do  with  its  nature.  Later  on  in  this  book, 
in  Paragraphs  2ii-i4,it  will  be  shown  at  what  point 
right  must  become  positive.  The  details  to  be  ex¬ 
pounded  there  are  being  mentioned  here  only  to  in¬ 
dicate  the  limits  of  the  philosophical  study  of  law 
and  to  obviate  at  once  any  possible  supposition,  let 
alone  demand,  that  the  outcome  of  its  systematic 
development  should  be  a  code  of  positive  law,  i.e. 
a  code  like  the  one  an  actual  state  requires. 

Natural  law,  or  law  from  the  philosophical  point 
of  view,  is  distinct  from  positive  law;  but  to  pervert 

1  See  e.g.,  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  126  and  140. — Ed 

2  See  Preface,  p.  1. — Ed. 

8  For  the  distinction  between  Recht  and  Gesetz  see  Par¬ 
agraphs  21 1  ff. — Ed. 

4  See  the  section  on  the  “Geographical  Basis  of  His¬ 
tory”  in  the  Philosophy  of  History ,  pp.  190  ff. — Ed. 
6  See  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  69,  212,  214. — Ed. 


their  difference  into  an  opposition  and  a  contradic¬ 
tion  would  be  a  gross  misunderstanding.  The  rela¬ 
tion  between  them  is  much  more  like  that  between 
Institutes  and  Pandects. 

As  for  the  historical  element  in  positive  law,  men¬ 
tioned  above  in  Paragraph  3,  Montesquieu  0  pro¬ 
claimed  the  true  historical  view,  the  genuinely  philo¬ 
sophical  position,  namely  that  legislation  both  in 
general  and  in  its  particular  provisions  is  to  be 
treated  not  as  something  isolated  and  abstract  but 
rather  as  a  subordinate  moment  in  a  whole,  inter¬ 
connected  with  all  the  other  features  which  make 
up  the  character  of  a  nation  and  an  epoch.  It  is  in 
being  so  connected  that  the  various  laws  acquire 
their  true  meaning  and  therewith  their  justification. 
To  consider  particular  laws  as  they  appear  and 
develop  in  time  is  a  purely  historical  task.  Like  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  what  can  be  logically  deduced  from 
a  comparison  of  these  laws  with  previously  existing 
legal  principles,  this  task  is  appreciated  and  re¬ 
warded  in  its  own  sphere  and  has  no  relation  what¬ 
ever  to  the  philosophical  study  of  the  subject — un¬ 
less  of  course  the  derivation  of  particular  laws  from 
historical  events  is  confused  with  their  derivation 
from  the  concept,  and  the  historical  explanation  and 
justification  is  stretched  to  become  an  absolutely 
valid  justification.  This  difference,  which  is  very  im¬ 
portant  and  should  be  firmly  adhered  to,  is  also  very 
obvious.  A  particular  law  may  be  shown  to  be 
wholly  grounded  in  and  consistent  with  the  circum¬ 
stances  and  with  existing  legally  established  institu¬ 
tions,  and  yet  it  may  be  wrong  and  irrational  in  its 
essential  character,  like  a  number  of  provisions  in 
Roman  private  law  which  followed  quite  logically 
from  such  institutions  as  Roman  matrimony  and 
Roman  patria  potestas7  But  even  if  particular  laws 
are  both  right  and  reasonable,  still  it  is  one  thing 
to  prove  that  they  have  that  character — which  can¬ 
not  be  truly  done  except  by  means  of  the  concept — 
and  quite  another  to  describe  their  appearance  in 
history  or  the  circumstances,  contingencies,  needs, 
and  events  which  brought  about  their  enactment. 
That  kind  of  exposition  and  (pragmatic)  knowl¬ 
edge,  based  on  proximate  or  remote  historical  causes, 
is  frequently  called  “explanation”  or  preferably 
“comprehension”  by  those  who  think  that  to  ex¬ 
pound  history  in  this  way  is  the  only  thing,  or  rath¬ 
er  the  essential  thing,  the  only  important  thing,  to 
be  done  in  order  to  comprehend  law  or  an  estab¬ 
lished  institution ;  whereas  what  is  really  essential, 
the  concept  of  the  thing,  they  have  not  discussed  at 
all.  From  the  same  point  of  view,  reference  is  com¬ 
monly  made  also  to  the  Roman  or  the  German  “con¬ 
cepts”  of  law,  i.e.  concepts  of  law  as  they  might  be 
defined  in  this  or  that  legal  code,  whereas  what  is 
meant  is  not  concepts  but  only  general  legal  princi¬ 
ples,  propositions  of  the  Understanding,  maxims, 
positive  laws,  and  the  like. 

By  dint  of  obscuring  the  difference  between  the 

6  Cf.  Montesquieu,  The  Spirit  of  Laws,  Book  i,  Chap. 
3. — Ed. 

7  See  Remark  and  Addition  to  Paragraph  180. — Ed. 


INTRODUCTION 


historical  and  the  philosophical  study  of  law,  it  be¬ 
comes  possible  to  shift  the  point  of  view  and  slip 
over  from  the  problem  of  the  true  justification  of  a 
thing  to  a  justification  by  appeal  to  circumstances, 
to  deductions  from  presupposed  conditions  which  in 
themselves  may  have  no  higher  validity,  and  so 
forth.  To  generalize,  by  this  means  the  relative  is 
put  in  place  of  the  absolute  and  the  external  appear¬ 
ance  in  place  of  the  true  nature  of  the  thing.  When 
those  who  try  to  justify  things  on  historical  grounds 
confound  an  origin  in  external  circumstances  with 
one  in  the  concept,  they  unconsciously  achieve  the 
very  opposite  of  what  they  intend.  Once  the  origina¬ 
tion  of  an  institution  has  been  shown  to  be  wholly 
to  the  purpose  and  necessary  in  the  circumstances  of 
the  time,  the  demands  of  history  have  been  fulfilled. 
But  if  this  is  supposed  to  pass  for  a  general  justifica¬ 
tion  of  the  thing  itself,  it  turns  out  to  be  the  op¬ 
posite,  because,  since  those  circumstances  are  no 
longer  present,  the  institution  so  far  from  being 
justified  has  by  their  disappearance  lost  its  meaning 
and  its  right.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  we  accept 
as  a  vindication  of  the  monasteries  their  service  in 
cultivating  wildernesses  and  populating  them,  in 
keeping  learning  alive  by  transcribing  manuscripts 
and  giving  instruction,  &c.,  and  suppose  further  that 
this  service  has  been  deemed  to  be  the  ground  and  the 
purpose  of  their  continued  existence,  then  what  real¬ 
ly  follows  from  considering  this  past  service  is  that, 
since  circumstances  have  now  entirely  altered,  the 
monasteries  are  at  least  in  this  respect  superfluous 
and  inappropriate. 

Now  that  the  historical  meaning  of  coming  to  be 
— the  historical  method  of  portraying  it  and  making 
it  comprehensible — is  at  home  in  a  different  sphere 
from  the  philosophical  survey  of  the  concept  of  the 
thing  and  of  a  thing’s  coming  to  be  too,1  philosophy 
and  history  are  able  to  that  extent  to  preserve  an 
attitude  of  mutual  indifference.  But  they  are  not 
always  at  peace  in  this  way,  even  in  scientific  circles, 
and  so  I  quote  something,  relevant  to  their  contact, 
which  appears  in  Herr  Hugo’s  Lehrbuch  der  Geschich- 
te  des  romischen  Rechts2  and  which  will  at  the 
same  time  cast  further  light  on  the  affectation  that 
they  are  opposed.  Herr  Hugo  says3  that  “Cicero 
praises  the  Twelve  Tables  with  a  side-glance  at  the 
philosophers  .  .  .  but  the  philosopher  Favorinus 
treats  them  exactly  as  many  a  great  philosopher 
since  his  day  has  treated  positive  law.”  In  the  same 
context  Herr  Hugo  makes  the  final  retort  to  a  treat¬ 
ment  of  the  subject  like  Favorinus’  when  he  gives  as 
the  reason  for  it  that  “Favorinus  understood  the 
Twelve  Tables  just  as  little  as  these  philosophers 
have  understood  positive  law.” 

The  correction  of  the  philosopher  Favorinus  by  the 
jurist  Sextus  Caecilius  in  Aulus  Gellius 4  is  primarily 
an  expression  of  the  permanent  and  true  principle 

1  For  some  of  Hegel’s  criticisms  of  Savigny,  see  Para¬ 
graph  2  n. — Ed. 

2  Gustav,  Ritter  von  Hugo,  Text-book  of  the  History  of 
Roman  Law. — Ed. 

8  5th  edn.,  §  53. 

4  Nodes  Atticae,  xx.  1. 


II 

for  justifying  what  is  purely  positive  in  its  intrinsic 
worth.  Non  . .  .  ignoras,  Caecilius  happily  retorts  to 
Favorinus,  legum  opportunitates  et  medelas  pro  tem- 
porum  moribus  et  pro  rerum  publicarum  generibus, 
ac  pro  utilitatum  praesentium  rationibus,  proque 
vitiorum,  quibus  medendum  est,  fervoribus,  mutari 
ac  flecti,  neque  uno  statu  consistere,  quin ,  ut  facies 
coeli  et  maris,  ita  rerum  atque  fortunae  tempestati- 
bus  varientur.  Quid  salubrius  visum  est  rogatione 
ilia  Stolonis  . .  .,  quid  utilius  plebiscito  Voconio  . .  .? 
Quid  tarn  necessarium  existimatum  est  .  .  .  quam 
Lex  Licinia  .  .  .?  Omnia  tamen  haec  obliterata  et 
operta  sunt  civitatis  opulentia.5  These  laws  are  pos¬ 
itive  in  so  far  as  they  have  their  meaning  and  ap¬ 
propriateness  in  contemporary  conditions,  and  there¬ 
fore  their  sole  value  is  historical  and  they  are  of  a 
transitory  nature.  The  wisdom  of  what  legislators 
and  administrators  did  in  their  day  or  settled  to 
meet  the  needs  of  the  hour  is  a  separate  matter  and 
one  properly  to  be  assessed  by  history.  History’s 
recognition  of  it  will  be  all  the  deeper  the  more  its 
assessment  is  supported  by  a  philosophical  outlook. 

Of  Caecilius’s  further  arguments  in  justification  of 
the  Twelve  Tables  against  Favorinus,  however,  I 
will  give  an  example,  because  he  introduces  in  them 
the  eternally  deceptive  method  and  argumentation 
of  the  Understanding,  I  mean  the  production  of  a 
good  reason  for  a  bad  thing  and  the  supposition  that 
the  bad  thing  has  thereby  been  justified.  Caecilius  is 
discussing  the  horrible  law  that  gave  a  creditor  the 
right  after  a  fixed  period  of  time  to  kill  his  debtor  or 
sell  him  into  slavery,  or,  if  there  were  several  credi¬ 
tors,  to  cut  pieces  off  their  debtor  and  divide  him  up 
amongst  themselves;  and  there  was  even  a  further 
proviso  that  if  one  of  them  cut  off  too  much  or  too 
little,  no  action  was  for  that  reason  to  lie  against 
him — a  clause  which  would  have  benefited  Shake¬ 
speare’s  Shylock  in  the  Merchant  of  Venice  and  of 
which  he  would  most  gratefully  have  availed  him¬ 
self.  For  this  law  Caecilius  adduces  the  good  reason 
that  it  rendered  trust  and  credit  all  the  more  secure 
and  that  because  of  its  horrible  character  there  was 
never  to  have  been  any  question  of  its  application. 
In  his  thoughtlessness  not  only  does  the  reflection 
escape  him  that  if  the  law  could  never  have  been 
applied,  then  the  aim  of  securing  trust  and  credit  by 
it  was  frustrated,  but  he  even  goes  on  directly  after¬ 
wards  to  give  an  example  of  how  the  law  concerning 
false  witness  was  made  ineffective  owing  to  its  im¬ 
moderate  penalties. 

There  is  no  knowing,  however,  what  Herr  Hugo 

5  “You  must  be  aware  that  the  advantages  and  reme¬ 
dies  offered  by  the  laws  vary  and  fluctuate  in  accordance 
with  contemporary  customs,  types  of  constitution,  con¬ 
siderations  of  immediate  advantage,  and  the  violence  of 
the  ills  to  be  remedied.  Laws  do  not  persist  unchanged  in 
character;  on  the  contrary,  the  storms  of  circumstance 
and  chance  alter  them  as  storms  change  the  face  of  the 
sea  and  the  sky.  Has  anything  ever  seemed  more  salutary 
than  Stolo’s  proposal  .  .  .,  more  advantageous  than  the 
decree  .  .  .  carried  by  Voconius  as  tribune?  What  has 
been  taken  to  be  so  necessary  ...  as  the  Licinian  law? 
Yet,  now  that  the  state  has  grown  wealthy,  all  these  reg¬ 
ulations  have  been  blotted  out  and  buried/’ — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


means  when  he  says  that  Favorinus  did  not  under¬ 
stand  the  law.  Any  schoolboy  is  perfectly  capable 
of  understanding  it,  and  Shylock  would  have  under¬ 
stood  better  than  anyone  else  the  clause,  cited  above, 
which  would  have  been  so  advantageous  to  him.  By 
“understand”  Herr  Hugo  must  have  meant  only 
that  level  of  understanding  which  in  the  case  of  such 
a  law  is  content  if  it  can  find  a  good  reason  for  it. 

Still,  another  misunderstanding  of  which  Favori¬ 
nus  was  convicted  by  Caecilius  in  the  same  context 
is  one  to  which  a  philosopher  may  surely  confess 
without  exactly  blushing;  I  mean  the  failure  to  un¬ 
derstand  that  jumentum  (which  “as  distinct  from 
arcera”  is,  according  to  the  law,  the  only  convey¬ 
ance  to  be  provided  for  a  sick  man  who  has  to  ap¬ 
pear  in  court)  is  to  be  interpreted  to  mean  not  only 
a  horse  but  also  a  carriage  or  wagon.  From  this  legal 
proviso  Caecilius  was  able  to  derive  a  further  proof 
of  the  excellence  and  precision  of  the  old  laws  by 
pointing  out  that,  in  fixing  the  terms  of  a  summons 
to  a  sick  man  to  appear  in  court,  they  even  carried 
precision  so  far  as  to  distinguish  not  only  between  a 
horse  and  a  wagon,  but  even  between  one  wagon 
and  another,  between  one  covered  in  and  “uphol¬ 
stered,”  according  to  Caecilius’  interpretation,  and 
one  not  so  comfortable.  Here  we  would  have  the 
choice  between  the  severity  of  the  original  law  and 
the  triviality  of  such  distinctions,  but  to  describe 
such  things,  and  still  more  their  learned  interpreta¬ 
tion,  as  “trivial”  would  be  one  of  the  worst  of  in¬ 
sults  to  erudition  of  this  kind  and  others! 

But  in  the  same  Lehrbuch  Herr  Hugo  goes  on  to 
speak  of  rationality  in  connexion  with  Roman  law, 
and  what  has  struck  me  in  his  remarks  is  the  follow¬ 
ing.  In  his  treatment  of  the  “period  from  the  origin 
of  the  state  to  the  Twelve  Tables”  he  says  1  that  (in 
Rome)  “men  had  many  wants  and  were  compelled 
to  work  and  hence  needed  the  assistance  of  draught 
and  pack  animals,  such  as  we  are  familiar  with  our¬ 
selves  ;  that  in  Roman  territory  hills  and  valleys  al¬ 
ternated  and  that  the  city  was  built  on  a  hill”  and  so 
forth — disquisitions  which  were  perhaps  intended  to 
carry  out  Montesquieu’s  ideas,  but  in  which  one  will 
hardly  find  that  his  spirit  has  been  caught.  Then  he 
goes  on  to  say2  that  “the  legal  position  was  still 
very  far  from  satisfying  the  highest  demands  of  rea¬ 
son.”  That  is  quite  right,  Roman  law  in  respect  of 
the  family,  slavery,  &c.,  fails  even  to  satisfy  reason’s 
most  modest  demands.  But  in  dealing  with  later 
periods  of  Roman  history,  Herr  Hugo  forgets  to  tell 
us  whether  in  any  of  them,  and  if  so  in  which,  Ro¬ 
man  law  did  “satisfy  the  highest  demands  of  rea¬ 
son.”  However,  of  the  classical  jurists  in  the  period 
of  the  “highest  maturity  of  Roman  law  asa science,” 
Herr  Hugo  writes: 3  “It  has  long  since  been  observed 
that  the  classical  jurists  were  educated  through  phi¬ 
losophy,”  yet  “few  know”  (though  more  know  now, 
thanks  to  the  numerous  editions  of  Herr  Hugo’s 
Lehrbuch )  “that  no  class  of  writers  is  so  well  en¬ 

1  §§  38-9  \_op .  cit.  in  7th  edn.]. 

2  §  40  [ibid,  in  7th  edn.] 

8  §  289  [§  314  in  7th  edn.]. 


titled  as  these  same  Roman  jurists  to  be  compared 
with  mathematicians  in  respect  of  the  rigorous  logic 
of  their  deductive  reasoning  or  with  the  new  founder 
of  metaphysics  in  respect  of  their  quite  strikingly 
distinctive  method  of  developing  their  concepts — a 
contention  supported  by  the  curious  fact  that  no¬ 
where  are  there  to  be  found  so  many  trichotomies 
as  there  are  in  the  classical  jurists  and  in  Kant.” 
Logical  deduction,  a  method  commended  by  Leibniz, 
is  certainly  an  essential  characteristic  of  the  study  of 
positive  law,  as  of  mathematics  and  any  other 
science  of  the  Understanding,  but  this  deductive 
method  of  the  Understanding  has  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  the  satisfaction  of  the  demands  of  reason 
or  with  philosophical  science.  But  apart  from  that 
it  is  the  i/logicality  of  the  Roman  jurists  and  prae¬ 
tors  that  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  their  chief  vir¬ 
tues,  for  by  dint  of  being  illogical  they  evaded  un¬ 
just  and  detestable  laws,  though  in  the  process  they 
found  themselves  compelled  collide 4  to  devise  empty 
verbal  distinctions  (e.g.  to  call  bonorum  possessio 
what  was  nevertheless  hereditas )  and  downright 
foolish  subterfuges  (and  folly  also  is  illogicality)  in 
order  to  preserve  the  letter  of  the  Twelve  Tables 
(e.g.  by  the  jictio,  vtt oKpiais,  that  a  filia  was  a  filt- 
us )  .6  It  is  ludicrous  though  to  see  the  classical  jurists 
compared  with  Kant  because  of  a  few  trichotomous 
divisions,  especially  those  cited  as  examples  in  the 
fifth  note  to  Herr  Hugo’s  paragraph,  and  to  see  that 
kind  of  thing  called  “development  of  concepts.” 

4.  The  basis  of  right  is,  in  general,  mind;  its 
precise  place  and  point  of  origin  is  the  will.  The 
will  is  free,  so  that  freedom  is  both  the  substance 
of  right  and  its  goal,  while  the  system  of  right 
is  the  realm  of  freedom  made  actual,  the  world 
of  mind  brought  forth  out  of  itself  like  a  second 
nature. 

In  considering  the  freedom  of  the  will,  we  may  re¬ 
call  the  old  method  of  cognition.  The  procedure  was 
to  presuppose  the  idea  of  the  will  and  to  attempt  to 
establish  a  definition  of  the  will  by  deriving  it  from 
that  idea;  then  the  so-called  “proof”  of  the  will’s 
freedom  was  extracted,  in  the  manner  of  the  old  em¬ 
pirical  psychology,  from  the  various  feelings  and 
phenomena  of  the  ordinary  consciousness,  such  as 
remorse,  guilt,  and  the  like,  by  maintaining  that  they 
were  to  be  explained  only  in  the  light  of  a  will  that 
was  free.  But  it  is  more  convenient  of  course  to  ar¬ 
rive  at  the  same  point  by  taking  the  short  cut  of  sup¬ 
posing  that  freedom  is  given  as  a  “fact  of  conscious¬ 
ness”  and  that  we  must  simply  believe  in  it ! 

The  proof  that  the  will  is  free  and  the  proof  of  the 
nature  of  the  will  and  freedom  can  be  established  (as 
has  already  been  pointed  out  in  Paragraph  2)  only 
as  a  link  in  the  whole  chain  [of  philosophy].  The 
fundamental  premisses  of  this  proof  are  that  mind 

4  Collide — “artfully”  or  “on  the  sly”  (see  Remark  to 
Paragraph  180). — Ed. 

5J.  G.  Heineccius:  Antiquitatum  Romanarum  juris- 
prudentiam  illustrantium  Synta  ma  [Basel,  1752],  lib, 
i,  tit.  ii,  §  24. 


INTRODUCTION 


to  start  with  is  intelligence,  that  the  phases  through 
which  it  passes  in  its  development  from  feeling, 
through  representative  thinking,  to  thinking  proper, 
are  the  road  along  which  it  produces  itself  as  will, 
and  that  will,  as  practical  mind  in  general,  is  the 
truth  of  intelligence,  the  stage  next  above  it.  These 
premisses  I  have  expounded  in  my  Encyclopaedia  of 
the  Philosophical  Sciences'  and  I  hope  by  and  by  to 
be  able  to  elaborate  them  still  further.  There  is  all 
the  more  need  for  me  by  so  doing  to  make  my  con¬ 
tribution  to  what  I  hope  is  the  deeper  knowledge  of 
the  nature  of  mind  in  that,  as  I  have  said  in  the  En¬ 
cyclopaedia ,2  scarcely  any  philosophical  science  is  so 
neglected  and  so  ill  off  as  the  theory  of  mind, usually 
called  “psychology.”  The  moments  in  the  concept  of 
the  will  which  are  dealt  with  in  this  and  the  follow¬ 
ing  Paragraphs  of  the  Introduction  result  from  the 
premisses  to  which  I  have  just  referred,  but  in  addi¬ 
tion  anyone  may  find  help  towards  forming  an  idea 
of  them  by  calling  on  his  own  self-consciousness.  In 
the  first  place,  anyone  can  discover  in  himself  ability 
to  abstract  from  everything  whatever,  and  in  the 
same  way  to  determine  himself,  to  posit  any  con¬ 
tent  in  himself  by  his  own  effort ;  and  similarly  the 
other  specific  characteristics  of  the  will  are  exempli¬ 
fied  for  him  in  his  own  consciousness.  [A.] 

5.  The  will  contains  (a)  the  element  of  pure 
indeterminacy  or  that  pure  reflection  of  the  ego 
into  itself  which  involves  the  dissipation  of  every 
restriction  and  every  content  either  immediately 
presented  by  nature,  by  needs,  desires,  and  im¬ 
pulses,  or  given  and  determined  by  any  means 
whatever.  This  is  the  unrestricted  infinity  of 
absolute  abstraction  or  universality,  the  pure 
thought  of  oneself. 

Those  who  regard  thinking  as  one  special  faculty, 
distinct  from  the  will  as  another  special  faculty,  and 
who  even  proceed  to  contend  that  thinking  is  preju¬ 
dicial  to  the  will,  especially  the  good  will,  reveal  at 
the  very  outset  their  complete  ignorance  of  the  na¬ 
ture  of  the  will — a  remark  we  shall  have  to  make 
rather  often  when  dealing  with  this  same  subject. 

In  Paragraph  5,  it  is  only  one  side  of  the  will  which 
is  described,  namely  this  unrestricted  possibility  of 
abstraction  from  every  determinate  state  of  mind 
which  I  may  find  in  myself  or  which  I  may  have  set 
up  in  myself,  my  flight  from  every  content  as  from  a 
restriction.  When  the  will’s  self-determination  con¬ 
sists  in  this  alone,  or  when  representative  thinking 
regards  this  side  by  itself  as  freedom  and  clings  fast 
to  it,  then  we  have  negative  freedom,  or  freedom  as 
the  Understanding  conceives  it.  This  is  the  freedom 
of  the  void  which  rises  to  a  passion  and  takes  shape 
in  the  world;  while  still  remaining  theoretical,  it 
takes  shape  in  religion  as  the  Hindu  fanaticism  of 
pure  contemplation,  but  when  it  turns  to  actual  prac¬ 
tice,  it  takes  shape  in  religion  and  politics  alike  as 

Heidelberg,  1817,  §§363-99  [3rd  edn.  §§440-82]. 

2  [1st  edn.]  Remark  to  §  367  [3rd  edn.  §  444  and  cf. 
§  378]. 


13 

the  fanaticism  of  destruction — the  destruction  of 
the  whole  subsisting  social  order — as  the  elimination 
of  individuals  who  are  objects  of  suspicion  to  any 
social  order,  and  the  annihilation  of  any  organization 
which  tries  to  rise  anew  from  the  ruins.  Only  in  de¬ 
stroying  something  does  this  negative  will  possess 
the  feeling  of  itself  as  existent.  Of  course  it  imagines 
that  it  is  willing  some  positive  state  of  affairs,  such 
as  universal  equality  or  universal  religious  life,  but 
in  fact  it  does  not  will  that  this  shall  be  positively 
actualized,  and  for  this  reason:  such  actuality  leads 
at  once  to  some  sort  of  order,  to  a  particularization 
of  organizations  and  individuals  alike;  while  it  is 
precisely  out  of  the  annihilation  of  particularity  and 
objective  characterization  that  the  self-consciousness 
of  this  negative  freedom  proceeds.  Consequently, 
what  negative  freedom  intends  to  will  can  never  be 
anything  in  itself  but  an  abstract  idea,  and  giving 
effect  to  this  idea  can  only  be  the  fury  of  destruction. 
[A.] 

6.  ( f3 )  At  the  same  time,  the  ego  is  also  the 
transition  from  undifferentiated  indeterminacy 
to  the  differentiation,  determination,  and  posit¬ 
ing  of  a  determinacy  as  a  content  and  object. 
Now  further,  this  content  may  either  be  given  by 
nature  or  engendered  by  the  concept  of  mind. 
Through  this  positing  of  itself  as  something  de¬ 
terminate,  the  ego  steps  in  principle  into  deter¬ 
minate  existence.  This  is  the  absolute  moment, 
the  finitude  or  particularization  of  the  ego. 

This  second  moment — determination — is  negativity 
and  cancellation  like  the  first,  i.e.  it  cancels  the  ab¬ 
stract  negativity  of  the  first.  Since  it  is  the  general 
rule  that  the  particular  is  contained  in  the  universal, 
it  follows  that  this  second  moment  is  already  con¬ 
tained  in  the  first  and  is  simply  an  explicit  positing 
of  what  the  first  already  was  implicitly  .The  first 
moment,  I  mean — because  by  itself  it  is  only  the  first 
— is  not  true  infinity  or  concrete  universality,  not 
the  concept,  but  only  something  determinate,  one¬ 
sided;  i.e.,  being  abstraction  from  all  determinacy, 
it  is  itself  not  without  determinacy ;  and  to  be  some¬ 
thing  abstract  and  one-sided  constitutes  its  determi¬ 
nacy,  its  defectiveness,  and  its  finitude. 

The  determination  and  differentiation  of  the  two 
moments  which  have  been  mentioned  is  to  be  found 
in  the  philosophies  of  Fichte,  Kant,  and  others; 
only,  in  Fichte — to  confine  ourselves  to  his  exposi¬ 
tion — the  ego,  as  that  which  is  without  limitation,  is 
taken  (in  the  first  proposition  of  his  Science  of 
Knowledge)  purely  and  simply  as  something  posi¬ 
tive  and  so  as  the  universality  and  identity  of  the 
Understanding.  The  result  is  that  this  abstract  ego 
by  itself  is  supposed  to  be  the  whole  truth,  and 
therefore  the  restriction — the  negative  in  general, 
whether  as  a  given  external  barrier  or  as  an  activity 
of  the  ego  itself— appears  (in  the  second  propos;tion) 
as  an  addition  merely. 

To  apprehend  the  negativity  immanent  in  the  uni¬ 
versal  or  self-identical,  e.g.  in  the  ego,  was  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


next  step  which  speculative  philosophy  had  to  take 
—a  step  of  whose  necessity  they  have  no  inkling  who 
hold  to  the  dualism  of  infinite  and  finite  and  do  not 
even  grasp  it  in  that  immanence  and  abstraction  in 
which  Fichte  did.  [A.] 

7 .  (y)  The  will  is  the  unity  of  both  these  mo¬ 
ments.  It  is  particularity  reflected  into  itself  and 
so  brought  back  to  universality,  i.e.  it  is  individ¬ 
uality.  It  is  the  ^//-determination  of  the  ego, 
which  means  that  at  one  and  the  same  time  the 
ego  posits  itself  as  its  own  negative,  i.e.  as  re¬ 
stricted  and  determinate,  and  yet  remains  by  it¬ 
self,  i.e.  in  its  self-identity  and  universality.  It 
determines  itself  and  yet  at  the  same  time  binds 
itself  together  with  itself.  The  ego  determines 
itself  in  so  far  as  it  is  the  relating  of  negativity 
to  itself.  As  this  self-relation,  it  is  indifferent  to 
this  determinacy ;  it  knows  it  as  something  which 
is  its  own,  something  which  is  only  ideal,  a  mere 
possibility  by  which  it  is  not  constrained  and  in 
which  it  is  Confined  only  because  it  has  put  it¬ 
self  in  it. — This  is  the  freedom  of  the  will  and 
it  constitutes  the  concept  or  substantiality  of  the 
will,  its  weight,  so  to  speak,  just  as  weight  con¬ 
stitutes  the  substantiality  of  a  body. 

Every  self-consciousness  knows  itself  (i)  as  univer¬ 
sal,  as  the  potentiality  of  abstracting  from  everything 
determinate,  and  (ii)  as  particular,  with  a  determi¬ 
nate  object,  content,  and  aim.  Still,  both  these  mo¬ 
ments  are  only  abstractions;  what  is  concrete  and 
true  (and  everything  true  is  concrete)  is  the  univer¬ 
sality  which  has  the  particular  as  its  opposite,  but 
the  particular  which  by  its  reflection  into  itself  has 
been  equalized  with  the  universal.  This  unity  is  in¬ 
dividuality,  not  individuality  in  its  immediacy  as  a 
unit,  our  first  idea  of  individuality,  but  individuality 
in  accordance  with  its  concept ; 1  indeed,  individual¬ 
ity  in  this  sense  is  just  precisely  the  concept  itself. 
The  first  two  moments — (i)  that  the  will  can  ab¬ 
stract  from  everything,  and  (ii)  that  it  is  also  de¬ 
termined  in  some  specific  way  either  by  itself  or  by 
something  else — are  readily  admitted  and  grasped 
because,  taken  independently,  they  are  false  and 
moments  of  the  Understanding.  But  the  third  mo¬ 
ment,  which  is  true  and  speculative  (and  everything 
true  must  be  thought  speculatively  if  it  is  to  be  com¬ 
prehended)  is  the  one  into  which  the  Understanding 
declines  to  advance,  for  it  is  precisely  the  concept 
which  it  persists  in  calling  the  inconceivable.  It  is 
the  task  of  logic  as  purely  speculative  philosophy  to 
prove  and  explain  further  this  innermost  secret  of 
speculation,  of  infinity  as  negativity  relating  itself 
to  itself,  this  ultimate  spring  of  all  activity,  life,  and 
consciousness.  Here  attention  can  only  be  drawn  to 
the  fact  that  if  you  say  “the  will  is  universal,  the 
will  determines  itself,”  the  words  you  use  to  describe 
the  will  presuppose  it  to  be  a  subject  or  substratum 
from  the  start.  But  the  will  is  not  something  com- 

xEnc.,  [ist  edn.]  §§  112-14  [3rd  edn.  §§  163-5]. 


plete  and  universal  prior  to  its  determining  itself 
and  prior  to  its  superseding  and  idealizing  this  de¬ 
termination.  The  will  is  not  a  will  until  it  is  this 
self-mediating  activity,  this  return  into  itself.  [A.] 

8.  The  more  detailed  process  of  particulariza¬ 
tion  (see  Paragraph  6)  constitutes  the  difference 
between  the  forms  of  the  will:  (a)  If  the  will’s 
determinate  character  lies  in  the  abstract  oppo¬ 
sition  of  its  subjectivity  to  the  objectivity  of  ex¬ 
ternal  immediate  existence,  then  this  is  the  for¬ 
mal  will  of  mere  self-consciousness  which  finds 
an  external  world  confronting  it.  As  individual¬ 
ity  returning  in  its  determinacy  into  itself,  it  is 
the  process  of  translating  the  subjective  purpose 
into  objectivity  through  the  use  of  its  own  ac¬ 
tivity  and  some  external  means.  Once  mind  has 
developed  its  potentialities  to  actuality  (me  er 
an  and  fur  sich  ist),  its  determinate  character 
is  true  and  simply  its  own.2  At  that  stage,  the  re¬ 
lation  of  consciousness  constitutes  only  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  the  will,3  an  aspect  which  is  not  sepa¬ 
rately  considered  any  further  here.  [A.] 

9.  ( b )  In  so  far  as  the  specific  determinations 
of  the  will  are  its  own  or,  in  general,  its  particu¬ 
larization  reflected  into  itself,  they  are  its  con¬ 
tent.  This  content,  as  content  of  the  will,  is,  in 
accordance  with  the  form  of  will  described  in 
(a),  its  purpose,  either  its  inward  or  subjective 
purpose  when  the  will  merely  images  its  object, 
or  else  its  purpose  actualized  and  achieved  by 
means  of  its  activity  of  translating  its  subjective 
purpose  into  objectivity. 

10.  This  content,  or  the  will’s  determination  on 
something  specific,  is  in  the  first  place  immedi¬ 
ate.  Consequently  the  will  is  then  free  only  in 
itself  or  for  an  external  observer,  or,  to  speak 
generally,  it  is  the  will  in  its  concept.  It  is  not 
until  it  has  itself  as  its  object  that  the  will  is  for 
itself  what  it  is  in  itself. 

Finitude  consists  therefore  in  this,  that  what  some¬ 
thing  is  in  itself  or  in  accordance  with  its  concept  is 
one  phenomenon  or  exists  in  one  way,  while  what  it 
is  for  itself  is  a  different  phenomenon  or  exists  in  an¬ 
other  way ;  so,  for  example,  in  itself  the  abstract  re¬ 
ciprocal  externality  characteristic  of  nature  is  space, 
but  for  itself  it  is  time.4  In  this  connexion, two  things 
are  to  be  noticed:  (i)  The  true  is  the  Idea  and  the 
Idea  alone,  and  hence  if  you  take  an  object  or  a  cate¬ 
gory  only  as  it  is  in  itself  or  in  its  concept,  you  have 
not  yet  grasped  it  in  its  truth,  (ii)  A  thing  which  is 
in  itself  or  as  concept  is  also  existent  in  some  way 
and  its  existence  in  such  a  way  is  a  shape  proper  to 
the  thing  itself  (asspaceisin  the  example  just  given). 

2Enc.,  [ist  edn.]  §  363  [3rd  edn.  §  440]. 

3  With  this  Paragraph  compare  the  references  to  it  in 
Paragraphs  25,  28,  108,  and  109. — Ed. 

4  See  Addition  to  Paragraph  42. — Ed. 


INTRODUCTION 


The  gulf  present  in  the  sphere  of  the  finite  between 
“in-itself-ness”  and  “for-itseif-ness”  constitutes  at 
the  same  time  that  sphere’s  mere  existential  or  phe¬ 
nomenal  character.  (Examples  of  this — the  natural 
will  and  then  formal  rights,  &c. — will  be  forthcoming 
directly.)1 

The  Understanding  goes  no  further  than  the  pure¬ 
ly  implicit  character  of  a  thing  and  consequently 
calls  the  freedom  which  accords  with  this  implicit 
character  a  “potency,”  because  if  freedom  is  only 
implicit  it  is  indeed  mere  potentiality.  But  the  Un¬ 
derstanding  looks  upon  this  implicit  character  as  ab¬ 
solute  and  perennial;  and  it  takes  the  relation  of 
freedom  to  what  it  wills,  or  in  general  to  the  ob¬ 
ject  in  which  it  is  realized,  as  merely  a  matter  of  its 
application  to  a  given  material,  not  belonging  to 
the  essence  of  freedom  itself.  Thus  it  has  to  do  with 
the  abstract  only,  not  with  its  Idea  and  its  truth.  [A.] 

11.  The  will  which  is  but  implicitly  free  is  the 
immediate  or  natural  will.  The  specific  char¬ 
acteristics  of  the  difference  which  the  self-deter¬ 
mining  concept  sets  up  within  the  will  appear  in 
the  natural  will  as  an  immediately  existing  con¬ 
tent,  i.e.  as  the  impulses,  desires,  inclinations, 
whereby  the  will  finds  itself  determined  in  the 
course  of  nature.  This  content,  together  with  the 
specific  differences  developed  within  it,  arises 
from  the  rationality  of  the  will  and  so  is  implic¬ 
itly  rational;  but,  poured  out  in  this  way  into 
the  mould  of  immediacy,  it  still  lacks  the  form 
of  rationality.  It  is  true  that  this  content  has  for 
me  the  general  character  of  being  mine;  but  this 
form  is  still  different  from  the  content,  and 
hence  the  will  is  still  a  will  finite  in  character. 

Empirical  psychology  details  and  describes  these 
impulses  and  inclinations,  and  the  needs  arising  from 
them,  as  it  finds  them,  or  presumes  it  finds  them,  in 
experience,  and  it  proceeds  in  the  usual  way  to  classi¬ 
fy  this  given  material.  Consideration  is  given  below2 
to  the  objective  element  in  these  impulses,  both  to  its 
true  character  stripped  of  the  form  of  irrationality 
which  it  possesses  as  impulse  and  also  to  the  manner 
in  which  at  the  same  time  it  is  shaped  externally. 
[A.] 

12.  The  whole  of  this  content,  as  we  light  upon 
it  in  its  immediacy  in  the  will,  is  there  only  as  a 
medley  and  multiplicity  of  impulses,  each  of 
which  is  merely  “my  desire”  but  exists  along¬ 
side  other  desires  which  are  likewise  all  “mine,” 
and  each  of  which  is  at  the  same  time  something 
universal  and  indeterminate,  aimed  at  all  kinds 
of  objects  and  satiable  in  all  kinds  of  ways. 
When,  in  this  twofold  indeterminacy,  the  will 
gives  itself  the  form  of  individuality  (see  Para¬ 
graph  7),  this  constitutes  the  resolution  of  the 

1See  Paragraphs  n-18  and  21  ff— Ed. 

2  i.e.,  in  Paragraphs  19  and  150  with  the  Remarks 
thereto. — Ed. 


will,  and  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  it  resolves  that  the 
will  is  an  actual  will  at  all. 

To  resolve  on  something  is  to  cancel  the  state  of 
indeterminacy  in  which  one  content  is  prima  facie 
just  as  much  of  a  possibility  as  any  other.  As  an  al¬ 
ternative  to  etwas  beschliessen  (to  resolve  on  some¬ 
thing)  the  German  language  also  contains  the  ex¬ 
pression  sich  entschliessen.  This  expresses  the  fact 
that  the  indeterminate  character  of  the  will  itself,  as 
itself  neutral  yet  infinitely  prolific,  the  original  seed 
of  all  determinate  existence,  contains  its  determina¬ 
tions  and  aims  within  itself  and  simply  brings  them 
forth  out  of  itself. 

13.  By  resolving,  the  will  posits  itself  as  the 
will  of  a  specific  individual  and  as  a  will  separat¬ 
ing  itself  off  against  another  individual.  But 
apart  from  this  finitude  as  consciousness  (see 
Paragraph  8),  the  immediate  will  is  on  account 
of  the  difference  between  its  form  and  its  con¬ 
tent  (see  Paragraph  11)  a  will  only  in  form.  The 
decision  which  belongs  to  it  as  such  is  only  ab¬ 
stract  and  its  content  is  not  yet  the  content  and 
product  of  its  freedom. 

In  so  far  as  intelligence  thinks,3  its  object  and  con¬ 
tent  remains  something  universal,  while  its  own  be¬ 
haviour  consists  of  a  universal  activity.  In  the  will, 
“the  universal”  also  means  in  essence  “mine,”  “indi¬ 
viduality”  ;  and  in  the  immediate  will — the  will  which 
is  will  in  form  only — it  means  abstract  individuality, 
individuality  not  yet  filled  with  its  free  universality. 
Hence  it  is  in  the  will  that  the  intrinsic  finitude  of 
intelligence  has  its  beginning ;  and  it  is  only  by  rais¬ 
ing  itself  to  become  thought  again,4  and  endowing 
its  aims  with  immanent  universality,  that  the  will 
cancels  the  difference  of  form  and  content  and  makes 
itself  the  objective,  infinite,  will.  Thus  they  under¬ 
stand  little  of  the  nature  of  thinking  and  willing  who 
suppose  that  while,  in  willing  as  such,  man  is  infi¬ 
nite,  in  thinking,  he,  or  even  reason  itself,  is  restrict¬ 
ed.  In  so  far  as  thinking  and  willing  are  still  distin¬ 
guished,  the  opposite  is  rather  the  truth,  and  will  is 
thinking  reason  resolving  itself  to  finitude.  [A.] 

14.  The  finite  will  as,  in  respect  of  its  form, 
though  only  its  form,  the  self -reflecting,  inde¬ 
pendent,  and  infinite  ego  (see  Paragraph  5), 
stands  over  its  content,  i.e.  its  various  impulses, 
and  also  over  the  further  separate  ways  in  which 
these  are  actualized  and  satisfied.  At  the  same 
time,  since  it  is  infinite  in  form  only,  it  is  tied 
to  this  content  (see  Paragraphs  6  and  11)  as  to 
the  specific  determinations  of  its  nature  and  its 
external  actuality;  though  since  it  is  indeter¬ 
minate,  it  is  not  tied  to  this  or  that  specific  con¬ 
tent.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  ego  reflected 
into  itself,  this  content  is  only  a  possible  one, 

3  See  Paragraph  4. — Ed. 

4  See  Part  III. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


i.e.  it  may  be  mine  or  it  may  not ;  and  the  ego 
similarly  is  the  possibility  of  determining  myself 
to  this  or  to  something  else,  of  choosing  between 
these  specific  determinations,  which  at  this 
point  I  regard  as  external  to  me. 

15.  At  this  stage,  the  freedom  of  the  will  is 
arbitrariness  ( Willkur )  and  this  involves  two 
factors:  (a)  free  reflection,  abstracting  from 
everything,  and  ( b )  dependence  on  a  content 
and  material  given  either  from  within  or  from 
without.  Because  this  content,  implicitly  neces¬ 
sary  as  purpose,1  is  at  the  same  time  qualified 
in  the  face  of  free  reflection  as  possible,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  arbitrariness  is  contingency  manifest¬ 
ing  itself  as  will.2 

The  idea  which  people  most  commonly  have  of 
freedom  is  that  it  is  arbitrariness — the  mean,  chosen 
by  abstract  reflection,  between  the  will  wholly  de¬ 
termined  by  natural  impulses,  and  the  will  free  ab¬ 
solutely.  If  we  hear  it  said  that  the  definition  of 
freedom  is  ability  to  do  what  we  please,  such  an  idea 
can  only  be  taken  to  reveal  an  utter  immaturity  of 
thought,  for  it  contains  not  even  an  inkling  of  the 
absolutely  free  will,  of  right,  ethical  life,  and  so 
forth.  Reflection,  the  formal  universality  and  unity  of 
self-consciousness,  is  the  will’s  abstract  certainty  of 
its  freedom,  but  it  is  not  yet  the  truth  of  freedom,  be¬ 
cause  it  has  not  yet  got  itself  as  its  content  and  aim, 
and  consequently  the  subjective  side  is  still  other 
than  the  objective ;  the  content  of  this  self-determi¬ 
nation,  therefore,  also  remains  purely  and  simply 
finite.  Instead  of  being  the  will  in  its  truth,  arbi¬ 
trariness  is  more  like  the  will  as  contradiction. 

In  the  controversy  carried  on  especially  at  the 
time  of  Wolff’s  metaphysic  3  as  to  whether  the  will 
were  really  free  or  whether  the  conviction  of  its  free¬ 
dom  were  only  a  delusion,  it  was  arbitrariness  which 
was  in  view.  In  opposition  to  the  certitude  of  this 
abstract  self-determination,  determinism  has  right¬ 
ly  pointed  to  the  content  which,  as  something  met 
with,  is  not  contained  in  that  certitude  and  so  comes 
to  it  from  outside,  although  “outside”  in  this  case 
means  impulses,  ideas,  or,  in  general,  consciousness 
so  filled  in  one  way  or  another  that  its  content  is 
not  intrinsic  to  its  self-determining  activity  as  such. 
Since,  then,  arbitrariness  has  immanent  in  it  only  the 
formal  element  in  willing,  i.e.  free  self-determination, 
while  the  other  element  is  something  given  to  it,  we 
may  readily  allow  that,  if  it  is  arbitrariness  which 
is  supposed  to  be  freedom,  it  may  indeed  be  called  an 
illusion.  In  every  philosophy  of  reflection,  like  Kant’s, 
and  Kant’s  deprived  of  all  its  depth  by  Fries,  free¬ 
dom  is  nothing  else  but  this  empty  self-activity.  [A.] 

16.  What  the  will  has  decided  to  choose  (see 
Paragraph  14)  it  can  equally  easily  renounce 
(see  Paragraph  5).  But  its  ability  to  go  beyond 

1See  Paragraph  19  and  the  Remark  thereto. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraph  5. — Ed. 

8  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  4. — Ed. 


any  other  choice  which  it  may  substitute,  and 
so  on  ad  infinitum,  never  enables  it  to  get  be¬ 
yond  its  own  finitude,  because  the  content  of 
every  such  choice  is  something  other  than  the 
form  of  the  will  and  therefore  something  finite, 
while  the  opposite  of  determinacy,  namely  in¬ 
determinacy,  i.e.  indecision  or  abstraction  from 
any  content,  is  only  the  other,  equally  one-sided, 
moment  of  the  will. 

17.  The  contradiction  which  the  arbitrary  will 
is  (see  Paragraph  15),  comes  into  appearance 
as  a  dialectic  of  impulses  and  inclinations;  each 
of  them  is  in  the  way  of  every  other — the  satis¬ 
faction  of  one  is  unavoidably  subordinated  or 
sacrificed  to  the  satisfaction  of  another,  and  so 
on.  An  impulse  is  simply  a  uni-directional  urge 
and  thus  has  no  measuring-rod  in  itself,  and  so 
this  determination  of  its  subordination  or  sacri¬ 
fice  is  the  contingent  decision  of  the  arbitrary 
will  which,  in  deciding,  may  proceed  either  by 
using  intelligence  to  calculate  which  impulse 
will  give  most  satisfaction,  or  else  in  accordance 
with  any  other  optional  consideration.  [A.] 

18.  In  connexion  with  the  judgement  of  im¬ 
pulses,  this  dialectic  appears  in  the  following 
form:  (a)  As  immanent  and  so  positive,  the  de¬ 
terminations  of  the  immediate  will  are  good; 
thus  man  is  said  to  be  by  nature  good.  ( b )  But, 
in  so  far  as  these  determinations  are  natural  and 
thus  are  in  general  opposed  to  freedom  and  the 
concept  of  mind,  and  hence  negative,  they  must 
be  uprooted,  and  so  man  is  said  to  be  by  nature 
evil. — At  this  point  a  decision  in  favour  of  either 
thesis  depends  equally  on  subjective  arbitrari¬ 
ness.  [A.] 

19.  In  the  demand  for  the  purification 4  of  im¬ 
pulses  there  lies  the  general  notion  that  they 
should  be  freed  both  from  their  form  as  immedi¬ 
ate  and  natural  determinations,  and  also  from 
the  subjectivity  and  contingency  of  their  con¬ 
tent,  and  so  brought  back  to  their  substantial 
essence.  The  truth  behind  this  vague  demand  is 
that  the  impulses  should  become  the  rational 
system  of  the  will’s  volitions.  To  grasp  them  like 
that,  proceeding  out  of  the  concept  of  the  will,  is 
the  content  of  the  philosophical  science  of  right. 

The  content  of  this  science  through  every  single 
one  of  its  moments,  e.g.  right,  property,  morality, 
family,  state,  and  so  forth,  may  be  expounded  in 
the  form:  man  has  by  nature  the  impulse  towards 
right,  also  the  impulse  to  property  and  morality,  al¬ 
so  the  impulse  of  love  between  the  sexes,  the  impulse 
to  sociability,  &c.  This  form  is  to  be  found  in  em¬ 
pirical  psychology.  But  if  in  its  stead  the  greater 

4  See  Paragraph  139. — Ed. 


INTRODUCTION 


dignity  of  a  philosophical  dress  is  desired,  then  ac¬ 
cording  to  what,  as  was  remarked  before,1  has  passed 
in  recent  times,  and  still  passes,  for  philosophy,  this 
dress  may  be  had  cheap  by  the  simple  device  of  say¬ 
ing  that  man  discovers  within  himself  as  a  “fact  of 
his  consciousness”  that  right,  property,  the  state,  &c., 
are  objects  of  his  volition.  Later  in  the  text,2  this 
same  subject-matter,  which  appears  here  in  the 
shape  of  impulses,  will  come  on  the  scene  in  another 
form,  i.e.  in  the  shape  of  duties. 

20.  When  reflection  is  brought  to  bear  on  im¬ 
pulses,  they  are  imaged,  estimated,  compared 
with  one  another,  with  their  means  of  satisfac¬ 
tion  and  their  consequences,  &c.,  and  with  a  sum 
of  satisfaction  (i.e.  with  happiness).  In  this  way 
reflection  invests  this  material  with  abstract 
universality  and  in  this  external  manner  puri¬ 
fies  it  from  its  crudity  and  barbarity.  This 
growth  of  the  universality  of  thought  is  the  ab¬ 
solute  value  in  education3  (compare  Paragraph 
187).  [A.] 

21.  The  truth,  however,  of  this  abstract  uni¬ 
versality,  which  is  indeterminate  in  itself  and 
finds  its  determinacy  in  the  material  mentioned 
in  Paragraph  20,  is  self-determining  universality, 
the  will,  freedom.  In  having  universality,  or  it¬ 
self  qua  infinite  form,4  for  its  object,  content, 
and  aim,  the  will  is  free  not  only  in  itself  but 
for  itself  also;  it  is  the  Idea  in  its  truth. 

(i)  When  the  will’s  self-consciousness  takes  the 
form  of  desire  and  impulse,  this  consciousness  is 
sense-consciousness,  just  as  sensation  in  general  de¬ 
notes  externality  and  therefore  the  condition  in 
which  self-consciousness  is  self -external,  (ii)  When 
the  will  is  reflective,  it  contains  two  elements — this 
sense-consciousness  and  the  universality  of  thought, 
(iii)  When  the  will’s  potentialities  have  become  fully 
explicit,  then  it  has  for  its  object  the  will  itself  as 
such,  and  so  the  will  in  its  sheer  universality — a  uni¬ 
versality  which  is  what  it  is  simply  because  it  has 
absorbed  in  itself  the  immediacy  of  instinctive  de¬ 
sire  and  the  particularity  which  is  produced  by  re¬ 
flection  and  with  which  such  desire  eo  ipso  becomes 
imbued.  But  this  process  of  absorption  in  or  eleva¬ 
tion  to  universality  is  what  is  called  the  activity  of 
thought.  The  self-consciousness  which  purifies  its  ob¬ 
ject,  content,  and  aim,  and  raises  them  to  this  uni¬ 
versality  effects  this  as  thinking  getting  its  own  way 
in  the  will.  Here  is  the  point  at  which  it  becomes 
clear  that  it  is  only  as  thinking  intelligence  that  the 
will  is  genuinely  a  will  and  free.  The  slave  does  not 
know  his  essence,  his  infinity,  his  freedom ;  he  does 
not  know  himself  as  human  in  essence ;  and  he  lacks 
this  knowledge  of  himself  because  he  does  not  think 

1e.g.,  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  2  and  4. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraphs  148  ff.  and  especially  Remark  to 
Paragraph  150. — Ed. 

3  See  Paragraphs  123,  268,  and  315. — Ed. 

4  See  Paragraph  5. — Ed. 


himself.  This  self-consciousness  which  apprehends 
itself  through  thinking  as  essentially  human,  and 
thereby  frees  itself  from  the  contingent  and  the  false, 
is  the  principle  of  right,  morality,  and  all  ethical  life. 
Philosophic  utterances  about  right,  morality,  and  eth¬ 
ical  life  from  those  who  would  banish  thought  and 
have  recourse  instead  to  feeling,  enthusiasm,  the  heart 
and  the  breast,  are  expressive  of  the  utterly  contempt¬ 
ible  position  into  which  thought  and  philosophic 
science  have  fallen,  because  what  this  amounts  to  is 
that  even  philosophic  science  itself,  plunged  in  self¬ 
despair  and  extreme  exhaustion,  is  taking  as  its  prin¬ 
ciple  barbarity  and  absence  of  thought,  and  would 
do  its  best  to  rob  mankind  of  all  truth,  worth,  and 
dignity.  [A.] 

22.  It  is  the  will  whose  potentialities  have  be¬ 
come  fully  explicit  which  is  truly  infinite,  be¬ 
cause  its  object  is  itself  and  so  is  not  in  its  eyes 
an  “other”  or  a  barrier;  on  the  contrary,  in  its 
object  this  will  has  simply  turned  backward  in¬ 
to  itself.  Further  this  will  is  not  mere  potential¬ 
ity,  capacity,  potency  ( potentia ),  but  the  in¬ 
finite  in  actuality  ( infinitum  actu ),  since  the 
concept’s  existence  or  its  objective  externality 
is  inwardness  itself. 

Thus,  if  anyone  speaks  simply  of  the  “free  will”  as 
such,  without  specifically  referring  to  the  will  which 
is  fret  absolutely,  he  is  speaking  only  of  the  capacity 
for  freedom,  or  of  the  natural  and  finite  will  (see 
Paragraph  11),  and  not  by  any  means  therefore  of 
the  free  will,  despite  his  intention  and  the  words  he 
uses. 

Since  the  Understanding  takes  the  infinite  only  as 
something  negative  and  so  as  something  “beyond,” 
it  supposes  that  it  is  doing  all  the  more  honour  to 
the  infinite,  the  more  it  pushes  it  into  the  distance 
away  from  itself  and  removes  it  from  itself  as  some¬ 
thing  alien.  In  the  free  will,  the  truly  infinite  be¬ 
comes  actual  and  present;  the  free  will  itself  is  this 
Idea  whose  nature  it  is  to  be  present  here  and  now. 
[A.] 

23.  Only  in  freedom  of  this  kind  is  the  will  by 
itself  without  qualification,  because  then  it  is 
related  to  nothing  except  itself  and  so  is  released 
from  every  tie  of  dependence  on  anything  else. 
The  will  is  then  true,  or  rather  truth  itself,  be¬ 
cause  its  self-determination  consists  in  a  corre¬ 
spondence  between  wThat  it  is  in  its  existence 
(i.e.  what  it  is  as  objective  to  itself)  and  its  con¬ 
cept  ;  or  in  other  words,  the  pure  concept  of  the 
will  has  the  intuition  of  itself  for  its  goal  and  its 
reality. 

24.  The  will  is  then  universal,  because  all  re¬ 
striction  and  all  particular  individuality  have 
been  absorbed  within  it.  These  lie  only  in  the 
difference  between  the  concept  and  its  content 
or  object,  or,  to  put  it  otherwise,  in  the  differ- 


18  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


ence  between  its  implicit  character  and  its  sub¬ 
jective  awareness  of  itself,  or  between  its  uni¬ 
versality  and  its  exclusive  individuality,  the  in¬ 
dividuality  which  resolves. 

The  various  types  of  universality  develop  in  logic.1 
In  connexion  with  this  word  “universality,”  what 
strikes  representative  thinking  first  is  the  idea  of  ab¬ 
stract  and  external  universality;  but  in  connexion 
with  absolute  universality — and  the  universality 
here  in  question  is  of  this  character — we  have  to 
think  neither  of  the  universality  of  reflection,  i.e. 
“all-ness”  or  the  universal  as  a  common  character¬ 
istic,  nor  of  the  abstract  universality  which  stands 
outside  and  over  against  the  individual,  the  abstract 
identity  of  the  Understanding  (see  Remark  to  Para¬ 
graph  6).  It  is  the  universality  concrete  in  character 
and  so  explicitly  universal  which  is  the  substance  of 
self-consciousness,  its  immanent  generic  essence,  or 
its  immanent  Idea.  This — the  concept  of  the  free 
will — is  the  universal  which  overlaps  its  object,  pene¬ 
trates  its  particular  determination  through  and 
through  and  therein  remains  identical  with  itself. 
The  absolutely  universal  is  definable  as  what  is 
called  the  “rational,”  and  it  can  be  apprehended  on¬ 
ly  in  this  speculative  way. 

25.  The  subjective,  in  relation  to  the  will  in 
general,  means  the  will’s  self-conscious  side,  its 
individuality  (see  Paragraph  7)  in  distinction 
from  its  implicit  concept.  The  subjectivity  of 
the  will  means  therefore 

fa)  the  pure  form  of  the  will,  the  absolute 
unity  of  self-consciousness  with  itself  (a  unity  in 
which  self-consciousness,  as  1=1,  is  purely  and 
simply  inward  and  abstractly  self-dependent), 
the  pure  certainty,  as  distinguished  from  the 
truth,  of  individuality; 

(l 3 )  the  particular  will  as  the  arbitrary  will  and 
the  contingent  content  of  optional  aims ; 

(y)  in  general,  the  one-sided  form  of  the  will 
(see  Paragraph  8)  for  which  the  thing  willed, 
whatever  its  content,  is  but  a  content  belonging 
to  self-consciousness  and  an  aim  unfulfilled. 

26.  (a)  The  will  is  purely  and  simply  objective 
in  so  far  as  it  has  itself  for  its  determination  and 
so  is  in  correspondence  with  its  concept  and 
genuinely  a  will ; 

Q 3 )  but  the  objective  will,  being  without  the 
infinite  form  of  self-consciousness,  is  the  will 
absorbed  in  its  object  or  condition,  whatever 
the  content  of  these  may  be;  it  is  the  will  of  the 
child,  the  ethical  will,  also  the  will  of  the  slave, 
the  superstitious  man,  &c.; 

(y)  objectivity,  finally,  is  the  one-sided  form 
opposed  to  the  subjective  volition,  and  hence  it 
is  the  immediacy  of  existence  as  external  reality; 
the  will  first  becomes  objective  to  itself  in  this 

1Enc.,  [1st  edn.]  §§  118-26  [3rd  edn.  §§  169-78]. 


sense  through  the  fulfilment  of  its  aims. 

These  logical  categories — subjectivity  and  objectiv¬ 
ity — have  been  set  forth  in  detail  here  primarily  with 
a  view  to  pointing  out  expressly  in  relation  to  them, 
since  they  are  often  used  in  the  sequel,  that  they, 
like  other  distinctions  and  opposed  categories  of  re¬ 
flection,  pass  over  into  their  opposites  as  a  result 
of  their  finitude  and  their  dialectical  character.  In 
other  cases  of  opposition  between  two  categories, 
each  opposite  retains  a  hard  and  fast  meaning  for 
representative  thinking  and  the  Understanding,  be¬ 
cause  the  identity  of  the  opposites  is  still  only  some¬ 
thing  inward.  In  the  will,  on  the  other  hand,  these 
opposed  aspects  are  supposed  to  be  at  one  and  the 
same  time  abstractions  and  yet  determinations  of 
the  will ,  which  can  be  known  only  as  something  con¬ 
crete,  and  they  lead  automatically  to  their  identity 
and  to  the  confusion  of  their  meanings — a  confusion 
into  which  the  Understanding  slips  quite  uncon¬ 
sciously.  Thus,  for  example,  the  will  as  inward  free¬ 
dom  is  subjectivity  itself ;  subjectivity  therefore  is 
the  concept  of  the  will  and  so  its  objectivity.  But  it 
is  its  subjectivity, contrasted  with  objectivity, which 
is  finitude,  and  yet,  because  of  this  very  contrast,  the 
will  is  not  by  itself  but  is  entangled  with  its  object, 
and  so  its  finitude  consists  quite  as  much  in  the  fact 
that  it  is  not  subjective — and  so  on.  Hence  the  mean¬ 
ing  to  be  attributed  in  what  follows  to  “subjective” 
or  “objective”  in  respect  of  the  will  must  each  time 
appear  from  the  context,  which  supplies  the  data  for 
inferring  their  position  in  relation  to  the  will  as  a 
whole.  [A.] 

27.  The  absolute  goal,  or,  if  you  like,  the  abso¬ 
lute  impulse,  of  free  mind  (see  Paragraph  21)  is 
to  make  its  freedom  its  object,  i.e.  to  make  free¬ 
dom  objective  as  much  in  the  sense  that  freedom 
shall  be  the  rational  system  of  mind,  as  in  the 
sense  that  this  system  shall  be  the  world  of  im¬ 
mediate  actuality  (see  Paragraph  26).  In  mak¬ 
ing  freedom  its  object,  mind’s  purpose  is  to  be 
explicitly,  as  Idea,  what  the  will  is  implicitly. 
The  definition  of  the  concept  of  the  will  in  ab¬ 
straction  from  the  Idea  of  the  will  is  “the  free 
will  which  wills  the  free  will.”  2 

28.  The  will’s  activity  consists  in  annulling  the 
contradiction  between  subjectivity  and  objec¬ 
tivity  and  giving  its  aims  an  objective  instead 
of  a  subjective  character,  while  at  the  same  time 
remaining  by  itself  even  in  objectivity.  Outside 
the  formal  mode  of  willing  (i.e.  consciousness, 
see  Paragraph  8)  where  objectivity  is  present 
only  as  immediate  actuality,  this  activity  is  in 
essence  the  development  of  the  substantive  con¬ 
tent  of  the  Idea  (see  Paragraph  21) — a  develop¬ 
ment  through  which  the  concept  determines  the 
Idea,  itself  at  first  abstract,  until  it  becomes  a 

2  See  Paragraph  28. — Ed. 


INTRODUCTION  19 

systematized  whole.  This  whole,  as  what  is  moral  or  the  ethical  and  the  right,  the  right  in  ques- 
substantive,  is  independent  of  the  opposition  bon  is  only  the  elementary,  formal,  right  of  abstract 


between  a  merely  subjective  aim  and  its  reali¬ 
zation  and  is  the  same  in  both  despite  their  dif¬ 
ference  in  form. 

29.  An  existent  of  any  sort  embodying  the  free 
will,  this  is  what  right  is.  Right  therefore  is  by 
definition  freedom  as  Idea. 

The  crucial  point  in  both  the  Kantian  and  the  gen¬ 
erally  accepted  definition  of  right  (see  the  Introduc¬ 
tion  to  Kant’s  Philosophy  of  Law )  is  the  “restriction 
which  makes  it  possible  for  my  freedom  or  self-will 
to  co-exist  with  the  self-will  of  each  and  all  accord¬ 
ing  to  a  universal  law.”  On  the  one  hand,  this  defini¬ 
tion  contains  only  a  negative  category,  restriction, 
while  on  the  other  hand  the  positive  factor — the 
universal  law  or  the  so-called  “law  of  reason,”  the 
correspondence  of  the  self-will  of  one  individual 
with  that  of  another — is  tantamount  to  the  principle 
of  contradiction  and  the  familiar  notion  of  abstract 
identity.  The  definition  of  right  which  I  have  quoted 
involves  that  way  of  looking  at  the  matter,  especial¬ 
ly  popular  since  Rousseau  ^according  to  which  what 
is  fundamental,  substantive,  and  primary  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  the  will  of  a  single  person  in  his  own 
private  self-will,  not  the  absolute  or  rational  will, 
and  mind  as  a  particular  individual,  not  mind  as  it 
is  in  its  truth.  Once  this  principle  is  adopted,  of 
course  the  rational  can  come  on  the  scene  only  as  a 
restriction  on  the  type  of  freedom  which  this  prin¬ 
ciple  involves,  and  so  also  not  as  something  imma- 
nently  rational  but  only  as  an  external  abstract  uni¬ 
versal.  This  view  is  devoid  of  any  speculative  think¬ 
ing  and  is  repudiated  by  the  philosophic  concept. 
And  the  phenomena  which  it  has  produced  both  in 
men’s  heads  and  in  the  world  are  of  a  frightfulness 
parallel  only  to  the  superficiality  of  the  thoughts  on 
which  they  are  based. 

30.  It  is  only  because  right  is  the  embodiment 
of  the  absolute  concept  or  of  self-conscious  free¬ 
dom  that  it  is  something  sacrosanct.  But  the 
exclusively  formal  character  of  right  (and  duty 
also,  as  we  shall  see) 2  arises  at  a  distinct  stage 
in  the  development  of  the  concept  of  freedom. 
By  contrast  with  the  right  which  is  comparative¬ 
ly  formal  (i.e.  abstract)  and  so  comparatively 
restricted,  a  higher  right  belongs  to  the  sphere 
and  stage  of  mind  in  which  mind  has  determined 
and  actualized  within  itself  the  further  moments 
contained  in  its  Idea;  and  it  belongs  to  this 
sphere  as  the  sphere  which  is  concreter,  intrinsi¬ 
cally  richer,  and  more  genuinely  universal. 

Every  stage  in  the  development  of  the  Idea  of 
freedom  has  its  own  special  right,  since  it  is  the  em¬ 
bodiment  of  freedom  in  one  of  its  proper  specific 
forms.  When  there  is  said  to  be  a  clash  between  the 

1  Cf.  Rousseau,  The  Social  Contract,  i.  6. — Ed. 

2  Paragraphs  133  ff. — Ed. 


personality.  Morality,  ethical  life,  the  interest  of  the 
state,  each  of  these  is  a  right  of  a  special  character 
because  each  of  them  is  a  specific  form  and  embodi¬ 
ment  of  freedom.  They  can  come  into  collision  with 
each  other  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  all  on  the  same 
footing  as  rights.  If  mind’s  moral  attitude  were  not 
also  a  right,  or  freedom  in  one  of  its  forms,  it  could 
not  possibly  come  into  collision  with  the  right  of 
personality  or  with  any  other  right,  because  any 
right  whatever  has  inherent  in  it  the  concept  of 
freedom,  i.e.  the  highest  category  of  mind,  in  con¬ 
trast  with  which  any  other  thing  is  without  sub¬ 
stance.  Yet  at  the  same  time  collision  involves  an¬ 
other  moment,  namely  the  fact  that  it  is  restrictive, 
and  so  if  two  rights  collide  one  is  subordinated  to 
the  other.  It  is  only  the  right  of  the  world-mind 
which  is  absolute  without  qualification. 

31.  The  method  whereby,  in  philosophic  science, 
the  concept  develops  itself  out  of  itself  is  ex¬ 
pounded  in  logic  and  is  here  likewise  presup¬ 
posed.3  Its  development  is  a  purely  immanent 
progress,  the  engendering  of  its  determinations. 
Its  advance  is  not  effected  by  the  assertion  that 
various  things  exist  and  then  by  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  the  universal  to  extraneous  material  of 
that  sort  culled  from  elsewhere. 

The  concept’s  moving  principle,  which  alike  en¬ 
genders  and  dissolves  the  particularizations  of  the 
universal,  I  call  “dialectic,”  though  I  do  not  mean 
that  dialectic  which  takes  an  object,  proposition, 
&c.,  given  to  feeling  or,  in  general,  to  immediate  con¬ 
sciousness,  and  explains  it  away,  confuses  it,  pursues 
it  this  way  and  that,  and  has  as  its  sole  task  the  de¬ 
duction  of  the  contrary  of  that  with  which  it  starts 
— a  negative  type  of  dialectic  commonly  appearing 
even  in  Plato.  Dialectic  of  this  kind  may  regard  as 
its  final  result  either  the  contrary  of  the  idea  with 
which  it  begins,  or,  if  it  is  as  incisive  as  the  scepti¬ 
cism  of  the  ancients,  the  contradictory  of  this  idea, 
or  again,  it  may  be  feeble  enough  to  be  content  with 
an  “approximation”  to  the  truth,  a  modern  half¬ 
measure.4  The  loftier  dialectic  of  the  concept  consists 
not  simply  in  producing  the  determination  as  a  con¬ 
trary  and  a  restriction,  but  in  producing  and  seizing 
upon  the  positive  content  and  outcome  of  the  deter¬ 
mination,  because  it  is  this  which  makes  it  solely  a 
development  and  an  immanent  progress.  Moreover, 
this  dialectic  is  not  an  activity  of  subjective  think¬ 
ing  applied  to  some  matter  externally,  but  is  rather 
the  matter’s  very  soul  putting  forth  its  branches  and 
fruit  organically.  This  development  of  the  Idea  is 
the  proper  activity  of  its  rationality,  and  thinking, 
as  something  subjective,  merely  looks  on  at  it  with¬ 
out  for  its  part  adding  to  it  any  ingredient  of  its 
own.  To  consider  a  thing  rationally  means  not  to 

3  See  Paragraph  2. — Ed. 

4  Plato — it  is  usually  the  second  half  of  the  Parmeni¬ 
des  which  Hegel  has  in  mind. — Ed. 


20 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


bring  reason  to  bear  on  the  object  from  the  outside 
and  so  to  tamper  with  it,  but  to  find  that  the  object 
is  rational  on  its  own  account ;  here  it  is  mind  in  its 
freedom,  the  culmination  of  self-conscious  reason, 
which  gives  itself  actuality  and  engenders  itself  as 
an  existing  world.  The  sole  task  of  philosophic 
science  is  to  bring  into  consciousness  this  proper 
work  of  the  reason  of  the  thing  itself. 

32.  The  determinations  of  the  concept  in  the 
course  of  its  development  are  from  one  point 
of  view  themselves  concepts,  but  from  another 
they  take  the  form  of  existents,  since  the  con¬ 
cept  is  in  essence  Idea.  The  series  of  concepts 
which  this  development  yields  is  therefore  at  the 
same  time  a  series  of  shapes  of  experience,  and 
philosophic  science  must  treat  them  accordingly. 

In  a  more  speculative  sense,  a  concept’s  determi- 
nacy  and  its  mode  of  existence  are  one  and  the  same 
thing.  But  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  moments,  whose 
result  is  a  further  determined  form  of  the  concept, 
precede  it  in  the  philosophical  development  of  the 
Idea  as  determinations  of  the  concept,  but  they  do 
not  go  in  advance  of  it  in  the  temporal  development 
as  shapes  of  experience.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  Idea 
determined  as  the  family,  presupposes  the  determi¬ 
nations  of  the  concept  from  which  the  family  will 
later  on  in  this  work  be  shown  to  result.  But  the  ex¬ 
plicit  existence  of  these  inner  presuppositions  as 
shapes  of  experience  also,  e.g.  as  the  right  of  prop¬ 
erty,  contract,  morality,  and  so  forth,  is  the  other 
aspect  of  the  development,  and  it  is  only  in  a  higher 
and  more  complete  civilization  that  the  development 
has  gone  so  far  as  to  endow  its  moments  with  this 
appropriately  shaped  existence.  [A.] 

Division  of  the  Subject 

33.  In  correspondence  with  the  stages  in  the 
development  of  the  Idea  of  the  absolutely  free 
will,  the  will  is 

A.  immediate;  its  concept  therefore  is  abstract, 
namely  personality,  and  its  embodiment  is  an 
immediate  external  thing — the  sphere  of  Ab¬ 
stract  or  Formal  Right; 

B.  reflected  from  its  external  embodiment  into 
itself — it  is  then  characterized  as  subjective 
individuality  in  opposition  to  the  universal.  The 
universal  here  is  characterized  as  something  in¬ 
ward,  the  good,  and  also  as  something  outward, 
a  world  presented  to  the  will;  both  these  sides 
of  the  Idea  are  here  mediated  only  by  each  other. 
This  is  the  Idea  in  its  division  or  in  its  existence 
as  particular ;  and  here  we  have  the  right  of  the 
subjective  will  in  relation  to  the  right  of  the 
world  and  the  right  of  the  Idea,  though  only  the 


Idea  implicit — the  sphere  of  Morality; 

C.  the  unity  and  truth  of  both  these  abstract 
moments — the  Idea  of  the  good  not  only  appre¬ 
hended  in  thought  but  so  realized  both  in  the 
will  reflected  into  itself  and  in  the  external 
world  that  freedom  exists  as  substance,  as  actu¬ 
ality  and  necessity,  no  less  than  as  subjective 
will;  this  is  the  Idea  in  its  absolutely  universal 
existence — Ethical  Life. 

But  on  the  same  principle  the  ethical  substance 
is 

(а)  natural  mind,  the  Family; 

(б)  in  its  division  and  appearance,  Civil 
Society; 

(c)  the  State  as  freedom,  freedom  universal  and 
objective  even  in  the  free  self-subsistence  of  the 
particular  will.  This  actual  and  organic  mind  (a) 
of  a  single  nation  (/?)  reveals  and  actualizes  it¬ 
self  through  the  inter-relation  of  the  particular 
national  minds  until  (y)  in  the  process  of  world- 
history  it  reveals  and  actualizes  itself  as  the  uni¬ 
versal  world-mind  whose  right  is  supreme. 

The  fact  that  when  a  thing  or  a  content  is  posited 
first  of  all  in  accordance  with  its  concept  or  as  it  is 
implicitly,  it  then  has  the  form  of  immediacy  or 
pure  being,  is  the  doctrine  of  speculative  logic,  here 
presupposed;  the  concept  which  confronts  itself  in 
the  form  of  the  concept  is  a  different  thing  and  no 
longer  something  immediate. 

The  principle  which  determines  the  division  of  the 
subject  is  likewise  here  presupposed.  The  division 
may  also  be  looked  upon  as  a  predeclaration  in  his¬ 
torical  form  of  the  parts  of  the  book,  since  the 
various  stages  must  engender  themselves  out  of  the 
subject-matter  itself  as  moments  in  the  development 
of  the  Idea.  A  philosophical  division  is  far  from  be¬ 
ing  an  external  one,  i.e.  it  is  not  an  external  classifi¬ 
cation  of  a  given  material  in  accordance  with  one  or 
more  borrowed  bases  of  division,  but,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  is  the  immanent  self -differentiation  of  the  con¬ 
cept. 

“Morality”  and  “ethical  life,”  1  which  perhaps  usu¬ 
ally  pass  current  as  synonyms,  are  taken  here  in  es¬ 
sentially  different  senses.  Yet  even  commonplace 
thinking  seems  to  be  distinguishing  them ;  Kant  gen¬ 
erally  prefers  to  use  the  word  “morality”  and,  since 
the  principles  of  action  in  his  philosophy  are  always 
limited  to  this  conception,  they  make  the  standpoint 
of  ethical  life  completely  impossible,  in  fact  they  ex¬ 
plicitly  nullify  and  spurn  it.  But  even  if  “moral” 
and  “ethical”  meant  the  same  thing  by  derivation, 
that  would  in  no  way  hinder  them,  once  they  had 
become  different  words,  from  being  used  for  differ¬ 
ent  conceptions.  [A.] 

1  See  Paragraph  141. — Ed. 


FIRST  PART 

ABSTRACT  RIGHT 


34.  The  absolutely  free  will,  at  the  stage  when 
its  concept  is  abstract,  has  the  determinate  char¬ 
acter  of  immediacy.  Accordingly  this  stage  is  its 
negative  actuality,  and  actuality  contrasted  with 
the  real  world,  only  an  abstractly  self-related  ac¬ 
tuality — the  inherently  single  will  of  a  subject. 
Pursuant  to  the  moment  of  the  particularity  of 
the  will,  it  has  in  addition  a  content  consisting  of 
determinate  aims  and,  as  exclusive  individuality, 
it  has  this  content  at  the  same  time  as  an  external 
world  directly  confronting  it.1  [A.] 

35.  The  universality  of  this  consciously  free 
will  is  abstract  universality,  the  self-conscious 
but  otherwise  contentless  and  simple  relation  of 
itself  to  itself  in  its  individuality,  and  from  this 
point  of  view  the  subject  is  a  person.  Personality 
implies  that  as  this  person:  (i)  lam  completely 
determined  on  every  side  (in  my  inner  caprice, 
impulse,  and  desire,  as  well  as  by  immediate  ex¬ 
ternal  facts)  and  so  finite,  yet  (ii)  none  the  less 
I  am  simply  and  solely  self-relation,  and  there¬ 
fore  in  finitude  I  know  myself  as  something  in¬ 
finite,  universal,  and  free. 

Personality  begins  not  with  the  subject’s  mere  gen¬ 
eral  consciousness  of  himself  as  an  ego  concretely 
determined  in  some  way  or  other,  but  rather  with 
his  consciousness  of  himself  as  a  completely  abstract 
ego  in  which  every  concrete  restriction  and  value  is 
negated  and  without  validity.  In  personality,  there¬ 
fore,  knowledge  is  knowledge  of  oneself  as  an  object, 
but  an  object  raised  by  thinking  to  the  level  of 
simple  infinity  and  so  an  object  purely  self-identical. 
Individuals  and  nations  have  no  personality  until 
they  have  achieved  this  pure  thought  and  knowledge 
of  themselves.  Mind  fully  explicit  differs  from  the 
phenomenal  mind  in  this,  that  at  the  same  level  at 
which  the  latter  is  only  self-consciousness — a  con¬ 
sciousness  of  self  but  only  one  pursuant  to  the  nat¬ 
ural  will  and  its  still  external  oppositions 2 — the  form¬ 
er  has  itself,  as  the  abstract  and  free  ego,  for  its 
object  and  aim,  and  so  is  personality.  [A.] 

36.  (1)  Personality  essentially  involves  the  ca- 

1  See  Paragraph  5. — Ed. 

2  See  Phenomenology  (Bamberg  and  Wiirzburg,  1807), 
pp.  101  ff.  [Eng.  tr.  pp.  218  ff.],  and  Enc.  [1st  edn.], 
§  344  [3rd  edn.  §  424]. 


pacity  for  rights  and  constitutes  the  concept  and 
the  basis  (itself  abstract)  of  the  system  of  ab¬ 
stract  and  therefore  formal  right.  Hence  the  im¬ 
perative  of  right  is:  “Be  a  person  and  respect 
others  as  persons.” 

37.  (2)  The  particularity  of  the  will  is  a  mo¬ 
ment  in  the  consciousness  of  the  will  as  a  whole 
(see  Paragraph  34),  but  it  is  not  yet  contained  in 
abstract  personality  as  such.  Therefore,  it  is 
present  at  this  point,  but  as  still  sundered  from 
personality,  from  the  character  of  freedom, 
present  as  desire,  need,  impulse,  casual  whim, 
and  so  forth.  In  formal  right,  therefore,  there  is 
no  question  of  particular  interests,  of  my  advan¬ 
tage  or  my  welfare,  any  more  than  there  is  of 
the  particular  motive  behind  my  volition,  of  in¬ 
sight  and  intention.3  [A.] 

38.  In  relation  to  action  in  the  concrete  and  to 
moral  and  ethical  ties,  abstract  right  is,  in  con¬ 
trast  with  the  further  content  which  these  in¬ 
volve,  only  a  possibility,  and  to  have  a  right  is 
therefore  to  have  only  a  permission  or  a  warrant. 
The  unconditional  commands  of  abstract  right 
are  restricted,  once  again  because  of  its  abstract¬ 
ness,  to  the  negative:  “Do  not  infringe  personal¬ 
ity  and  what  personality  entails.”  The  result  is 
that  there  are  only  prohibitions  in  the  sphere  of 
right,  and  the  positive  form  of  any  command  in 
this  sphere  is  based  in  the  last  resort,  if  we  ex¬ 
amine  its  ultimate  content,  on  prohibition. 

39.  (3)  As  immediate  individuality,  a  person 
in  making  decisions  is  related  to  a  world  of  na¬ 
ture  directly  confronting  him,  and  thus  the  per¬ 
sonality  of  the  will  stands  over  against  this  world 
as  something  subjective.  For  personality,  how¬ 
ever,  as  inherently  infinite  and  universal,  the 
restriction  of  being  only  subjective  is  a  contra¬ 
diction  and  a  nullity.  Personality  is  that  which 
struggles  to  lift  itself  above  this  restriction  and 
to  give  itself  reality,  or  in  other  words  to  claim 
that  external  world  as  its  own. 

40.  Right  is  in  the  first  place  the  immediate 

3  See  Paragraphs  119  ff.  and  Paragraph  132. — Ed. 


21 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


embodiment  which  freedom  gives  itself  in  an 
immediate  way,  i.e.  (a)  possession,  which  is 
property- ownership.  Freedom  is  here  the  free¬ 
dom  of  the  abstract  will  in  general  or,  eo  ipso , 
the  freedom  of  a  single  person  related  only  to 
himself.  ( b )  A  person  by  distinguishing  himself 
from  himself  relates  himself  to  another  person,1 
and  it  is  only  as  owners  that  these  two  persons 
really  exist  for  each  other.  Their  implicit  iden¬ 
tity  is  realized  through  the  transference  of  prop¬ 
erty  from  one  to  the  other  in  conformity  with  a 
common  will  and  without  detriment  to  the  rights 
of  either.  This  is  contract,  (c)  The  will  which  is 
differentiated  not  in  the  sense  of  ( b )  as  being 
contrasted  with  another  person,  but  in  the  sense 
of  (a)  as  related  to  itself,  is  as  a  particular  will 
at  variance  with  and  opposed  to  itself  as  an  ab¬ 
solute  will.  This  opposition  is  wrongdoing  and 
crime. 

The  classification  of  the  system  of  rights  into  jus 
ad  personam  and  jus  ad  rem  on  the  one  hand,  and 
jus  ad  actiones  on  the  other,  like  the  many  other 
similar  classifications,  has  as  its  primary  aim  the 
imposition  of  an  external  order  on  the  mass  of  un¬ 
organized  material  confronting  the  classifier.  The 
striking  thing  about  this  classification  is  the  con¬ 
fusion  in  it  due  to  the  disorderly  intermixture  of 
rights  which  presuppose  substantial  ties,  e.g.  those 
of  family  and  political  life,  and  rights  which  only 
concern  abstract  personality  as  such.  This  confusion 
is  exemplified  in  the  classification  of  rights  (adopted 
by  Kant  and  since  favoured  by  others)  into  jus 
reale,  jus  personate,  and  jus  realiter  personate. 

To  develop  the  perversity  and  lack  of  speculative 
thought  in  the  classification  of  rights  into  jus  ad 
personam  and  jus  ad  rem,  which  lies  at  the  root  of 
Roman  law  ( jus  ad  actiones  concerns  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  justice  and  is  of  a  different  order  alto¬ 
gether),  would  take  us  too  far  afield.  Here  this 
much  at  least  is  clear:  it  is  personality  alone  which 
can  confer  a  right  to  things  and  therefore  jus  ad  per¬ 
sonam  in  its  essence  is  jus  ad  rem,  rem  being  taken 
here  in  its  general  sense  as  anything  external  to  my 
freedom,  including  even  my  body  and  my  life.  In 
this  sense,  jus  ad  rem  is  the  right  of  personality  as 
such.  But  from  the  point  of  view  of  what  is  called 
jus  ad  personam  in  Roman  law,  a  man  is  reckoned 
a  person  only  when  he  is  treated  as  possessing  a  cer¬ 
tain  status.2  Hence  in  Roman  law,  even  personality 
itself  is  only  a  certain  standing  or  status  contrasted 
with  slavery.  The  so-called  Roman  law  of  “per¬ 
sonal”  rights,  then,  is  concerned  with  family  rela¬ 
tionships,  though  it  excludes  the  right  over  slaves 
(and  “slaves”  almost  includes  children  too) as  well 
as  the  status  (called  capitis  diminutio )  of  having  lost 
one’s  rights.3  (In  Kant,  by  the  way,  family  relation- 

*  See  Paragraphs  323  and  331. — Ed. 

2  J.  G.  Heineccius:  Elementa  juris  civilis  [Bonn, 
1763],  §lxxv. 

3  See  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  175,  180. — Ed. 


ships  are  the  jura  realiter  personalia .)  The  Roman 
jus  ad  personam  is  therefore  not  the  right  of  the 
person  as  person  but  at  most  the  right  of  a  person 
in  his  particular  capacity.  (Later  on  in  this  book,4 
it  will  be  shown  that  the  substantial  basis  of  family 
relationships  is  rather  the  sacrifice  of  personality.) 
Now  it  must  be  obvious  that  it  is  perverse  to  treat 
the  right  of  a  specific  person  in  his  particular  ca¬ 
pacity  before  the  universal  right  of  personality  as 
such. 

Kant’s  jura  personalia  are  the  rights  issuing  from 
a  contract  whereby  I  undertake  to  give  something 
or  to  perform  something — the  jus  ad  rem  conferred 
by  an  obligatio  in  Roman  law.  To  be  sure,  it  is  only 
a  person  who  is  required  to  execute  the  covenants 
of  a  contract,  just  as  it  is  also  only  a  person  who 
acquires  the  right  to  their  execution.  But  a  right  of 
this  sort  cannot  for  this  reason  be  called  a  “personal” 
right;  rights  of  whatever  sort  belong  to  a  person 
alone.  Objectively  considered,  a  right  arising  from  a 
contract  is  never  a  right  over  a  person,  but  only  a 
right  over  something  external  to  a  person  or  some¬ 
thing  which  he  can  alienate,  always  a  right  over  a 
thing. 

Sub-section  I 

PROPERTY 

41.  A  person  must  translate  his  freedom  into  an 
external  sphere  in  order  to  exist  as  Idea.  Person¬ 
ality  is  the  first,  still  wholly  abstract,  determina¬ 
tion  of  the  absolute  and  infinite  will,  and  there¬ 
fore  this  sphere  distinct  from  the  person,  the 
sphere  capable  of  embodying  his  freedom,  is  like¬ 
wise  determined  as  what  is  immediately  differ¬ 
ent  and  separable  from  him.  [A.] 

42.  What  is  immediately  different  from  free 
mind  is  that  which,  both  for  mind  and  in  itself, 
is  the  external  pure  and  simple,  a  thing,  some¬ 
thing  not  free,  not  personal,  without  rights. 

“Thing,”  like  “the  objective,”  has  two  opposed 
meanings.  If  we  say  “that’s  the  thing”  or  “the  thing 
is  what  matters,  not  the  person,”  “thing”  means 
what  is  substantive.  On  the  other  hand,  when  “thing” 
is  contrasted  with  “person”  as  such,  not  with  the 
particular  subject,  it  means  the  opposite  of  what  is 
substantive,  i.e.  that  whose  determinate  character 
lies  in  its  pure  externality.  From  the  point  of  view 
of  free  mind,  which  must,  of  course,  be  distinguished 
from  mere  consciousness,  the  external  is  external 
absolutely,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  deter¬ 
minate  character  assigned  to  nature  by  the  concept 
is  inherent  externality.  [A.] 

43.  As  the  concept  in  its  immediacy ,  and  so  as 
in  essence  a  unit,  a  person  has  a  natural  exist¬ 
ence  partly  within  himself  and  partly  of  such  a 
kind  that  he  is  related  to  it  as  to  an  external 
world. — It  is  only  these  things  in  their  immedi¬ 
acy  as  things,  not  what  they  are  capable  of  be- 

4  Paragraphs  163,  167-8. — Ed. 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT  23 


coming  through  the  mediation  of  the  will,  i.e. 
things  with  determinate  characteristics,  which 
are  in  question  here  where  the  topic  under  dis¬ 
cussion  is  personality,  itself  at  this  point  still  in 
its  most  elementary  immediacy. 

Mental  aptitudes,  erudition,  artistic  skill,  even 
things  ecclesiastical  (like  sermons,  masses,  prayers, 
consecration  of  votive  objects),  inventions,  and  so 
forth,  become  subjects  of  a  contract,  brought  on  to 
a  parity,  through  being  bought  and  sold,  with  things 
recognized  as  things.  It  may  be  asked  whether  the 
artist,  scholar,  &c.,  is  from  the  legal  point  of  view 
in  possession  of  his  art,  erudition,  ability  to  preach 
a  sermon,  sing  a  mass,  &c.,  that  is,  whether  such  at¬ 
tainments  are  “things.”  We  may  hesitate  to  call  such 
abilities,  attainments,  aptitudes,  &c.,  “things,”  for 
while  possession  of  these  may  be  the  subject  of  busi¬ 
ness  dealings  and  contracts,  as  if  they  were  things, 
there  is  also  something  inward  and  mental  about  it, 
and  for  this  reason  the  Understanding  may  be  in 
perplexity  about  how  to  describe  such  possession  in 
legal  terms,  because  its  field  of  vision  is  as  limited 
to  the  dilemma  that  this  is  “either  a  thing  or  not  a 
thing”  as  to  the  dilemma  “either  finite  or  infinite.” 
Attainments,  erudition,  talents,  and  so  forth,  are,  of 
course,  owned  by  free  mind  and  are  something  in¬ 
ternal  and  not  external  to  it,  but  even  so, by  express¬ 
ing  them  it  may  embody  them  in  something  external 
and  alienate  them  (see  below)  ,*  and  in  this  way  they 
are  put  into  the  category  of  “things.”  Therefore  they 
are  not  immediate  at  the  start  but  only  acquire  this 
character  through  the  mediation  of  mind  which  re¬ 
duces  its  inner  possessions  to  immediacy  and  ex¬ 
ternality. 

It  was  an  unjustifiable  and  unethical  proviso  of 
Roman  law  that  children  were  from  their  father’s 
point  of  view  “things.”  Hence  he  was  legally  the 
owner  of  his  children,  although,  of  course,  he  still 
also  stood  to  them  in  the  ethical  relation  of  love 
(though  this  relation  must  have  been  much  weak¬ 
ened  by  the  injustice  of  his  legal  position).  Here, 
then,  the  two  qualities  “being  a  thing”  and  “not  be¬ 
ing  a  thing”  were  united,  though  quite  wrongly. 

In  the  sphere  of  abstract  right,  we  are  concerned 
only  with  the  person  as  person,  and  therefore  with 
the  particular  (which  is  indispensable  if  the  person’s 
freedom  is  to  have  scope  and  reality)  only  in  so  far 
as  it  is  something  separable  from  the  person  and 
immediately  different  from  him,  no  matter  whether 
this  separability  constitutes  the  essential  nature  of 
the  particular,  or  whether  the  particular  receives  it 
only  through  the  mediation  of  the  subjective  will. 
Hence  in  this  sphere  we  are  concerned  with  mental 
aptitudes,  erudition,  &c.,  only  in  so  far  as  they  are 
possessions  in  a  legal  sense;  we  have  not  to  treat 
here  the  possession  of  our  body  and  mind  which  we 
can  achieve  through  education,  study,  habit,  &c.,  and 
which  exists  as  an  inward  property  of  mind.  But  it 
is  not  until  we  come  to  deal  with  alienation 2  that  we 

1  Paragraphs  65  ff. — Ed. 

2  Paragraphs  65  ff. — Ed. 


need  begin  to  speak  of  the  transition  of  such  mental 
property  into  the  external  world  where  it  falls  un¬ 
der  the  category  of  property  in  the  legal  sense. 

44.  A  person  has  as  his  substantive  end  the  right 
of  putting  his  will  into  any  and  every  thing  and 
thereby  making  it  his,  because  it  has  no  such  end 
in  itself  and  derives  its  destiny  and  soul  from  his 
will.  This  is  the  absolute  right  of  appropriation 
which  man  has  over  all  “things.” 

The  so-called  “philosophy”  which  attributes  reality 
in  the  sense  of  self -subsistence  and  genuine  inde¬ 
pendent  self-enclosed  existence  to  unmediated  single 
things,  to  the  non-personal,  is  directly  contradicted 
by  the  free  will’s  attitude  to  these  things.  The  same 
is  true  of  the  other  philosophy  which  assures  us  that 
mind  cannot  apprehend  the  truth  or  know  the  nature 
of  the  thing-in-itself.  While  so-called  “external” 
things  have  a  show  of  self -subsistence  for  conscious¬ 
ness,  intuition,  and  representative  thinking,  the  free 
will  idealizes  that  type  of  actuality  and  so  is  its 
truth.  [A.] 

45.  To  have  power  over  a  thing  ab  extra  con¬ 
stitutes  possession.  The  particular  aspect  of  the 
matter,  the  fact  that  I  make  something  my  own 
as  a  result  of  my  natural  need,  impulse,  and  ca¬ 
price,  is  the  particular  interest  satisfied  by  pos¬ 
session.  But  I  as  free  will  am  an  object  to  myself 
in  what  I  possess  and  thereby  also  for  the  first 
time  am  an  actual  will,  and  this  is  the  aspect 
which  constitutes  the  category  of  property ,  the 
true  and  right  factor  in  possession. 

If  emphasis  is  placed  on  my  needs,  then  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  property  appears  as  a  means  to  their  satis¬ 
faction,  but  the  true  position  is  that,  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  freedom,  property  is  the  first  embodiment 
of  freedom  and  so  is  in  itself  a  substantive  end. 

46.  Since  my  will,  as  the  will  of  a  person,  and 
so  as  a  single  will,  becomes  objective  to  me  in 
property,  property  acquires  the  character  of  pri¬ 
vate  property ;  and  common  property  of  such  a 
nature  that  it  may  be  owned  by  separate  persons 
acquires  the  character  of  an  inherently  dissolu¬ 
ble  partnership  in  which  the  retention  of  my 
share  is  explicitly  a  matter  of  my  arbitrary  pref¬ 
erence. 

The  nature  of  the  elements  makes  it  impossible  for 
the  use  of  them  to  become  so  particularized  as  to  be 
the  private  possession  of  anyone. 

In  the  Roman  agrarian  laws  there  was  a  clash  be¬ 
tween  public  and  private  ownership  of  land.  The 
latter  is  the  more  rational  and  therefore  had  to  be 
given  preference  even  at  the  expense  of  other  rights. 

One  factor  in  family  testamentary  trusts  contravenes 
the  right  of  personality  and  so  the  right  of  private 
property.  But  the  specific  characteristics  pertaining 
to  private  property  may  have  to  be  subordinated  to 
a  higher  sphere  of  right  (e.g.to  a  society  or  the  state), 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


as  happens,  for  instance,  when  private  property  is 
put  into  the  hands  of  a  so-called  “artificial”  person 
and  into  mortmain.  Still,  such  exceptions  to  private 
property  cannot  be  grounded  in  chance,  in  private 
caprice,  or  private  advantage,  but  only  in  the  ra¬ 
tional  organism  of  the  state. 

The  general  principle  that  underlies  Plato’s  ideal 
state  violates  the  right  of  personality  by  forbidding 
the  holding  of  private  property.1  The  idea  of  a  pious 
or  friendly  and  even  a  compulsory  brotherhood  of 
men  holding  their  goods  in  common  and  rejecting 
the  principle  of  private  property  may  readily  pre¬ 
sent  itself  to  the  disposition  which  mistakes  the  true 
nature  of  the  freedom  of  mind  and  right  and  fails 
to  apprehend  it  in  its  determinate  moments.  As  for 
the  moral  or  religious  view  behind  this  idea,  when 
Epicurus’s  friends  proposed  to  form  such  an  associ¬ 
ation  holding  goods  in  common,  he  forbade  them, 
precisely  on  the  ground  that  their  proposal  betrayed 
distrust  and  that  those  who  distrusted  each  other 
were  not  friends.2  [A.] 


47.  As  a  person,  I  am  myself  an  immediate  in¬ 
dividual;  if  we  give  further  precision  to  this 
expression,  it  means  in  the  first  instance  that  I 
am  alive  in  this  bodily  organism  which  is  my  ex¬ 
ternal  existence,  universal  in  content  and  un¬ 
divided,  the  real  pre-condition  of  every  further 
determined  mode  of  existence.  But,  all  the  same, 
as  person,  I  possess  my  life  and  my  body,  like 
other  things,  only  in  so  far  as  my  will  is  in  them. 

The  fact  that,  considered  as  existing  not  as  the  con¬ 
cept  explicit  but  only  as  the  concept  in  its  immedi¬ 
acy,  I  am  alive  and  have  a  bodily  organism,  depends 
on  the  concept  of  life  and  on  the  concept  of  mind  as 
soul — on  moments  which  are  taken  over  here  from 
the  Philosophy  of  Nature  3  and  from  Anthropology.4 

I  possess  the  members  of  my  body,  my  life,  only 
so  long  as  I  will  to  possess  them.  An  animal  cannot 
maim  or  destroy  itself,  but  a  man  can.  [A.] 


48.  In  so  far  as  the  body  is  an  immediate  exist¬ 
ent,  it  is  not  in  conformity  with  mind.  If  it  is  to 
be  the  willing  organ  and  soul-endowed  instru¬ 
ment  of  mind,  it  must  first  be  taken  into  posses¬ 
sion  by  mind  (see  Paragraph  57).  But  from  the 
point  of  view  of  others,  I  am  in  essence  a  free 
entity  in  my  body  while  my  possession  of  it  is 
still  immediate. 


It  is  only  because  I  am  alive  as  a  free  entity  in  my 
body  that  this  living  existent  ought  not  to  be  mis¬ 
used  by  being  made  a  beast  of  burden.  While  I  am 
alive,  my  soul  (the  concept  and,  to  use  a  higher 
term,  the  free  entity)  and  my  body  are  not  separated; 
my  body  is  the  embodiment  of  my  freedom  and  it  is 
with  my  body  that  I  feel.  It  is  therefore  only  ab- 


1  Cf.  Plato,  Laws,  v.  739. — Ed. 

2  Diogenes  Laertius,  x.  6. 

3  Enc.  [1st  edn.],  §§  259  ff.  Cf.  §§  161,164,298.  [3rd 
edn.  §§  336  ff.  Cf.  §§  213,  216,  376]. 

*  Enc.  [1st  edn.],  §  318  [3rd  edn.  §§  388  ff.]. 


stract  sophistical  reasoning  which  can  so  distinguish 
body  and  soul  as  to  hold  that  the  “thing-in-itself,” 
the  soul,  is  not  touched  or  attacked  if  the  body  is 
maltreated  and  the  existent  embodiment  of  person¬ 
ality  is  subjected  to  the  power  of  another.  I  can 
withdraw  into  myself  out  of  my  bodily  existence 
and  make  my  body  something  external  to  myself ; 
particular  feelings  I  can  regard  as  something  out¬ 
side  me  and  in  chains  I  can  still  be  free.  But  this  is 
my  will;  so  far  as  others  are  concerned,  1  am  in  my 
body.  To  be  free  from  the  point  of  view  of  others 
is  identical  with  being  free  in  my  determinate  exist¬ 
ence.6  If  another  does  violence  to  my  body,  he  does 
violence  to  me. 

If  my  body  is  touched  or  suffers  violence,  then,  be¬ 
cause  I  feel,  I  am  touched  myself  actually,  here  and 
now.  This  creates  the  distinction  between  personal 
injury  and  damage  to  my  external  property,  for  in 
such  property  my  will  is  not  actually  present  in  this 
direct  fashion. 

49.  In  relation  to  external  things,  the  rational 
aspect  is  that  I  possess  property, but  theparticu- 
lar  aspect  comprises  subjective  aims,  needs,  ar¬ 
bitrariness,  abilities,  external  circumstances, and 
so  forth  (see  Paragraph  45).  On  these  mere  pos¬ 
session  as  such  depends,  but  this  particular  as¬ 
pect  has  in  this  sphere  of  abstract  personality 
not  yet  been  established  as  identical  with  free¬ 
dom.  What  and  how  much  I  possess,  therefore, 
is  a  matter  of  indifference  so  far  as  rights  are 
concerned. 

If  at  this  stage  we  may  speak  of  more  persons  than 
one,  although  no  such  distinction  has  yet  been  made, 
then  we  may  say  that  in  respect  of  their  personality 
persons  are  equal.  But  this  is  an  empty  tautology, 
for  the  person,  as  something  abstract,  has  not  yet 
been  particularized  or  established  as  distinct  in  some 
specific  way. 

“Equality”  is  the  abstract  identity  of  the  Under¬ 
standing;  reflective  thought  and  all  kinds  of  intel¬ 
lectual  mediocrity  stumble  on  it  at  once  when  they 
are  confronted  by  the  relation  of  unity  to  a  differ¬ 
ence.  At  this  point,  equality  could  only  be  the  equal¬ 
ity  of  abstract  persons  as  such,  and  therefore  the 
whole  field  of  possession,  this  terrain  of  inequality, 
falls  outside  it. 

The  demand  sometimes  made  for  an  equal  division 
of  land,  and  other  available  resources  too,  is  an  in- 
tellectualism  all  the  more  empty  and  superficial  in 
that  at  the  heart  of  particular  differences  there  lies 
not  only  the  external  contingency  of  nature  but  also 
the  whole  cohipass  of  mind,  endlessly  particularized 
and  differentiated,  and  the  rationality  of  mind  de¬ 
veloped  into  an  organism. 

We  may  not  speak  of  the  injustice  of  nature  in  the 
unequal  distribution  of  possessions  and  resources, 
since  nature  is  not  free  and  therefore  is  neither  just 

5  See  my  Science  of  Logic  [1st  edn.],  vol.  i,  pp.  49  ff. 
[Eng.  tr.  vol.  i,  pp.  127-35,  but  this  is  a  translation  of 
the  second  edition,  in  which  the  passage  in  question 
was  much  altered,  as  Lasson  points  out]. 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT 


nor  unjust.  That  everyone  ought  to  have  subsistence 
enough  for  his  needs  is  a  moral  wish  and  thus  vaguely 
expressed  is  well  enough  meant,  but  like  anything 
that  is  only  well  meant  it  lacks  objectivity.  On  the 
other  hand,  subsistence  is  not  the  same  as  posses¬ 
sion  and  belongs  to  another  sphere,  i.e.  to  civil  soci¬ 
ety.1  [A.] 

50.  The  principle  that  a  thing  belongs  to  the 
person  who  happens  to  be  the  first  in  time  to 
take  it  into  his  possession  is  immediately  self- 
explanatory  and  superfluous,  because  a  second 
person  cannot  take  into  his  possession  what  is 
already  the  property  of  another.  [A.] 

51.  Since  property  is  the  embodiment  of  per¬ 
sonality,  my  inward  idea  and  will  that  something 
is  to  be  mine  is  not  enough  to  make  it  my  prop¬ 
erty;  to  secure  this  end  occupancy  is  requisite. 
The  embodiment  which  my  willing  thereby  at¬ 
tains  involves  its  recognizability  by  others. — 
The  fact  that  a  thing  of  which  I  can  take  posses¬ 
sion  is  a  res  mdlias  is  (see  Paragraph  50)  a  self- 
explanatory  negative  condition  of  occupancy,  or 
rather  it  has  a  bearing  on  the  anticipated  relation 
to  others.  [A.] 

52.  Occupancy  makes  the  matter  of  the  thing 
my  property,  since  matter  in  itself  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  itself. 

Matter  offers  resistance  to  me — and  matter  is  noth¬ 
ing  except  the  resistance  it  offers  to  me — that  is, 
it  presents  itself  to  my  mind  as  something  abstractly 
independent  only  when  my  mind  is  taken  abstract¬ 
ly  as  sensation.  (Sense-perception  perversely  takes 
mind  as  sensation  for  the  concrete  and  mind  as 
reason  for  the  abstract.)  In  relation  to  the  will  and 
property,  however,  this  independence  of  matter  has 
no  truth.  Occupancy,  as  an  external  activity  where¬ 
by  we  actualize  our  universal  right  of  appropriating 
natural  objects,  comes  to  be  conditioned  by  physical 
strength,  cunning,  dexterity,  the  means  of  one  kind 
or  another  whereby  we  take  physical  possession  of 
things.  Owing  to  the  qualitative  differences  between 
natural  objects,  mastery  and  occupancy  of  these  has 
an  infinite  variety  of  meanings  and  involves  a  re¬ 
striction  and  contingency  that  is  just  as  infinite. 
Apart  from  that,  a  “kind”  of  thing,  or  an  element  as 
such,  is  not  the  correlative  object  of  an  individual 
person.  Before  it  can  become  such  and  be  appropri¬ 
ated,  it  must  first  be  individualized  into  single  parts, 
into  a  breath  of  air  or  a  drink  of  water.  In  the  fact 
that  it  is  impossible  to  take  possession  of  an  ex¬ 
ternal  “kind”  of  thing  as  such,  or  of  an  element,  it  is 
not  the  external  physical  impossibility  which  must 
be  looked  on  as  ultimate,  but  the  fact  that  a  person, 
as  will,  is  characterized  as  individual,  while  as  per¬ 
son  he  is  at  the  same  time  immediate  individuality ; 
hence  as  person  he  is  related  to  the  external  world 

1  See  Paragraphs  199  ff.,  230,  237  ff. — Ed. 


25 

as  to  single  things  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  13 
and  Paragraph  43). 

Thus  the  mastery  and  external  possession  of  things 
becomes,  in  ways  that  again  are  infinite,  more  or 
less  indeterminate  and  incomplete.  Yet  matter  is 
never  without  an  essential  form  of  its  own  and  only 
because  it  has  one  is  it  anything.  The  more  I  ap¬ 
propriate  this  form,  the  more  do  I  enter  into  actual 
possession  of  the  thing.  The  consumption  of  food 
is  an  out  and  out  alteration  of  its  qualitative  char¬ 
acter,  the  character  on  the  strength  of  which  it  was 
what  it  was  before  it  was  eaten.  The  training  of  my 
body  in  dexterity,  like  the  training  of  my  mind,  is 
likewise  a  more  or  less  complete  occupancy  and 
penetration  of  it.  It  is  my  mind  which  of  all  things 
I  can  make  most  completely  my  own.  Yet  this  actual 
occupancy  is  different  from  property  as  such  be¬ 
cause  property  is  complete  as  the  work  of  the  free 
will  alone.2  In  face  of  the  free  will,  the  thing  retains 
no  property  in  itself  even  though  there  still  remains 
in  possession,  as  an  external  relation  to  an  object, 
something  external.  The  empty  abstraction  of  a  mat¬ 
ter  without  properties  which,  when  a  thing  is  my 
property,  is  supposed  to  remain  outside  me  and  the 
property  of  the  thing,  is  one  which  thought  must 
master.  [A.] 

53.  Property  has  its  modifications  determined 
in  the  course  of  the  will’s  relation  to  the  thing. 
This  relation  is 

(A)  taking  possession  of  the  thing  directly 
(here  it  is  in  the  thing  qua  something  posi¬ 
tive  that  the  will  has  its  embodiment)  ; 

(B)  use  (the  thing  is  negative  in  contrast  with 
the  will  and  so  it  is  in  the  thing  as  some¬ 
thing  to  be  negated  that  the  will  has  its 
embodiment) ; 

(C)  alienation,  the  reflection  of  the  will  back 
from  the  thing  into  itself. 

These  three  are  respectively  the  positive,  nega¬ 
tive,  and  infinite  judgements  of  the  will  on  the 
thing. 

A.  Taking  Possession 

54.  We  take  possession  of  a  thing  (a)  by  direct¬ 
ly  grasping  it  physically,  (/?)  by  forming  it,  and 
(y)  by  merely  marking  it  as  ours.  [A.] 

55.  (a)  From  the  point  of  view  of  sensation,  to 
grasp  a  thing  physically  is  the  most  complete  of 
these  modes,  because  then  I  am  directly  present 
in  this  possession,  and  therefore  my  will  is  rec¬ 
ognizable  in  it.  But  at  bottom  this  mode  is  only 
subjective,  temporary,  and  seriously  restricted 
in  scope,  as  well  as  by  the  qualitative  nature  of 
the  things  grasped. — As  a  result  of  the  connexion 
which  I  may  effect  between  something  and  things 
which  have  already  become  my  property  mother 
w7ays,  or  into  which  something  may  otherwise 
be  accidentally  brought,  the  scope  of  this  method 

2Cf.  end  of  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  43. — Ed. 


26  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


is  somewhat  enlarged,  and  the  same  result  is  pro¬ 
duced  by  other  means  also. 

Mechanical  forces,  weapons,  tools,  extend  the  range 
of  my  power.  Connexions  between  my  property  and 
something  else  may  be  regarded  as  making  it  more 
easily  possible  for  me  than  for  another  owner,  or 
sometimes  possible  for  me  alone,  to  take  possession 
of  something  or  to  make  use  of  it.  Instances  of  such 
connexions  are  that  my  land  may  be  on  the  seashore, 
or  on  a  river  bank ;  or  my  estate  may  march  with 
hunting  country  or  pasture  or  land  useful  for  some 
other  purpose ;  stone  or  other  mineral  deposits  may 
be  under  my  fields ;  there  may  be  treasure  in  or  un¬ 
der  my  ground,  and  so  on.  The  same  is  true  of  con¬ 
nexions  made  by  chance  and  subsequent  to  posses¬ 
sion,  like  some  of  what  are  called  “natural  accessions,” 
such  as  alluvial  deposits,  &c.,  and  jetsam.  ( Fetura 
is  an  accession  to  my  wealth  too,  but  the  connex¬ 
ion  here  is  an  organic  one,  it  is  not  a  case  of  a  thing 
being  added  ab  extra  to  another  thing  already  in 
my  possession;  and  therefore  fetura  is  of  a  type 
quite  different  from  the  other  accessions.)  Alter¬ 
natively,  the  addition  to  my  property  may  be 
looked  upon  as  a  non-self-subsistent  accident  of  the 
thing  to  which  it  has  been  added.  In  every  case, 
however,  these  are  external  conjunctions  whose 
bond  of  connexion  is  neither  life  nor  the  concept.  It 
devolves,  therefore,  on  the  Understanding  to  ad¬ 
duce  and  weigh  their  pros  and  cons,  and  on  positive 
legislation  to  make  decisions  about  them  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  extent  to  which  the  relation  between 
the  things  conjoined  has  or  has  not  any  essentiality. 
[A.] 

56.  (/?)  When  I  impose  a  form  on  something, 
the  thing’s  determinate  character  as  mine  ac¬ 
quires  an  independent  externality  and  ceases  to 
be  restricted  to  my  presence  here  and  now  and 
to  the  direct  presence  of  my  awareness  and  will. 

To  impose  a  form  on  a  thing  is  the  mode  of  taking 
possession  most  in  conformity  with  the  Idea  to  this 
extent,  that  it  implies  a  union  of  subject  and  object, 
although  it  varies  endlessly  with  the  qualitative  char¬ 
acter  of  the  objects  and  the  variety  of  subjective 
aims. 

Under  this  head  there  also  falls  the  formation  of 
the  organic.  What  I  do  to  the  organic  does  not  re¬ 
main  external  to  it  but  is  assimilated  by  it.  Examples 
are  the  tilling  of  the  soil,  the  cultivation  of  plants, 
the  taming  and  feeding  of  animals,  the  preservation 
of  game,  as  well  as  contrivances  for  utilizing  raw 
materials  or  the  forces  of  nature  and  processes  for 
making  one  material  produce  effects  on  another,  and 
so  forth.  [A.] 

57.  Man,  pursuant  to  his  immediate  existence 
within  himself,  is  something  natural,  external  to 
his  concept.  It  is  only  through  the  development 
of  his  own  body  and  mind,  essentially  through 
his  self-consciousness’s  apprehension  of  itself  as 
free,  that  he  takes  possession  of  himself  and  be¬ 


comes  his  own  property  and  no  one  else’s.  This 
taking  possession  of  oneself,  looked  at  from  the 
opposite  point  of  view,  is  the  translation  into  ac¬ 
tuality  of  what  one  is  according  to  one’s  concept, 
i.e.  a  potentiality,  capacity,  potency.  In  that 
translation  one’s  self-consciousness  for  the  first 
time  becomes  established  as  one’s  own,  as  one’s 
object  also  and  distinct  from  self-consciousness 
pure  and  simple,  and  thereby  capable  of  taking 
the  form  of  a  “thing”  (compare  Remark  to 
Paragraph  43). 

The  alleged  justification  of  slavery  (by  reference 
to  all  its  proximate  beginnings  through  physical 
force,  capture  in  war,  saving  and  preservation  of 
life,  upkeep,  education,  philanthropy,  the  slave’s 
own  acquiescence, and  so  forth) , as  well  as  the  justi¬ 
fication  of  a  slave-ownership  as  simple  lordship  in 
general,  and  all  historical  views  of  the  justice  of 
slavery  and  lordship,  depend  on  regarding  man  as  a 
natural  entity  pure  and  simple,  as  an  existent  not  in 
conformity  with  its  concept  (an  existent  also  to 
which  arbitrariness  is  appropriate).  The  argument 
for  the  absolute  injustice  of  slavery,  on  the  other 
hand,  adheres  to  the  concept  of  man  as  mind,  as 
something  inherently  free.  This  view  is  one-sided  in 
regarding  man  as  free  by  nature,  or  in  other  words 
it  takes  the  concept  as  such  in  its  immediacy,  not 
the  Idea,  as  the  truth.  This  antinomy  rests,  like  all 
others,  on  the  abstract  thinking  which  asserts  both 
the  moments  of  an  Idea  in  separation  from  one  an¬ 
other  and  clings  to  each  of  them  in  its  independence 
and  so  in  its  inadequacy  to  the  Idea  and  in  its  fal¬ 
sity.  Free  mind  consists  precisely  (see  Paragraph  21) 
in  its  being  no  longer  implicit  or  as  concept  alone, 
but  in  its  transcending  this  formal  stage  of  its  being, 
and  eo  ipso  its  immediate  natural  existence,  until  the 
existence  which  it  gives  to  itself  is  one  which  is  solely 
its  own  and  free.  The  side  of  the  antinomy  which 
asserts  the  except  of  freedom  therefore  has  the 
merit  of  implying  the  absolute  starting-point,  though 
only  the  starting-point,  for  the  discovery  of  truth, 
while  the  other  side  goes  no  further  than  existence 
without  the  concept  and  therefore  excludes  the  out¬ 
look  of  rationality  and  right  altogether.  The  position 
of  the  free  will,  with  which  right  and  the  science  of 
right  begin,  is  already  in  advance  of  the  false  position 
at  which  man,  as  a  natural  entity  and  only  the  con¬ 
cept  implicit,  is  for  that  reason  capable  of  being 
enslaved.  This  false,  comparatively  primitive,  phe¬ 
nomenon  of  slavery  is  one  which  befalls  mind  when 
mind  is  only  at  the  level  of  consciousness.  The  dia¬ 
lectic  of  the  concept  and  of  the  purely  immediate 
consciousness  of  freedom  brings  about  at  that  point 
the  fight  for  recognition  and  the  relationship  of  mas¬ 
ter  and  slave.1  But  that  objective  mind,  the  content 
of  the  right,  should  no  longer  be  apprehended  in  its 
subjective  concept  alone,  and  consequently  that 
man’s  absolute  unfitness  for  slavery  should  no  long- 

1  See  Phenomenology  [1st  edn.],  pp.  115  ff.  [Eng.  tr. 
pp.  229  ff.],  and  Enc.  [1st  edn.],  §§  352  ff.  [3rd  edn. 
§§  430  ff.]. 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT 


er  be  apprehended  as  a  mere  “ought  to  be,”  is  some¬ 
thing  which  does  not  come  home  to  our  minds  until 
we  recognize  that  the  Idea  of  freedom  is  genuinely 
actual  only  as  the  state.  [A.] 

58.  (y)  The  mode  of  taking  possession  which  in 
itself  is  not  actual  but  is  only  representative  of 
my  will  is  to  mark  the  thing,  and  the  meaning  of 
the  mark  is  supposed  to  be  that  I  have  put  my 
will  into  the  thing.  In  its  objective  scope  and  its 
meaning,  this  mode  of  taking  possession  is  very 
indeterminate.  [A.] 

B.  Use  of  the  Thing 

59.  By  being  taken  into  possession,  the  thing 
acquires  the  predicate  “mine”  and  my  will  is  re¬ 
lated  to  it  positively.  Within  this  identity,  the 
thing  is  equally  established  as  something  nega¬ 
tive,  and  my  will  in  this  situation  is  a  particular 
will,  i.e.  need,  inclination,  and  so  forth.  Yet  my 
need,  as  the  particular  aspect  of  a  single  will,  is 
the  positive  element  which  finds  satisfaction, 
and  the  thing,  as  something  negative  in  itself, 
exists  only  for  my  need  and  is  at  its  service. — 
The  use  of  the  thing  is  my  need  being  externally 
realized  through  the  change,  destruction,  and 
consumption  of  the  thing.  The  thing  thereby 
stands  revealed  as  naturally  self-less  and  so  ful¬ 
fils  its  destiny.1 

The  fact  that  property  is  realized  and  actualized  on¬ 
ly  in  use  floats  before  the  minds  of  those  who  look 
upon  property  as  derelict  and  a  res  nullius  if  it  is  not 
being  put  to  any  use,  and  who  excuse  its  unlawful 
occupancy  on  the  ground  that  it  has  not  been  used 
by  its  owner.  But  the  owner’s  will,  in  accordance 
with  which  a  thing  is  his,  is  the  primary  substantive 
basis  of  property;  use  is  a  further  modification  of 
property,  secondary  to  that  universal  basis,  and  is 
only  its  manifestation  and  particular  mode.  [A.] 

60.  To  use  a  thing  by  grasping  it  directly  is  in 
itself  to  take  possession  of  a  single  thing  here 
and  now.  But  if  my  use  of  it  is  grounded  on  a 
persistent  need,  and  if  I  make  repeated  use  of  a 
product  which  continually  renews  itself,  restrict¬ 
ing  my  use  if  necessary  to  safeguard  that  renew¬ 
al,  then  these  and  other  circumstances  transform 
the  direct  single  grasp  of  the  thing  into  a  mark, 
intended  to  signify  that  I  am  taking  it  into  my 
possession  in  a  universal  way,  and  thereby  tak¬ 
ing  possession  of  the  elemental  or  organic  basis 
of  such  products,  or  of  anything  else  that  condi¬ 
tions  them. 

61.  Since  the  substance  of  the  thing  which  is 
my  property  is,  if  we  take  the  thing  by  itself, 

1  See  Paragraph  42. — Ed. 


27 

its  externality,  i.e.  its  non-substantiality  “ — in 
contrast  with  me  it  is  not  an  end  in  itself  (see 
Paragraph  42) — and  since  in  my  use  or  employ¬ 
ment  of  it  this  externality  is  realized,  it  follows 
that  my  full  use  or  employment  of  a  thing  is  the 
thing  in  its  entirety,  so  that  if  I  have  the  full 
use  of  the  thing  I  am  its  owner.  Over  and  above 
the  entirety  of  its  use,  there  is  nothing  left  of  the 
thing  which  could  be  the  property  of  another. 

[A.] 

62.  My  merely  partial  or  temporary  use  of  a 
thing,  like  my  partial  or  temporary  possession 
of  it  (a  possession  which  itself  is  simply  the 
partial  or  temporary  possibility  of  using  it)  is 
therefore  to  be  distinguished  from  ownership  of 
the  thing  itself.  If  the  whole  and  entire  use  of  a 
thing  were  mine,  while  the  abstract  ownership 
was  supposed  to  be  someone  else’s,  then  the 
thing  as  mine  would  be  penetrated  through  and 
through  by  my  will  (see  Paragraphs  52  and  61), 
and  at  the  same  time  there  would  remain  in  the 
thing  something  impenetrable  by  me,  namely 
the  will,  the  empty  will,  of  another.  As  a  posi¬ 
tive  will,  I  would  be  at  one  and  the  same  time 
objective  and  not  objective  tomyself  in  the  thing 
— an  absolute  contradiction.  Ownership  there¬ 
fore  is  in  essence  free  and  complete. 

To  distinguish  between  the  right  to  the  whole  and 
entire  use  of  a  thing  and  ownership  in  the  abstract 
is  the  work  of  the  empty  Understanding  for  which 
the  Idea — i.e.  in  this  instance  the  unity  of  (a)  own¬ 
ership  (or  even  the  person’s  will  as  such)  and  ( b ) 
its  realization — is  not  the  truth,  but  for  which  these 
two  moments  in  their  separation  from  one  another 
pass  as  something  which  is  true.  This  distinction, 
then,  as  a  relation  in  the  world  of  fact,  is  that  of  an 
overlord  to  nothing,  and  this  might  be  called  an  “in¬ 
sanity  of  personality”  (if  we  may  mean  by  “insanity” 
not  merely  the  presence  of  a  direct  contradiction  be¬ 
tween  a  man’s  purely  subjective  ideas  and  the  actual 
facts  of  his  life),  because  “mine”  as  applied  to  a 
single  object  would  have  to  mean  the  direct  presence 
in  it  of  both  my  single  exclusive  will  and  also  the 
single  exclusive  will  of  someone  else. 

In  the  Institutes 3  we  read:  Uususfructusest  jusalie- 
nis  rebus  utendifruendi  salva  rerum  substantia.  .  .  . 
Ne  tamen  in  universum  inutiles  essent  proprietates , 
semper  abscedente  usufructu,  placuit  certis  modis 
extingui  usumjructum  et  ad  proprietatem  reverti”  4 
Placuit  l  As  if  it  were  in  the  first  instance  a  whim 

2  See  Paragraph  44. — Ed. 

8  [Of  Justinian]  ii.  4. 

4  “Usufruct  is  the  right  of  using  another’s  property,  of 
enjoying  its  fruits  short  of  waste  of  its  substance.  .  .  . 
Nevertheless,  in  order  that  properties  should  not  remain 
wholly  unused  through  the  entire  cessation  of  usufruct, 
the  law  has  been  pleased  to  ordain  that  in  certain  cir¬ 
cumstances  the  right  of  usufruct  shall  be  annulled  and 
that  the  owner  proper  shall  resume  the  land.” — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


or  a  fiat  to  make  this  proviso  and  thereby  give  some 
sense  to  that  empty  distinction!  A  proprietas  sem¬ 
per  abscedente  usufructu  would  not  merely  be 
inutilis,  it  would  be  no  proprietas  at  all. 

To  examine  other  distinctions  in  property  itself, 
e.g.  between  res  mancipi  and  nec  mancipi,  domi¬ 
nium  quiritarium  and  bonitarium,  & c.,  is  inappro¬ 
priate  here  since  they  have  no  bearing  on  any  of  the 
modifications  of  property  determined  by  the  con¬ 
cept  and  are  merely  tit-bits  culled  from  the  history 
of  the  right  of  property.  The  empty  distinction  dis¬ 
cussed  above,  however,  is  in  a  way  contained  in 
the  relations  of  dominium  directum  and  dominium 
utile,  in  the  contractus  emphyteutic,  in  the  further 
relations  involved  in  estates  in  fee  with  the  ground 
rents  and  other  rents,  dues,  villeinage,  &c.,  entailed 
in  their  sundry  modifications,  in  cases  where  such 
burdens  are  irredeemable.  But  from  another  point 
of  view,  these  relations  preclude  that  distinction. 
They  preclude  it  in  so  far  as  burdens  are  entailed  in 
dominium  utile,  with  the  result  that  dominium  di¬ 
rectum  becomes  at  the  same  time  a  dominium  utile. 
Were  there  nothing  in  these  two  relationships  except 
that  distinction  in  its  rigid  abstraction,  then  in  them 
we  would  not  have  two  overlords  ( domini )  in  the 
strict  sense,  but  an  owner  on  the  one  hand  and  an 
overlord  who  was  the  overlord  of  nothing  on  the 
other.  But  on  the  score  of  the  burdens  imposed 
there  are  two  owners  standing  in  relation  to  each 
other.  Although  their  relation  is  not  that  of  being 
common  owners  of  a  property,  still  the  transition 
from  it  to  common  ownership  is  very  easy — a  tran¬ 
sition  which  has  already  begun  in  dominium  direct¬ 
um  when  the  yield  of  the  property  is  calculated  and 
looked  upon  as  the  essential  thing,  while  that  in¬ 
calculable  factor  in  the  overlordship  of  a  property, 
the  factor  which  has  perhaps  been  regarded  as  the 
honourable  thing  about  property,  is  subordinated 
to  the  utile  which  here  is  the  rational  factor. 

It  is  about  a  millennium  and  a  half  since  the  free¬ 
dom  of  personality  began  through  the  spread  of 
Christianity  to  blossom  and  gain  recognition  as  a 
universal  principle  from  a  part,  though  still  a  small 
part,  of  the  human  race.  But  it  was  only  yesterday, 
we  might  say,  that  the  principle  of  the  freedom  of 
property  became  recognized  in  some  places.  This 
example  from  history  may  serve  to  rebuke  the 
impatience  of  opinion  and  to  show  the  length  of 
time  that  mind  requires  for  progress  in  its  self- 
consciousness. 

63.  A  thing  in  use  is  a  single  thing  determined 
quantitatively  and  qualitatively  and  related  to  a 
specific  need.  But  its  specific  utility,  being  quan¬ 
titatively  determinate,  is  at  the  same  time  com¬ 
parable  with  [the  specific  utility  of]  other  things 
of  like  utility.  Similarly,  the  specific  need  which 
it  satisfies  is  at  the  same  time  need  in  general 
and  thus  is  comparable  on  its  particular  side 
with  other  needs,  while  the  thing  in  virtue  of  the 
same  considerations  is  comparable  with  things 


meeting  other  needs.  This,  the  thing’s  universal¬ 
ity,  whose  simple  determinate  character  arises 
from  the  particularity  of  the  thing,  so  that  it  is 
eo  ipso  abstracted  from  the  thing’s  specific  qual¬ 
ity,  is  the  thing’s  value,  wherein  its  genuine  sub¬ 
stantiality  becomes  determinate  and  an  object 
of  consciousness.1  As  full  owner  of  the  thing,  I 
am  eo  ipso  owner  of  its  value  as  well  as  of  its 
use. 

The  distinctive  character  of  the  property  of  a  feudal 
tenant  is  that  he  is  supposed  to  be  the  owner  of  the 
use  only,  not  of  the  value  of  the  thing.  [A.] 

64.  The  form  given  to  a  possession  and  its  mark 
are  themselves  externalities  but  for  the  subjec¬ 
tive  presence  of  the  will  which  alone  constitutes 
the  meaning  and  value  of  externalities.  This 
presence,  however,  which  is  use,  employment,  or 
some  other  mode  in  which  the  will  expresses  it¬ 
self,  is  an  event  in  time,  and  what  is  objective  in 
time  is  the  continuance  of  this  expression  of  the 
will.  Without  this  the  thing  becomes  a  res nullius, 
because  it  has  been  deprived  of  the  actuality  of 
the  will  and  possession.  Therefore  I  gain  or  lose 
possession  of  property  through  prescription. 

Prescription,  therefore,  has  not  been  introduced  in¬ 
to  law  solely  from  an  external  consideration  running 
counter  to  right  in  the  strict  sense,  i.e.  with  a  view 
to  truncating  the  disputes  and  confusions  which  old 
claims  would  introduce  into  the  security  of  property. 
On  the  contrary,  prescription  rests  at  bottom  on  the 
specific  character  of  property  as  “real,”  on  the  fact 
that  the  will  to  possess  something  must  express  itself. 

Public  memorials  are  national  property,  or,  more 
precisely,  like  works  of  art  in  general  so  far  as  their 
enjoyment  is  concerned,  they  have  life  and  count  as 
ends  in  themselves  so  long  as  they  enshrine  the  spirit 
of  remembrance  and  honour.  If  they  lose  this  spirit, 
they  become  in  this  respect  res  nullius  in  the  eyes  of 
a  nation  and  the  private  possession  of  the  first  com¬ 
er,  like  e.g.  the  Greek  and  Egyptian  works  of  art  in 
Turkey. 

The  right  of  private  property  which  the  family  of 
an  author  has  in  his  publications  dies  out  for  a 
similar  reason ;  such  publications  become  res  nul¬ 
lius  in  the  sense  that  like  public  memorials,  though 
in  an  opposite  way,  they  become  public  property, 
and,  by  having  their  special  handling  of  their  topic 
copied,  the  private  property  of  anyone. 

Vacant  land  consecrated  for  a  burial  ground,  or 
even  to  lie  unused  in  perpetuity,  embodies  an  empty 
absent  arbitrary  will.  If  such  a  will  is  infringed,  noth¬ 
ing  actual  is  infringed,  and  hence  respect  for  it  can¬ 
not  be  guaranteed.  [A.] 

C.  Alienation  of  Property 

65.  The  reason  I  can  alienate  my  property  is 
that  it  is  mine  only  in  so  far  as  I  put  my  will  into 

1  See  Paragraph  44. — Ed. 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT 


it.  Hence  I  may  abandon  ( derelinquere )  as  a  res 
nullius  anything  that  I  have  or  yield  it  to  the  will 
of  another  and  so  into  his  possession,  provided 
always  that  the  thing  in  question  is  a  thing  ex¬ 
ternal  by  nature.  [A.] 

66.  Therefore  those  goods,  or  rather  substan¬ 
tive  characteristics,  which  constitute  my  own 
private  personality  and  the  universal  essence  of 
my  self-consciousness  are  inalienable  and  my 
right  to  them  is  imprescriptible.  Such  character¬ 
istics  are  my  personality  as  such,  my  universal 
freedom  of  will,  my  ethical  life,  my  religion. 

The  fact  that  what  mind  is  in  accordance  with  its 
concept  or  implicitly  it  also  should  be  explicitly  and 
existentially  (the  fact  that  thus  mind  should  be  a 
person,  be  capable  of  holding  property,  should  have 
an  ethical  life,  a  religion)  is  the  Idea  which  is  itself 
the  concept  of  mind.  As  causa  sui,  i.e.  as  free  causal¬ 
ity,  mind  is  that  cuius  natura  non  potest  concipi  nisi 
existens} 

It  is  just  in  this  concept  of  mind  as  that  which  is 
what  it  is  only  through  its  own  free  causality  and 
through  its  endless  return  into  itself  out  of  the  nat¬ 
ural  immediacy  of  its  existence,  that  there  lies  the 
possibility  of  a  clash:  i.e.  what  it  is  potentially  it 
may  not  be  actually  (see  Paragraph  57),  and  vice 
versa  what  it  is  actually  (e.g.  evil,  in  the  case  of  the 
will)  may  be  other  than  what  it  is  potentially.  Here¬ 
in  lies  the  possibility  of  the  alienation  of  person¬ 
ality  and  its  substantive  being,  whether  this  aliena¬ 
tion  occurs  unconsciously  or  intentionally.  Examples 
of  the  alienation  of  personality  are  slavery,  serfdom, 
disqualification  from  holding  property,  encum¬ 
brances  on  property,  and  so  forth.  Alienation  of  intel¬ 
ligence  and  rationality,  of  morality,  ethical  life,  and 
religion,  is  exemplified  in  superstition,  in  ceding 
to  someone  else  full  power  and  authority  to  fix  and 
prescribe  what  actions  are  to  be  done  (as  when  an 
individual  binds  himself  expressly  to  steal  or  to 
murder,  &c.,  or  to  a  course  of  action  that  may  in¬ 
volve  crime),  or  what  duties  are  binding  on  one’s 
conscience  or  what  religious  truth  is,  &c. 

The  right  to  what  is  in  essence  inalienable  is  impre¬ 
scriptible,  since  the  act  whereby  I  take  possession  of 
my  personality,  of  my  substantive  essence, and  make 
myself  a  responsible  being,  capable  of  possessing 
rights  and  with  a  moral  and  religious  life,  takes 
away  from  these  characteristics  of  mine  just  that 
externality  which  alone  made  them  capable  of  pass¬ 
ing  into  the  possession  of  someone  else.  When  I  have 
thus  annulled  their  externality,  I  cannot  lose  them 
through  lapse  of  time  or  from  any  other  reason 
drawn  from  my  prior  consent  or  willingness  to  alien¬ 
ate  them.  This  return  of  mine  into  myself,  whereby 
I  make  myself  existent  as  Idea,  as  a  person  with 
rights  and  moral  principles,  annuls  the  previous  po¬ 
sition  and  the  wrong  done  to  my  concept  and  my 
reason  by  others  and  myself  when  the  infinite  em¬ 
bodiment  of  self-consciousness  has  been  treated  as 

1  Spinoza:  Ethics,  Part  I,  Definition  i. 


29 

something  external,  and  that  with  my  consent.  This 
return  into  myself  makes  clear  the  contradiction  in 
supposing  that  I  have  given  into  another’s  posses¬ 
sion  my  capacity  for  rights,  my  ethical  life  and  re¬ 
ligious  feeling;  for  either  I  have  given  up  what  I 
myself  did  not  possess,  or  I  am  giving  up  what,  so 
soon  as  I  possess  it,  exists  in  essence  as  mine  alone 
and  not  as  something  external.  [A.] 

67.  Single  products  of  my  particular  physical 
and  mental  skill  and  of  my  power  to  act  I  can 
alienate  to  someone  else  and  I  can  give  him  the 
use  of  my  abilities  for  a  restricted  period,  be¬ 
cause,  on  the  strength  of  this  restriction,  my 
abilities  acquire  an  external  relation  to  the  total¬ 
ity  and  universality  of  my  being.  By  alienating 
the  whole  of  my  time,  as  crystallized  in  my  work, 
and  everything  I  produced,  I  would  be  making 
into  another’s  property  the  substance  of  my  be¬ 
ing,  my  universal  activity  and  actuality,  my  per¬ 
sonality. 

The  relation  here  between  myself  and  the  exercise 
of  my  abilities  is  the  same  as  that  between  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  a  thing  and  its  use  (see  Paragraph  61).  It 
is  only  when  use  is  restricted  that  a  distinction  be¬ 
tween  use  and  substance  arises.  So  here,  the  use  of 
my  powers  differs  from  my  powers  and  therefore 
from  myself,  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  quantitatively  re¬ 
stricted.  Force  is  the  totality  of  its  manifestations, 
substance  of  its  accidents,  the  universal  of  its  par¬ 
ticulars.  [A.] 

68.  What  is  peculiarly  mine  in  a  product  of  my 
mind  may,  owing  to  the  method  whereby  it  is 
expressed,  turn  at  once  into  something  external 
like  a  “thing”  which  eo  ipso  may  then  be  pro¬ 
duced  by  other  people.  The  result  is  that  by  tak¬ 
ing  possession  of  a  thing  of  this  kind,  its  new 
owner  may  make  his  own  the  thoughts  communi¬ 
cated  in  it  or  the  mechanical  invention  which  it 
contains,  and  it  is  ability  to  do  this  which  some¬ 
times  (i.e.  in  the  case  of  books)  constitutes  the 
value  of  these  things  and  the  only  purpose  of 
possessing  them.  But  besides  this,  the  new  owner 
at  the  same  time  comes  into  possession  of  the 
universal  methods  of  so  expressing  himself  and 
producing  numerous  other  things  of  the  same 
sort. 

In  the  case  of  works  of  art,  the  form — the  por¬ 
trayal  of  thought  in  an  external  medium — is,  re¬ 
garded  as  a  thing,  so  peculiarly  the  property  of  the 
individual  artist  that  a  copy  of  a  work  of  art  is  es¬ 
sentially  a  product  of  the  copyist’s  own  mental  and 
technical  ability.  In  the  case  of  a  literary  work,  the 
form  in  virtue  of  which  it  is  an  external  thing  is  of 
a  mechanical  kind,  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  in¬ 
vention  of  a  machine ;  forin  the  first  case  the  thought 
is  presented  not  en  bloc,  as  a  statue  is,  but  in  a  series 
of  separable  abstract  symbols,  while  in  the  second 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


case  the  thought  has  a  mechanical  content  through¬ 
out.  The  ways  and  means  of  producing  things  of  that 
mechanical  kind  as  things  are  commonplace  accom¬ 
plishments. 

But  between  the  work  of  art  at  one  extreme  and 
the  mere  journeyman  production  at  the  other  there 
are  transitional  stages  which  to  a  greater  or  less  de¬ 
gree  partake  of  the  character  of  one  or  other  of  the 
extremes. 

69.  Since  the  owner  of  such  a  product,  in  own¬ 
ing  a  copy  of  it,  is  in  possession  of  the  entire  use 
and  value  of  that  copy  qua  a  single  thing,  he  has 
complete  and  free  ownership  of  that  copy  qua  a 
single  thing,  even  if  the  author  of  the  book  or 
the  inventor  of  the  machine  remains  the  owner 
of  the  universal  ways  and  means  of  multiplying 
such  books  and  machines,  &c.  Qua  universal  ways 
and  means  of  expression,  he  has  not  necessarily 
alienated  them,  but  may  reserve  them  to  himself 
as  means  of  expression  which  belong  to  him. 

The  substance  of  an  author’s  or  an  inventor’s  right 
cannot  in  the  first  instance  be  found  in  the  suppo¬ 
sition  that  when  he  disposes  of  a  single  copy  of  his 
work,  he  arbitrarily  makes  it  a  condition  that  the 
power  to  produce  facsimiles  as  things,  a  power  which 
thereupon  passes  into  another’s  possession,  should 
not  become  the  property  of  the  other  but  should 
remain  his  own.  The  first  question  is  whether  such 
a  separation  between  ownership  of  the  thing  and 
the  power  to  produce  facsimiles  which  is  given  with 
the  thing  is  compatible  with  the  concept  of  prop¬ 
erty,  or  whether  it  does  not  cancel  the  complete  and 
free  ownership  (see  Paragraph  62)  on  which  there 
originally  depends  the  option  of  the  original  pro¬ 
ducer  of  intellectual  work  to  reserve  to  himself  the 
power  to  reproduce,  or  to  part  with  this  power  as 
a  thing  of  value,  or  to  attach  no  value  to  it  at  all 
and  surrender  it  together  with  the  single  exemplar 
of  his  work.  I  reply  that  this  power  to  reproduce  has 
a  special  character,  viz.  it  is  that  in  virtue  of  which 
the  thing  is  not  merely  a  possession  but  a  capital  as¬ 
set  (see  Paragraphs  170  ff.)  ;  the  fact  that  it  is  such 
an  asset  depends  on  the  particular  external  kind  of 
way  in  which  the  thing  is  used,  a  way  distinct  and 
separable  from  the  use  to  which  the  thing  is  directly 
destined  (the  asset  here  is  not,  as  has  been  said,  an 
accessio  naturalis  like  jetura ) .  Since  then  this  dis¬ 
tinction  falls  into  the  sphere  of  that  whose  nature 
entails  its  divisibility,  into  the  sphere  of  external 
use,  the  retention  of  part  of  a  thing’s  [external]  use 
and  the  alienation  of  another  part  is  not  the  reten¬ 
tion  of  a  proprietorship  without  utile. 

The  purely  negative,  though  the  primary,  means  of 
advancing  the  sciences  and  arts  is  to  guarantee  sci¬ 
entists  and  artists  against  theft  and  to  enable  them 
to  benefit  from  the  protection  of  their  property,  just 
as  it  was  the  primary  and  most  important  means  of 
advancing  trade  and  industry  to  guarantee  it  against 
highway  robbery. 

Moreover,  the  purpose  of  a  product  of  mind  is  that 


people  other  than  its  author  should  understand  it 
and  make  it  the  possession  of  their  ideas,  memory, 
thinking,  &c.  Their  mode  of  expression,  whereby  in 
turn  they  make  what  they  have  learnt  (for  “learn¬ 
ing”  means  more  than  “learning  things  by  heart,” 
“memorizing  them”;  the  thoughts  of  others  can  be 
apprehended  only  by  thinking,  and  this  re-thinking 
the  thoughts  of  others  is  learning  too)  into  a  “thing” 
which  they  can  alienate,  very  likely  has  some  special 
form  of  its  own  in  every  case.  The  result  is  that  they 
may  regard  as  their  own  property  the  capital  asset 
accruing  from  their  learning  and  may  claim  for  them¬ 
selves  the  right  to  reproduce  their  learning  in  books 
of  their  own.  Those  engaged  in  the  propagation  of 
knowledge  of  all  kinds,  in  particular  those  whose  ap¬ 
pointed  task  is  teaching,  have  as  their  specific  func¬ 
tion  and  duty  (above  all  in  the  case  of  the  positive 
sciences,  the  doctrine  of  a  church,  the  study  of  posi¬ 
tive  law,  &c.)  the  repetition  of  well-established 
thoughts,  taken  up  ab  extra  and  all  of  them  given  ex¬ 
pression  already.  The  same  is  true  of  writings  de¬ 
vised  for  teaching  purposes  and  the  spread  and  prop¬ 
agation  of  the  sciences.  Now  to  what  extent  does  the 
new  form  which  turns  up  when  something  is  expres¬ 
sed  again  and  again  transform  the  available  stock  of 
knowledge,  and  in  particular  the  thoughts  of  others 
who  still  retain  external  property  in  those  intellectual 
productions  of  theirs,  into  a  private  mental  property 
of  the  individual  reproducer  and  thereby  give  him 
or  fail  to  give  him  the  right  to  make  them  his  external 
property  as  well?  To  what  extent  is  such  repetition 
of  another’s  material  in  one’s  book  a  plagiarism? 
There  is  no  precise  principle  of  determination  avail¬ 
able  to  answer  these  questions,  and  therefore  they 
cannot  be  finally  settled  either  in  principle  or  by 
positive  legislation.  Hence  plagiarism  would  have  to 
be  a  matter  of  honour  and  be  held  in  check  by  hon¬ 
our. 

Thus  copyright  legislation  attains  its  end  of  secur¬ 
ing  the  property  rights  of  author  and  publisher  only 
to  a  very  restricted  extent,  though  it  does  attain  it 
within  limits.  The  ease  with  which  we  may  deliber¬ 
ately  change  something  in  the  form  of  what  we  are 
expounding  or  invent  a  trifling  modification  in  a  large 
body  of  knowledge  or  a  comprehensive  theory  which 
is  another’s  work,  and  even  the  impossibility  of  stick¬ 
ing  to  the  author’s  words  in  expounding  something 
we  have  learnt,  all  lead  of  themselves  (quite  apart 
from  the  particular  purposes  for  which  such  repeti¬ 
tions  are  required)  to  an  endless  multiplicity  of  al¬ 
terations  which  more  or  less  superficially  stamp  some¬ 
one  else’s  property  as  our  own.  For  instance,  the 
hundreds  and  hundreds  of  compendia,  selections,  an¬ 
thologies,  &c.,  arithmetics,  geometries,  religious  tracts, 
&c.,  show  how  every  new  idea  in  a  review  or  annual 
or  encyclopaedia,  &c.,  can  be  forthwith  repeated  over 
and  over  again  under  the  same  or  a  different  title, 
and  yet  may  be  claimed  as  something  peculiarly  the 
writer’s  own.  The  result  of  this  may  easily  be  that 
the  profit  promised  to  the  author,  or  the  projector 
of  the  original  undertaking,  by  his  work  or  his  orig¬ 
inal  idea  becomes  negligible  or  reduced  for  both 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT 


parties  or  lost  to  all  concerned. 

But  as  for  the  effectiveness  of  honour  in  checking 
plagiarism,  what  has  happened  is  that  nowadays  we 
scarcely  hear  the  word  “plagiarism,”  nor  are  scholars 
accused  of  stealing  each  other’s  results.  It  may  be 
that  honour  has  been  effective  in  abolishing  plagia¬ 
rism,  or  perhaps  plagiarism  has  ceased  to  be  dishon¬ 
ourable  and  feeling  against  it  is  a  thing  of  thepast;or 
possibly  an  ingenious  and  trivial  idea,  and  a  change 
in  external  form,  is  rated  so  highly  as  originality  and 
a  product  of  independent  thinking  that  the  thought 
of  plagiarism  becomes  wholly  insufferable. 

70.  The  comprehensive  sum  of  external  activ¬ 
ity,  i.e.  life,  is  not  external  to  personality  as  that 
which  itself  is  immediate  and  a  this.  The  sur¬ 
render  or  the  sacrifice  of  life  is  not  the  existence 
of  this  personality  but  the  very  opposite.  There 
is  therefore  no  unqualified  right  to  sacrifice  one’s 
life.  To  such  a  sacrifice  nothing  is  entitled  except 
an  ethical  Idea1 2  as  that  in  which  this  immediately 
single  personality  has  vanished  and  to  whose 
power  it  is  actually  subjected.  Just  as  life  as 
such  is  immediate,  so  death  is  its  immediate  ne¬ 
gation  and  hence  must  come  from  without,  ei¬ 
ther  by  natural  causes,  or  else,  in  the  service  of 
the  Idea,  by  the  hand  of  a  foreigner.  [A.] 

Transition  from  Property  to  Contract 

71.  Existence  as  determinate  being  is  in  essence 
being  for  another  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  48). 
One  aspect  of  property  is  that  it  is  an  existent 
as  an  external  thing,  and  in  this  respect  property 
exists  for  other  external  things  and  is  connected 
with  their  necessity  and  contingency.  But  it  is 
also  an  existent  as  an  embodiment  of  the  will, 
and  from  this  point  of  view  the  “other”  for 
which  it  exists  can  only  be  the  will  of  another 
person.  This  relation  of  will  to  will  is  the  true 
and  proper  ground  in  which  freedom  is  existent. 
— The  sphere  of  contract  is  made  up  of  this  me¬ 
diation  whereby  I  hold  property  not  merely  by 
means  of  a  thing  and  my  subjective  will,  but  by 
means  of  another  person’s  will  as  well  and  so 
hold  it  in  virtue  of  my  participation  in  a  com¬ 
mon  will. 

Reason  makes  it  just  as  necessary  for  men  to  enter 
into  contractual  relationships — gift,  exchange,  trade, 
&c. — as  to  possess  property  (see  Remark  to  Para¬ 
graph  45).  While  all  they  are  conscious  of  is  that 
they  are  led  to  make  contracts  by  need  in  general, 
by  benevolence,  advantage,  &c.,  the  fact  remains  that 
they  are  led  to  do  this  by  reason  implicit  within  them, 
i.e.  by  the  Idea  of  the  real  existence  of  free  personal¬ 
ity,  “real”  here  meaning  “present  in  the  will  alone.” 3 

1See  Paragraphs  257  and  323  ff. — Ed. 

2Cf.  Paragraph  344  and  Aristotle,  Ethics,  ii53b25 

ff.  and  On  the  Soul,  415“ 2 6  ff. — Ed. 


Contract  presupposes  that  the  parties  entering  it 
recognize  each  other  as  persons  and  property  own¬ 
ers.  It  is  a  relationship  at  the  level  of  mind  objective, 
and  so  contains  and  presupposes  from  the  start  the 
moment  of  recognition  (compare  Remarks  to  Para¬ 
graphs  35  and  57).  [A.] 

Sub-section  II 

CONTRACT 

72.  Contract  brings  into  existence  the  prop¬ 
erty  whose  external  side,  its  side  as  an  existent, 
is  no  longer  a  mere  “thing”  but  contains  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  a  will  (and  consequently  the  will  of  a 
second  person  also).  Contract  is  the  process  in 
which  there  is  revealed  and  mediated  the  contra¬ 
diction  that  I  am  and  remain  the  independent 
owner  of  something  from  which  I  exclude  the 
will  of  another  only  in  so  far  as  in  identifying 
my  will  with  the  will  of  another  I  cease  to  be  an 
owner. 

73.  I  have  power  to  alienate  a  property  as  an 
external  thing  (see  Paragraph  65);  but  more 
than  this,  the  concept  compels  me  to  alienate  it 
qua  property  in  order  that  thereby  my  will  may 
become  objective  to  me  as  determinate^  exist¬ 
ent.  In  this  situation,  however,  my  will  as  alien¬ 
ated  is  at  the  same  time  another’s  will.3  Con¬ 
sequently  this  situation  wherein  this  compulsion 
of  the  concept  is  realized  is  the  unity  of  different 
wills  and  so  a  unity  in  which  both  surrender  their 
difference  and  their  own  special  character.  Yet 
this  identity  of  their  wills  implies  also  (at  this 
stage)  that  each  will  still  is  and  remains  not 
identical  with  the  other  but  retains  from  its  own 
point  of  view  a  special  character  of  its  own. 

74.  This  contractual  relationship,  therefore,  is 
the  means  whereby  one  identical  will  can  persist 
within  the  absolute  difference  between  independ¬ 
ent  property  owners.  It  implies  that  each,  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  common  will  of  both,  ceases 
to  be  an  owner  and  yet  is  and  remains  one.  It  is 
the  mediation  of  the  will  to  give  up  a  property,  a 
single  property,  and  the  will  to  take  up  another, 
i.e.  another  belonging  to  someone  else;  and  this 
mediation  takes  place  when  the  two  wills  are  as¬ 
sociated  in  an  identity  in  the  sense  that  one  of 
them  comes  to  its  decision  only  in  the  presence 
of  the  other. 

75.  The  two  contracting  parties  are  related  to 
each  other  as  immediate  self-subsistent  persons. 
Therefore  (a)  contract  arises  from  the  arbitrary 

3  See  Paragraph  71  with  the  Remark  and  the  note 
thereto. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


will,  (/?)  The  identical  will  which  is  brought  into 
existence  by  the  contract  is  only  one  posited  by 
the  parties,  and  so  is  only  a  will  shared  in  com¬ 
mon  and  not  an  absolutely  universal  will,  (y) 
The  object  about  which  a  contract  is  made  is  a 
single  external  thing,  since  it  is  only  things  of 
that  kind  which  the  parties’  purely  arbitrary  will 
has  it  in  its  power  to  alienate  (see  Paragraphs 

65  ff.). 

To  subsume  marriage  under  the  concept  of  contract 
is  thus  quite  impossible ;  this  subsumption — though 
shameful  is  the  only  word  for  it — is  propounded  in 
Kant’s  Philosophy  of  Law }  It  is  equally  far  from 
the  truth  to  ground  the  nature  of  the  state  on  the  con¬ 
tractual  relation,  whether  the  state  is  supposed  to 
be  a  contract  of  all  with  all,  or  of  all  with  the  mon¬ 
arch  and  the  government. 

The  intrusion  of  this  contractual  relation,  and  rela¬ 
tionships  concerning  private  property  generally,  into 
the  relation  between  the  individual  and  the  state  has 
been  productive  of  the  greatest  confusion  in  both  con¬ 
stitutional  law  and  public  life.  Just  as  at  one  time  2 
political  rights  and  duties  were  considered  and  main¬ 
tained  to  be  an  unqualified  private  property  of  par¬ 
ticular  individuals,  something  contrasted  with  the 
right  of  the  monarch  and  the  state,  so  also  in  more 
recent  times  the  rights  of  the  monarch  and  the  state 
have  been  regarded  as  the  subjects  of  a  contract  and 
as  grounded  in  contract,  as  something  embodying 
merely  a  common  will  and  resulting  from  the  arbi¬ 
trariness  of  parties  united  into  a  state.  However  dif¬ 
ferent  these  two  points  of  view  may  be,  they  have 
this  in  common,  that  they  have  transferred  the  char¬ 
acteristics  of  private  property  into  a  sphere  of  a 
quite  different  and  higher  nature.  (See  below,3  Ethi¬ 
cal  Life  and  the  State.)  [A.] 

76.  Contract  is  formal  when  the  double  consent 
whereby  the  common  will  is  brought  into  exist¬ 
ence  is  apportioned  between  the  two  contracting 
parties  so  that  one  of  them  has  the  negative  mo¬ 
ment — the  alienation  of  a  thing — and  the  other 
the  positive  moment — the  appropriation  of  the 
thing.  Such  a  contract  is  gift.  But  contract  may 
be  called  real  when  each  of  the  two  contracting 
wills  is  the  sum  of  these  mediating  moments  and 
therefore  in  such  a  contract  becomes  a  property 
owner  and  remains  so.  This  is  a  contract  of  ex¬ 
change.  [A.] 

77.  Since  in  real  contract  each  party  retains  the 
same  property  with  which  he  enters  the  contract 
and  which  at  the  same  time  he  surrenders,  what 
thus  remains  identical  throughout  as  the  prop¬ 
erty  implicit  in  the  contract  is  distinct  from  the 
external  things  whose  owners  alter  when  the  ex- 

1  [§§  2 4“7-l  * 

2  See  Paragraphs  277-8. — Ed. 

si.e.,  Part  III;  see  especially  Paragraphs  258,  278, 
254. — Ed. 


change  is  made.  What  remains  identical  is  the 
value,  in  respect  of  which  the  subjects  of  the 
contract  are  equal  to  one  another  whatever  the 
qualitative  external  differences  of  the  things  ex¬ 
changed.  Value  is  the  universal  in  which  the  sub¬ 
jects  of  the  contract  participate  (see  Paragraph 

63)- 

The  legal  provision  that  laesio  enormis 4  annuls  the 
obligation  arising  out  of  the  making  of  a  contract 
has  its  source,  therefore,  in  the  concept  of  contract, 
particularly  in  this  moment  of  it,  that  the  contract¬ 
ing  party  by  alienating  his  property  still  remains  a 
property  owner  and,  more  precisely,  an  owner  of 
the  quantitative  equivalent  of  what  he  alienates.  But 
a  laesio  is  not  merely  enormis  (as  it  is  taken  to  be 
if  it  exceeds  one-half  of  the  value)  but  infinite,  if 
someone  has  entered  on  a  contract  or  made  a  stipu¬ 
lation  of  any  sort  for  the  alienation  of  inalienable 
goods  (see  Paragraph  66). 

A  stipulation,  moreover,  differs  from  a  contract,  first, 
in  its  content,  because  it  signifies  only  some  single 
part  or  moment  of  the  whole  contract,  and  secondly, 
because  it  is  the  form  in  which  the  contract  is  settled 
(a  point  on  which  more  will  be  said  later).5  So  far 
as  its  content  is  concerned,  it  comprises  only  the 
formal  character  of  contract,  i.e.  the  willingness  of 
one  party  to  give  something  and  the  willingness  of 
the  other  to  accept  it ;  for  this  reason,  the  stipulation 
has  been  enumerated  amongst  so-called  ‘‘unilateral” 
contracts.  The  distinction  between  unilateral  and  bi¬ 
lateral  contracts,  and  distinctions  in  Roman  law  be¬ 
tween  other  types  of  contract,  are  sometimes  super¬ 
ficial  juxtapositions  made  from  an  isolated  and  often 
external  point  of  view  such  as  that  of  the  different 
types  of  contractual  forms;  or  sometimes  they  con¬ 
fuse  characteristics  intrinsic  to  contract  itself  with 
others  which  only  arise  later  in  connexion  with  the 
administration  of  justice  ( actiones )  and  the  legal 
processes  giving  effect  to  positive  laws,  and  which 
are  often  derived  from  quite  external  circumstances 
and  contravene  the  concept  of  right. 

78.  The  distinction  between  property  and  pos¬ 
session,  the  substantive  and  external  aspects  of 
ownership  (see  Paragraph  45),  appears  in  the 
sphere  of  contract  as  the  distinction  between  a 
common  will  and  its  actualization,  or  between  a 
covenant  and  its  performance.  Once  made,  a  cov¬ 
enant  taken  by  itself  in  distinction  from  its  per¬ 
formance  is  something  held  before  the  mind, 
something  therefore  to  which  a  particular  de¬ 
terminate  existence  must  be  given  in  accordance 
with  the  appropriate  mode  of  giving  determinate 
existence  to  ideas  by  symbolizing  them.8  This  is 
done,  therefore,  by  expressing  the  stipulation  in 
formalities  such  as  gestures  and  other  symbolic 
actions,  particularly  by  declaring  it  with  preci- 

4  Laesio  enormis,  excessive  damage. 

6  See  Paragraph  217. — Ed. 

6 Enc.  [xst  edn.]  §§379  ff.  [3rd  edn.  §§458  ff.]. 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT 


sion  in  language,  the  most  worthy  medium  for 
the  expression  of  our  mental  ideas. 

The  stipulation  accordingly  is  the  form  given  to  the 
content  of  a  contract,  i.e.  to  what  is  agreed  in  it,  and 
thereby  this  content, previously  only  an  idea, attains 
its  determinate  existence.  But  the  idea  which  we  have 
of  the  content  is  itself  only  a  form  which  the  con¬ 
tent  takes ;  to  have  an  idea  of  the  content  does  not 
mean  that  the  content  is  still  something  subjective, 
a  desire  or  a  wish  for  so  and  so.  On  the  contrary,  the 
content  is  the  will’s  ultimate  decision  on  such  sub¬ 
jective  wishes.  [A.] 

79.  In  contract  it  is  the  will,  and  therefore  the 
substance  of  what  is  right  in  contract,  that  the 
stipulation  enshrines.  In  contrast  with  this  sub¬ 
stance,  the  possession  which  is  still  being  re¬ 
tained  while  the  contract  remains  unfulfilled  is  in 
itself  only  something  external,  dependent  for  its 
character  as  a  possession  on  the  will  alone.  By 
making  the  stipulation,  I  have  given  up  a  prop¬ 
erty  and  withdrawn  my  particular  arbitrary  will 
from  it,  and  it  has  eo  ipso  become  the  property 
of  another.  If  then  I  agree  to  stipulated  terms,  I 
am  by  rights  at  once  bound  to  carry  them  out. 

The  difference  between  a  mere  promise  and  a  con¬ 
tract  lies  in  the  fact  that  a  promise  is  a  statement  that 
I  will  give  or  do  or  perform  something  in  the  future , 
and  a  promise  still  remains  a  sub  j ecti ve  volition  which 
because  it  is  subjective  I  can  still  alter.  A  stipulation 
in  a  contract,  on  the  other  hand,  is  itself  already  the 
embodiment  of  the  will’s  decision  in  the  sense  that 
by  making  the  stipulation  I  have  alienated  my  prop¬ 
erty,  it  has  now  ceased  to  be  mine,  and  I  already 
recognize  it  as  the  property  of  another.  The  distinc¬ 
tion  in  Roman  law  between  pactum  and  contractus 
is  one  of  a  false  type. 

Fichte  at  one  time  maintained  that  my  obligation 
to  keep  a  contract  begins  only  when  the  other  party 
starts  fulfilling  his  side  of  it;  his  reason  was  that 
up  to  that  point  I  am  uncertain  whether  the  other 
party’s  declarations  are  seriously  meant.  In  that  case 
it  would  follow  that  the  obligation  to  keep  a  contract 
before  it  was  carried  out  would  only  be  a  moral  one, 
not  an  obligation  by  rights. — But  the  expression  of 
the  stipulation  is  not  simply  a  declaration  of  a  gen¬ 
eral  character ;  it  embodies  a  common  will  which  has 
been  brought  into  existence  and  which  has  super¬ 
seded  the  arbitrary  and  alterable  dispositions  of  the 
parties.  The  question  therefore  is  not  whether  the 
other  party  could  have  had  different  private  inten¬ 
tions  when  the  contract  was  made  or  afterwards,  but 
whether  he  had  any  right  to  have  them.  Even  if  the 
other  party  begins  to  fulfil  his  side  of  the  contract, 
it  is  equally  open  to  me  to  do  wrong  if  I  like.  The 
nullity  of  Fichte’s  view  is  also  shown  by  the  fact 
that  it  would  base  contractual  rights  on  the  false 
infinite,  i.e.  on  the  progress  ad  infinitum  involved  in 
the  infinite  divisibility  of  time,  things,  action,  &c.  The 
embodiment  of  the  will  in  formal  gestures  or  in  ex¬ 
plicit  and  precise  language  is  already  the  complete 


embodiment  of  the  will  as  an  intelligent  entity,  and 
the  performance  of  the  covenant  so  embodied  is  only 
the  mechanical  consequence. 

It  is  true  that  in  positive  law  there  are  so-called 
“real”  contracts  as  distinguished  from  “consensual” 
contracts,  in  the  sense  that  the  former  are  looked  up¬ 
on  as  fully  valid  only  when  the  actual  performance 
( reSytraditiorei )  of  the  undertaking  supervenes  upon 
willingness  to  perform  it ;  but  this  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  thing  at  issue.  For  one  thing,  these  “real” 
contracts  cover  particular  cases  where  it  is  only  this 
delivery  by  the  other  party  which  puts  me  in  a  po¬ 
sition  to  fulfil  my  side  of  the  bargain,  and  where  my 
obligation  to  do  my  part  relates  only  to  the  thing 
after  it  has  come  into  my  hands,  as  happens  for  in¬ 
stance  in  loans,  pawning, or  deposits.  (The  same  may 
also  be  the  case  in  other  contracts.)  But  this  is  a 
matter  which  concerns  not  the  nature  of  the  relation 
of  the  stipulation  to  performance  but  only  the  man¬ 
ner  of  performance. — For  another  thing,  it  is  always 
open  to  the  parties  at  their  discretion  to  stipulate  in 
any  contract  that  the  obligation  of  one  party  to  per¬ 
form  his  side  shall  not  lie  in  the  making  of  the  con¬ 
tract  itself  as  such,  but  shall  arise  only  from  the  per¬ 
formance  by  the  other  party  of  his  side. 

80.  The  classification  of  contracts  and  an  intel¬ 
ligent  treatment  of  their  various  species  once 
classified  is  not  here  to  be  derived  from  external 
circumstances  but  from  distinctions  lying  in  the 
very  nature  of  contract.  These  distinctions  are 
those  between  formal  and  real1  contracts,  be¬ 
tween  ownership  and  possession  and  use,  be¬ 
tween  value  and  specific  thing,  and  they  yield 
contracts  of  the  following  sorts: 2 

A.  Gift. 

(1)  Gift  of  a  thing — gift  properly  so  called. 

(2)  Loan  of  a  thing — i.e.  the  gift  of  a  portion 
of  it  or  of  restricted  use  and  enjoyment  of  it; 
here  the  lender  remains  the  owner  of  the  thing 
( mutuum  and  commodatum  without  interest). 
Here  the  thing  lent  is  either  a  specific  thing  or 
else,  even  if  it  be  such,  it  may  none  the  less  be 
looked  on  as  universal,  or  it  may  be  a  thing  which 
counts  (like  money)  as  a  thing  universal  in  it¬ 
self. 

(3)  Gift  of  service  of  any  sort,  e.g.  the  mere 
safe-keeping  of  a  property  ( depositum ).  The 
gift  of  a  thing  on  the  special  condition  that  its 
recipient  shall  not  become  its  owner  until  the 
date  of  the  donor’s  death,  i.e.  the  date  at  which 
he  ceases  in  any  case  to  be  an  owner  of  property, 
is  testamentary  disposition;  this  is  not  contained 

1  See  Paragraph  76. — Ed. 

2  The  classification  given  here  agrees  on  the  whole  with 
Kant’s  ( Philosophy  of  Law  [§31.]).  One  would  have 
expected  that  the  usual  humdrum  classification  of  con¬ 
tracts  as  real  and  consensual,  nominate  and  innomi¬ 
nate,  &c.,  would  have  been  long  since  abandoned  in 
favour  of  a  rational  classification. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


in  the  concept  of  contract  but  presupposes  civil 
society  and  positive  legislation.1 

B.  Exchange. 

(1)  Exchange  as  such : 

(a)  exchange  of  a  thing  pure  and  simple,  i.e. 
exchange  of  one  specific  thing  for  another  of 
the  same  kind. 

(/3)  purchase  or  sale  {emtio,  venditio ) ;  ex¬ 
change  of  a  specific  thing  for  one  characterized 
as  universal,  one  which  counts  as  value  alone 
and  which  lacks  the  other  specific  character, 
utility — i.e.  for  money. 

(2)  Letting  {locatio,  conductio );  alienation  of 
the  temporary  use  of  a  property  in  return  for 
rent: 

(a)  letting  of  a  specific  thing — letting  strictly 
so  called,  or 

{p)  letting  of  a  universal  thing,  so  that  the  les¬ 
sor  remains  only  the  owner  of  this  universal,  or 
in  other  words  of  the  value — loan  ( mutuum ,  or 
even  commodatum,  if  interest  is  charged).  The 
additional  empirical  characteristics  of  the  thing 
(which  may  be,  e.g.,  a  flat,  furniture,  a  house, 
res  fungibilis  or  non  fungibilis,  &c.)  entail  (as 
in  A.  2  above)  other  particular  though  unim¬ 
portant  subdivisions. 

(3)  Contract  for  wages  {locatio  operae ) — 
alienation  of  my  productive  capacity  or  my  serv¬ 
ices  so  far,  that  is,  as  these  are  alienable,  the 
alienation  being  restricted  in  time  or  in  some 
other  way  (see  Paragraph  67). 

Counsel’s  acceptance  of  a  brief  is  akin  to  this,  and 
so  are  other  contracts  whose  fulfilment  depends  on 
character,  good  faith,  or  superior  gifts,  and  where  an 
incommensurability  arises  between  the  services  ren¬ 
dered  and  a  value  in  terms  of  cash.  (In  such  cases 
the  cash  payment  is  called  not  “wages”  out  “hono¬ 
rarium.”) 

C.  Completion  of  a  contract  (cautio) 
through  giving  a  pledge. 

In  the  contracts  whereby  I  part  with  the  use  of  a 
thing,  I  am  no  longer  in  possession  of  the  thing 
though  I  am  still  its  owner,  as  for  example  when  I 
let  a  house.  Further,  in  gifts  or  contracts  for  ex¬ 
change  or  purchase,  I  may  have  become  the  owner 
of  a  thing  without  as  yet  being  in  possession  of  it, 
and  the  same  cleavage  between  ownership  and  pos¬ 
session  arises  in  respect  of  the  implementing  of  any 
undertaking  which  is  not  simply  a  cash  or  barter 
transaction.  Now  what  the  pledge  effects  is  that  in 
the  one  case  I  remain,  and  in  the  other  case  I  am  put, 
in  actual  possession  of  the  value  as  that  which  is  still 
or  has  already  become  my  property,  without  in 
either  case  being  in  possession  of  the  specific  thing 

1  See  Paragraphs  179  ff. — Ed. 


which  I  am  renouncing  or  which  is  to  be  mine.  The 
pledge  is  a  specific  thing  but  one  which  is  my  prop¬ 
erty  only  to  the  extent  of  the  value  of  the  property 
which  I  have  renounced  into  another’s  possession  or 
which  is  due  to  me ;  its  specific  character  as  a  thing 
and  any  excess  value  it  may  have  still  belong  to  the 
person  who  gave  the  pledge.  Giving  a  pledge,  there¬ 
fore,  is  not  itself  a  contract  but  only  a  stipulation 
(see  [Remark  to]  Paragraph  77),  i.e.  it  is  the  mo¬ 
ment  which  brings  a  contract  to  completion  so  far 
as  the  possession  of  the  property  is  concerned.  Mort¬ 
gage  and  surety  are  particular  forms  of  pledge.  [A.] 

81.  In  the  bare  relation  of  immediate  persons 
to  one  another,  their  wills  while  implicitly  identi¬ 
cal,  and  in  contract  posited  by  them  as  common, 
are  yet  particular.  Because  they  are  immediate 
persons,  it  is  a  matter  of  chance  whether  or  not 
their  particular  wills  actually  correspond  with 
the  implicit  will,  although  it  is  only  through  the 
former  that  the  latter  has  its  real  existence.  If 
the  particular  will  is  explicitly  at  variance  with 
the  universal,  it  assumes  a  way  of  looking  at 
things  and  a  volition  which  are  capricious  and 
fortuitous  and  comes  on  the  scene  in  opposition 
to  the  principle  of  rightness.  This  is  wrong. 

The  transition  to  wrong  is  made  by  the  logical  high¬ 
er  necessity  that  the  moments  of  the  concept — here 
the  principle  of  rightness  or  the  will  as  universal, 
and  right  in  its  real  existence,  which  is  just  the  par¬ 
ticularity  of  the  will — should  be  posited  as  explicitly 
different,  and  this  happens  when  the  concept  is  real¬ 
ized  abstractly.  But  this  particularity  of  the  will, 
taken  by  itself,  is  arbitrariness  and  contingency,  and 
in  contract  I  have  surrendered  these  only  as  arbitrari¬ 
ness  in  the  case  of  a  single  thing  and  not  as  the  arbi¬ 
trariness  and  contingency  of  the  will  itself.  [A.] 

Sub-section  III 

WRONG 

82.  In  contract  the  principle  of  rightness  is 
present  as  something  posited,  while  its  inner  uni¬ 
versality  is  there  as  something  common  in  the 
arbitrariness  and  particular  will  of  the  parties. 
This  appearance  of  right,  in  which  right  and  its 
essential  embodiment,  the  particular  will,  corre¬ 
spond  immediately,  i.e.  fortuitously,  proceeds 
in  wrong  to  become  a  show,2  an  opposition  be¬ 
tween  the  principle  of  rightness  and  the  particu¬ 
lar  will  as  that  in  which  right  becomes  particu¬ 
larized.  But  the  truth  of  this  show  is  its  nullity 
and  the  fact  that  right  reasserts  itself  by  negat¬ 
ing  this  negation  of  itself.  In  this  process  the 
right  is  mediated  by  returning  into  itself  out  of 
the  negation  of  itself;  thereby  it  makes  itself 
actual  and  valid,  while  at  the  start  it  was  only 
implicit  and  something  immediate.  [A.] 

2  See  Paragraphs  97  ff. — Ed. 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT  35 


83.  When  right  is  something  particular  and 
therefore  manifold  in  contrast  with  its  implicit 
universality  and  simplicity,  it  acquires  the  form 
of  a  show,  (a)  This  show  of  right  is  implicit  or 
immediate — non-malicious  wrong  or  a  civil 
offence;  ( b )  right  is  made  a  show  by  the  agent 
himself — fraud;  ( c )  the  agent  makes  it  a  nullity 
altogether — crime.  [A.] 

A.  Non-malicious  Wrong 

84.  Taking  possession  (see  Paragraph  54)  and 
contract — both  in  themselves  and  in  their  par¬ 
ticular  species — are  in  the  first  instance  different 
expressions  and  consequences  of  my  willing  pure 
and  simple ;  but  since  the  will  is  the  inherently 
universal,  they  are,  through  their  recognition 
by  others,  grounds  of  title.  Such  grounds  are  ex¬ 
ternal  to  one  another  and  multiple,  and  this  im¬ 
plies  that  different  persons  may  have  them  in  re¬ 
lation  to  one  and  the  same  thing.  Each  person 
may  look  upon  the  thing  as  his  property  on  the 
strength  of  the  particular  ground  on  which  he 
bases  his  title.  It  is  in  this  way  that  one  man’s 
right  may  clash  with  another’s. 

85.  This  clash  which  arises  when  a  thing  has 
been  claimed  on  some  single  ground,  and  which 
comprises  the  sphere  of  civil  suits  at  law,  entails 
the  recognition  of  rightness  as  the  universal  and 
decisive  factor,  so  that  it  is  common  ground 
that  the  thing  in  dispute  should  belong  to  the 
party  who  has  the  right  to  it.  The  suit  is  con¬ 
cerned  only  with  the  subsumption  of  the  thing 
under  the  property  of  one  or  other  of  the  parties 
— a  straightforward  negative  judgement,  where, 
in  the  predicate  “mine,”  only  the  particular  is 
negated. 

86.  The  recognition  of  rightness  by  the  parties 
is  bound  up  with  their  opposed  particular  inter¬ 
est  and  point  of  view.  In  opposition  to  this  show 
of  rightness,  yet  within  this  show  itself  (see  the 
preceding  Paragraph),  the  principle  of  right¬ 
ness  arises  as  something  kept  in  view  and  de¬ 
manded  by  the  parties.  But  at  first  it  arises  only 
as  an  “ought-to-be”  because  the  will  is  not  yet 
present  herg  as  a  will  so  freed  from  the  immedi¬ 
acy  of  interest  as,  despite  its  particularity,  to 
have  the  universal  will  for  its  aim;  nor  is  it  yet 
at  this  point  characterized  as  a  recognized  ac¬ 
tuality  of  such  a  sort  that  in  face  of  it  the  par¬ 
ties  would  have  to  renounce  their  particular  in¬ 
terest  and  point  of  view.  [A.] 

B.  Fraud 

87.  The  principle  of  rightness,  when  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  right  as  particular  and  as  de¬ 


terminately  existent,  is  characterized  as  some¬ 
thing  demanded,  as  the  essential  thing;  yet  in 
this  situation  it  is  still  only  something  demanded 
and  from  that  point  of  view  something  purely 
subjective,  and  so  inessential — something  merely 
showing  there.  Thus  we  have  fraud  when  the 
universal  is  set  aside  by  the  particular  will  and 
reduced  to  something  only  showing  in  the  situa¬ 
tion,  primarily  in  contract,  when  the  universal 
will  is  reduced  to  a  will  which  is  common  only 
from  the  outsider’s  point  of  view.  [A.] 

88.  In  contract  I  acquire  a  property  for  the 
sake  of  its  particular  characteristics,  and  at  the 
same  time  my  acquisition  of  it  is  governed  by 
the  inner  universality  which  it  possesses  partly 
in  respect  of  its  value  and  partly  because  it  has 
been  the  property  of  another.  If  the  other  likes, 
a  false  disguise  may  be  given  to  the  thing  I  ac¬ 
quire,  so  that  the  contract  is  right  enough  so  far 
as  it  is  an  exchange,  voluntary  on  both  sides,  of 
this  thing  in  its  immediacy  and  uniqueness,  but 
still  the  aspect  of  implicit  universality  is  lacking. 
(Here  we  have  an  infinite  judgement  expressed 
positively  or  as  a  tautology.1) 

89.  Here  again  it  is  in  the  first  instance  only  a 
demand  that,  in  contrast  with  this  acceptance  of 
the  thing  simply  as  this  thing  and  with  the  mere 
intentions  and  arbitrariness  of  the  will,  objec¬ 
tivity  or  universality  should  be  recognizable  as 
value  and  should  prevail  as  right,  and  equally  a 
demand  only  that  the  subjective  arbitrary  will, 
opposing  itself  to  the  right,  should  be  super¬ 
seded.  [A.] 

C.  Coercion  and  Crime 

90.  In  owning  property  I  place  my  will  in  an 
external  thing,  and  this  implies  that  my  will, 
just  by  being  thus  reflected  in  the  object,  may 
be  seized  in  it  and  brought  under  compulsion.  It 
may  simply  be  forced  in  the  thing  uncondition¬ 
ally,  or  it  may  be  constrained  to  sacrifice  some¬ 
thing  or  to  do  some  action  as  a  condition  of  re¬ 
taining  one  or  other  of  its  possessions  or  em¬ 
bodiments — it  may  be  coerced.  [A.] 

91.  As  a  living  thing  man  may  be  coerced,  i.e. 
his  body  or  anything  else  external  about  him 
may  be  brought  under  the  power  of  others ;  but 
the  free  will  cannot  be  coerced  at  all  (see  Para¬ 
graph  5),  except  in  so  far  as  it  fails  to  withdraw 
itself  out  of  the  external  object  in  which  it  is 
held  fast,  or  rather  out  of  its  idea  of  that  object 
(see  Paragraph  7).  Only  the  will  which  allows 
itself  to  be  coerced  can  in  any  way  be  coerced. 

92. Since  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  the  will  has  an  ex- 

1Enc.  fist  edn.],  §121  [3rd  edn.  §  173]. 


36  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


istence  in  something  determinate  that  it  is  Idea 
or  actually  free,  and  since  the  existent  in  which 
it  has  laid  itself  is  freedom  in  being,  it  follows 
that  force  or  coercion  is  in  its  very  conception 
directly  self-destructive  because  it  is  an  expres¬ 
sion  of  a  will  which  annuls  the  expression  or  de¬ 
terminate  existence  of  a  will.  Hence  force  or 
coercion,  taken  abstractly,  is  wrong. 

93.  That  coercion  is  in  its  conception  self¬ 
destructive  is  exhibited  in  the  world  of  reality 
by  the  fact  that  coercion  is  annulled  by  coer¬ 
cion;  coercion  is  thus  shown  to  be  not  only  right 
under  certain  conditions  but  necessary,  i.e.  as  a 
second  act  of  coercion  which  is  the  annulment 
of  one  that  has  preceded. 

Breaking  a  contract  by  failing  to  carry  out  its  stip¬ 
ulated  terms,  or  neglect  of  duty  rightly  owed  to 
family  or  state,  or  action  in  defiance  of  that  duty,  is 
the  first  act  of  coercion  or  at  least  force,  in  that  it 
involves  depriving  another  of  his  property  or  evad¬ 
ing  a  service  due  to  him. 

Coercion  by  a  schoolmaster,  or  coercion  of  savages 
and  brutes,  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  an  initial  act 
of  coercion,  not  a  second,  following  on  one  that  has 
preceded.  But  the  merely  natural  will  is  implicitly  a 
force  against  the  implicit  Idea  of  freedom  which 
must  be  protected  against  such  an  uncivilized  will 
and  be  made  to  prevail  in  it.  Either  an  ethical  insti¬ 
tution  has  already  been  established  in  family  or  gov¬ 
ernment,  and  the  natural  will  is  a  mere  display  of 
force  against  it ;  or  else  there  is  only  a  state  of  na¬ 
ture,  a  state  of  affairs  where  mere  force  prevails  and 
against  which  the  Idea  establishes  a  right  of  Heroes.1 
[A.] 

94.  Abstract  right  is  a  right  to  coerce,  because 
the  wrong  which  transgresses  it  is  an  exercise  of 
force  against  the  existence  of  my  freedom  in  an 
external  thing.  The  maintenance  of  this  existent 
against  the  exercise  of  force  therefore  itself 
takes  the  form  of  an  external  act  and  an  exercise 
of  force  annulling  the  force  originally  brought 
against  it. 

To  define  abstract  right,  or  right  in  the  strict  sense, 
at  the  very  outset  as  a  right  in  the  name  of  which 
coercion  may  be  used,  means  to  fasten  on  it  in  a  re¬ 
sult  which  first  comes  on  the  scene  by  the  indirect 
route  of  wrong.  [A.] 

95.  The  initial  act  of  coercion  as  an  exercise  of 
force  by  the  free  agent,  an  exercise  of  force 
which  infringes  the  existence  of  freedom  in  its 
concrete  sense,  infringes  the  right  as  right,  is 
crime — a  negatively  infinite  judgement  in  its  full 
sense,2  whereby  not  only  the  particular  (i.e.  the 
subsumption  under  my  will  of  a  single  thing — 

1  Cf.  Hegel,  Philosophy  of  History,  pp.  166,  344. — Ed. 

2  See  my  [ Science  of]  Logic  [1st  edn.],  vol.  ii,  p.  99 
[Eng.  tr.  vol.  11,  pp.  277-8]. 


see  Paragraph  85)  is  negated,  but  also  the  uni¬ 
versality  and  infinity  in  the  predicate  “mine” 
(i.e.  my  capacity  for  rights).  Here  the  negation 
does  not  come  about  with  the  co-operation  of 
my  thinking  (as  it  does  in  fraud — see  Paragraph 
88)  but  in  defiance  of  it.  This  is  the  sphere  of 
criminal  law. 

Right,  the  infringement  of  which  is  crime,  has  so 
far  only  those  formations  which  we  have  seen  in  the 
preceding  Paragraphs;  hence  crime  also,  to  begin 
with,  has  its  more  precise  significance  in  relation  to 
these  specific  rights.  But  the  substance  of  these  forms 
is  the  universal  which  remains  the  same  throughout 
its  further  development  and  formation,  and  conse¬ 
quently  its  infringement,  crime,  also  remains  the 
same  and  accords  with  its  concept.  Thus  the  specific 
characteristic  of  crime  [in  general]  to  be  noticed  in 
the  next  Paragraph  is  characteristic  also  of  the  par¬ 
ticular,  more  determinate,  content  in  e.g.  perjury, 
treason,  forgery,  coining,  &c. 

96.  It  is  only  the  will  existent  in  an  object  that 
can  suffer  injury.  In  becoming  existent  in  some¬ 
thing,  however,  the  will  enters  the  sphere  of 
quantitative  extension  and  qualitative  charac¬ 
teristics,  and  hence  varies  accordingly.  For  this 
reason,  it  makes  a  difference  to  the  objective 
aspect  of  crime  whether  the  will  so  objectified 
and  its  specific  quality  is  injured  throughout  its 
entire  extent,  and  so  in  the  infinity  which  is 
equivalent  to  its  concept  (as  in  murder,  slavery, 
enforced  religious  observance,  &c.),  or  whether 
it  is  injured  only  in  a  single  part  or  in  one  of 
its  qualitative  characteristics,  and  if  so,  in  which 
of  these. 

The  Stoic  view  that  there  is  only  one  virtue  and 
one  vice,  the  laws  of  Draco  which  prescribe  death  as 
a  punishment  for  every  offence,3  the  crude  formal 
code  of  Honour  which  takes  any  insult  as  an  offence 
against  the  infinity  of  personality,  all  have  this  in 
common,  that  they  go  no  further  than  the  abstract 
thought  of  the  free  will  and  personality  and  fail  to 
apprehend  it  in  the  concrete  and  determinate  exist¬ 
ence  which  it  must  possess  as  Idea. 

The  distinction  between  robbery  and  theft  is  quali¬ 
tative  ;  when  I  am  robbed,  personal  violence  is  done 
to  me  and  I  am  injured  in  my  character  as  conscious¬ 
ness  existing  here  and  now  and  so  as  this  infinite 
subject. 

Many  qualitative  characteristics  of  crime,  e.g.  its 
danger  to  public  safety,4  have  their  basis  in  more 
concrete  circumstances,  although  in  the  first  instance 
they  also  are  often  fastened  on  by  the  indirect  route 
as  consequences  instead  of  from  the  concept  of  the 
thing.  For  instance,  the  crime  which  taken  by  itself 
is  the  more  dangerous  in  its  immediate  character  is 

3  Cf.  Plutarch,  Lives,  life  of  Solon. — Ed. 

4  See  Paragraph  218  and  Remark  to  Paragraph  319. 
— Ed. 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT  37 


an  injury  of  a  more  serious  type  in  its  range  or  its 
quality. 

The  subjective,  moral,  quality  of  crime  rests  on  the 
higher  distinction  implied  in  the  question  of  how 
far  an  event  or  fact  pure  and  simple  is  an  action,  and 
concerns  the  subjective  character  of  the  action  itself, 
on  which  see  below.1  [A.] 

97.  The  infringement  of  right  as  right  is  some¬ 
thing  that  happens  and  has  positive  existence  in 
the  external  world,  though  inherently  it  is  noth¬ 
ing  at  all.  The  manifestation  of  its  nullity  is  the 
appearance,  also  in  the  external  world,  of  the 
annihilation  of  the  infringement.  This  is  the 
right  actualized,  the  necessity  of  the  right  medi¬ 
ating  itself  with  itself  by  annulling  what  has  in¬ 
fringed  it.  [A.] 

98.  In  so  far  as  the  infringement  of  the  right  is 
only  an  injury  to  a  possession  or  to  something 
which  exists  externally,  it  is  a  malum  or  damage 
to  some  kind  of  property  or  asset.  The  annulling 
of  the  infringement,  so  far  as  the  infringement 
is  productive  of  damage,  is  the  satisfaction  giv¬ 
en  in  a  civil  suit,  i.e.  compensation  for  the  wrong 
done,  so  far  as  any  such  compensation  can  be 
found. 

Apropos  of  such  satisfaction,  the  universal  char¬ 
acter  of  the  damage,  i.e.  its  “value,”  must  here  again 
take  the  place  of  its  specific  qualitative  character  in 
cases  where  the  damage  done  amounts  to  destruc¬ 
tion  and  is  quite  irreparable. 

99.  But  the  injury  which  has  befallen  the  im¬ 
plicit  will  (and  this  means  the  implicit  will  of 
the  injuring  party  as  well  as  that  of  the  injured 
and  everyone  else)  has  as  little  positive  exist¬ 
ence  in  this  implicit  will  as  such  as  it  has  in  the 
mere  state  of  affairs  which  it  produces.  In  itself 
this  implicit  will  (i.e.  the  right  or  law  implicit) 
is  rather  that  which  has  no  external  existence 
and  which  for  that  reason  cannot  be  injured. 
Consequently,  the  injury  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  particular  will  of  the  injured  party  and 
of  onlookers  is  only  something  negative.  The 
sole  positive  existence  which  the  injury  pos¬ 
sesses  is  that  it  is  the  particular  will  of  the  crimi¬ 
nal.2  Hence  to  injure  [or  penalize]  this  particu¬ 
lar  will  as  a  will  determinately  existent  is  to 
annul  the  crime,  which  otherwise  would  have 
been  held  valid,  and  to  restore  the  right. 

The  theory  of  punishment  is  one  of  the  topics 
which  have  come  off  worst  in  the  recent  study  of  the 
positive  science  of  law,  because  in  this  theory  the 
Understanding  is  insufficient;  the  essence  of  the 
matter  depends  on  the  concept. 

If  crime  and  its  annulment  (which  later  8  will  ac- 

1  See  Paragraphs  113  ff. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraphs  97  and  99. — Ed. 

3  See  Paragraph  220. — Ed. 


quire  the  specific  character  of  punishment)  are 
treated  as  if  they  were  unqualified  evils,  it  must,  of 
course,  seem  quite  unreasonable  to  will  an  evil  mere' 
ly  because  “another  evil  is  there  already.”  4  To  give 
punishment  this  superficial  character  of  an  evil  is, 
amongst  the  various  theories  of  punishment,  the 
fundamental  presupposition  of  those  which  regard 
it  as  a  preventive,  a  deterrent,  a  threat,  as  reforma¬ 
tive,  &c.,  and  what  on  these  theories  is  supposed  to 
result  from  punishment  is  characterized  equally  su¬ 
perficially  as  a  good.  But  it  is  not  merely  a  question 
of  an  evil  or  of  this,  that,  or  the  other  good ;  the  pre¬ 
cise  point  at  issue  is  wrong  and  the  righting  of  it.  If 
you  adopt  that  superficial  attitude  to  punishment, 
you  brush  aside  the  objective  treatment  of  the  right¬ 
ing  of  wrong,  which  is  the  primary  and  fundamental 
attitude  in  considering  crime ;  and  the  natural  con¬ 
sequence  is  that  you  take  as  essential  the  moral  at¬ 
titude,  i.e.  the  subjective  aspect  of  crime,  inter¬ 
mingled  with  trivial  psychological  ideas  of  stimuli, 
impulses  too  strong  for  reason,  and  psychological 
factors  coercing  and  working  on  our  ideas  (as  if 
freedom  were  not  equally  capable  of  thrusting  an 
idea  aside  and  reducing  it  to  something  fortuitous !) . 
The  various  considerations  which  are  relevant  to 
punishment  as  a  phenomenon  and  to  the  bearing  it 
has  on  the  particular  consciousness,  and  which  con¬ 
cern  its  effects  (deterrent,  reformative,  &c.)  on  the 
imagination,  are  an  essential  topic  for  examination 
in  their  place,  especially  in  connexion  with  modes  of 
punishment,  but  all  these  considerations  presuppose 
as  their  foundation  the  fact  that  punishment  is  in¬ 
herently  and  actually  just.  In  discussing  this  matter 
the  only  important  things  are,  first,  that  crime  is  to 
be  annulled,  not  because  it  is  the  producing  of  an 
evil,  but  because  it  is  an  infringement  of  the  right 
as  right,  and  secondly,  the  question  of  what  that 
positive  existence  is  which  crime  possesses  and  which 
must  be  annulled;  it  is  this  existence  which  is  the 
real  evil  to  be  removed,  and  the  essential  point  is  the 
question  of  where  it  lies.  So  long  as  the  concepts 
here  at  issue  are  not  clearly  apprehended,  confusion 
must  continue  to  reign  in  the  theory  of  punishment. 
[A.] 

100.  The  injury  [the  penalty]  which  falls  on 
the  criminal  is  not  merely  implicitly  just — as 
just,  it  is  eo  ipso  his  implicit  will,  an  embodi¬ 
ment  of  his  freedom,  his  right;  on  the  contrary, 
it  is  also  a  right  established  within  the  criminal 
himself,  i.e.  in  his  objectively  embodied  will,  in 
his  action.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  his  action 
is  the  action  of  a  rational  being  and  this  implies 
that  it  is  something  universal  and  that  by  doing 
it  the  criminal  has  laid  down  a  law  which  he  has 
explicitly  recognized  in  his  action  and  under 
which  in  consequence  he  should  be  brought  as 
under  his  right. 

As  is  well  known,  Beccaria  denied  to  the  state  the 

4  [E.  F.]  Klein:  Grundsatze  des  peinlichen  Rechts 
[Halle,  1796],  §§  9  ff. 


38  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


right  of  inflicting  capital  punishment.  His  reason 
was  that  it  could  not  be  presumed  that  the  readiness 
of  individuals  to  allow  themselves  to  be  executed 
was  included  in  the  social  contract,  and  that  in  fact 
the  contrary  would  have  to  be  assumed.  But  the 
state  is  not  a  contract  at  all  (see  [Remark  to]  Para¬ 
graph  75)  nor  is  its  fundamental  essence  the  uncon¬ 
ditional  protection  and  guarantee  of  the  life  and 
property  of  members  of  the  public  as  individuals. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  that  higher  entity  which  even 
lays  claim  to  this  very  life  and  property  and  de¬ 
mands  its  sacrifice.  Further,  what  is  involved  in  the 
action  of  the  criminal  is  not  only  the  concept  of 
crime,  the  rational  aspect  present  in  crime  as  such 
whether  the  individual  wills  it  or  not,  the  aspect 
which  the  state  has  to  vindicate,  but  also  the  abstract 
rationality  of  the  individual's  volition.  Since  that  is 
so,  punishment  is  regarded  as  containing  the  crimi¬ 
nal's  right  and  hence  by  being  punished  he  is  hon¬ 
oured  as  a  rational  being.  He  does  not  receive  this 
due  of  honour  unless  the  concept  and  measure  of 
his  punishment  are  derived  from  his  own  act.  Still 
less  does  he  receive  it  if  he  is  treated  either  as  a 
harmful  animal  who  has  to  be  made  harmless,  or 
with  a  view  to  deterring  and  reforming  him. 

Moreover,  apart  from  these  considerations,  the 
form  in  which  the  righting  of  wrong  exists  in  the 
state,  namely  punishment,  is  not  its  only  form,  nor 
is  the  state  a  pre-condition  of  the  principle  of  right¬ 
ing  wrong.  [A.] 

101.  The  annulment  of  the  crime  is  retribution 
in  so  far  as  (a)  retribution  in  conception  is  an 
“injury  of  the  injury,”  and  ( b )  since  as  existent 
a  crime  is  something  determinate  in  its  scope 
both  qualitatively  and  quantitatively,  its  nega¬ 
tion  as  existent  is  similarly  determinate.  This 
identity  rests  on  the  concept,  but  it  is  not  an 
equality  between  the  specific  character  of  the 
crime  and  that  of  its  negation ;  on  the  contrary, 
the  two  injuries  are  equal  only  in  respect  of 
their  implicit  character,  i.e.  in  respect  of  their 
“value.” 

Empirical  science  requires  that  the  definition  of  a 
class  concept  (punishment  in  this  case)  shall  be 
drawn  from  ideas  universally  present  to  conscious 
psychological  experience.  This  method  would  prove 
that  the  universal  feeling  of  nations  and  individuals 
about  crime  is  and  has  been  that  it  deserves  punish¬ 
ment,  that  as  the  criminal  has  done,  so  should  it  be 
done  to  him.  (There  is  no  understanding  how  these 
sciences,  which  find  the  source  of  their  class  con¬ 
cepts  in  ideas  universally  shared,  come  on  other  oc¬ 
casions  to  take  for  granted  propositions  contradic¬ 
tory  of  like  “facts  of  consciousness”  also  styled  “uni¬ 
versal.”) 

But  a  point  of  great  difficulty  has  been  introduced 
into  the  idea  of  retribution  by  the  category  of  equal¬ 
ity,  though  it  is  still  true  that  the  justice  of  specific 
types  or  amounts  of  punishment  is  a  further  matter, 
subsequent  to  the  substance  of  the  thing  itself.  Even 


if  to  determine  the  later  question  of  specific  punish¬ 
ments  we  had  to  look  round  for  principles  other 
than  those  determining  the  universal  character  of 
punishment,  still  the  latter  remains  what  it  is.  The 
only  thing  is  that  the  concept  itself  must  in  general 
contain  the  fundamental  principle  for  determining 
the  particular  too.  But  the  determinate  character 
given  by  the  concept  to  punishment  is  just  that  nec¬ 
essary  connexion  between  crime  and  punishment  al¬ 
ready  mentioned ;  crime,  as  the  will  which  is  implic¬ 
itly  null,  eo  ipso  contains  its  negation  in  itself  and 
this  negation  is  manifested  as  punishment.  It  is  this 
inner  identity  whose  reflection  in  the  external  world 
appears  to  the  Understanding  as  “equality.”  The 
qualitative  and  quantitative  characteristics  of  crime 
and  its  annulment  fall,  then,  into  the  sphere  of  ex¬ 
ternality.  In  any  case,  no  absolute  determinacy  is 
possible  in  this  sphere  (compare  Paragraph  49)  ;  in 
the  field  of  the  finite,  absolute  determinacy  remains 
only  a  demand,  a  demand  which  the  Understanding 
has  to  meet  by  continually  increasing  delimitation — 
a  fact  of  the  greatest  importance — but  which  con¬ 
tinues  ad  infinitum  and  which  allows  only  of  peren¬ 
nially  approximate  satisfaction. 

If  we  overlook  this  nature  of  the  finite  and  then 
into  the  bargain  refuse  to  go  beyond  abstract  and 
specific  equality,  we  are  faced  with  the  insuperable 
difficulty  of  fixing  punishments  (especially  if  psy¬ 
chology  adduces  in  addition  the  strength  of  sensual 
impulses  and  consequentially  either  the  greater 
strength  of  the  evil  will  or  the  greater  weakness,  or 
the  restricted  freedom,  of  the  will  as  such — we  may 
choose  which  we  please).  Furthermore,  it  is  easy 
enough  from  this  point  of  view  to  exhibit  the  retrib¬ 
utive  character  of  punishment  as  an  absurdity  (theft 
for  theft,  robbery  for  robbery,  an  eye  for  an  eye, 
a  tooth  for  a  tooth — and  then  you  can  go  on  to 
suppose  that  the  criminal  has  only  one  eye  or  no 
teeth) .  But  the  concept  has  nothing  to  do  with  this 
absurdity,  for  which  indeed  the  introduction  of  this 
specific  equality  is  solely  to  blame.  Value,  as  the  in¬ 
ner  equality  of  things  which  in  their  outward  exist¬ 
ence  are  specifically  different  from  one  another  in 
every  way,  is  a  category  which  has  appeared  already 
in  connexion  with  contracts  (see  Paragraph  7 7), and 
also  in  connexion  with  injuries  that  are  the  subject 
of  civil  suits  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  98)  ;  1  and 
by  means  of  it  our  idea  of  a  thing  is  raised  above 
its  immediate  character  to  its  universality.  In  crime, 
as  that  which  is  characterized  at  bottom  by  the  in¬ 
finite  aspect 2  of  the  deed,  the  purely  external  specific 
character  vanishes  all  the  more  obviously,  and  equal¬ 
ity  remains  the  fundamental  regulator  of  the  essen¬ 
tial  thing,  to  wit  the  deserts  of  the  criminal,  though 
not  for  the  specific  external  form  which  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  those  deserts  may  take.  It  is  only  in  respect 
of  that  form  that  there  is  a  plain  inequality  between 
theft  and  robbery  on  the  one  hand,  and  fines,  im¬ 
prisonment,  &c.,  on  the  other.  In  respect  of  their 
“value,”  however,  i.e.  in  respect  of  their  universal 

1  All  editions  have  “Paragraph  95.” — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraph  22. — Ed. 


ABSTRACT  RIGHT 


property  of  being  injuries,  they  are  comparable. 
Thus,  as  was  said  above,  it  is  a  matter  for  the  Un¬ 
derstanding  to  look  for  something  approximately 
equal  to  their  “value”  in  this  sense.  If  the  implicit 
interconnexion  of  crime  and  its  negation,  and  if  also 
the  thought  of  value  and  the  comparability  of  crime 
and  punishment  in  respect  of  their  value  are  not  ap¬ 
prehended,  then  it  may  become  possible  to  see  in  a 
punishment  proper  only  an  “arbitrary”  1  connexion 
of  an  evil  with  an  unlawful  action.  [A.] 

102.  The  annulling  of  crime  in  this  sphere 
where  right  is  immediate  is  principally  revenge, 
which  is  just  in  its  content  in  so  far  as  it  is  re¬ 
tributive.  But  in  its  form  it  is  an  act  of  a  sub¬ 
jective  will  which  can  place  its  infinity  in  every 
act  of  transgression  and  whose  justification, 
therefore,  is  in  all  cases  contingent,  while  to  the 
other  party  too  it  appears  as  only  particular. 
Hence  revenge,  because  it  is  a  positive  action  of 
a  particular  will,  becomes  a  new  transgression ; 
as  thus  contradictory  in  character,  it  falls  into 
an  infinite  progression  and  descends  from  one 
generation  to  another  ad  infinitum. 

In  cases  where  crimes  are  prosecuted  and  punished 
not  as  crimina  publica  but  as  crimina  privata  (e.g. 
in  Jewish  law  and  Roman  law,  theft  and  robbery; 
in  English  law  to  this  day,  certain  crimes,  &c.)  pun¬ 
ishment  is  in  principle,  at  least  to  some  extent,  re¬ 
venge.  There  is  a  difference  between  private  revenge 
and  the  revenge  of  heroes,  knights-errant,  &c.,  which 
is  part  of  the  founding  of  states.  [A.] 

103.  The  demand  that  this  contradiction,  which 
is  present  here  in  the  manner  in  which  wrong  is 
annulled,  be  resolved  like  contradictions  in  the 
case  of  other  types  of  wrong  (see  Paragraphs 
86,  89),  is  the  demand  for  a  justice  freed  from 
subjective  interest  and  a  subjective  form  and 
no  longer  contingent  on  might,  i.e.  it  is  the  de¬ 
mand  for  justice  not  as  revenge  but  as  punish¬ 
ment.  Fundamentally,  this  implies  the  demand 
for  a  will  which,  though  particular  and  subjec¬ 
tive,  yet  wills  the  universal  as  such.  But  this 
concept  of  Morality  is  not  simply  something  de¬ 
manded;  it  has  emerged  in  the  course  of  this 
movement  itself. 

Transition  from  Right  to  Morality 

104.  That  is  to  say,  crime,  and  justice  in  the 
form  of  revenge,  display  (i)  the  shape  which  the 

1  Klein:  op.  cit.,  §  9. 


will’s  development  takes  when  it  has  passed 
over  into  the  distinction  between  the  universal 
implicit  will  and  the  single  will  explicitly  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  universal;  and  (ii)  the  fact  that 
the  universal  will,  returning  into  itself  through 
superseding  this  opposition,  has  now  itself  be¬ 
come  actual  and  explicit.  In  this  way,  the  right, 
upheld  in  face  of  the  explicitly  independent 
single  will,  is  and  is  recognized  as  actual  on  the 
score  of  its  necessity.  At  the  same  time,  how¬ 
ever,  this  external  formation  which  the  will  has 
here  is  eo  ipso  a  step  forward  in  the  inner  de¬ 
termination  of  the  will  by  the  concept.  The 
will’s  immanent  actualization  in  accordance  with 
its  concept  is  the  process  whereby  it  supersedes 
its  implicit  stage  and  the  form  of  immediacy  in 
which  it  begins  and  which  is  the  shape  it  as¬ 
sumes  in  abstract  right  (see  [Remark  to]  Para¬ 
graph  21)  ;  this  means  that  it  first  puts  itself  in 
the  opposition  between  the  implicit  universal 
will  and  the  single  explicitly  independent  will; 
and  then,  through  the  supersession  of  this  op¬ 
position  (through  the  negation  of  the  negation), 
it  determines  itself  in  its  existence  as  a  will,  so 
that  it  is  a  free  will  not  only  in  itself  but  for  it¬ 
self  also,  i.e.  it  determines  itself  as  self-related 
negativity.  Its  personality — and  in  abstract  right 
the  will  is  personality  and  no  more — it  now  has 
for  its  object;  the  infinite  subjectivity  of  free¬ 
dom,  a  subjectivity  become  explicit  in  this  way, 
is  the  principle  of  the  moral  standpoint.2 

Let  us  look  back  more  closely  over  the  moments 
through  which  the  concept  of  freedom  develops  it¬ 
self  from  the  will’s  determinate  character  as  origi¬ 
nally  abstract  to  its  character  as  self-related,  and  so 
at  this  point  to  its  self-determination  as  subjectivity. 
In  property  this  determinate  character  is  the  ab¬ 
stract  one,  “mine,”  and  is  therefore  found  in  an  ex¬ 
ternal  thing.  In  contract,  “mine”  is  mediated  by  the 
wills  of  the  parties  and  means  only  something  com¬ 
mon.  In  wrong  the  will  of  the  sphere  of  right  has  its 
abstract  character  of  implicit  being  or  immediacy 
posited  as  contingency  through  the  act  of  a  single 
will,  itself  a  contingent  will.  At  the  moral  stand¬ 
point,  the  abstract  determinacy  of  the  will  in  the 
sphere  of  right  has  been  so  far  overcome  that  this 
contingency  itself  is,  as  reflected  in  upon  itself  and 
self-identical,  the  inward  infinite  contingency  of  the 
will,  i.e.  its  subjectivity.  [A.] 

2  See  Paragraphs  7,  34,  15,  and  Addition  to  Paragraph 
35.— Ed. 


SECOND  PART 

MORALITY 


105.  The  standpoint  of  morality  is  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  will  which  is  infinite  not  merely  in 
itself  but  for  itself  (see  Paragraph  104).  In  con¬ 
trast  with  the  will’s  implicit  being,  with  its  im¬ 
mediacy  and  the  determinate  characteristics  de¬ 
veloped  within  it  at  that  level,  this  reflection  of 
the  will  into  itself  and  its  explicit  awareness  of 
its  identity  makes  the  person  into  the  subject. 

106.  It  is  as  subjectivity  that  the  concept  has 
now  been  determined,  and  since  subjectivity  is 
distinct  from  the  concept  as  such,  i.e.  from  the 
implicit  principle  of  the  will,  and  since  further¬ 
more  it  is  at  the  same  time  the  will  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  as  a  single  individual  aware  of  himself  (i.e. 
still  has  immediacy  in  him),  it  constitutes  the 
determinate  existence  of  the  concept.  In  this 
way  a  higher  ground  has  been  assigned  to  free¬ 
dom;  the  Idea’s  existential  aspect,  or  its  mo¬ 
ment  of  reality,  is  now  the  subjectivity  of  the 
will.  Only  in  the  will  as  subjective  can  freedom 
or  the  implicit  principle  of  the  will  be  actual.1 

The  second  sphere,  Morality,  therefore  throughout 
portrays  the  real  aspect  of  the  concept  of  freedom, 
and  the  movement  of  this  sphere  is  as  follows:  the 
will,  which  at  the  start  is  aware  only  of  its  inde¬ 
pendence  and  which  before  it  is  mediated  is  only 
implicitly  identical  with  the  universal  will  or  the 
principle  of  the  will,  is  raised  beyond  its  [explicit] 
difference  from  the  universal  will,  beyond  this  situ¬ 
ation  in  which  it  sinks  deeper  and  deeper  into  itself, 
and  is  established  as  explicitly  identical  with  the 
principle  of  the  will.  This  process  is  accordingly  the 
cultivation  of  the  ground  in  which  freedom  is  now 
set,  i.e.  subjectivity.  What  happens  is  that  subjec¬ 
tivity,  which  is  abstract  at  the  start,  i.e.  distinct 
from  the  concept,  becomes  likened  to  it,  and  there¬ 
by  the  Idea  acquires  its  genuine  realization.  The 
result  is  that  the  subjective  will  determines  itself  as 
objective  too  and  so  as  truly  concrete.  [A.] 

107.  The  self-determination  of  the  will  is  at  the 
same  time  a  moment  in  the  concept  of  the  will, 
and  subjectivity  is  not  merely  its  existential  as¬ 
pect  but  its  own  determinate  character  (see 
Paragraph  104).  The  will  aware  of  its  freedom 

1  See  Paragraph  90. — Ed. 


and  determined  as  subjective  is  at  the  start  con¬ 
cept  alone,  but  itself  has  determinate  existence 
in  order  to  exist  as  Idea.  The  moral  standpoint 
therefore  takes  shape  as  the  right  of  the  subjec¬ 
tive  will.2  In  accordance  with  this  right,  the  will 
recognizes  something  and  is  something,  only  in 
so  far  as  the  thing  is  its  own  and  as  the  will  is 
present  to  itself  there  as  something  subjective. 

The  same  process  through  which  the  moral  atti¬ 
tude  develops  (see  the  Remark  to  the  preceding 
Paragraph)  has  from  this  point  of  view  the  form  of 
being  the  development  of  the  right  of  the  subjective 
will,  or  of  the  mode  of  its  existence.  In  this  process 
the  subjective  will  further  determines  what  it  recog¬ 
nizes  as  its  own  in  its  object  (Gegenstand) ,  so  that 
this  object  becomes  the  will’s  own  true  concept,  be¬ 
comes  objective  ( objektiv )  as  the  expression  of  the 
will’s  own  universality.3  [A.] 

108.  The  subjective  will,  directly  aware  of  it¬ 
self,  and  distinguished  from  the  principle  of  the 
will  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  106),  is  there¬ 
fore  abstract,  restricted,  and  formal.  But  not 
merely  is  subjectivity  itself  formal;  in  addition, 
as  the  infinite  self-determination  of  the  will,  it 
constitutes  the  form  of  all  willing.  In  this,  its 
first  appearance  in  the  single  will,  this  form  has 
not  yet  been  established  as  identical  with  the 
concept  of  the  will,  and  therefore  the  moral 
point  of  view  is  that  of  relation,  of  ought-to-be, 
or  demand.  And  since  the  self-difference  of  sub¬ 
jectivity  involves  at  the  same  time  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  being  opposed  to  objectivity  as  external 
fact,  it  follows  that  the  point  of  view  of  con¬ 
sciousness  comes  on  the  scene  here  too  (see 
Paragraph  8).  The  general  point  of  view  here  is 
that  of  the  will’s  self-difference,  finitude,  and 
appearance.4 

The  moral  is  not  characterized  primarily  by  its 
having  already  been  opposed  to  the  immoral,  nor  is 
right  directly  characterized  by  its  opposition  to 
wrong.  The  point  is  rather  that  the  general  charac¬ 
teristics  of  morality  and  immorality  alike  rest  on  the 
subjectivity  of  the  will.  [A.] 

2  See  Paragraph  29. — Ed. 

8  See  Paragraphs  125,  26,  and  112. — Ed. 

4  See  Paragraph  7. — Ed. 


40 


MORALITY  41 


109.  This  form  of  all  willing  primarily  involves 
in  accordance  with  its  general  character  (a)  the 
opposition  of  subjectivity  and  objectivity,  and 
( b )  the  activity  (see  Paragraph  8)  related  to 
this  opposition.  Now  existence  and  specific  de- 
terminacy  are  identical  in  the  concept  of  the  will 
(see  Paragraph  104),  and  the  will  as  subjective 
is  itself  this  concept.1  Hence  the  moments  of 
this  activity  consist  more  precisely  in  (a)  dis¬ 
tinguishing  between  objectivity  and  subjectivity 
and  even  ascribing  independence  to  them  both, 
and  ( b )  establishing  them  as  identical.  In  the 
will  which  is  self-determining,  (a)  its  specific 
determinacy  is  in  the  first  place  established  in 
the  will  itself  by  itself  as  its  inner  particulariza¬ 
tion,  as  a  content  which  it  gives  to  itself.  This  is 
the  first  negation,  and  the  formal  limitation 
(Grenze)  of  this  negation  is  that  of  being  only 
something  posited,  something  subjective.  (/?)  As 
infinitely  reflected  into  itself,  this  limitation  ex¬ 
ists  for  the  will,  and  the  will  is  the  struggle  to 
transcend  this  barrier  (Schranke) ,  i.e.  it  is  the 
activity  of  translating  this  content  in  some  way 
or  other  from  subjectivity  into  objectivity,  into 
an  immediate  existence,  (y)  The  simple  identity 
of  the  will  with  itself  in  this  opposition  is  the 
content  which  remains  self -identical  in  both 
these  opposites  and  indifferent  to  this  formal 
distinction  of  opposition.  In  short,  it  is  my  aim 
[the  purpose  willed].2 

no.  But,  at  the  standpoint  of  morality,  where 
the  will  is  aware  of  its  freedom,  of  this  identity 
of  the  will  with  itself  (see  Paragraph  105),  this 
identity  of  content  acquires  the  more  particu¬ 
larized  character  appropriate  to  itself. 

(a)  The  content  as  “mine”  has  for  me  this 
character:  by  virtue  of  its  identity  in  subject 
and  object  it  enshrines  for  me  my  subjectivity, 
not  merely  as  my  inner  purpose,  but  also  inas¬ 
much  as  it  has  acquired  outward  existence.  [A.] 

in.  ( b )  Though  the  content  does  have  in  it 
something  particular,  whencesoever  it  may  be 
derived,  still  it  is  the  content  of  the  will  reflected 
into  itself  in  its  determinacy  and  thus  of  the 
self -identical  and  universal  will;  and  therefore: 

(a)  the  content  is  inwardly  characterized  as 
adequate  to  the  principle  of  the  will  or  as  pos¬ 
sessing  the  objectivity  of  the  concept; 

(/?)  since  the  subjective  will,  as  aware  of  it¬ 
self,  is  at  the  same  time  still  formal  (see  Para¬ 
graph  108),  the  content’s  adequacy  to  the  con¬ 
cept  is  still  only  something  demanded, and  hence 
this  entails  the  possibility  that  the  content  may 

1  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  32. — Ed. 

2  See  Addition  to  Paragraph  no. — Ed. 


not  be  adequate  to  the  concept. 

1 12.  ( c )  Since  in  carrying  out  my  aims  I  retain 
my  subjectivity  (see  Paragraph  no),  during 
this  process  of  objectifying  them  I  simultane¬ 
ously  supersede  the  immediacy  of  this  subjec¬ 
tivity  as  well  as  its  character  as  this  my  individ¬ 
ual  subjectivity.  But  the  external  subjectivity 
which  is  thus  identical  with  me  is  the  will  of 
others  (see  Paragraph  73).  The  will’s  ground  of 
existence  is  now  subjectivity  (see  Paragraph 
106)  and  the  will  of  others  is  that  existence 
which  I  give  to  my  aim  and  which  is  at  the 
same  time  to  me  an  other.  The  achievement  of 
my  aim,  therefore,  implies  this  identity  of  my 
will  with  the  will  of  others,  it  has  a  positive 
bearing  on  the  will  of  others. 

The  objectivity  of  the  aim  achieved  thus  involves 
three  meanings,  or  rather  it  has  three  moments  pres¬ 
ent  within  it  at  once;  it  is: 

(a)  something  existing  externally  and  immediately 
(see  Paragraph  109)  ; 

(p)  adequate  to  the  concept  (see  Paragraph  111)  ;3 

(7)  universal  subjectivity. 

The  subjectivity  which  maintains  itself  in  this  ob¬ 
jectivity  consists: 

(a)  in  the  fact  that  the  objective  aim  is  mine,  so 
that  in  it  I  maintain  myself  as  this  individual  (see 
Paragraph  no) ; 

(P)  and  (7) ,  in  moments  which  coincide  with  the 
moments  ( p )  and  (7)  above. 

At  the  standpoint  of  morality,  subjectivity  and  ob¬ 
jectivity  are  distinct  from  one  another,  or  united 
only  by  their  mutual  contradiction ;  it  is  this  fact 
more  particularly  which  constitutes  the  finitude  of 
this  sphere  or  its  character  as  mere  appearance  (see 
Paragraph  108),  and  the  development  of  this  stand¬ 
point  is  the  development  of  these  contradictions  and 
their  resolutions,  resolutions,  however,  which  with¬ 
in  this  field  can  be  no  more  than  relative.  [A.] 

1 13.  The  externalization  of  the  subjective  or 
moral  will  is  action.  Action  implies  the  determi¬ 
nate  characteristics  here  indicated: 

(a)  in  its  externality  it  must  be  known  to  me 
as  my  action; 

(/?)  it  must  bear  essentially  on  the  concept  as 
an  “ought”  [see  Paragraph  13 1]; 

(7)  it  must  have  an  essential  bearing  on  the 
will  of  others. 

It  is  not  until  we  come  to  the  externalization  of  the 
moral  will  that  we  come  to  action.  The  existence 
which  the  will  gives  to  itself  in  the  sphere  of  formal 
rights  is  existence  in  an  immediate  thing  and  is  itself 
immediate ;  to  start  with,  it  neither  has  in  itself  any 
express  bearing  on  the  concept,  which  is  at  that  point 
not  yet  contrasted  with  the  subjective  will  and  so  is 
not  distinguished  from  it,  nor  has  it  a  positive  bear¬ 
ing  on  the  will  of  others ;  in  the  sphere  of  right,  com- 

3  All  editions  read  “11 2.” — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


mand  in  its  fundamental  character  is  only  prohibi¬ 
tion  (see  Paragraph  38).  In  contract  and  wrong, 
there  is  the  beginning  of  a  bearing  on  the  will  of  oth¬ 
ers  ;  but  the  correspondence  established  in  contract 
between  one  will  and  another  is  grounded  in  arbitrar¬ 
iness,  and  the  essential  bearing  which  the  will  has 
there  on  the  will  of  the  other  is, as  a  matter  of  rights, 
something  negative,  i.e.  one  party  retains  his  prop¬ 
erty  (the  value  of  it)  and  allows  the  other  to  retain 
his.  On  the  other  hand,  crime  in  its  aspect  as  issuing 
from  the  subjective  will,  and  the  question  of  the 
mode  of  its  existence  in  that  will,  come  before  us 
now  for  consideration  for  the  first  time. 

The  content  of  an  action  at  law  {actio),  as  some¬ 
thing  determined  by  legal  enactment,  is  not  imput¬ 
able  to  me.  Consequently,  such  an  action  contains 
only  some  of  the  moments  of  a  moral  action  proper, 
and  contains  them  only  incidentally.  The  aspect  of 
an  action  in  virtue  of  which  it  is  properly  moral  is 
therefore  distinct  from  its  aspect  as  legal. 

1 14.  The  right  of  the  moral  will  involves  three 
aspects: 

(a)  The  abstract  or  formal  right  of  action,  the 
right  that  the  content  of  the  action  as  carried 
out  in  immediate  existence,  shall  be  in  principle 
mine,  that  thus  the  action  shall  be  the  Purpose 
of  the  subjective  will. 

( b )  The  particular  aspect  of  the  action  is  its 
inner  content  (a)  as  I  am  aware  of  it  in  its  gen¬ 
eral  character;  my  awareness  of  this  general 
character  constitutes  the  worth  of  the  action 
and  the  reason  I  think  good  to  do  it — in  short 
my  Intention.  (/?)  Its  content  is  my  special  aim, 
the  aim  of  my  particular,  merely  individual,  ex¬ 
istence,  i.e.  Welfare. 

(c)  This  content  (as  something  which  is  in¬ 
ward  and  which  yet  at  the  same  time  is  raised  to 
its  universality  as  to  absolute  objectivity)  is 
the  absolute  end  of  the  will,  the  Good — with  the 
opposition  in  the  sphere  of  reflection,  of  subjec¬ 
tive  universality,  which  is  now  wickedness  and 
now  conscience.1  [A.] 

Sub-section  I 

PURPOSE  AND  RESPONSIBILITY 

1 1 5.  The  finitude  of  the  subjective  will  in  the 
immediacy  of  acting  consists  directly  in  this, 
that  its  action  presupposes  an  external  object 
with  a  complex  environment.  The  deed  sets  up 
an  alteration  in  this  state  of  affairs  confronting 
the  will,  and  my  will  has  responsibility  in  gen¬ 
eral  for  its  deed  in  so  far  as  the  abstract  predi¬ 
cate  “mine”  belongs  to  the  state  of  affairs  so 
altered. 

An  event,  a  situation  which  has  been  produced,  is 
a  concrete  external  actuality  which  because  of  its 

1See  Remark  to  Paragraph  112. — Ed. 


concreteness  has  in  it  an  indeterminable  multiplicity 
of  factors.  Any  and  every  single  element  which  ap¬ 
pears  as  the  condition,  ground,  or  cause  of  one  such 
factor,  and  so  has  contributed  its  share  to  the  event 
in  question,  may  be  looked  upon  as  responsible  for 
the  event,  or  at  least  as  sharing  the  responsibility 
for  it.  Hence,  in  the  case  of  a  complex  event  (e.g. 
the  French  Revolution)  it  is  open  to  the  abstract 
Understanding  to  choose  which  of  an  endless  num¬ 
ber  of  factors  it  will  maintain  to  be  responsible  for 
it.  [A.] 

1 16.  It  is,  of  course,  not  my  own  doing  if  dam¬ 
age  is  caused  to  others  by  things  whose  owner  I 
am  and  which  as  external  objects  stand  and  are 
effective  in  manifold  connexions  with  other 
things  (as  may  also  be  the  case  with  my  self  as 
a  bodily  mechanism  or  as  a  living  thing).  This 
damage,  however,  is  to  some  extent  chargeable 
to  me  because  the  things  that  cause  it  are  in 
principle  mine,  although  it  is  true  that  they  are 
subject  to  my  control,  vigilance,  &c.,  only  to  an 
extent  varying  with  their  special  character. 

1 1 7.  The  freely  acting  will,  in  directing  its  aim 
on  the  state  of  affairs  confronting  it,  has  an  idea 
of  the  attendant  circumstances.  But  because  the 
will  is  finite,  since  this  state  of  affairs  is  pre¬ 
supposed,  the  objective  phenomenon  is  contin¬ 
gent  so  far  as  the  will  is  concerned,  and  may 
contain  something  other  than  what  the  will’s 
idea  of  it  contains.  The  will’s  right,  however,  is 
to  recognize  as  its  action,  and  to  accept  respon¬ 
sibility  for,  only  those  presuppositions  of  the 
deed  of  which  it  was  conscious  in  its  aim  and 
those  aspects  of  the  deed  which  were  contained 
in  its  purpose.  The  deed  can  be  imputed  to  me 
only  if  my  will  is  responsible  for  it — this  is  the 
right  to  know.  [A.] 

1 18.  Further,  action  is  translated  into  external 
fact,  and  external  fact  has  connexions  in  the 
field  of  external  necessity  through  which  it  de¬ 
velops  itself  in  all  directions.  Hence  action  has  a 
multitude  of  consequences.  These  consequences 
are  the  outward  form  whose  inner  soul  is  the 
aim  of  the  action,  and  thus  they  are  the  con¬ 
sequences  of  the  action,  they  belong  to  the  ac¬ 
tion.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  action,  as 
the  aim  posited  in  the  external  world,  has  be¬ 
come  the  prey  of  external  forces  which  attach  to 
it  something  totally  different  from  what  it  is 
explicitly  and  drive  it  on  into  alien  and  distant 
consequences.  Thus  the  will  has  the  right  to 
repudiate  the  imputation  of  all  consequences 
except  the  first,  since  it  alone  was  purposed. 

To  determine  which  results  are  accidental  and 
which  necessary  is  impossible,  because  the  necessity 
implicit  in  the  finite  comes  into  determinate  exist- 


MORALITY 


ence  as  an  external  necessity,  as  a  relation  of  single 
things  to  one  another,  things  which  as  self-subsist- 
ent  are  conjoined  in  indifference  to  one  another  and 
externally.  The  maxim:  “Ignore  the  consequences  of 
actions”  and  the  other:  “Judge  actions  by  their  con¬ 
sequences  and  make  these  the  criterion  of  right  and 
good”  are  both  alike  maxims  of  the  abstract  Un¬ 
derstanding.  The  consequences,  as  the  shape  proper 
to  the  action  and  immanent  within  it,  exhibit  noth¬ 
ing  but  its  nature  and  are  simply  the  action  itself ; 
therefore  the  action  can  neither  disavow  nor  ignore 
them.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  among  the  con¬ 
sequences  there  is  also  comprised  something  inter¬ 
posed  from  without  and  introduced  by  chance,  and 
this  is  quite  unrelated  to  the  nature  of  the  action  it¬ 
self. 

The  development  in  the  external  world  of  the  con¬ 
tradiction  involved  in  the  necessity  of  the  finite  is 
just  the  conversion  of  necessity  into  contingency  and 
vice  versa.  From  this  point  of  view,  therefore,  acting 
means  surrendering  oneself  to  this  law.1  It  is  because 
of  this  that  it  is  to  the  advantage  of  the  criminal  if 
his  action  has  comparatively  few  bad  consequences 
(while  a  good  action  must  be  content  to  have  had 
no  consequences  or  very  few),  and  that  the  fully 
developed  consequences  of  a  crime  are  counted  as 
part  of  the  crime. 

The  self-consciousness  of  heroes  (like  that  of  Oedi¬ 
pus  and  others  in  Greek  tragedy)  had  not  advanced 
out  of  its  primitive  simplicity  either  to  reflection  on 
the  distinction  between  act  and  action,  between  the 
external  event  and  the  purpose  and  knowledge  of 
the  circumstances,  or  to  the  subdivision  of  conse¬ 
quences.  On  the  contrary,  they  accepted  responsi¬ 
bility  for  the  whole  compass  of  the  deed.  [A.] 

Sub-section  II 

INTENTION  AND  WELFARE 

1 19.  An  action  as  an  external  event  is  a  com¬ 
plex  of  connected  parts  which  may  be  regarded 
as  divided  into  units  ad  infinitum,  and  the  ac¬ 
tion  may  be  treated  as  having  touched  in  the 
first  instance  only  one  of  these  units.  The  truth 
of  the  single,  however,  is  the  universal;  and 
what  explicitly  gives  action  its  specific  character 
is  not  an  isolated  content  limited  to  an  external 
unit,  but  a  universal  content,  comprising  in  it¬ 
self  the  complex  of  connected  parts.  Purpose,  as 
issuing  from  a  thinker,  comprises  more  than  the 
mere  unit ;  essentially  it  comprises  that  univer¬ 
sal  side  of  the  action,  i.e.  the  intention. 

Etymologically,  Absicht  (intention)  implies  ab¬ 
straction,  either  the  form  of  universality  or  the  ex¬ 
traction  of  a  particular  aspect  of  the  concrete  thing. 
The  endeavour  to  justify  an  action  by  the  intention 
behind  it  involves  the  isolation  of  one  or  other  of  its 
single  aspects  which  is  alleged  to  be  the  essence  of 

1  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  26. — Ed. 


the  action  on  its  subjective  side. 

To  judge  an  action  as  an  external  deed  without  yet 
determining  its  rightness  or  wrongness  is  simply  to 
bestow  on  it  a  universal  predicate,  i.e.  to  describe  it 
as  burning,  killing,  &c. 

The  discrete  character  of  the  external  world  shows 
what  the  nature  of  that  world  is,  namely  a  chain  of 
external  relations.  Actuality  is  touched  in  the  first 
instance  only  at  a  single  point  (arson,  for  instance, 
directly  concerns  only  a  tiny  section  of  the  firewood, 
i.e.  is  describable  in  a  proposition,  not  a  judgement), 
but  the  universal  nature  of  this  point  entails  its  ex¬ 
pansion.  In  a  living  thing,  the  single  part  is  there  in 
its  immediacy  not  as  a  mere  part,  but  as  an  organ  in 
which  the  universal  is  really  present  as  the  univer¬ 
sal;  hence  in  murder,  it  is  not  a  piece  of  flesh,  as 
something  isolated,  which  is  injured,  but  life  itself 
which  is  injured  in  that  piece  of  flesh.  It  is  subjective 
reflection,  ignorant  of  the  logical  nature  of  the  single 
and  the  universal,  which  indulges  ad  libitum  in  the 
subdivision  of  single  parts  and  consequences;  and  yet 
it  is  the  nature  of  the  finite  deed  itself  to  contain 
such  separable  contingencies. — The  device  of  dolus 
indirectus  has  its  basis  in  these  considerations.  [A.] 

1 20.  The  right  of  intention  is  that  the  universal 
quality  of  the  action  shall  not  merely  be  implicit 
but  shall  be  known  by  the  agent,  and  so  shall 
have  lain  from  the  start  in  his  subjective  will. 
Vice  versa,  what  may  be  called  the  right  of  the 
objectivity  of  action  is  the  right  of  the  action  to 
evince  itself  as  known  and  willed  by  the  sub¬ 
ject  as  a  thinker. 

This  right  to  insight  of  this  kind  entails  the  com¬ 
plete,  or  almost  complete,  irresponsibility  of  chil¬ 
dren,  imbeciles,  lunatics,  &c.,  for  their  actions. — But 
just  as  actions  on  their  external  side  as  events  in¬ 
clude  accidental  consequences,  so  there  is  involved 
in  the  subjective  agent  an  indeterminacy  whose  de¬ 
gree  depends  on  the  strength  and  force  of  his  self- 
consciousness  and  circumspection.  This  indetermi¬ 
nacy,  however,  may  not  be  taken  into  account  ex¬ 
cept  in  connexion  with  childhood  or  imbecility,  lu¬ 
nacy,  &c.,  since  it  is  only  such  well  marked  states 
of  mind  that  nullify  the  trait  of  thought  and  free¬ 
dom  of  will,  and  permit  us  to  treat  the  agent  as  de¬ 
void  of  the  dignity  of  being  a  thinker  and  a  will. 

1 21.  The  universal  quality  of  the  action  is  the 
manifold  content  of  the  action  as  such,  reduced 
to  the  simple  form  of  universality.  But  the  sub¬ 
ject,  an  entity  reflected  into  himself  and  so  par¬ 
ticular  in  correlation  with  the  particularity  of 
his  object,  has  in  his  end  his  own  particular  con¬ 
tent,  and  this  content  is  the  soul  of  the  action 
and  determines  its  character.  The  fact  that  this 
moment  of  the  particularity  of  the  agent  is  con¬ 
tained  and  realized  in  the  action  constitutes  sub¬ 
jective  freedom  in  its  more  concrete  sense,  the 
right  of  the  subject  to  find  his  satisfaction  in  the 
action.  [A.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


122.  It  is  on  the  strength  of  this  particular  as¬ 
pect  that  the  action  has  subjective  worth  or  in¬ 
terest  for  me.  In  contrast  with  this  end — the 
content  of  the  intention — the  direct  character 
of  the  action  in  its  further  content  is  reduced 
to  a  means.  In  so  far  as  such  an  end  is  some¬ 
thing  finite,  it  may  in  its  turn  be  reduced  to  a 
means  to  some  further  intention  and  so  on  ad 
infinitum. 

123.  For  the  content  of  these  ends  nothing  is 
available  at  this  point  except  (a)  pure  activity 
itself,  i.e.  the  activity  present  owing  to  the  fact 
that  the  subject  puts  himself  into  whatever  he 
is  to  look  upon  and  promote  as  his  end.  Men  are 
willing  to  be  active  in  pursuit  of  what  interests 
them,  or  should  interest  them,  as  something 
which  is  their  own.  (/?)  A  more  determinate 
content,  however,  the  still  abstract  and  formal 
freedom  of  subjectivity  possesses  only  in  its 
natural  subjective  embodiment,  i.e.  in  needs,  in¬ 
clinations,  passions,  opinions,  fancies,  &c.  The 
satisfaction  of  these  is  welfare  or  happiness, 
both  in  general  and  in  its  particular  species — 
the  ends  of  the  whole  sphere  of  finitude. 

Here — the  standpoint  of  relation  (see  Paragraph 
108),  when  the  subject  is  characterized  by  his  self¬ 
difference  and  so  counts  as  a  particular — is  the  place 
where  the  content  of  the  natural  will  (see  Paragraph 
11 )  comes  on  the  scene.  But  the  will  here  is  not  as  it 
is  in  its  immediacy;  on  the  contrary,  this  content 
now  belongs  to  a  will  reflected  into  itself  and  so  is 
elevated  to  become  a  universal  end,  the  end  of  wel¬ 
fare  or  happiness ; 1  this  happens  at  the  level  of  the 
thinking  which  does  not  yet  apprehend  the  will  in  its 
freedom  but  reflects  on  its  content  as  on  one  natural 
and  given — the  level,  for  example,  of  the  time  of 
Croesus  and  Solon.2  [A.] 


124.  Since  the  subjective  satisfaction  of  the 
individual  himself  (including  the  recognition 
which  he  receives  by  way  of  honour  and  fame) 
is  also  part  and  parcel  of  the  achievement  of 
ends  of  absolute  worth,  it  follows  that  the  de¬ 
mand  that  such  an  end  alone  shall  appear  as 
willed  and  attained,  like  the  view  that,  in  will¬ 
ing,  objective  and  subjective  ends  are  mutually 
exclusive,  is  an  empty  dogmatism  of  the  ab¬ 
stract  Understanding.  And  this  dogmatism  is 
more  than  empty,  it  is  pernicious  if  it  passes 
into  the  assertion  that  because  subjective  satis¬ 
faction  is  present,  as  it  always  is  when  any  task 
is  brought  to  completion,  it  is  what  the  agent 
intended  in  essence  to  secure  and  that  the  objec¬ 
tive  end  was  in  his  eyes  only  a  means  to  that. — 
What  the  subject  is,  is  the  series  of  his  actions. 


Enc.  [1st  edn.],  §§  395  ff.  [3rd  edn.  §§  478  ff. 
Cf.  Herodotus,  i.  30-3. — Ed. 


]. 


If  these  are  a  series  of  worthless  productions, 
then  the  subjectivity  of  his  willing  is  just  as 
worthless.  But  if  the  series  of  his  deeds  is  of  a 
substantive  nature,  then  the  same  is  true  also  of 
the  individual’s  inner  will. 

The  right  of  the  subject’s  particularity,  his  right 
to  be  satisfied,  or  in  other  words  the  right  of  sub¬ 
jective  freedom,  is  the  pivot  and  centre  of  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  antiquity  and  modern  times.  This 
right  in  its  infinity  is  given  expression  in  Christian¬ 
ity  and  it  has  become  the  universal  effective  prin¬ 
ciple  of  a  new  form  of  civilization.  Amongst  the 
primary  shapes  which  this  right  assumes  are  love, 
romanticism,  the  quest  for  the  eternal  salvation  of 
the  individual,  &c.;  next  come  moral  convictions 
and  conscience;  and,  finally,  the  other  forms,  some 
of  which  come  into  prominence  in  what  follows  as 
the  principle  of  civil  society  and  as  moments  in  the 
constitution  of  the  state,  while  others  appear  in  the 
course  of  history,  particularly  the  history  of  art, 
science,  and  philosophy.3 

Now  this  principle  of  particularity  is,  to  be  sure, 
one  moment  of  the  antithesis,  and  in  the  first  place 
at  least  it  is  just  as  much  identical  with  the  universal 
as  distinct  from  it.  Abstract  reflection,  however, 
fixes  this  moment  in  its  distinction  from  and  op¬ 
position  to  the  universal  and  so  produces  a  view  of 
morality  as  nothing  but  a  bitter,  unending,  struggle 
against  self-satisfaction,  as  the  command:  “Do  with 
abhorrence  what  duty  enjoins.” 

It  is  just  this  type  of  ratiocination  which  adduces 
that  familiar  psychological  view  of  history  which 
understands  how  to  belittle  and  disparage  all  great 
deeds  and  great  men  by  transforming  into  the  main 
intention  and  operative  motive  of  actions  the  in¬ 
clinations  and  passions  which  likewise  found  their 
satisfaction  from  the  achievement  of  something  sub¬ 
stantive,  the  fame  and  honour,  &c.,  consequential  on 
such  actions,  in  a  word  their  particular  aspect,  the 
aspect  which  it  has  decreed  in  advance  to  be  some¬ 
thing  in  itself  pernicious.  Such  ratiocination  assures 
us  that,  while  great  actions  and  the  efficiency  which 
has  subsisted  through  a  series  of  them  have  pro¬ 
duced  greatness  in  the  world  and  have  had  as  their 
consequences  for  the  individual  agent  power,  hon¬ 
our,  and  fame,  still  what  belongs  to  the  individual  is 
not  the  greatness  itself  but  what  has  accrued  to  him 
from  it,  this  purely  particular  and  external  result; 
because  this  result  is  a  consequence,  it  is  therefore 
supposed  to  have  been  the  agent’s  end  and  even  his 
sole  end.  Reflection  of  this  sort  stops  short  at  the 
subjective  side  of  great  men,  since  it  itself  stands  on 
purely  subjective  ground,  and  consequently  it  over¬ 
looks  what  is  substantive  in  this  emptiness  of  its 
own  making.  This  is  the  view  of  those  valet  psy¬ 
chologists  “for  whom  there  are  no  heroes,  not  be¬ 
cause  there  are  no  heroes,  but  because  these  psy¬ 
chologists  are  only  valets.”  4  [A.] 

1 2 5. The  subjective  element  of  the  will,  with  its 

3  See  Paragraphs  120  ff. — Ed. 

4  Phenomenology  [1st  edn.],  p.  616  [Eng.  tr.  p.  673]. 


MORALITY 


particular  content — welfare,  is  reflected  into  it¬ 
self  and  infinite  and  so  stands  related  to  the  uni¬ 
versal  element,  to  the  principle  of  the  will.  This 
moment  of  universality,  posited  first  of  all  within 
this  particular  content  itself,  is  the  welfare  of 
others  also,  or,  specified  completely, though  quite 
emptily,  the  welfare  of  all.  The  welfare  of  many 
other  unspecified  particulars  is  thus  also  an  es¬ 
sential  end  and  right  of  subjectivity.  But  since 
the  absolutely  universal, in  distinction  from  such 
a  particular  content,  has  not  so  far  been  further 
determined  than  as  “the  right,”  it  follows  that 
these  ends  of  particularity,  differing  as  they  do 
from  the  universal,  may  be  in  conformity  with 
it,  but  they  also  may  not. 

126.  My  particularity,  however,  like  that  of 
others,  is  only  a  right  at  all  in  so  far  as  I  am  a 
free  entity.  Therefore  it  may  not  make  claims 
for  itself  in  contradiction  to  this  its  substantive 
basis,  and  an  intention  to  secure  my  welfare  or 
that  of  others  (and  it  is  particularly  in  this  lat¬ 
ter  case  that  such  an  intention  is  called  “moral”) 
cannot  justify  an  action  which  is  wrong. 

It  is  one  of  the  most  prominent  of  the  corrupt  max¬ 
ims  of  our  time  to  enter  a  plea  for  the  so-called  “mor¬ 
al”  intention  behind  wrong  actions  and  to  imagine 
bad  men  with  well-meaning  hearts,  i.e.  hearts  will¬ 
ing  their  own  welfare  and  perhaps  that  of  others  al¬ 
so.  This  doctrine  is  rooted  in  the  “benevolence”  ( gu - 
ten  Herzens)  of  the  pre-Kantian  philosophers  and 
constitutes,  e.g.,  the  quintessence  of  well-known 
touching  dramatic  productions;  but  to-day  it  has 
been  resuscitated  in  a  more  extravagant  form,  and 
inner  enthusiasm  and  the  heart,  i.e.  the  form  of  par¬ 
ticularity  as  such,  have  been  made  the  criterion  of 
right,  rationality,  and  excellence.  The  result  is  that 
crime  and  the  thoughts  that  lead  to  it,  be  they  fancies 
however  trite  and  empty,  or  opinions  however  wild, 
are  to  be  regarded  as  right,  rational,  and  excellent, 
simply  because  they  issue  from  men’s  hearts  and  en¬ 
thusiasms.  (See  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  140, 
where  more  details  are  given.) 

Incidentally,  however,  attention  must  be  paid  to 
the  point  of  view  from  which  right  and  welfare  are 
being  treated  here.  We  are  considering  right  as  ab¬ 
stract  right  and  welfare  as  the  particular  welfare  of 
the  single  agent.  The  so-called  “general  good,”  the 
welfare  of  the  state,  i.e.  the  right  of  mind  actual  and 
concrete,  is  quite  a  different  sphere,  a  sphere  in  which 
abstract  right  is  a  subordinate  moment  like  particu¬ 
lar  welfare  and  the  happiness  of  the  individual.  As 
was  remarked  above,1  it  is  one  of  the  commonest 
blunders  of  abstract  thinking  to  make  private  rights 
and  private  welfare  count  as  absolute  in  opposition 
to  the  universality  of  the  state.  [A.] 

127.  The  particularity  of  the  interests  of  the 
natural  will,  taken  in  their  entirety  as  a  single 

1  See  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  29. — Ed. 


45 

whole,  is  personal  existence  or  life.  In  extreme 
danger  and  in  conflict  with  the  rightful  property 
of  someone  else,  this  life  may  claim  (as  a  right, 
not  a  mercy)  a  right  of  distress,  because  in  such 
a  situation  there  is  on  the  one  hand  an  infinite 
injury  to  a  man’s  existence  and  the  consequent 
loss  of  rights  altogether,  and  on  the  other  hand 
only  an  injury  to  a  single  restricted  embodiment 
of  freedom,  and  this  implies  a  recognition  both 
of  right  as  such  and  also  of  the  injured  man’s 
capacity  for  rights,  because  the  injury  affects 
only  this  property  of  his. 

The  right  of  distress  is  the  basis  of  benejicium  com- 
petentiae  whereby  a  debtor  is  allowed  to  retain  of  his 
tools,  farming  implements,  clothes,  or,  in  short,  of 
his  resources,  i.e.  of  his  creditor’s  property,  so  much 
as  is  regarded  as  indispensable  if  he  is  to  continue  to 
support  life — to  support  it,  of  course,  on  his  own 
social  level.  [A.] 

128.  This  distress  reveals  the  finitude  and 
therefore  the  contingency  of  both  right  and  wel¬ 
fare,  of  right  as  the  abstract  embodiment  of 
freedom  without  embodying  the  particular  per¬ 
son,  and  of  welfare  as  the  sphere  of  the  particu¬ 
lar  will  without  the  universality  of  right.  In  this 
way  they  are  established  as  one-sided  and  ideal, 
the  character  which  in  conception  they  already 
possessed.  Right  has  already  (see  Paragraph 
106)  determined  its  embodiment  as  the  particu¬ 
lar  will;  and  subjectivity,  in  its  particularity  as 
a  comprehensive  whole,  is  itself  the  embodi¬ 
ment  of  freedom  (see  Paragraph  127),  while  as 
the  infinite  relation  of  the  will  to  itself,  it  is 
implicitly  the  universal  element  in  freedom. 
The  two  moments  present  in  right  and  subjec¬ 
tivity,  thus  integrated  and  attaining  their  truth, 
their  identity,  though  in  the  first  instance  still 
remaining  relative  to  one  another,  are  (a)  the 
good  (as  the  concrete,  absolutely  determinate, 
universal),  and  ( b )  conscience  (as  infinite  sub¬ 
jectivity  inwardly  conscious  and  inwardly  de¬ 
termining  its  content). 

Sub-section  III 

GOOD  AND  CONSCIENCE 

129.  The  good  is  the  Idea  as  the  unity  of  the 
concept  of  the  will  with  the  particular  will.  In 
this  unity,  abstract  right,  welfare,  the  subjectiv¬ 
ity  of  knowing  and  the  contingency  of  external 
fact,  have  their  independent  self-subsistence 
superseded,  though  at  the  same  time  they  are 
still  contained  and  retained  within  it  in  their 
essence.  The  good  is  thus  freedom  realized  the 
absolute  end  and  aim  of  the  world.  [A.] 


46  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


130.  In  this  Idea,  welfare  has  no  independent 
validity  as  the  embodiment  of  a  single  particu¬ 
lar  will  but  only  as  universal  welfare  and  essen¬ 
tially  as  universal  in  principle,  i.e.  as  according 
with  freedom.  Welfare  without  right  is  not  a 
good.  Similarly,  right  without  welfare  is  not  the 
good;  fiat  justitia  should  not  be  followed  by 
pereat  tnundus.  Consequently,  since  the  good 
must  of  necessity  be  actualized  through  the  par¬ 
ticular  will  and  is  at  the  same  time  its  substance, 
it  has  absolute  right  in  contrast  with  the  abstract 
right  of  property  and  the  particular  aims  of  wel¬ 
fare.  If  either  of  these  moments  becomes  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  the  good,  it  has  validity  only 
in  so  far  as  it  accords  with  the  good  and  is  sub¬ 
ordinated  to  it. 

13 1.  For  the  subjective  will,  the  good  and  the 
good  alone  is  the  essential,  and  the  subjective 
will  has  value  and  dignity  only  in  so  far  as  its 
insight  and  intention  accord  with  the  good.  In¬ 
asmuch  as  the  good  is  at  this  point  still  only  this 
abstract  Idea  of  good,  the  subjective  will  has 
not  yet  been  caught  up  into  it  and  established  as 
according  with  it.  Consequently,  it  stands  in  a 
relation  to  the  good,  and  the  relation  is  that  the 
good  ought  to  be  substantive  for  it,  i.e.  it  ought 
to  make  the  good  its  aim  and  realize  it  com¬ 
pletely,  while  the  good  on  its  side  has  in  the  sub¬ 
jective  will  its  only  means  of  stepping  into 
actuality.  [A.] 

132.  The  right  of  the  subjective  will  is  that 
whatever  it  is  to  recognize  as  valid  shall  be  seen 
by  it  as  good,  and  that  an  action,  as  its  aim  en¬ 
tering  upon  external  objectivity,  shall  be  im¬ 
puted  to  it  as  right  or  wrong,  good  or  evil,  legal 
or  illegal,  in  accordance  with  its  knowledge  of 
the  worth  which  the  action  has  in  this  objectiv¬ 
ity. 

The  good  is  in  principle  the  essence  of  the  will  in 
its  substantiality  and  universality,  i.e.  of  the  will  in 
its  truth,  and  therefore  it  exists  simply  and  solely 
in  thinking  and  by  means  of  thinking.  Hence  asser¬ 
tions  such  as  “man  cannot  know  the  truth  but  has  to 
do  only  with  phenomena,”  or  “thinking  injures  the 
good  will”  are  dogmas  depriving  mind  not  only  of  in¬ 
tellectual  but  also  of  all  ethical  worth  and  dignity. 

The  right  of  giving  recognition  only  to  what  my 
insight  sees  as  rational  is  the  highest  right  of  the  sub¬ 
ject,  although  owing  to  its  subjective  character  it  re¬ 
mains  a  formal  right ;  against  it  the  right  which  rea¬ 
son  qua  the  objective  possesses  over  the  subject  re¬ 
mains  firmly  established. 

On  account  of  its  formal  character,  insight  is  ca¬ 
pable  equally  of  being  true  and  of  being  mere  opinion 
and  error.  The  individual’s  acquisition  of  this  right 
of  insight  is,  on  the  principles  of  the  sphere  which  is 
still  moral  only,  part  and  parcel  of  his  particular 


subjective  education.  I  may  demand  from  myself, 
and  regard  it  as  one  of  my  subjective  rights,  that  my 
insight  into  an  obligation  shall  be  based  on  good  rea¬ 
sons,  that  I  shall  be  convinced  of  the  obligation  and 
even  that  I  shall  apprehend  it  from  its  concept  and 
fundamental  nature.  But  whatever  I  may  claim  for 
the  satisfaction  of  my  conviction  about  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  an  action  as  good,  permitted,  or  forbidden, 
and  so  about  its  imputability  in  respect  of  this  char¬ 
acter,  this  in  no  way  detracts  from  the  right  of  ob¬ 
jectivity. 

This  right  of  insight  into  the  good  is  distinct  from 
the  right  of  insight  in  respect  of  action  as  such  (see 
Paragraph  1 1 7 )  ;  the  form  of  the  right  of  objectivity 
which  corresponds  to  the  latter  is  this,  that  since  ac¬ 
tion  is  an  alteration  which  is  to  take  place  in  an  ac¬ 
tual  world  and  so  will  have  recognition  in  it,  it  must 
in  general  accord  with  what  has  validity  there.  Who¬ 
ever  wills  to  act  in  this  world  of  actuality  has  eo  ipso 
submitted  himself  to  its  laws  and  recognized  the 
right  of  objectivity. 

Similarly,  in  the  state  as  the  objectivity  of  the  con¬ 
cept  of  reason,  legal  responsibility  cannot  be  tied 
down  to  what  an  individual  may  hold  to  be  or  not  to 
be  in  accordance  with  his  reason,  or  to  his  subjective 
insight  into  what  is  right  or  wrong,  good  or  evil,  or 
to  the  demands  which  he  makes  for  the  satisfaction 
of  his  conviction.  In  this  objective  field,  the  right  of 
insight  is  valid  as  insight  into  the  legal  or  illegal,  qua 
into  what  is  recognized  as  right,  and  it  is  restricted 
to  its  elementary  meaning,  i.e.  to  knowledge  in  the 
sense  of  acquaintance  with  what  is  legal  and  to  that 
extent  obligatory.  By  means  of  the  publicity  of  the 
laws  and  the  universality  of  manners,1  the  state  re¬ 
moves  from  the  right  of  insight  its  formal  aspect 
and  the  contingency  which  it  still  retains  for  the 
subject  at  the  level  of  morality.  The  subject’s  right 
to  know  action  in  its  specific  character  as  good  or 
evil,  legal  or  illegal,  has  the  result  of  diminishing  or 
cancelling  in  this  respect  too2  the  responsibility  of 
children,  imbeciles,  and  lunatics,  although  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  delimit  precisely  either  childhood,  imbe¬ 
cility,  &c.,  or  their  degree  of  irresponsibility.  But  to 
turn  momentary  blindness,  the  goad  of  passion,  in¬ 
toxication,  or,  in  a  word,  what  is  called  the  strength 
of  sensual  impulse  (excluding  impulses  which  are 
the  basis  of  the  right  of  distress — see  Paragraph  127) 
into  reasons  when  the  imputation,  specific  character, 
and  culpability  of  a  crime  are  in  question,  and  to 
look  upon  such  circumstances  as  if  they  took  away 
the  criminal’s  guilt,  again  means  (compare  Paragraph 
100  and  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  120) 3  failing  to 
treat  the  criminal  in  accordance  with  the  right  and 
honour  due  to  him  as  a  man ;  for  the  nature  of  man 
consists  precisely  in  the  fact  that  he  is  essentially 
something  universal,  not  a  being  whose  knowledge  is 
an  abstractly  momentary  and  piecemeal  affair. 

Just  as  what  the  incendiary  really  sets  on  fire  is  not 
the  isolated  square  inch  of  wooden  surface  to  which 

1  See  Paragraph  151. — Ed. 

2  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  120. — Ed. 

3  All  editions  read  “1 19.” — Ed. 


MORALITY 


he  applies  his  torch,  but  the  universal  in  that  square 
inch,  e.g.  the  house  as  a  whole,  so,  as  subject,  he  is 
neither  the  single  existent  of  this  moment  of  time 
nor  this  isolated  hot  feeling  of  revenge.  If  he  were, 
he  would  be  an  animal  which  would  have  to  be 
knocked  on  the  head  as  dangerous  and  unsafe  be¬ 
cause  of  its  liability  to  fits  of  madness. 

The  claim  is  made  that  the  criminal  in  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  his  action  must  have  had  a  “clear  idea”  of 
the  wrong  and  its  culpability  before  it  can  be  im¬ 
puted  to  him  as  a  crime.  At  first  sight,  this  claim 
seems  to  preserve  the  right  of  his  subjectivity,  but 
the  truth  is  that  it  deprives  him  of  his  indwelling  na¬ 
ture  as  intelligent,  a  nature  whose  effective  presence 
is  not  confined  to  the  “clear  ideas”  of  Wolff’s  psy¬ 
chology,  and  only  in  cases  of  lunacy  is  it  so  de¬ 
ranged  as  to  be  divorced  from  the  knowing  and  do¬ 
ing  of  isolated  things. 

The  sphere  in  which  these  extenuating  circum¬ 
stances  come  into  consideration  as  grounds  for  the 
mitigation  of  punishment  is  a  sphere  other  than  that 
of  rights,  the  sphere  of  pardon.1 

133.  The  particular  subject  is  related  to  the 
good  as  to  the  essence  of  his  will,  and  hence  his 
will’s  obligation  arises  directly  in  this  relation.2 
Since  particularity  is  distinct  from  the  good  and 
falls  within  the  subjective  will,  the  good  is  char¬ 
acterized  to  begin  with  only  as  the  universal  ab¬ 
stract  essentiality  of  the  will,  i.e.  as  duty.  Since 
duty  is  thus  abstract  and  universal  in  character, 
it  should  be  done  for  duty’s  sake.  [A.] 

134.  Because  every  action  explicitly  calls  for  a 
particular  content  and  a  specific  end,  while  duty 
as  an  abstraction  entails  nothing  of  the  kind,  the 
question  arises:  what  is  my  duty?  As  an  answer 
nothing  is  so  far  available  except :  (a)  to  do  the 
right,  and  ( b )  to  strive  after  welfare,  one’s  own 
welfare,  and  welfare  in  universal  terms,  the 
welfare  of  others  (see  Paragraph  119).3  [A.] 

135.  These  specific  duties,  however,  are  not 
contained  in  the  definition  of  duty  itself;  but 
since  both  of  them  are  conditioned  and  restrict¬ 
ed,  they  eo  ipso  bring  about  the  transition  to  the 
higher  sphere  of  the  unconditioned,  the  sphere 
of  duty.  Duty  itself  in  the  moral  self-conscious¬ 
ness  is  the  essence  or  the  universality  of  that 
consciousness,  the  way  in  which  it  is  inwardly 
related  to  itself  alone ;  all  that  is  left  to  it,  there¬ 
fore,  is  abstract  universality,  and  for  its  deter¬ 
minate  character  it  has  identity  without  content, 
or  the  abstractly  positive,  the  indeterminate. 

However  essential  it  is  to  give  prominence  to  the 
pure  unconditioned  self-determination  of  the  will  as 
the  root  of  duty,  and  to  the  way  in  which  knowl- 

1  See  Paragraph  282. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraph  13 1. — Ed. 

3  Together  with  Paragraph  125. — Ed. 


edge  of  the  will,  thanks  to  Kant’s  philosophy,  has 
won  its  firm  foundation  and  starting-point  for  the 
first  time  owing  to  the  thought  of  its  infinite  auton¬ 
omy,  still  to  adhere  to  the  exclusively  moral  posi¬ 
tion,  without  making  the  transition  to  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  ethics,  is  to  reduce  this  gain  to  an  empty 
formalism,  and  the  science  of  morals  to  the  preach¬ 
ing  of  duty  for  duty’s  sake.  From  this  point  of  view, 
no  immanent  doctrine  of  duties  is  possible ;  of  course, 
material  may  be  brought  in  from  outside  and  par¬ 
ticular  duties  may  be  arrived  at  accordingly,  but  if 
the  definition  of  duty  is  taken  to  be  the  absence  of 
contradiction,  formal  correspondence  with  itself — 
which  is  nothing  but  abstract  indeterminacy  stabi¬ 
lized — then  no  transition  is  possible  to  the  specifica¬ 
tion  of  particular  duties  nor,  if  some  such  particu¬ 
lar  content  for  acting  comes  under  consideration,  is 
there  any  criterion  in  that  principle  for  deciding 
whether  it  is  or  is  not  a  duty.  On  the  contrary,  by 
this  means  any  wrong  or  immoral  line  of  conduct 
may  be  justified. 

Kant’s  further  formulation,4  the  possibility  of  vis¬ 
ualizing  an  action  as  a  universal  maxim,  does  lead 
to  the  more  concrete  visualization  of  a  situation,  but 
in  itself  it  contains  no  principle  beyond  abstract 
identity  and  the  “absence  of  contradiction”  already 
mentioned. 

The  absence  of  property  contains  in  itself  just  as 
little  contradiction  as  the  non-existence  of  this  or 
that  nation,  family,  &c.,  or  the  death  of  the  whole 
human  race.  But  if  it  is  already  established  on  other 
grounds  and  presupposed  that  property  and  human 
life  are  to  exist  and  be  respected,  then  indeed  it  is  a 
contradiction  to  commit  theft  or  murder;  a  contra¬ 
diction  must  be  a  contradiction  of  something,  i.e.  of 
some  content  presupposed  from  the  start  as  a  fixed 
principle.  It  is  to  a  principle  of  that  kind  alone, 
therefore,  that  an  action  can  be  related  either  by 
correspondence  or  contradiction.  But  if  duty  is  to  be 
willed  simply  for  duty’s  sake  and  not  for  the  sake 
of  some  content,  it  is  only  a  formal  identity  whose 
nature  it  is  to  exclude  all  content  and  specification. 

The  further  antinomies  and  configurations  of  this 
never-ending  ought-to-be,  in  which  the  exclusively 
moral  way  of  thinking — thinking  in  terms  of  rela¬ 
tion — just  wanders  to  and  fro  without  being  able  to 
resolve  them  and  get  beyond  the  ought-to-be,  I  have 
developed  in  my  Phenomenology  of  Mind.5  [A.] 

136.  Because  of  the  abstract  characterization 
of  the  good,  the  other  moment  of  the  Idea — 
particularity  in  general — falls  within  subjectiv¬ 
ity.  Subjectivity  in  its  universality  reflected  into 
itself  is  the  subject’s  absolute  inward  certainty 
(Gewissheit)  of  himself,  that  which  establishes 
the  particular  and  is  the  determining  and  deci¬ 
sive  element  in  him,  his  conscience  (Gewissen) . 
[A.] 

4  Cf.  Kant,  Critique  of  Practical  Reason ,  Analytic, 
Chap,  i,  sections  1-6. — Ed. 

6  [1st  edn.]  pp.  550  ff.  [Eng.  tr.  pp.  615  ff.].  Cf  Enc. 
[1st  edn.],  §§  420  ff.  [3rd  edn.  §§  507  ff.j. 


48  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


137.  True  conscience  is  the  disposition  to  will 
what  is  absolutely  good.  It  therefore  has  fixed 
principles  and  it  is  aware  of  these  as  its  explicit¬ 
ly  objective  determinants  and  duties.  In  distinc¬ 
tion  from  this  its  content  (i.e.  truth), conscience 
is  only  the  formal  side  of  the  activity  of  the 
will,  which  as  this  will  has  no  special  content 
of  its  own.  But  the  objective  system  of  these 
principles  and  duties,  and  the  union  of  subjec¬ 
tive  knowing  with  this  system,  is  not  present 
until  we  come  to  the  standpoint  of  ethical  life. 
Here  at  the  abstract  standpoint  of  morality,  con¬ 
science  lacks  this  objective  content  and  so  its 
explicit  character  is  that  of  infinite  abstract  self¬ 
certainty,  which  at  the  same  time  is  for  this 
very  reason  the  self-certainty  of  this  subject. 

Conscience  is  the  expression  of  the  absolute  title  of 
subjective  self-consciousness  to  know  in  itself  and 
from  within  itself  what  is  right  and  obligatory,  to 
give  recognition  only  to  what  it  thus  knows  as  good, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  maintain  that  whatever  in 
this  way  it  knows  and  wills  is  in  truth  right  and 
obligatory.  Conscience  as  this  unity  of  subjective 
knowing  with  what  is  absolute  is  a  sanctuary  which 
it  would  be  sacrilege  to  violate.  But  whether  the 
conscience  of  a  specific  individual  corresponds  with 
this  Idea  of  conscience,  or  whether  what  it  takes  or 
declares  to  be  good  is  actually  so,  is  ascertainable  on¬ 
ly  from  the  content  of  the  good  it  seeks  to  realize. 
What  is  right  and  obligatory  is  the  absolutely  ra¬ 
tional  element  in  the  will’s  volitions  and  therefore  it 
is  not  in  essence  the  particular  property  of  an  indi¬ 
vidual,  and  its  form  is  not  that  of  feeling  or  any  oth¬ 
er  private  (i.e.  sensuous)  type  of  knowing,  but  es¬ 
sentially  that  of  universal  determined  by  thought, 
i.e.  the  form  of  laws  and  principles.  Conscience  is 
therefore  subject  to  the  judgement  of  its  truth  or  fal¬ 
sity,  and  when  it  appeals  only  to  itself  for  a  deci¬ 
sion,  it  is  directly  at  variance  with  what  it  wishes  to 
be,  namely  the  rule  for  a  mode  of  conduct  which  is 
rational,  absolutely  valid,  and  universal.  For  this 
reason,  the  state  cannot  give  recognition  to  con¬ 
science  in  its  private  form  as  subjective  knowing, 
any  more  than  science  can  grant  validity  to  subjec¬ 
tive  opinion,  dogmatism,  and  the  appeal  to  a  subjec¬ 
tive  opinion.  In  true  conscience,  its  elements  are  not 
different,  but  they  may  become  so,  and  it  is  the  de¬ 
termining  element,  the  subjectivity  of  willing  and 
knowing,  which  can  sever  itself  from  the  true  con¬ 
tent  of  conscience,  establish  its  own  independence, 
and  reduce  that  content  to  a  form  and  a  show.  The 
ambiguity  in  connexion  with  conscience  lies  there¬ 
fore  in  this:  it  is  presupposed  to  mean  the  identity 
of  subjective  knowing  and  willing  with  the  true 
good,  and  so  is  claimed  and  recognized  to  be  some¬ 
thing  sacrosanct ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time,  as  the 
mere  subjective  reflection  of  self-consciousness  into 
itself,  it  still  claims  for  itself  the  title  due,  solely  on 
the  strength  of  its  absolutely  valid  rational  content, 
to  that  identity  alone. 


At  the  level  of  morality,  distinguished  as  it  is  in  this 
book  from  the  level  of  ethics,  it  is  only  formal  con¬ 
science  that  is  to  be  found.  True  conscience  has  been 
mentioned  only  to  indicate  its  distinction  from  the 
other  and  to  obviate  the  possible  misunderstanding 
that  here,  where  it  is  only  formal  conscience  that  is 
under  consideration,  the  argument  is  about  true  con¬ 
science.  The  latter  is  part  of  the  ethical  disposition 
which  comes  before  us  for  the  first  time  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  section.1 — The  religious  conscience,  however, 
does  not  belong  to  this  sphere  at  all.  [A.] 

138.  This  subjectivity,  qua  abstract  self-deter¬ 
mination  and  pure  certainty  of  oneself  alone,  as 
readily  evaporates  into  itself  the  whole  deter¬ 
minate  character  of  right,  duty,  and  existence, 
as  it  remains  both  the  power  to  judge,  to  deter¬ 
mine  from  within  itself  alone,  what  is  good  in 
respect  of  any  content,  and  also  the  power  to 
which  the  good,  at  first  only  an  ideal  and  an 
ought-to-be,  owes  its  actuality. 

The  self-consciousness  which  has  attained  this  ab¬ 
solute  reflection  into  itself  knows  itself  in  this  reflec¬ 
tion  to  be  the  kind  of  consciousness  which  is  and 
should  be  beyond  the  reach  of  every  existent  and 
given  specific  determination.  As  one  of  the  common¬ 
er  features  of  history  (e.g.  in  Socrates,2  the  Stoics, 
and  others) ,  the  tendency  to  look  deeper  into  one¬ 
self  and  to  know  and  determine  from  within  oneself 
what  is  right  and  good  appears  in  ages  when  what  is 
recognized  as  right  and  good  in  contemporary  man¬ 
ners  cannot  satisfy  the  will  of  better  men.  When  the 
existing  world  of  freedom  has  become  faithless  to 
the  will  of  better  men,  that  will  fails  to  find  itself 
in  the  duties  there  recognized  and  must  try  to  find  in 
the  ideal  world  of  the  inner  life  alone  the  harmony 
which  actuality  has  lost.  Once  self-consciousness 
has  grasped  and  secured  its  formal  right  in  this 
way,  everything  depends  on  the  character  of  the 
content  which  it  gives  to  itself.  [A.] 

139.  Once  self-consciousness  has  reduced  all 
otherwise  valid  duties  to  emptiness  and  itself  to 
the  sheer  inwardness  of  the  will,  it  has  become 
the  potentiality  of  either  making  the  absolutely 
universal  its  principle,  or  equally  well  of  elevating 
above  the  universal  the  self-will  of  private  par¬ 
ticularity,  taking  that  as  its  principle  and  realiz¬ 
ing  it  through  its  actions,  i.e.  it  has  become  po¬ 
tentially  evil. 

To  have  a  conscience,  if  conscience  is  only  formal 
subjectivity,  is  simply  to  be  on  the  verge  of  slipping 
into  evil ;  in  independent  self-certainty,  with  its  in¬ 
dependence  of  knowledge  and  decision,  both  morali¬ 
ty  and  evil  have  their  common  root. 

The  origin  of  evil  in  general  is  to  be  found  in  the 
mystery  of  freedom  (i.e.  in  the  speculative  aspect 
of  freedom),  the  mystery  whereby  freedom  of  ne- 

1  See  Paragraph  268. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraphs  279  and  343. — Ed. 


MORALITY  49 


cessity  arises  out  of  the  natural  level  of  the  will  and 
is  something  inward  in  comparison  with  that  level.1 
It  is  this  natural  level  of  the  will  which  comes  into 
existence  as  a  self-contradiction,  as  incompatible 
with  itself  in  this  opposition,  and  so  it  is  just  this 
particularity  of  the  will  which  later  makes  itself  evil. 
That  is  to  say,  particularity  is  always  duality ;  here 
it  is  the  opposition  of  the  natural  level  and  the  in¬ 
wardness  of  the  will.  In  this  opposition,  the  latter  is 
only  a  relative  and  abstract  subjectivity  which  can 
draw  its  content  only  from  the  determinate  content 
of  the  natural  will,  from  desire,  impulse,  inclination, 
&c.  Now  it  is  said  of  these  desires,  impulses,  &c.,  that 
they  may  be  either  good  or  evil.  But  since  the  will 
here  makes  into  a  determinant  of  its  content  both 
these  impulses  in  this  contingent  character  which 
they  possess  as  natural,  and  also,  therefore,  the  form 
which  it  has  at  this  point,  the  form  of  particularity 
itself,  it  follows  that  it  is  set  in  opposition  to  the 
universal  as  inner  objectivity,  to  the  good,  which 
comes  on  the  scene  as  the  opposite  extreme  to  im¬ 
mediate  objectivity,  the  natural  pure  and  simple,  as 
soon  as  the  will  is  reflected  into  itself  and  conscious¬ 
ness  is  a  knowing  consciousness.  It  is  in  this  opposi¬ 
tion  that  this  inwardness  of  the  will  is  evil.  Man  is 
therefore  evil  by  a  conjunction  between  his  natural 
or  undeveloped  character  and  his  reflection  into  him¬ 
self  ;  and  therefore  evil  belongs  neither  to  nature  as 
such  by  itself — unless  nature  were  supposed  to  be 
the  natural  character  of  the  will  which  rests  in  its 
particular  content — nor  to  introverted  reflection  by 
itself,  i.e.  cognition  in  general,  unless  this  were  to 
maintain  itself  in  that  opposition  to  the  universal. 

With  this  facet  of  evil,  its  necessity,  there  is  inevi¬ 
tably  combined  the  fact  that  this  same  evil  is  con¬ 
demned  to  be  that  which  of  necessity  ought  not  to 
be,  i.e.  the  fact  that  evil  ought  to  be  annulled.  It  is 
not  that  there  ought  never  to  be  a  diremption  of 
any  sort  in  the  will — on  the  contrary,  it  is  just  this 
level  of  diremption  which  distinguishes  man  from 
the  unreasoning  animal;  the  point  is  that  the  will 
should  not  rest  at  that  level  and  cling  to  the  particu¬ 
lar  as  if  that  and  not  the  universal  were  the  essential 
thing ;  it  should  overcome  the  diremption  as  a  nul¬ 
lity.  Further,  as  to  this  necessity  of  evil,  it  is  sub¬ 
jectivity,  as  infinite  self-reflection,  which  is  present 
in  and  confronted  by  this  opposition  of  universal 
and  particular ;  if  it  rests  in  this  opposition,  i.e.  if  it 
is  evil,  then  it  is  eo  ipso  independent,  regarding  itself 
as  isolated,  and  is  itself  this  self-will.2  Therefore  if 
the  individual  subject  as  such  does  evil,  the  evil  is 
purely  and  simply  his  own  responsibility.  [A.] 

140.  In  every  end  of  a  self-conscious  subject, 
there  is  a  positive  aspect  (see  Paragraph  135) 
necessarily  present  because  the  end  is  what  is 
purposed  in  an  actual  concrete  action.  This  as¬ 
pect  he  knows  how  to  elicit  and  emphasize,  and 
he  may  then  proceed  to  regard  it  as  a  duty  or  a 

1  See  Paragraphs  n-15  and  the  Remark  to  Paragraph 
132. — Ed. 

2  i.e.,  the  self-will  mentioned  in  Paragraph  139. — Ed. 


fine  intention.  By  so  interpreting  it,  he  is  en¬ 
abled  to  pass  off  his  action  as  good  in  the  eyes 
both  of  himself  and  others,  despite  the  fact  that, 
owing  to  his  reflective  character  and  his  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  universal  aspect  of  the  will,  he  is 
aware  of  the  contrast  between  this  aspect  and 
the  essentially  negative  content  of  his  action. 
To  impose  in  this  way  on  others  is  hypocrisy; 
while  to  impose  on  oneself  is  a  stage  beyond 
hypocrisy,  a  stage  at  which  subjectivity  claims 
to  be  absolute.3 

This  final,  most  abstruse,  form  of  evil,  whereby 
evil  is  perverted  into  good  and  good  into  evil,  and 
consciousness,  in  being  aware  of  its  power  to  effect 
this  perversion,  is  also  made  aware  of  itself  as  ab¬ 
solute,  is  the  highwater  mark  of  subjectivity  at  the 
level  of  morality ;  it  is  the  form  into  which  evil  has 
blossomed  in  our  present  epoch,  a  result  due  to  phi¬ 
losophy,  i.e.  to  a  shallowness  of  thought  which  has 
twisted  a  profound  concept  into  this  shape  and 
usurped  the  name  of  philosophy,  just  as  it  has 
arrogated  to  evil  the  name  of  good. 

In  this  Remark  I  will  indicate  briefly  the  chief 
forms  of  this  subjectivity  which  have  become  cur¬ 
rent. 

(a)  In  hypocrisy  the  following  moments  are  con¬ 
tained:  (a)  knowledge  of  the  true  universal,  wheth¬ 
er  knowledge  in  the  form  merely  of  a  feeling  for 
right  and  duty,  or  of  a  deeper  cognition  and  appre¬ 
hension  of  them;  (/3)  volition  of  the  particular 
which  conflicts  with  this  universal;  (7)  conscious 
comparison  of  both  moments  (a)  and  (/3),  so  that 
the  conscious  subject  is  aware  in  willing  that  his 
particular  volition  is  evil  in  character. 

These  points  are  descriptive  of  acting  with  a  bad 
conscience;  hypocrisy  proper  involves  something 
more. 

At  one  time  great  importance  was  attached  to  the 
question  whether  an  action  was  evil  only  in  so  far  as 
it  was  done  with  a  bad  conscience,  i.e.  with  explicit 
knowledge  of  the  three  moments  just  specified.  The 
inference  from  an  affirmative  answer  is  admirably 
drawn  by  Pascal:  Ils  seront  tons  damnes  ces  demi- 
picheurs,  qui  ont  quelque  amour  pour  la  vertu. 
Mais  pour  ces  franc-pecheurs,  pecheurs  endurcis ,  pe- 
cheurs  sans  melange ,  pleins  et  acheves,  Venjer  ne  les 
tient  pas;  ils  ont  trompe  le  diable  a,  force  de  sJy 
abandonner .4 

3  See  Paragraphs  120  ff. — Ed. 

4  Provincial  Letters ,  iv.  In  the  same  context,  Pascal 
also  quotes  Christ’s  intercession  on  the  Cross  for  his 
enemies:  “Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do” — a  superfluous  prayer  if  the  fact  that  they  did 
not  know  what  they  did  made  their  action  innocent  and  so 
took  away  the  need  of  forgiveness.  Pascal  quotes  there 
too  Aristotle’s  distinction  ( Ethics ,  mob24)  between 
the  man  who  acts  ovk  eLSum  and  the  one  who  acts  ayvoiav 
in  the  former  type  of  ignorance,  his  action  is  not  freely 
willed  (here  the  ignorance  depends  on  external  circum¬ 
stances,  see  above,  Paragraph  117)  and  his  action  is  not 
imputable  to  him.  But  of  the  latter  Aristotle  says:  “Ev¬ 
ery  wicked  man  is  ignorant  of  what  he  ought  to  do  and 
what  he  ought  to  refrain  from  doing;  and  it  is  this  kind 
of  failure  (a/iapria)  which  makes  men  unjust  and  in 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


The  subjective  right  of  self-consciousness  to  know 
whether  an  action  is  truly  good  or  evil  in  character 
must  not  be  thought  of  as  so  colliding  with  the  abso¬ 
lute  right  of  the  objectivity  of  this  character  that 
the  two  rights  are  represented  as  separable,  indiffer¬ 
ent  to  one  another,  and  related  only  accidentally.  It 
was  such  a  conception  of  their  relation  that  lay  in 
particular  at  the  root  of  the  old  questions  about  ef¬ 
ficacious  grace.  On  its  formal  side,  evil  is  most  pecul¬ 
iarly  the  individual’s  own,  since  (a)  it  is  precisely 
his  subjectivity  establishing  itself  purely  and  simply 
for  itself,  and  for  that  reason  it  is  purely  and  simply 
the  individual’s  own  responsibility  (see  Paragraph 
139  and  the  Remark  thereto)  ;  (b)  on  his  objective 
side  man  accords  with  his  concept  inasmuch  as  he  is 
mind,  in  a  word  a  rational  entity,  and  has  in  his  own 
nature  as  such  the  character  of  self-knowing  uni¬ 
versality.  Therefore  it  means  failing  to  treat  him 
with  the  respect  due  to  his  concept  if  his  good  side 
is  divorced  from  him,  so  that  the  character  of  his 
evil  action  as  evil  is  divorced  from  him  too  and  is 
not  imputed  to  him  as  evil.  How  determinate  is  the 
consciousness  of  these  moments  in  distinction  from 
one  another,  or  to  what  extent  it  has  developed  or 
failed  to  develop  in  clarity  so  as  to  become  a  recogni¬ 
tion  of  them,  and  to  what  degree  an  evil  action  has 
been  done  with  a  conscience  more  or  less  downright 
evil — all  these  questions  are  the  more  trivial  aspect 
of  the  matter,  the  aspect  mainly  concerned  with  the 
empirical. 

( b )  Evil  and  doing  evil  with  a  bad  conscience, 
however,  is  not  quite  hypocrisy.  Into  hypocrisy 
there  enters  in  addition  the  formal  character  of  fal¬ 
sity,  first  the  falsity  of  holding  up  evil  as  good  in 
the  eyes  of  others,  of  setting  oneself  up  to  all  ap¬ 
pearance  as  good,  conscientious,  pious,  and  so  on — 
conduct  which  in  these  circumstances  is  only  a  trick 
to  deceive  others.  Secondly,  however,  the  bad  man 
may  find  in  his  good  conduct  on  other  occasions,  or 
in  his  piety,  or,  in  a  word,  in  good  reasons,  a  justifi¬ 
cation  in  his  own  eyes  for  the  evil  he  does,  because 
he  can  use  these  reasons  to  pervert  its  apparent 
character  from  evil  into  good.  His  ability  to  do  this 
depends  on  the  subjectivity  which,  as  abstract  nega¬ 
tivity,  knows  that  all  determinations  are  subordi¬ 
nate  to  itself  and  issue  from  its  own  will. 

( c )  In  this  perversion  of  evil  into  good  we  may 
prima  facie  include  the  form  of  subjectivism  known 
as  Probabilism.  Its  guiding  principle  is  that  an  ac¬ 
tion  is  permissible,  and  may  be  done  with  an  easy 
conscience,  provided  that  the  agent  can  hunt  out 
any  single  good  reason  for  it,  be  it  only  the  authority 
of  a  single  theologian,  and  even  if  other  theologians 
are  known  by  the  agent  to  dissent  ever  so  widely 
from  that  authority.  Even  in  this  idea  there  is  still 

general  bad.  ...  An  ignorant  choice”  between  good  and 
evil  “is  the  cause  not  of  the  action’s  being  involuntary” 
f  of  being  nonimputable)  “but  only  of  its  being  wicked.” 
Aristotle  evidently  had  a  deeper  insight  into  the  connex¬ 
ion  between  knowing  and  willing  than  has  become  com¬ 
mon  in  a  superficial  philosophy  which  teaches  that  the 
opposite  of  knowledge,  the  heart  and  enthusiasm,  are 
the  true  principles  of  ethical  action. 


present  the  correct  apprehension  that  authority  and 
a  reason  based  on  authority  gives  probability  only, 
although  this  is  supposed  to  be  enough  to  produce 
an  easy  conscience ;  it  is  granted  in  Probabilism  that 
a  good  reason  is  inevitably  of  such  a  character  that 
there  may  exist  along  with  it  different  reasons  at 
least  as  good.  Even  here  we  must  recognize  a  vestige 
of  objectivity  in  the  admission  that  it  is  a  reason 
which  should  be  the  determining  factor.  But  since 
the  discrimination  between  good  and  evil  is  made  to 
depend  on  all  those  good  reasons,  including  theologi¬ 
cal  authorities  too,  despite  the  fact  that  they  are  so 
numerous  and  contradictory,  the  implication  is  that 
it  is  not  this  objectivity  of  the  thing,  but  subjec¬ 
tivity,  which  has  the  last  word.  This  means  that 
caprice  and  self-will  are  made  the  arbiters  of  good 
and  evil,  and  the  result  is  that  ethics  as  well  as  reli¬ 
gious  feeling  is  undermined.  But  the  fact  that  it  is 
private  subjectivity  to  which  the  decision  falls  is 
one  which  Probabilism  does  not  openly  avow  as  its 
principle;  on  the  contrary,  as  has  already  been 
stated,  it  gives  out  that  it  is  some  reason  or  other 
which  is  decisive,  and  Probabilism  is  to  that  extent 
still  a  form  of  hypocrisy. 

( d )  In  the  stages  of  subjectivism,  the  next  in  as¬ 
cending  order  is  the  view  that  the  goodness  of  the 
will  consists  in  its  willing  the  good ;  this  willing  of 
the  abstract  good  is  supposed  to  suffice,  in  fact  to  be 
the  sole  requisite,  to  make  its  action  good.  As  the 
willing  of  something  determinate,  action  has  a  con¬ 
tent,  but  good  in  the  abstract  determines  nothing, 
and  hence  it  devolves  on  particular  subjectivity  to 
give  this  content  its  character  and  constituents.  Just 
as  in  Probabilism  anyone  who  is  not  himself  a 
learned  Revirend  Pere  may  have  the  subsumption 
of  a  determinate  content  under  the  universal  predi¬ 
cate  “good”  effected  for  him  by  the  sole  authority 
of  one  such  theologian,  so  here  every  subject,  with¬ 
out  any  further  qualification,  is  invested  with  this 
honour  of  giving  a  content  to  good  in  the  abstract, 
or  in  other  words  subsuming  a  content  under  a  uni¬ 
versal.  This  content  is  only  one  of  the  many  elements 
in  an  action  as  a  concrete  whole,  and  the  others  may 
perhaps  entail  its  description  as  “criminal”  and  “bad.” 
That  determinate  content  which  I,  as  subject,  give 
to  the  good,  however,  is  the  good  known  to  me  in 
the  action,  i.e.  it  is  my  good  intention  (see  Para¬ 
graph  114).1  Thus  there  arises  a  contradiction  be¬ 
tween  descriptions:  according  to  one  the  action  is 
good,  according  to  the  other  it  is  criminal.  Hence  al¬ 
so  there  seems  to  arise,  in  connexion  with  a  concrete 
action,  the  question  whether  in  such  circumstances 
the  intention  behind  it  is  actually  good.  It  may  gen¬ 
erally  be  the  case  that  the  good  is  what  is  actually 
intended;  but  this  in  fact  must  always  be  the  case  if 
it  is  held  that  good  in  the  abstract  is  the  subject’s 
determining  motive.  Where  wrong  is  done  through 
an  action  which  is  well  intentioned  but  in  other  re¬ 
spects  criminal  and  bad,  the  wrong  so  done  must,  of 
course,  also  be  good,  and  the  important  question 

1  So  Hegel’s  first  edition.  All  other  editions  read  “in.” 
Sterrett  reads  “119.” — Ed. 


MORALITY 


would  seem  to  be:  which  of  these  sides  of  the  action 
is  really  the  essential  one?  This  objective  question, 
however,  is  here  out  of  place,  or  rather  it  is  the  sub¬ 
jective  consciousness  alone  whose  decision  constitutes 
objectivity  at  this  point.  Besides,  “essential”  and 
“good”  mean  the  same  thing ;  one  is  just  as  much  an 
abstraction  as  the  other.  Good  is  that  which  is  essen¬ 
tial  in  respect  of  the  will ;  and  the  essential  in  this 
respect  should  be  precisely  this,  that  my  action  be 
characterized  as  good  in  my  eyes.  But  the  subsump¬ 
tion  under  the  good  of  any  content  one  pleases  is  the 
direct  and  explicit  result  of  the  fact  that  this  abstract 
good  is  totally  devoid  of  content  and  so  is  simply  re¬ 
duced  to  meaning  anything  positive,  i.e.  to  some¬ 
thing  which  is  valid  from  some  single  point  of 
view  and  which  in  its  immediate  character  may 
even  be  valid  as  an  essential  end,  as  for  example 
to  do  good  to  the  poor,  to  take  thought  for  myself, 
my  life,  my  family,  and  so  forth.  Further,  just 
as  the  good  is  the  abstract,  so  the  bad  too  must 
be  without  content  and  derive  its  specification 
from  my  subjectivity;  and  it  is  in  this  way  also 
that  there  arises  the  moral  end  of  hating  and  up¬ 
rooting  the  bad,  the  nature  of  the  bad  being  left 
unspecified. 

Theft,  cowardice,  murder,  and  so  forth,  as  actions, 
i.e.  as  achievements  of  a  subjective  will,  have  the 
immediate  character  of  being  satisfactions  of  such  a 
will  and  therefore  of  being  something  positive.  In  or¬ 
der  to  make  the  action  a  good  one,  it  is  only  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  recognizing  this  positive  aspect  of  the  action 
as  my  intention,  and  this  then  becomes  the  essential 
aspect  in  virtue  of  which  the  action  is  made  good,  sim¬ 
ply  because  I  recognize  it  as  the  good  in  my  inten¬ 
tion.  Theft  in  order  to  do  good  to  the  poor,  theft  or 
flight  from  battle  for  the  sake  of  fulfilling  one’s  duty 
to  care  for  one’s  life  or  one’s  family  (a  poor  family 
perhaps  into  the  bargain) ,  murder  out  of  hate  or  re¬ 
venge  (i.e.  in  order  to  satisfy  one’ssense  of  one’s  own 
rights  or  of  right  in  general,  or  one’s  sense  of  another’s 
wickedness,  of  wrong  done  by  him  to  oneself  or  to  oth¬ 
ers  or  to  the  world  or  the  nation  at  large,  by  extirpat¬ 
ing  this  wicked  individual  who  is  wickedness  incar¬ 
nate,  and  thereby  contributing  at  least  one’squotato 
the  project  of  uprooting  the  bad) — all  these  actions 
are  made  well  intentioned  and  therefore  good  by  this 
method  of  taking  account  of  the  positive  aspect  of 
their  content.  Only  the  bare  minimum  of  intelligence 
is  required  to  discover  in  any  action,  as  those  learned 
theologians  can,  a  positive  side  and  so  a  good  rea¬ 
son  for  it  and  a  good  intention  behind  it.  Hence  it 
has  been  said  that  in  the  strict  sense  there  are  no 
wicked  men,  since  no  one  wills  evil  for  the  sake  of 
evil,  i.e.  no  one  wills  a  pure  negative  as  such.  On  the 
contrary,  everyone  always  wills  something  positive, 
and  therefore,  on  the  view  we  are  considering,  some¬ 
thing  good.  In  this  abstract  good  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  good  and  evil  has  vanished  together  with  all 
concrete  duties;  for  this  reason,  simply  to  will  the 
good  and  to  have  a  good  intention  in  acting  is  more 
like  evil  than  good,  because  the  good  willed  is  only 
this  abstract  form  of  good  and  therefore  to  make  it 


concrete  devolves  on  the  arbitrary  will  of  the  sub¬ 
ject. 

To  this  context  there  also  belongs  the  notorious 
maxim:  “The  end  justifies  the  means.”  In  itself  and 
prima  facie  this  expression  is  trivial  and  pointless. 
Quite  so,  one  may  retort  in  terms  equally  general,  a 
just  end  of  course  justifies  the  means,  while  an  un¬ 
just  end  does  not.  The  phrase:  “If  the  end  is  right, 
so  is  the  means”  is  a  tautology,  since  the  means  is 
precisely  that  which  is  nothing  in  itself  but  is  for  the 
sake  of  something  else,  and  therein,  i.e.  in  the  end, 
has  its  purpose  and  worth — provided  of  course  it  be 
truly  a  means. 

But  when  someone  says  that  the  end  justifies  the 
means,  his  purport  is  not  confined  to  this  bare  tau¬ 
tology  ;  he  understands  by  the  words  something  more 
specific,  namely  that  to  use  as  means  to  a  good  end 
something  which  in  itself  is  simply  not  a  means  at 
all,  to  violate  something  in  itself  sacrosanct,  in  short 
to  commit  a  crime  as  a  means  to  a  good  end,  is  per¬ 
missible  and  even  one’s  bounden  duty,  (i)  There 
floats  before  the  minds  of  those  who  say  that  the 
end  justifies  the  means  a  vague  consciousness  of  the 
dialectic  of  the  aforesaid  “positive”  element  in  iso¬ 
lated  legal  or  ethical  principles,  or  of  such  equally 
vague  general  maxims  as:  “Thou  shalt  not  kill,”  or 
“Thou  shalt  take  thought  for  thy  welfare  and  the 
welfare  of  thy  family.”  Executioners  and  soldiers 
have  not  merely  the  right  but  the  duty  to  kill  men, 
though  there  it  has  been  precisely  laid  down  what 
kind  of  men  and  what  circumstances  make  the  kill¬ 
ing  permissible  and  obligatory.  So  also  my  welfare 
and  the  welfare  of  my  family  must  be  subordinated 
to  higher  ends  and  so  reduced  to  means  to  their  at¬ 
tainment.  (ii)  And  yet  what  bears  the  mark  of  crime 
is  not  a  general  maxim  of  that  kind,  left  vague  and 
still  subject  to  a  dialectic ;  on  the  contrary,  its  spe¬ 
cific  character  is  already  objectively  fixed.  Now 
what  is  set  up  against  such  a  determinate  crime, 
what  is  supposed  to  have  deprived  the  crime  of  its 
criminal  nature,  is  the  justifying  end,  and  this  is 
simply  subjective  opinion  about  what  is  good  and 
better.  What  happens  here  is  the  same  as  what  hap¬ 
pens  when  the  will  stops  at  willing  good  in  the  ab¬ 
stract,  i.e.  the  absolute  and  valid  determinate  char¬ 
acter  assigned  to  good  and  evil,  right  and  wrong,  is 
entirely  swept  away  and  the  determination  of  them 
is  ascribed  instead  to  the  individual’s  feeling,  imagi¬ 
nation,  and  caprice. 

(e)  Subjective  opinion  is  at  last  expressly  given  out 
as  the  measuring-rod  of  right  and  duty  and  it  is 
supposed  that  the  conviction  which  holds  something 
to  be  right  is  to  decide  the  ethical  character  of  an 
action.  Since  the  good  we  will  to  do  is  here  still  with¬ 
out  content,  the  principle  of  conviction  only  adds 
the  information  that  the  subsumption  of  an  action 
under  the  category  of  good  is  purely  a  personal  mat¬ 
ter.  If  this  be  so,  the  very  pretence  of  an  ethical  ob¬ 
jectivity  has  totally  disappeared.  A  doctrine  like 
this  is  directly  connected  with  the  self-styled  phi¬ 
losophy,  often  mentioned  already,  which  denies  that 
the  truth  is  knowable — and  the  truth  of  mind  qua 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


will,  the  rationality  of  mind  in  its  self-actualizing 
process,  is  the  laws  of  ethics.  Asserting,  as  such  phi¬ 
losophizing  does,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  true  is 
an  empty  vanity,  transcending  the  territory  of  science 
(which  is  supposed  to  be  mere  appearance),  it  must 
in  the  matter  of  action  at  once  find  its  principle  also 
in  the  apparent;  thereby  ethics  is  reduced  to  the 
special  theory  of  life  held  by  the  individual  and  to 
his  private  conviction.  The  degradation  into  which 
philosophy  has  thus  sunk  appears  doubtless  at  a  first 
glance  to  be  only  an  affair  of  supreme  indifference, 
an  occurrence  confined  to  the  trivial  field  of  aca¬ 
demic  futilities;  but  the  view  necessarily  makes  it¬ 
self  a  home  in  ethics,  an  essential  part  of  philosophy ; 
and  it  is  then  that  the  true  meaning  of  these  theories 
makes  its  first  appearance  in  and  is  apprehended  by 
the  world  of  actuality. 

The  result  of  the  dissemination  of  the  view  that 
subjective  conviction,  and  it  alone,  decides  the  ethi¬ 
cal  character  of  an  action  is  that  the  charge  of  hy¬ 
pocrisy,  once  so  frequent,  is  now  rarely  heard ;  you 
can  only  qualify  wickedness  as  hypocrisy  on  the  as¬ 
sumption  that  certain  actions  are  inherently  and 
actually  misdeeds,  vices,  and  crimes,  and  that  the 
defaulter  is  necessarily  aware  of  them  as  such,  be¬ 
cause  he  is  aware  of  and  recognizes  the  principles 
and  outward  acts  of  piety  and  honesty  even  in  the 
pretence  to  which  he  misapplies  them.  In  other 
words,  it  was  generally  assumed  as  regards  evil  that 
it  is  a  duty  to  know  the  good  and  to  be  aware  of  its 
distinction  from  evil.  In  any  case,  however,  it  was 
an  absolute  injunction  which  forbade  the  commis¬ 
sion  of  vicious  and  criminal  actions  and  which  in¬ 
sisted  on  such  actions  being  imputed  to  the  agent,  so 
far  as  he  was  a  man  and  not  a  beast.  But  if  a  good 
heart,  a  good  intention,  a  subjective  conviction  are 
set  forth  as  the  sources  from  which  conduct  derives 
its  worth,  then  there  is  no  longer  any  hypocrisy  or 
immorality  at  all ;  for  whatever  a  man  does,  he  can 
always  justify  by  the  reflection  on  it  of  good  inten¬ 
tions  and  motives,  and  by  the  influence  of  that  con¬ 
viction  it  is  good.1  Thus  there  is  no  longer  anything 
absolutely  vicious  or  criminal ;  and  instead  of  the 
above-mentioned  2  frank  and  free,  hardened  and 
unperturbed  sinner,  we  have  the  man  who  is  con¬ 
scious  of  being  fully  justified  by  intention  and  con¬ 
viction.  My  good  intention  in  my  action  and  my 
conviction  of  its  goodness  make  it  good.  We  speak 

1  “That  he  feels  completely  convinced  I  have  not  the 
least  doubt.  But  how  many  men  are  led  by  such  feelings 
of  conviction  into  the  worst  of  misdeeds!  Besides,  if  ev¬ 
erything  may  be  excused  on  this  ground,  then  that  ter¬ 
minates  the  rational  judgement  of  good  and  wicked,  hon¬ 
ourable  and  shameful,  resolutions.  Lunacy  in  that  case 
would  have  equal  rights  with  reason;  or  in  other  words 
reason  would  have  no  rights  whatever,  its  judgement 
would  cease  to  have  any  validity.  Its  voice  would  be  a 
minus  quantity;  truth  would  be  the  possession  of  the  man 
with  no  doubts!  I  tremble  at  the  results  of  such  tolera¬ 
tion.  for  it  would  be  exclusively  to  the  advantage  of  un¬ 
reason.”  (F.  H.  Jacobi  to  Count  Holmer,  on  Count  Stol- 
berg’s  change  of  faith,  Eutin,  August  5th,  1800.  Brennus, 
Berlin,  August  1802.) 

2  In  the  quotation  from  Pascal  in  Remark  (a)  to  this 
Paragraph. — Ed. 


of  judging  and  estimating  an  action;  but  on  this 
principle  it  is  only  the  intention  and  conviction  of 
the  agent,  his  faith,  by  which  he  ought  to  be  judged. 
Not,  however,  his  faith  in  the  sense  in  which  Christ 
requires  faith  in  objective  truth,  so  that  on  one  who 
has  a  false  faith,  i.e.  a  conviction  bad  in  its  content, 
the  judgement  to  be  pronounced  must  be  a  condem¬ 
nation,  i.e.  one  in  conformity  with  this  content.  On 
the  contrary,  faith  here  means  fidelity  to  conviction, 
and  the  question  to  be  asked  about  action  is:  “Has 
the  agent  in  his  acting  kept  true  to  his  conviction?” 
Fidelity  to  formal  subjectiveconviction  is  thusmade 
the  sole  measuring-rod  of  duty. 

This  principle,  under  which  conviction  is  expressly 
made  something  subjective,  cannot  but  thrust  upon 
us  the  thought  of  possible  error,  with  the  further 
implied  presupposition  of  an  absolute  law.  But  the 
law  is  no  agent ;  it  is  only  the  actual  human  being 
who  acts.  And.  on  the  aforesaid  principle,  the  only 
question,  in  estimating  the  worth  of  human  ac¬ 
tions,  is  how  far  he  has  taken  up  the  law  into  his 
conviction.  But  if  on  this  theory  it  is  not  actions 
which  are  to  be  judged,  i.e.  measured  generally,  by 
that  law,  it  is  impossible  to  see  what  the  law  is  for 
and  what  end  it  is  to  serve.  Such  a  law  is  degraded 
to  a  mere  external  letter,  in  fact  to  an  empty  word, 
if  it  is  only  my  conviction  which  makes  it  a  law  and 
invests  it  with  obligatory  force. 

Such  a  law  may  claim  its  authority  from  God  or 
the  state.  It  may  even  have  behind  it  the  authority 
of  tens  of  centuries  during  which  it  was  the  bond 
which  gave  men,  with  all  their  deeds  and  destiny, 
coherence  and  subsistence.  And  these  are  authorities 
which  enshrine  the  convictions  of  countless  individ¬ 
uals.  Now  if  I  set  against  these  the  authority  of  my 
single  conviction — for  as  my  subjectiveconviction  its 
sole  validity  is  authority — that  at  first  seems  a  piece 
of  monstrous  self-conceit,  but  in  virtue  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  that  subjective  conviction  is  to  be  the  measuring- 
rod,  it  is  pronounced  not  to  be  self-conceit  at  all. 

Even  if  reason  and  conscience — which  shallow 
science  and  bad  sophistry  can  never  altogether  expel 
— admit  with  a  noble  illogicality  that  error  is  pos¬ 
sible,  still  by  describing  crime,  and  evil  generally,  as 
only  an  error,  we  minimize  the  fault.  To  err  is  hu¬ 
man — who  has  not  been  mistaken  on  one  point  or 
another,  whether  he  had  fresh  or  pickled  cabbage 
for  dinner  yesterday,  and  about  innumerable  other 
things  of  more  or  less  importance?  But  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  importance  and  triviality  vanishes  if 
everything  turns  on  the  subjectivity  of  conviction 
and  on  persistence  in  it.  The  said  noble  illogicality 
which  admits  the  possibility  of  error  is  inevitable 
then  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  but  when  it  comes 
round  to  say  that  a  wrong  conviction  is  only  an  er¬ 
ror,  it  only  falls  into  a  further  illogicality,  the  illogi¬ 
cality  of  dishonesty.  At  one  moment  conviction  is 
made  the  basis  of  ethics  and  of  man’s  supreme  value, 
and  is  thus  pronounced  the  supreme  and  the  sacro¬ 
sanct;  at  another,  all  we  have  to  do  with  is  error, 
and  my  conviction  is  something  trivial  and  casual, 
in  fact  something  strictly  external,  which  may  turn 


MORALITY 


out  this  way  or  that.  Really,  my  being  convinced  is 
something  supremely  trivial  if  I  cannot  know  the 
truth ;  for  then  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  how  I 
think,  and  all  that  is  left  to  my  thinking  is  that 
empty  good,  the  abstraction  to  which  the  Under¬ 
standing  reduces  the  good. 

One  other  point.  It  follows  further,  on  this  princi¬ 
ple  of  justification  by  conviction,  that  logic  requires 
me,  in  dealing  with  the  way  others  act  against  my 
action,  to  admit  that  they  are  quite  in  the  right — 
so  far  at  any  rate  as  they  maintain  with  faith  and 
conviction  that  my  action  is  criminal.  On  such  logic, 
not  merely  do  I  gain  nothing,  I  am  even  deposed 
from  the  post  of  liberty  and  honour  into  a  situation 
of  slavery  and  dishonour.  Justice,  which  in  the  ab¬ 
stract  is  mine  as  well  as  theirs,  I  feel  only  as  a  for¬ 
eign  subjective  conviction,  and  when  it  is  executed 
on  me,  I  fancy  myself  to  be  treated  only  by  an  ex¬ 
ternal  force. 

(/)  Finally,  the  supreme  form  in  which  this  sub¬ 
jectivism  is  completely  comprised  and  expressed  is 
the  phenomenon  which  has  been  called  by  a  name 
borrowed  from  Plato — “Irony.”  The  name  alone, 
however,  is  taken  from  Plato ;  he  used  it  to  describe 
a  way  of  speaking  which  Socrates  employed  in  con¬ 
versation  when  defending  the  Idea  of  truth  and  jus¬ 
tice  against  the  conceit  of  the  Sophists  and  the  un¬ 
educated.1  What  he  treated  ironically,  however,  was 
only  their  type  of  mind,  not  the  Idea  itself.  Irony  is 
only  a  manner  of  talking  against  people.  Except  as 
directed  against  persons,  the  essential  movement  of 
thought  is  dialectic,  and  Plato  was  so  far  from  re¬ 
garding  the  dialectical  in  itself,  still  less  irony,  as  the 
last  word  in  thought  and  a  substitute  for  the  Idea, 
that  he  terminated  the  flux  and  reflux  of  thinking, 
let  alone  of  a  subjective  opinion,  and  submerged  it 
in  the  substantiality  of  the  Idea.2 

1Cf.  Plato,  The  Republic ,  337. — Ed. 

2  My  colleague,  the  late  Professor  Solger,  adopted  the 
word  “irony”  which  Friedrich  von  Schlegel  brought  into 
use  at  a  comparatively  early  period  of  his  literary  career 
and  enhanced  to  equivalence  with  the  said  principle  of 
subjectivity  knowing  itself  as  supreme.  But  Solger’s  finer 
mind  was  above  such  an  exaggeration;  he  had  philo¬ 
sophic  insight  and  so  seized  upon,  emphasized,  and  re¬ 
tained  only  that  part  of  SchlegePs  view  which  was  dia¬ 
lectic  in  the  strict  sense,  i.e.  dialectic  as  the  pulsating 
drive  of  speculative  inquiry.  His  last  publication,  a 
solid  piece  of  work,  a  thorough  Kritik  fiber  die  Vorlesun- 
gen  des  Herrn  August  Wilhelm  von  Schlegel  fiber  dra- 
matische  Kunst  und  Liter atur  (Wiener  Jahrbuch,  vol. 
vii,  pp.  90  ff.),  I  find  somewhat  obscure,  however,  and 
I  cannot  agree  with  the  argument  which  he  develops. 
“True  irony,”  he  says  (p.  92),  “arises  from  the  view  that 
so  long  as  man  lives  in  this  present  world,  it  is  only  in 
this  world  that  he  can  fulfil  his  ‘appointed  task’  no  mat¬ 
ter  how  elevated  a  sense  we  give  to  this  expression.  Any 
hope  we  may  have  of  transcending  finite  ends  is  foolish 
and  empty  conceit.  Even  the  highest  is  existent  for  our 
conduct  only  in  a  shape  that  is  limited  and  finite.”  Right¬ 
ly  understood,  this  is  Platonic  doctrine,  and  a  true  re¬ 
mark  in  rejection  of  what  he  has  referred  to  earlier,  the 
empty  striving  towards  the  (abstract)  infinite.  But  to 
say  that  the  highest  is  existent  in  a  limited  and  finite 
shape,  like  the  ethical  order  (and  that  order  is  in  essence 
actual  life  and  action),  is  very  different  from  saying 
that  the  highest  thing  is  a  finite  end.  The  outward  shape, 
the  form  of  finitude,  in  no  way  deprives  the  content  of 


53 

The  culminating  form  of  this  subjectivity  which 
conceives  itself  as  the  final  court  of  appeal — our 
topic  here — can  be  nothing  except  what  was  im¬ 
plicitly  present  already  in  its  preceding  forms, name¬ 
ly  subjectivity  knowing  itself  as  the  arbiter  and  judge 
of  truth,  right,  and  duty.  It  consists  then  in  this, 
that  it  knows  the  objective  ethical  principles,  but 
fails  in  self-forgetfulness  and  self-renunciation  to 
immerse  itself  in  their  seriousness  and  to  base  action 
upon  them.  Although  related  to  them,  it  holds  itself 
aloof  from  them  and  knows  itself  as  that  which  wills 
and  decides  thus,  although  it  may  equally  well  will 
and  decide  otherwise.  You  actually  accept  a  law,  it 
says,  and  respect  it  as  absolute.  So  do  I,  but  I  go 
further  than  you,  because  I  am  beyond  this  law  and 
can  make  it  to  suit  myself.  It  is  not  the  thing  that  is 
excellent,  but  I  who  am  so ;  as  the  master  of  law  and 
thing  alike,  I  simply  play  with  them  as  with  my  ca¬ 
price  ;  my  consciously  ironical  attitude  lets  the  high¬ 
est  perish  and  I  merely  hug  myself  at  the  thought. 


ethical  life  of  its  substantiality  and  the  infinity  inher¬ 
ent  within  it.  Solger  continues:  “And  just  for  this  rea¬ 
son  the  highest  is  in  us  as  negligible  as  the  lowest  and 
perishes  of  necessity  with  us  and  our  nugatory  thoughts 
and  feelings.  The  highest  is  truly  existent  in  God  alone, 
and  as  it  perishes  in  us  it  is  transfigured  into  something 
divine,  a  divinity  in  which  we  would  have  had  no  share 
but  for  its  immediate  presence  revealed  in  the  very  dis¬ 
appearance  of  our  actuality;  now  the  mood  to  which  this 
process  directly  comes  home  in  human  affairs  is  tragic 
irony.”  The  arbitrary  name  “irony”  would  be  of  no  im¬ 
portance,  but  there  is  an  obscurity  here  when  it  is  said 
that  it  is  “the  highest”  which  perishes  with  our  nothing¬ 
ness  and  that  it  is  in  the  disappearance  of  our  actuality 
that  the  divine  is  first  revealed;  e.g.  again  (ibid.,  p.  91) : 
“We  see  heroes  beginning  to  wonder  whether  they  have 
erred  in  the  noblest  and  finest  elements  of  their  feelings 
and  sentiments,  not  only  in  regard  to  their  successful  is¬ 
sue,  but  also  to  their  source  and  their  worth;  indeed, 
what  elevates  us  is  the  destruction  of  the  best  itself.” 
(The  just  destruction  of  utter  scoundrels  and  criminals 
who  flaunt  their  villainy — the  hero  of  a  modern  tragedy, 
Die  Schuld,  is  one — has  an  interest  for  criminal  law,  but 
none  at  all  for  art  proper  which  is  what  is  in  question 
here.)  The  tragic  destruction  of  figures  whose  ethical 
life  is  on  the  highest  plane  can  interest  and  elevate  us 
and  reconcile  us  to  its  occurrence  only  in  so  far  as  they 
come  on  the  scene  in  opposition  to  one  another  together 
with  equally  justified  but  different  ethical  powers  which 
have  come  into  collision  through  misfortune,  because  the 
result  is  that  then  these  figures  acquire  guilt  through 
their  opposition  to  an  ethical  law.  Out  of  this  situation 
there  arises  the  right  and  wrong  of  both  parties  and 
therefore  the  true  ethical  Idea,  which,  purified  and  in 
triumph  over  this  one-sidedness,  is  thereby  leconciled  in 
us.  Accordingly,  it  is  not  the  highest  in  us  which  perish¬ 
es;  we  are  elevated  not  by  the  destruction  of  the  best  but 
by  the  triumph  of  the  true.  This  it  is  which  constitutes 
the  true,  purely  ethical,  interest  of  ancient  tragedy  (in 
romantic  tragedy  the  character  of  the  interest  under¬ 
goes  a  certain  modification).  All  this  I  have  worked  out 
in  detail  in  my  Phenomenology  of  Mind  (1st  edn.,  pp. 
404  ff.  Cf.  pp.  683  ff.  [Eng.  tr.  pp.  484  ff.  Cf.  pp.  736 
ff.]).  But  the  ethical  Idea  is  actual  and  present  in  the 
world  of  social  institutions  without  the  misfortune  of 
tragic  clashes  and  the  destruction  of  individuals  over¬ 
come  by  this  misfortune.  And  this  Idea’s  (the  highest’s) 
revelation  of  itself  in  its  actuality  as  anything  but  a  nul¬ 
lity  is  what  the  external  embodiment  of  ethical  life,  the 
state,  purposes  and  effects,  and  what  the  ethical  self- 
consciousness  possesses,  intuits,  and  knows  in  the  state 
and  what  the  thinking  mind  comprehends  there. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


This  type  of  subjectivism  not  merely  substitutes  a 
void  for  the  whole  content  of  ethics,  right,  duties, 
and  laws — and  so  is  evil,  in  fact  evil  through  and 
through  and  universally — but  in  addition  its  form 
is  a  subjective  void,  i.e.  it  knows  itself  as  this  con¬ 
tentless  void  and  in  this  knowledge  knows  itself  as 
absolute. 

In  my  Phenomenology  of  Mind,1  I  have  shown 
how  this  absolute  self-complacency  fails  to  rest  in  a 
solitary  worship  of  itself  but  builds  up  a  sort  of 
community  whose  bond  and  substance  is,  e.g.,  the 
“mutual  asseveration  of  conscientiousness  and  good 
intentions,  the  enjoyment  of  this  mutual  purity,” 
but  is  above  all  “the  refreshment  derived  from  the 
glory  of  this  self-knowledge  and  self-expression, 
from  the  glory  of  fostering  and  cherishing  this  ex¬ 
perience.”  I  have  shown  also  how  what  has  been 
called  a  “beautiful  soul” — that  still  nobler  type  of 
subjectivism  which  empties  the  objective  of  all  con¬ 
tent  and  so  fades  away  until  it  loses  all  actuality — 
is  a  variation  of  subjectivism  like  other  forms  of  the 
same  phenomenon  akin  to  the  series  of  them  here  con¬ 
sidered.  What  is  said  here  may  be  compared  with 
the  entire  section  (C)  /‘Conscience,” in  the  Phenom¬ 
enology,  especially  the  part  dealing  with  the  transi¬ 
tion  to  a  higher  stage — a  stage,  however,  there  dif¬ 
ferent  in  character.  [A.] 

Transition  from  Morality  to  Ethical  Life 

141.  For  the  good  as  the  substantial  universal 
of  freedom,  but  as  something  still  abstract,  there 
are  therefore  required  determinate  characteris¬ 
tics  of  some  sort  and  the  principle  for  determin¬ 
ing  them,  though  a  principle  identical  with  the 
good  itself.  For  conscience  similarly,  as  the  pure¬ 
ly  abstract  principle  of  determination,  it  is  re¬ 
quired  that  its  decisions  shall  be  universal  and 
objective.  If  good  and  conscience  are  each  kept 
abstract  and  thereby  elevated  to  independent 
totalities,  then  both  become  the  indeterminate 
which  ought  to  be  determined. — But  the  inte¬ 
gration  of  these  two  relative  totalities  into  an 
absolute  identity  has  already  been  implicitly 
achieved  in  that  this  very  subjectivity  of  pure 
self-certainty,  aware  in  its  vacuity  of  its  gradual 
evaporation,  is  identical  with  the  abstract  uni¬ 
versality  of  the  good.  The  identity  of  the  good 

1  [1st  edn.]  pp.  605  ff.  [Eng.  tr.  pp.  663  ff.]. 


with  the  subjective  will, an  identity  which  there¬ 
fore  is  concrete  and  the  truth  of  them  both,  is 
Ethical  Life. 

The  details  of  such  a  transition  of  the  concept  are 
made  intelligible  in  logic.  Here,  however,  it  need  on¬ 
ly  be  said  that  it  is  the  nature  of  the  restricted  and 
the  finite  (i.e.  here  the  abstract  good  which  only 
ought  to  be  [but  is  not],  and  the  equally  abstract 
subjectivity  which  only  ought  to  be  good  [but  is 
not])  to  have  its  opposite  implicit  within  it,  the 
good  its  actuality,  and  subjectivity  (the  moment  in 
which  ethical  life  is  actual)  the  good  ;  but  since  they 
are  one-sided  they  are  not  yet  posited  in  accordance 
with  their  implicit  nature.  They  become  so  posited 
in  their  negation.  That  is  to  say,  in  their  one¬ 
sidedness,  when  each  is  bent  on  declining  to  have  in 
it  what  is  in  it  implicitly — when  the  good  is  without 
subjectivity  and  a  determinate  character,  and  the 
determining  principle,  subjectivity,  is  without  what 
is  implicit  within  it — and  when  both  build  them¬ 
selves  into  independent  totalities,  they  are  annulled 
and  thereby  reduced  to  moments, to  moments  of  the 
concept  which  becomes  manifest  as  their  unity  and, 
having  acquired  reality  precisely  through  this  posit¬ 
ing  of  its  moments,  is  now  present  as  Idea — as  the 
concept  which  has  matured  its  determinations  to 
reality  and  at  the  same  time  is  present  in  their  iden¬ 
tity  as  their  implicit  essence. 

The  embodiment  of  freedom  which  was  (a)  first 
of  all  immediate  as  right,  is  (£)  characterized  in  the 
reflection  of  self-consciousness  as  good.  (7)  The 
third  stage,  originating  here,  in  its  transition  from 
(/3)  to  ethical  life,  as  the  truth  of  good  and  sub¬ 
jectivity,  is  therefore  the  truth  both  of  subjectivity 
and  right.  Ethical  life  is  a  subjective  disposition, 
but  one  imbued  with  what  is  inherently  right.  The 
fact  that  this  Idea  is  the  truth  of  the  concept  of  free¬ 
dom  is  something  which,  in  philosophy,  must  be 
proved,  not  presupposed,  not  adopted  from  feeling  or 
elsewhere.  This  demonstration  is  contained  only  in 
the  fact  that  right  and  the  moral  self-consciousness 
both  display  in  themselves  their  regression  to  this 
Idea  as  their  outcome.  Those  who  hope  to  be  able 
to  dispense  with  proof  and  demonstration  in  philos¬ 
ophy  show  thereby  that  they  are  still  far  from 
knowing  the  first  thing  about  what  philosophy  is. 
On  other  topics  argue  they  may,  but  in  philosophy 
they  have  no  right  to  join  in  the  argument  if  they 
wish  to  argue  without  the  concept.  [A.] 


THIRD  PART 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


142.  Ethical  life  is  the  Idea  of  freedom  in  that 
on  the  one  hand  it  is  the  good  become  alive — 
the  good  endowed  in  self-consciousness  with 
knowing  and  willing  and  actualized  by  self- 
conscious  action — while  on  the  other  hand  self- 
consciousness  has  in  the  ethical  realm  its  ab¬ 
solute  foundation  and  the  end  which  actuates 
its  effort.1  Thus  ethical  life  is  the  concept  of 
freedom  developed  into  the  existing  world  and 
the  nature  of  self-consciousness. 

143.  Since  this  unity  of  the  concept  of  the  will 
with  its  embodiment — i.e.  the  particular  will — 
is  knowing,  consciousness  of  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  these  two  moments  of  the  Idea  is  pres¬ 
ent,  but  present  in  such  a  way  that  now  each  of 
these  moments  is  in  its  own  eyes  the  totality  of 
the  Idea  and  has  that  totality  as  its  foundation 
and  content.2 

144.  (a)  The  objective  ethical  order,  which 
comes  on  the  scene  in  place  of  good  in  the  ab¬ 
stract,  is  substance  made  concrete  by  subjectiv¬ 
ity  as  infinite  form.3  Hence  it  posits  within  itself 
distinctions  whose  specific  character  is  thereby 
determined  by  the  concept,4  and  which  endow 
the  ethical  order  with  a  stable  content  inde¬ 
pendently  necessary  and  subsistent  in  exaltation 
above  subjective  opinion  and  caprice.  These  dis¬ 
tinctions  are  absolutely  valid  laws  and  institu¬ 
tions.  [A.] 

145.  It  is  the  fact  that  the  ethical  order  is  the 
system  of  these  specific  determinations  of  the 
Idea  which  constitutes  its  rationality.  Hence  the 
ethical  order  is  freedom  or  the  absolute  will  as 
what  is  objective,  a  circle  of  necessity  whose 
moments  are  the  ethical  powers  which  regulate 
the  life  of  individuals.  To  these  powers  indi¬ 
viduals  are  related  as  accidents  to  substance, 
and  it  is  in  individuals  that  these  powers  are 

1  See  Paragraphs  258  and  146-7. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraphs  109,  144-5,  and  146-7. — Ed. 

3  See  Paragraph  156. — Ed. 

4  See  Paragraphs  7,  262,  269-70,  and  272. — Ed. 


represented,  have  the  shape  of  appearance,  and 
become  actualized.5  [A.] 

146.  (ft)  The  substantial  order,  in  the  self- 
consciousness  which  it  has  thus  actually  attained 
in  individuals,  knows  itself  and  so  is  an  object 
of  knowledge.  This  ethical  substance  and  its  laws 
and  powers  are  on  the  one  hand  an  object  over 
against  the  subject,  and  from  his  point  of  view 
they  are — “are”  in  the  highest  sense  of  self- 
subsistent  being.  This  is  an  absolute  authority 
and  power  infinitely  more  firmly  established 
than  the  being  of  nature.0 

The  sun,  the  moon,  mountains,  rivers,  and  the  nat¬ 
ural  objects  of  all  kinds  by  which  we  are  surrounded, 
are.  For  consciousness  they  have  the  authority  not 
only  of  mere  being  but  also  of  possessing  a  particu¬ 
lar  nature  which  it  accepts  and  to  which  it  adjusts 
itself  in  dealing  with  them,  using  them,  or  in  being 
otherwise  concerned  with  them.  The  authority  of 
ethical  laws  is  infinitely  higher,  because  natural  ob¬ 
jects  conceal  rationality  under  the  cloak  of  con¬ 
tingency  and  exhibit  it  only  in  their  utterly  external 
and  disconnected  way. 

147.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  not  something 
alien  to  the  subject.  On  the  contrary,  his  spirit 
bears  witness  to  them  as  to  its  own  essence,  the 
essence  in  which  he  has  a  feeling  of  his  selfhood, 
and  in  which  he  lives  as  in  his  own  element 
which  is  not  distinguished  from  himself.  The 
subject  in  thus  directly  linked  to  the  ethical 
order  by  a  relation  which  is  more  like  an  iden¬ 
tity  than  even  the  relation  of  faith  or  trust. 

Faith  and  trust  emerge  along  with  reflection ;  they 
presuppose  the  power  of  forming  ideas  and  making 
distinctions.  For  example,  it  is  one  thing  to  be  a 
pagan,  a  different  thing  to  believe  in  a  pagan  reli¬ 
gion.  This  relation  or  rather  this  absence  of  relation, 
this  identity  in  which  the  ethical  order  is  the  actual 
living  soul  of  self-consciousness,  can  no  doubt  pass 
over  into  a  relation  of  faith  and  conviction  and  into 
a  relation  produced  by  means  of  further  reflection, 
i.e.  into  an  insight  due  to  reasoning  starting  perhaps 

6  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  163. — Ed. 

6  See  Addition  to  Paragraph  44. — Ed. 


55 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


from  some  particular  purposes,  interests,  and  con¬ 
siderations,  from  fear  or  hope,  or  from  historical 
conditions.  But  adequate  knowledge  of  this  identity 
depends  on  thinking  in  terms  of  the  concept. 

148.  As  substantive  in  character, these  laws  and 
institutions  are  duties  binding  on  the  will  of  the 
individual,  because  as  subjective,  as  inherently 
undetermined,  or  determined  as  particular,  he 
distinguishes  himself  from  them  and  hence 
stands  related  to  them  as  to  the  substance  of  his 
own  being. 

The  “doctrine  of  duties”  in  moral  philosophy  (I 
mean  the  objective  doctrine,  not  that  which  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  contained  in  the  empty  principle  of 
moral  subjectivity,  because  that  principle  determines 
nothing — see  Paragraph  134)  is  therefore  comprised 
in  the  systematic  development  of  the  circle  of  ethical 
necessity  1  which  follows  in  this  Third  Part.  The  dif¬ 
ference  between  the  exposition  in  this  book  and  the 
form  of  a  “doctrine  of  duties”  2  lies  solely  in  the  fact 
that,  in  what  follows,  the  specific  types  of  ethical 
life  turn  up  as  necessary  relationships;  there  the 
exposition  ends,  without  being  supplemented  in  each 
case  by  the  addition  that  “therefore  men  have  a  duty 
to  conform  to  this  institution.” 

A  “doctrine  of  duties”  which  is  other  than  a  phil¬ 
osophical  science  takes  its  material  from  existing 
relationships  and  shows  its  connexion  with  the 
moralist’s  personal  notions  or  with  principles  and 
thoughts,  purposes,  impulses,  feelings,  &c.,  that  are 
forthcoming  everywhere ;  and  as  reasons  for  accept¬ 
ing  each  duty  in  turn,  it  may  tack  on  its  further 
consequences  in  their  bearing  on  the  other  ethical 
relationships  or  on  welfare  and  opinion.  But  an  im¬ 
manent  and  logical  “doctrine  of  duties”  can  be  noth¬ 
ing  except  the  serial  exposition  of  the  relationships 
which  are  necessitated  by  the  Idea  of  freedom  and 
are  therefore  actual  in  their  entirety,  to  wit  in  the 
state. 

149.  The  bond  of  duty  can  appear  as  a  restric¬ 
tion  only  on  indeterminate  subjectivity  or  ab¬ 
stract  freedom,  and  on  the  impulses  either  of 
the  natural  will  or  of  the  moral  will  which  de¬ 
termines  its  indeterminate  good  arbitrarily.  The 
truth  is,  however,  that  in  duty  the  individual 
finds  his  liberation;  first,  liberation  from  de¬ 
pendence  on  mere  natural  impulse  and  from  the 
depression  which  as  a  particular  subject  he  can¬ 
not  escape  in  his  moral  reflections  on  what  ought 
to  be  and  what  might  be;  secondly,  liberation 
from  the  indeterminate  subjectivity  which,  nev¬ 
er  reaching  reality  or  the  objective  determinacy 
of  action,  remains  self-enclosed  and  devoid  of 
actuality.  In  duty  the  individual  acquires  his 
substantive  freedom.  [A.] 

1  See  Addition  to  Paragraph  2. — Ed. 

2  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  1 50. — Ed. 


150.  Virtue  is  the  ethical  order  reflected  in  the 
individual  character  so  far  as  that  character  is 
determined  by  its  natural  endowment.  When 
virtue  displays  itself  solely  as  the  individual’s 
simple  conformity  with  the  duties  of  the  sta¬ 
tion  to  which  he  belongs,  it  is  rectitude. 

In  an  ethical  community,  it  is  easy  to  say  what 
man  must  do,  what  are  the  duties  he  has  to  fulfil  in 
order  to  be  virtuous:  he  has  simply  to  follow  the 
well-known  and  explicit  rules  of  his  own  situation. 
Rectitude  is  the  general  character  which  may  be  de¬ 
manded  of  him  by  law  or  custom.  But  from  the 
standpoint  of  morality,  rectitude  often  seems  to  be 
something  comparatively  inferior,  something  be¬ 
yond  which  still  higher  demands  must  be  made  on 
oneself  and  others,  because  the  craving  to  be  some¬ 
thing  special  is  not  satisfied  with  what  is  absolute 
and  universal;  it  finds  consciousness  of  peculiarity 
only  in  what  is  exceptional. 

The  various  facets  of  rectitude  may  equally  well  be 
called  virtues,  since  they  are  also  properties  of  the 
individual,  although  not  specially  of  him  in  contrast 
with  others.  Talk  about  virtue,  however,  readily 
borders  on  empty  rhetoric,  because  it  is  only  about 
something  abstract  and  indeterminate;  and  further¬ 
more,  argumentative  and  expository  talk  of  the  sort 
is  addressed  to  the  individual  as  to  a  being  of  caprice 
and  subjective  inclination.  In  an  existing  ethical  order 
in  which  a  complete  system  of  ethical  relations  has 
been  developed  and  actualized,  virtue  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  word  is  in  place  and  actually  appears 
only  in  exceptional  circumstances  or  when  one  obli¬ 
gation  clashes  with  another.  The  clash,  however, 
must  be  a  genuine  one,  because  moral  reflection  can 
manufacture  clashes  of  all  sorts  to  suit  its  purpose 
and  give  itself  a  consciousness  of  being  something 
special  and  having  made  sacrifices.  It  is  for  this  rea¬ 
son  that  the  phenomenon  of  virtue  proper  is  com¬ 
moner  when  societies  and  communities  are  uncivil¬ 
ized,  since  in  those  circumstances  ethical  conditions 
and  their  actualization  are  more  a  matter  of  private 
choice  or  the  natural  genius  of  an  exceptional  indi¬ 
vidual.  For  instance,  it  was  especially  to  Hercules 
that  the  ancients  ascribed  virtue.  In  the  states  of 
antiquity,  ethical  life  had  not  grown  into  this  free 
system  of  an  objective  order  self-subsistently  de¬ 
veloped,  and  consequently  it  was  by  the  personal 
genius  of  individuals  that  this  defect  had  to  be  made 
good.  It  follows  that  if  a  “doctrine  of  virtues”  is  not 
a  mere  “doctrine  of  duties,”  and  if  therefore  it  em¬ 
braces  the  particular  facet  of  character,  the  facet 
grounded  in  natural  endowment,  it  will  be  a  natural 
history  of  mind. 

Since  virtues  are  ethical  principles  applied  to  the 
particular,  and  since  in  this  their  subjective  aspect 
they  are  something  indeterminate,  there  turns  up 
here  for  determining  them  the  quantitative  principle 
of  more  or  less.  The  result  is  that  consideration  of 
them  introduces  their  corresponding  defects  or  vices, 
as  in  Aristotle,  who  defined  each  particular  virtue 


ETHICAL  LIFE  57 


as  strictly  a  mean  between  an  excess  and  a  deficiency. 

The  content  which  assumes  the  form  of  duties  and 
then  virtues  is  the  same  as  that  which  also  has  the 
form  of  impulses  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  19). 
Impulses  have  the  same  basic  content  as  duties  and 
virtues,  but  in  impulses  this  content  still  belongs  to 
the  immediate  will  and  to  instinctive  feeling ;  it  has 
not  been  developed  to  the  point  of  becoming  ethical. 
Consequently,  impulses  have  in  common  with  the 
content  of  duties  and  virtues  only  the  abstract  ob¬ 
ject  on  which  they  are  directed,  an  object  indeter¬ 
minate  in  itself,  and  so  devoid  of  anything  to  dis¬ 
criminate  them  as  good  or  evil.  Or  in  other  words, 
impulses,  considered  abstractly  in  their  positive  as¬ 
pect  alone,  are  good,  while,  considered  abstractly  in 
their  negative  aspect  alone,  they  are  evil  (see  Para¬ 
graph  18).  [A.] 

15 1.  But  when  individuals  are  simply  identified 
with  the  actual  order,  ethical  life  ( das  Sittliche) 
appears  as  their  general  mode  of  conduct,  i.e.  as 
custom1  ( Sitte ),  while  the  habitual  practice  of 
ethical  living  appears  as  a  second  nature  which, 
put  in  the  place  of  the  initial,  purely  natural 
will,  is  the  soul  of  custom  permeating  it  through 
and  through,  the  significance  and  the  actuality 
of  its  existence.  It  is  mind  living  and  present  as 
a  world,  and  the  substance  of  mind  thus  exists 
now  for  the  first  time  as  mind.  [A.] 

152.  In  this  way  the  ethical  substantial  order 
has  attained  its  right,  and  its  right  its  validity. 
That  is  to  say,  the  self-will  of  the  individual  has 
vanished  together  with  his  private  conscience 
which  had  claimed  independence  and  opposed 
itself  to  the  ethical  substance.  For,  when  his 
character  is  ethical,  he  recognizes  as  the  end 
which  moves  him  to  act  the  universal  which  is 
itself  unmoved  but  is  disclosed  in  its  specific  de¬ 
terminations  as  rationality  actualized.  He  knows 
that  his  own  dignity  and  the  whole  stability  of 
his  particular  ends  are  grounded  in  this  same 
universal,  and  it  is  therein  that  he  actually  at¬ 
tains  these.  Subjectivity  is  itself  the  absolute 
form  and  existent  actuality  of  the  substantial 
order,  and  the  distinction  between  subject  on 
the  one  hand  and  substance  on  the  other,  as  the 
object,  end,  and  controlling  power  of  the  sub¬ 
ject,  is  the  same  as,  and  has  vanished  directly 
along  with,  the  distinction  between  them  in 
form. 

Subjectivity  is  the  ground  wherein  the  concept  of 
freedom  is  realized  (see  Paragraph  106).  At  the  level 
of  morality,  subjectivity  is  still  distinct  from  free¬ 
dom,  the  concept  of  subjectivity;  but  at  the  level  of 
ethical  life  it  is  the  realization  of  the  concept  in  a 
way  adequate  to  the  concept  itself. 

1  Cf.  Pascal,  Pensie  93. — Ed. 


153.  The  right  of  individuals  to  be  subjectively 
destined  to  freedom  is  fulfilled  when  they  be¬ 
long  to  an  actual  ethical  order,  because  their 
conviction  of  their  freedom  finds  its  truth  in 
such  an  objective  order,  and  it  is  in  an  ethical 
order  that  they  are  actually  in  possession  of 
their  own  essence  or  their  own  inner  universal¬ 
ity  (see  Paragraph  147). 

When  a  father  inquired  about  the  best  method  of 
educating  his  son  in  ethical  conduct,  a  Pythagorean 
replied:  “Make  him  a  citizen  of  a  state  with  good 
laws.”  (The  phrase  has  also  been  attributed  to  oth¬ 
ers.)  [A.] 

154.  The  right  of  individuals  to  their  particular 
satisfaction  is  also  contained  in  the  ethical  sub¬ 
stantial  order,  since  particularity  is  the  outward 
appearance  of  the  ethical  order — a  mode  in 
which  that  order  is  existent. 

155.  Hence  in  this  identity  of  the  universal  will 
with  the  particular  will,  right  and  duty  coalesce, 
and  by  being  in  the  ethical  order  a  man  has 
rights  in  so  far  as  he  has  duties,  and  duties  in 
so  far  as  he  has  rights.  In  the  sphere  of  abstract 
right,  I  have  the  right  and  another  has  the  cor¬ 
responding  duty.  In  the  moral  sphere,  the  right 
of  my  private  judgement  and  will,  as  well  as  of 
my  happiness,  has  not,  but  only  ought  to  have, 
coalesced  with  duties  and  become  objective. 
[A.] 

156.  The  ethical  substance,  as  containing  inde¬ 
pendent  self-consciousness  united  with  its  con¬ 
cept,  is  the  actual  mind  of  a  family  and  a  na¬ 
tion.  [A.] 

157.  The  concept  of  this  Idea  has  being  only  as 
mind,  as  something  knowing  itself  and  actual, 
because  it  is  the  objectification  of  itself,  the 
movement  running  through  the  form  of  its  mo¬ 
ments.  It  is  therefore 

(A)  ethical  mind  in  its  natural  or  immediate 
phase — the  Family.  This  substantiality  loses  its 
unity,  passes  over  into  division,  and  into  the 
phase  of  relation,  i.e.  into 

(B)  Civil  Society — an  association  of  members 
as  self-subsistent  individuals  in  a  universality 
which,  because  of  their  self-subsistence,  is  only 
abstract.  Their  association  is  brought  about  by 
their  needs,  by  the  legal  system — the  means  to 
security  of  person  and  property — and  by  an 
external  organization  for  attaining  their  particu¬ 
lar  and  common  interests.  This  external  state 

(C)  is  brought  back  to  and  welded  into  unity 
in  the  Constitution  of  the  State  which  is  the 
end  and  actuality  of  both  the  substantial  uni¬ 
versal  order  and  the  public  life  devoted  thereto. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


Sub-section  I 

THE  FAMILY 

158.  The  family,  as  the  immediate  substantial¬ 
ity  of  mind,  is  specifically  characterized  by  love, 
which  is  mind’s  feeling  of  its  own  unity.  Hence 
in  a  family,  one’s  frame  of  mind  is  to  have  self- 
consciousness  of  one’s  individuality  within  this 
unity  as  the  absolute  essence  of  oneself,  with  the 
result  that  one  is  in  it  not  as  an  independent  per¬ 
son  but  as  a  member.  [A.] 

159.  The  right  which  the  individual  enjoys  on 
the  strength  of  the  family  unity  and  which  is  in 
the  first  place  simply  the  individual’s  life  within 
this  unity,  takes  on  the  form,  of  right  (as  the 
abstract  moment  of  determinate  individuality) 
only  when  the  family  begins  to  dissolve.  At  that 
point  those  who  should  be  family-members  both 
in  their  inclination  and  in  actuality  begin  to  be 
self-subsistent  persons,  and  whereas  they  for¬ 
merly  constituted  one  specific  moment  within 
the  whole,  they  now  receive  their  share  sepa¬ 
rately  and  so  only  in  an  external  fashion  by  way 
of  money,  food,  educational  expenses,  and  the 
like.  [A.] 

160.  The  family  is  completed  in  these  three 
phases : 

(a)  Marriage ,  the  form  assumed  by  the  con¬ 
cept  of  the  family  in  its  immediate  phase; 

(b)  Family  Property  a?id  Capital  (the  external 
embodiment  of  the  concept)  and  attention  to 
these ; 

( c )  The  Education  of  Children  and  the  Disso¬ 
lution  of  the  Family. 


selves  one  person,  to  renounce  their  natural  and 
individual  personality  to  this  unity  of  one  with 
the  other.  From  this  point  of  view,  their  union 
is  a  self-restriction,  but  in  fact  it  is  their  libera¬ 
tion,  because  in  it  they  attain  their  substantive 
self-consciousness. 

Our  objectively  appointed  end  and  so  our  ethical 
duty  is  to  enter  the  married  state.  The  external  ori¬ 
gin  of  any  particular  marriage  is  in  the  nature  of  the 
case  contingent,  and  it  depends  principally  on  the 
extent  to  which  reflective  thought  has  been  devel¬ 
oped.  At  one  extreme,  the  first  step  is  that  the  mar¬ 
riage  is  arranged  by  the  contrivance  of  benevolent 
parents ;  the  appointed  end  of  the  parties  is  a  union 
of  mutual  love,  and  their  inclination  to  marry  arises 
from  the  fact  that  each  grows  acquainted  with  the 
other  from  the  first  as  a  destined  partner.  At  the 
other  extreme,  it  is  the  inclination  of  the  parties 
which  comes  first,  appearing  in  them  as  these  two 
infinitely  particularized  individuals.  The  more  ethi¬ 
cal  way  to  matrimony  may  be  taken  to  be  the  for¬ 
mer  extreme  or  any  way  at  all  whereby  the  decision 
to  marry  comes  first  and  the  inclination  to  do  so  fol¬ 
lows,  so  that  in  the  actual  wedding  both  decision 
and  inclination  coalesce.  In  the  latter  extreme,  it  is 
the  uniqueness  of  the  infinitely  particularized  which 
makes  good  its  claims  in  accordance  with  the  subjec¬ 
tive  principle  of  the  modern  world  (see  Remark  to 
Paragraph  124). 

But  those  works  of  modern  art,  dramatic  and  oth¬ 
er,  in  which  the  love  of  the  sexes  is  the  main  inter¬ 
est,  are  pervaded  by  a  chill  despite  the  heat  of  pas¬ 
sion  they  portray,  for  they  associate  the  passion 
with  accident  throughout  and  represent  the  entire 
dramatic  interest  as  if  it  rested  solely  on  the  char¬ 
acters  as  these  individuals;  what  rests  on  them  may 
indeed  be  of  infinite  importance  to  them ,  but  is  of 
none  whatever  in  itself.2  [A.] 


A.  Marriage 

1 6 1.  Marriage,  as  the  immediate  type  of  ethical 
relationship,  contains  first,  the  moment  of  phys¬ 
ical  life;  and  since  marriage  is  a  substantial  tie, 
the  life  involved  in  it  is  life  in  its  totality,  i.e.  as 
the  actuality  of  the  race  and  its  life-process.1 
But,  secondly,  in  self-consciousness  the  natural 
sexual  union — a  union  purely  inward  or  implicit 
and  for  that  very  reason  existent  as  purely  ex¬ 
ternal — is  changed  into  a  union  on  the  level  of 
mind,  into  self-conscious  love.  [A.] 


162.  On  the  subjective  side,  marriage  may  have 
a  more  obvious  source  in  the  particular  inclina¬ 
tion  of  the  two  persons  who  are  entering  upon 
the  marriage  tie,  or  in  the  foresight  and  contriv¬ 
ance  of  the  parents,  and  so  forth.  But  its  objec¬ 
tive  source  lies  in  the  free  consent  of  the  per¬ 
sons,  especially  in  their  consent  to  make  them- 

]Ci  Enc,  [Ist  edn.],  §§  167  ff.  and  §§  288  fif.  [3rd 
edn.  §§  220  ff.  and  §§  366ff.]. 


163.  The  ethical  aspect  of  marriage  consists  in 
the  parties’  consciousness  of  this  unity  as  their 
substantive  aim,  and  so  in  their  love,  trust,  and 
common  sharing  of  their  entire  existence  as  in¬ 
dividuals.  When  the  parties  are  in  this  frame  of 
mind  and  their  union  is  actual,  their  physical 
passion  sinks  to  the  level  of  a  physical  moment, 
destined  to  vanish  in  its  very  satisfaction.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  spiritual  bond  of  union  se¬ 
cures  its  rights  as  the  substance  of  marriage 
and  thus  rises,  inherently  indissoluble,  to  a  plane 
above  the  contingency  of  passion  and  the  tran¬ 
sience  of  particular  caprice. 

It  was  noted  above  (in  Paragraph  75)  that  mar¬ 
riage,  so  far  as  its  essential  basis  is  concerned,  is  not 
a  contractual  relation.  On  the  contrary,  though  mar¬ 
riage  begins  in  contract,  it  is  precisely  a  contract  to 
transcend  the  standpoint  of  contract,  the  standpoint 
from  which  persons  are  regarded  in  their  individ- 

8  See  the  footnote  to  Remark  (/)  to  Paragraph  140. — 
Ed. 


ETHICAL  LIFE  59 


uality  as  self-subsistent  units.  The  identification  of 
personalities,  whereby  the  family  becomes  one  per¬ 
son  and  its  members  become  its  accidents  (though 
substance  is  in  essence  the  relation  of  accidents  to  it¬ 
self1),  is  the  ethical  mind.  Taken  by  itself  and 
stripped  of  the  manifold  externals  of  which  it  is  pos¬ 
sessed  owing  to  its  embodiment  in  these  individuals 
and  the  interests  of  the  phenomenal  realm,  interests 
limited  in  time  and  numerous  other  ways,  this  mind 
emerges  in  a  shape  for  representative  thinking  and 
has  been  revered  as  Penates ,  &c. ;  and  in  general  it  is 
in  this  mind  that  the  religious  character  of  marriage 
and  the  family,  or  pietas,  is  grounded.  It  is  a  further 
abstraction  still  to  separate  the  divine,  or  the  sub¬ 
stantive,  from  its  body,  and  then  to  stamp  it,  to¬ 
gether  with  the  feeling  and  consciousness  of  mental 
unity,  as  what  is  falsely  called  “Platonic”  love.  This 
separation  is  in  keeping  with  the  monastic  doctrine 
which  characterizes  the  moment  of  physical  life  as 
purely  negative  and  which,  precisely  by  thus  sepa¬ 
rating  the  physical  from  the  mental,  endows  the 
former  by  itself  with  infinite  importance.  [A.] 

164.  Mere  agreement  to  the  stipulated  terms  of 
a  contract  in  itself  involves  the  genuine  transfer 
of  the  property  in  question  (see  Paragraph  79). 
Similarly,  the  solemn  declaration  by  the  parties 
of  their  consent  to  enter  the  ethical  bond  of 
marriage,  and  its  corresponding  recognition  and 
confirmation  by  their  family  and  community,2 
constitutes  the  formal  completion  and  actual¬ 
ity  of  marriage.  The  knot  is  tied  and  made  eth¬ 
ical  only  after  this  ceremony,  whereby  through 
the  use  of  signs,  i.e.  of  language  (the  most  men¬ 
tal  embodiment  of  mind — see  Paragraph  78), 
the  substantial  thing  in  the  marriage  is  brought 
completely  into  being.  As  a  result,  the  sensuous 
moment,  the  one  proper  to  physical  life,  is  put 
into  its  ethical  place  as  something  only  conse¬ 
quential  and  accidental,  belonging  to  the  ex¬ 
ternal  embodiment  of  the  ethical  bond,  which 
indeed  can  subsist  exclusively  in  reciprocal  love 
and  support. 

If  with  a  view  to  framing  or  criticizing  legal  enact¬ 
ments,  the  question  is  asked:  what  should  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  chief  end  of  marriage?,  the  question 
may  be  taken  to  mean:  which  single  facet  of  mar¬ 
riage  in  its  actuality  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  most 
essential  one? No  one  facet  by  itself,  however, makes 
up  the  whole  range  of  its  implicit  and  explicit  con¬ 
tent,  i.e.  of  its  ethical  character,  and  one  or  other  of 
its  facets  may  be  lacking  in  an  existing  marriage 
without  detriment  to  the  essence  of  marriage  itself. 

It  is  in  the  actual  conclusion  of  a  marriage,  i.e.  in 
the  wedding,  that  the  essence  of  the  tie  is  expressed 
and  established  beyond  dispute  as  something  ethical, 

1  See  Enc.  [1st  edn.],  §  98  [3rd  edn.  §  150]. 

2  The  fact  that  the  church  comes  in  in  this  connexion  is 
a  further  point,  but  not  one  for  discussion  here.  See  foot¬ 
note  2,  p.  85. 


raised  above  the  contingency  of  feeling  and  private 
inclination.  If  this  ceremony  is  taken  as  an  external 
formality,  a  mere  so-called  “civil  requirement,”  it  is 
thereby  stripped  of  all  significance  except  perhaps 
that  of  serving  the  purpose  of  edification  and  attest¬ 
ing  the  civil  relation  of  the  parties.  It  is  reduced  in¬ 
deed  to  a  mere  fiat  of  a  civil  or  ecclesiastical  authori¬ 
ty.  As  such  it  appears  as  something  not  merely  in¬ 
different  to  the  true  nature  of  marriage,  but  actual¬ 
ly  alien  to  it.  The  heart  is  constrained  by  the  law 
to  attach  a  value  to  the  formal  ceremony  and  the 
latter  is  looked  upon  merely  as  a  condition  which 
must  precede  the  complete  mutual  surrender  of  the 
parties  to  one  another.  As  such  it  appears  to  bring 
disunion  into  their  loving  disposition  and,  like  an 
alien  intruder,  to  thwart  the  inwardness  of  their 
union.  Such  a  doctrine  pretentiously  claims  to  afford 
the  highest  conception  of  the  freedom,  inwardness, 
and  perfection  of  love ;  but  in  fact  it  is  a  travesty  of 
the  ethical  aspect  of  love,  the  higher  aspect  which 
restrains  purely  sensual  impulse  and  puts  it  in  the 
background.  Such  restraint  is  already  present  at  the 
instinctive  level  in  shame,  and  it  rises  to  chastity 
and  modesty  as  consciousness  becomes  more  specif¬ 
ically  intelligent.  In  particular,  the  view  just  criti¬ 
cized  casts  aside  marriage’s  specifically  ethical  char¬ 
acter,  which  consists  in  this,  that  the  consciousness 
of  the  parties  is  crystallized  out  of  its  physical  and 
subjective  mode  and  lifted  to  the  thought  of  what  is 
substantive;  instead  of  continually  reserving  to  it¬ 
self  the  contingency  and  caprice  of  bodily  desire,  it 
removes  the  marriage  bond  from  the  province  of 
this  caprice,  surrenders  to  the  substantive,  and  swears 
allegiance  to  the  Penates ;  the  physical  moment  it 
subordinates  until  it  becomes  something  wholly  con¬ 
ditioned  by  the  true  and  ethical  character  of  the 
marriage  relation  and  by  the  recognition  of  the  bond 
as  an  ethical  one.  It  is  effrontery  and  its  buttress, 
the  Understanding,  which  cannot  apprehend  the 
speculative  character  of  the  substantial  tie ;  never¬ 
theless,  with  this  speculative  character  there  corre¬ 
spond  both  ethical  purity  of  heart  and  the  legisla¬ 
tion  of  Christian  peoples.  [A.] 

165.  The  difference  in  the  physical  character¬ 
istics  of  the  two  sexes  has  a  rational  basis  and 
consequently  acquires  an  intellectual  and  ethical 
significance.  This  significance  is  determined  by 
the  difference  into  which  the  ethical  substantial¬ 
ity,  as  the  concept,  internally  sunders  itself  in  or¬ 
der  that  its  vitality  may  become  a  concrete  unity 
consequent  upon  this  difference. 

166.  Thus  one  sex  is  mind  in  its  self-diremption 
into  explicit  personal  self-subsistence  and  the 
knowledge  and  volition  of  free  universality,  i.e. 
the  self-consciousness  of  conceptual  thought  and 
the  volition  of  the  objective  final  end.  The  other 
sex  is  mind  maintaining  itself  in  unity  as  knowl¬ 
edge  and  volition  of  the  substantive,  but  knowl¬ 
edge  and  volition  in  the  form  of  concrete  indi- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


viduality  and  feeling.  In  relation  to  externality, 
the  former  is  powerful  and  active,  the  latter  pas¬ 
sive  and  subjective.  It  follows  that  man  has  his 
actual  substantive  life  in  the  state,  in  learning, 
and  so  forth,  as  well  as  in  labour  and  struggle 
with  the  external  world  and  with  himself  so  that 
it  is  only  out  of  his  diremption  that  he  fights  his 
way  to  self-subsistent  unity  with  himself.  In  the 
family  he  has  a  tranquil  intuition  of  this  unity, 
and  there  he  lives  a  subjective  ethical  life  on  the 
plane  of  feeling.  Woman,  on  the  other  hand,  has 
her  substantive  destiny  in  the  family,  and  to  be 
imbued  with  family  piety  is  her  ethical  frame  of 
mind. 

For  this  reason,  family  piety  is  expounded  in  Soph¬ 
ocles’  Antigone — one  of  the  most  sublime  pres¬ 
entations  of  this  virtue — as  principally  the  law  of 
woman,  and  as  the  law  of  a  substantiality  at  once 
subjective  and  on  the  plane  of  feeling,  the  law  of  the 
inward  life,  a  life  which  has  not  yet  attained  its  full 
actualization ;  as  the  law  of  the  ancient  gods,  “the 
gods  of  the  underworld”;  as  “an  everlasting  law, 
and  no  man  knows  at  what  time  it  was  first  put 
forth.”  JThis  law  is  there  displayed  as  a  law  opposed 
to  public  law,  to  the  law  of  the  land.  This  is  the 
supreme  opposition  in  ethics  and  therefore  in  trage¬ 
dy;  and  it  is  individualized  in  the  same  play  in  the 
opposing  natures  of  man  and  woman.2  [A.] 

167.  In  essence  marriage  is  monogamy  because 
it  is  personality — immediate  exclusive  individ¬ 
uality — which  enters  into  this  tie  and  surrenders 
itself  to  it;  and  hence  the  tie’s  truth  and  inward¬ 
ness  (i.e.  the  subjective  form  of  its  substantial¬ 
ity)  proceeds  only  from  the  mutual,  whole¬ 
hearted,  surrender  of  this  personality.  Personal¬ 
ity  attains  its  right  of  being  conscious  of  itself  in 
another  only  in  so  far  as  the  other  is  in  this 
identical  relationship  as  a  person,  i.e.  as  an 
atomic  individual. 

Marriage,  and  especially  monogamy,  is  one  of  the 
absolute  principles  on  which  the  ethical  life  of  a  com¬ 
munity  depends.  Hence  marriage  comes  to  be  re¬ 
corded  as  one  of  the  moments  in  the  founding  of 
states  by  gods  or  heroes. 

168.  Further,  marriage  results  from  the  free 
surrender  by  both  sexes  of  their  personality — a 
personality  in  every  possible  way  unique  in  each 
of  the  parties.  Consequently,  it  ought  not  to  be 
entered  by  two  people  identical  in  stock  who  are 
already  acquainted  and  perfectly  known  to  one 
another;  for  individuals  in  the  same  circle  of  re¬ 
lationship  have  no  special  personality  of  their 
own  in  contrast  with  that  of  others  in  the  same 
circle.  On  the  contrary,  the  parties  should  be 

1Cf.  Sophocles,  Antigone ,  11.  450-7. — Ed. 

2Cf.  Phenomenology  [1st  edn.],  pp.  383  ff.,  417  ff. 
[Eng.  tr.  pp.  466  ff.,  495  ff.] 


drawn  from  separate  families  and  their  personal¬ 
ities  should  be  different  in  origin.  Since  the  very 
conception  of  marriage  is  that  it  is  a  freely  un¬ 
dertaken  ethical  transaction,  not  a  tie  directly 
grounded  in  the  physical  organism  and  its  de¬ 
sires,  it  follows  that  the  marriage  of  blood-re¬ 
lations  runs  counter  to  this  conception  and  so 
also  to  genuine  natural  feeling. 

Marriage  itself  is  sometimes  said  to  be  grounded 
not  in  natural  rights  but  simply  in  instinctive  sexual 
impulses ;  or  again  it  is  treated  as  a  contract  with  an 
arbitrary  basis.  External  arguments  in  support  of 
monogamy  have  been  drawn  from  physical  consider¬ 
ations  such  as  the  number  of  men  and  women.  Dark 
feelings  of  repulsion  are  advanced  as  the  sole  ground 
for  prohibiting  consanguineous  marriage.  The  basis 
of  all  these  views  is  the  fashionable  idea  of  a  state 
of  nature  and  a  natural  origin  for  rights,  and  the 
lack  of  the  concept  of  rationality  and  freedom.  [A.] 

169.  The  family,  as  person,  has  its  real  exter¬ 
nal  existence  in  property;  and  it  is  only  when 
this  property  takes  the  form  of  capital  that  it 
becomes  the  embodiment  of  the  substantial  per¬ 
sonality  of  the  family. 

B.  The  Family  Capital 

1 70.  It  is  not  merely  property  which  a  family 
possesses;  as  a  universal  and  enduring  person, 
it  requires  possessions  specifically  determined 
as  permanent  and  secure,  i.e.  it  requires  capital. 
The  arbitrariness  of  a  single  owner’s  particular 
needs  is  one  moment  in  property  taken  abstract¬ 
ly;  but  this  moment,  together  with  the  selfish¬ 
ness  of  desire,  is  here  transformed  into  some¬ 
thing  ethical,  into  labour  and  care  for  a  common 
possession. 

In  the  sagas  of  the  founding  of  states,  or  at  least 
of  a  social  and  orderly  life,  the  introduction  of  per¬ 
manent  property  is  linked  with  the  introduction  of 
marriage.  The  nature  of  this  capital,  however,  and 
the  proper  means  of  its  consolidation  will  appear 
in  the  section  on  civil  society.8 

1 71.  The  family  as  a  legal  entity  in  relation  to 
others  must  be  represented  by  the  husband  as  its 
head.  Further,  it  is  his  prerogative  to  go  out  and 
work  for  its  living,  to  attend  to  its  needs,  and  to 
control  and  administer  its  capital.  This  capital 
is  common  property  so  that,  while  no  member 
of  the  family  has  property  of  his  own,  each  has 
his  right  in  the  common  stock.  This  right,  how¬ 
ever,  may  come  into  collision  with  the  head  of 
the  family’s  right  of  administration  owing  to  the 
fact  that  the  ethical  temper  of  the  family  is  still 
only  at  the  level  of  immediacy  (see  Paragraph 

3  See  Paragraphs  199  ff-  and  253. — Ed. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


158)  and  so  is  exposed  to  partition  and  con¬ 
tingency. 

1 72.  A  marriage  brings  into  being  a  new  family 
which  is  self-subsistent  and  independent  of  the 
clans  or  “houses”  from  which  its  members  have 
been  drawn.  The  tie  between  these  and  the  new 
family  has  a  natural  basis — consanguinity,  but 
the  new  family  is  based  on  love  of  an  ethical 
type.  Thus  an  individual’s  property  too  has  an 
essential  connexion  with  his  conjugal  relation¬ 
ship  and  only  a  comparatively  remote  one  with 
his  relation  to  his  clan  or  “house.” 

The  significance  of  marriage  settlements  which  im¬ 
pose  a  restriction  on  the  couple’s  common  ownership 
of  their  goods,  of  arrangements  to  secure  continued 
legal  assistance  for  the  woman,  and  so  forth,  lies  in 
their  being  provisions  in  case  of  the  dissolution  of 
the  marriage,  either  naturally  by  death,  or  by  di¬ 
vorce,  &c.  They  are  also  safeguards  for  securing  that 
in  such  an  eventuality  the  different  members  of  the 
family  shall  secure  their  share  of  the  common  stock. 
[A.]  ' 

C.  The  Education  of  Children  and  the 
Dissolution  of  the  Family 

173.  In  substance  marriage  is  a  unity,  though 
only  a  unity  of  inwardness  or  disposition;  in 
outward  existence,  however,  the  unity  is  sun¬ 
dered  in  the  two  parties.  It  is  only  in  the  chil¬ 
dren  that  the  unity  itself  exists  externally,  ob¬ 
jectively,  and  explicitly  as  a  unity,  because  the 
parents  love  the  children  as  their  love,  as  the 
embodiment  of  their  own  substance.  From  the 
physical  point  of  view,  the  presupposition — per¬ 
sons  immediately  existent  (as  parents) — here 
becomes  a  result,  a  process  which  runs  away  in¬ 
to  the  infinite  series  of  generations,  each  pro¬ 
ducing  the  next  and  presupposing  the  one  be¬ 
fore.  This  is  the  mode  in  which  the  single  mind 
of  the  Penates  reveals  its  existence  in  the  finite 
sphere  of  nature  as  a  race.  [A.] 

174.  Children  have  the  right  to  maintenance  and 
education  at  the  expense  of  the  family’s  com¬ 
mon  capital.  The  right  of  the  parents  to  the 
service  as  service  of  their  children  is  based  up¬ 
on  and  is  restricted  by  the  common  task  of  look¬ 
ing  after  the  family  generally.  Similarly,  the 
right  of  the  parents  over  the  wishes  of  their  chil¬ 
dren  is  determined  by  the  object  in  view — disci¬ 
pline  and  education.  The  punishment  of  chil¬ 
dren  does  not  aim  at  justice  as  such;  the  aim  is 
more  subjective  and  moral  in  character,  i.e.  to 
deter  them  from  exercising  a  freedom  still  in  the 
toils  of  nature  and  to  lift  the  universal  into  their 
consciousness  and  will.  [A.] 

175.  Children  are  potentially  free  and  their 


61 

life  directly  embodies  nothing  save  potential 
freedom.  Consequently  they  are  not  things  and 
cannot  be  the  property  either  of  their  parents  or 
others.  In  respect  of  his  relation  to  the  family, 
the  child’s  education  has  the  positive  aim  of  in¬ 
stilling  ethical  principles  into  him  in  the  form 
of  an  immediate  feeling  for  which  differences 
are  not  yet  explicit,  so  that  thus  equipped  with 
the  foundation  of  an  ethical  life,  his  heart  may 
live  its  early  years  in  love,  trust,  and  obedience. 
In  respect  of  the  same  relation,  this  education 
has  the  negative  aim  of  raising  children  out  of 
the  instinctive,  physical,  level  on  which  they  are 
originally,  to  self-subsistence  and  freedom  of  per¬ 
sonality  and  so  to  the  level  on  which  they  have 
power  to  leave  the  natural  unity  of  the  family. 

One  of  the  blackest  marks  against  Roman  legisla¬ 
tion  is  the  law  whereby  children  were  treated  by 
their  fathers  as  slaves.  This  gangrene  of  the  ethical 
order  at  the  tenderest  point  of  its  innermost  life  is 
one  of  the  most  important  clues  for  understanding 
the  place  of  the  Romans  in  the  history  of  the  world 
and  their  tendency  towards  legal  formalism.1 

The  necessity  for  education  is  present  in  children 
as  their  own  feeling  of  dissatisfaction  with  them¬ 
selves  as  they  are,  as  the  desire  to  belong  to  the  adult 
world  whose  superiority  they  divine,  as  the  longing 
to  grow  up.  The  play  theory  of  education  assumes 
that  what  is  childish  is  itself  already  something  of 
inherent  worth  and  presents  it  as  such  to  the  chil¬ 
dren;  in  their  eyes  it  lowers  serious  pursuits,  and 
education  itself,  to  a  form  of  childishness  for  which 
the  children  themselves  have  scant  respect.  The  ad¬ 
vocates  of  this  method  represent  the  child,  in  the 
immaturity  in  which  he  feels  himself  to  be,  as  really 
mature  and  they  struggle  to  make  him  satisfied  with 
himself  as  he  is.  But  they  corrupt  and  distort  his 
genuine  and  proper  need  for  something  better,  and 
create  in  him  a  blind  indifference  to  the  substantial 
ties  of  the  intellectual  world,  a  contempt  of  his 
elders  because  they  have  thus  posed  before  him,  a 
child,  in  a  contemptible  and  childish  fashion,  and 
finally  a  vanity  and  conceit  which  feeds  on  the  no¬ 
tion  of  its  own  superiority.  [A.] 

176.  Marriage  is  but  the  ethical  Idea  in  its 
immediacy  and  so  has  its  objective  actuality 
only  in  the  inwardness  of  subjective  feeling  and 
disposition.  In  this  fact  is  rooted  the  funda¬ 
mental  contingency  of  marriage  in  the  world 
of  existence.  There  can  be  no  compulsion  on 
people  to  marry;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there 
is  no  merely  legal  or  positive  bond  which  can 
hold  the  parties  together  once  their  dispositions 
and  actions  have  become  hostile  and  contrary. 
A  third  ethical  authority,  however,  is  called  for 
to  maintain  the  right  of  marriage — an  ethical 

1  Cf.  Hegel,  Philosophy  of  History,  pp.  288  ff.  Also  see 
below.  Paragraph  180. — Ed. 


62  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


substantiality — against  the  mere  whims  of  hos¬ 
tile  disposition  or  the  accident  of  a  purely  pass¬ 
ing  mood,  and  so  forth.  Such  an  authority  dis¬ 
tinguishes  these  from  the  total  estrangement  of 
the  two  parties  and  may  not  grant  divorce  until 
it  is  satisfied  that  the  estrangement  is  total.  [A.] 

177.  The  ethical  dissolution  of  the  family  con¬ 
sists  in  this,  that  once  the  children  have  been 
educated  to  freedom  of  personality,  and  have 
come  of  age,  they  become  recognized  as  persons 
in  the  eyes  of  the  law  and  as  capable  of  holding 
free  property  of  their  own  and  founding  families 
of  their  own,  the  sons  as  heads  of  new  families, 
the  daughters  as  wives.  They  now  have  their 
substantive  destiny  in  the  new  family;  the  old 
family  on  the  other  hand  falls  into  the  back¬ 
ground  as  merely  their  ultimate  basis  and  origin, 
while  a  fortiori  the  clan  is  an  abstraction,  devoid 
of  rights. 

178.  The  natural  dissolution  of  the  family  by 
the  death  of  the  parents,  particularly  the  father, 
has  inheritance  as  its  consequence  so  far  as  the 
family  capital  is  concerned.  The  essence  of  in¬ 
heritance  is  the  transfer  to  private  ownership  of 
property  which  is  in  principle  common.  When 
comparatively  remote  degrees  of  kinship  are  in 
question,  and  when  persons  and  families  are  so 
dispersed  in  civil  society  that  they  have  begun 
to  gain  self-subsistence,  this  transfer  becomes 
the  less  hard  and  fast  as  the  sense  of  family 
unity  fades  away  andas  every  marriage  becomes 
the  surrender  of  previous  family  relationships 
and  the  founding  of  a  newself-subsistent  family. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  the  basis  of  inheritance 
lies  in  the  fact  that,  by  a  man’s  death,  his  property 
becomes  wealth  without  an  owner,  and  as  such  falls 
to  the  first  person  who  takes  possession  of  it,  be¬ 
cause  of  course  it  is  the  relatives  who  are  normally 
nearest  a  man’s  death-bed  and  so  they  are  generally 
the  first  to  take  possession.  Hence  it  is  supposed  that 
this  customary  occurrence  is  made  a  rule  by  positive 
legislation  in  the  interests  of  orderliness.  This  ingen¬ 
ious  idea  disregards  the  nature  of  family  relation¬ 
ship. 

179.  The  result  of  this  disintegration  of  the 
family  is  that  a  man  may  at  will  either  squander 
his  capital  altogether,  mainly  in  accordance 
with  his  private  caprices,  opinions,  and  ends,  or 
else  look  upon  a  circle  of  friends  and  acquaint¬ 
ances,  &c.,  as  if  they  were  his  family  and  make  a 
will  embodying  a  declaration  to  that  effect,  with 
the  result  that  they  become  his  legal  heirs. 

The  ethical  justification  of  freedom  to  dispose  of 
one’s  property  by  will  to  a  circle  of  friends  would 
depend  on  the  formation  of  such  a  circle ;  but  there 


goes  to  its  formation  so  much  accident,  arbitrari¬ 
ness,  and  shrewd  self-seeking,  &c. — especially  since 
testamentary  hopes  have  a  bearing  on  readiness  to 
enter  it — that  the  ethical  moment  in  it  is  only  some¬ 
thing  very  vague.  Further,  the  recognition  of  a 
man’s  competence  to  bequeath  his  property  arbi¬ 
trarily  is  much  more  likely  to  be  an  occasion  for 
breach  of  ethical  obligations  and  for  mean  exertions 
and  equally  mean  subservience ;  and  it  also  provides 
opportunity  and  justification  for  the  folly,  caprice, 
and  malice  of  attaching  to  professed  benefactions 
and  gifts  vain,  tyrannical,  and  vexatious  conditions 
operative  after  the  testator’s  death  and  so  in  any 
case  after  his  property  ceases  to  be  his. 

180.  The  principle  that  the  members  of  the 
family  grow  up  to  be  self-subsistent  persons  in 
the  eyes  of  the  law  (see  Paragraph  177)  lets 
into  the  circle  of  the  family  something  of  the 
same  arbitrariness  and  discrimination  among  the 
natural  heirs,  though  its  exercise  there  must  be 
restricted  to  a  minimum  in  order  to  prevent  in¬ 
jury  to  the  basic  family  relationship. 

The  mere  downright  arbitrariness  of  the  deceased 
cannot  be  made  the  principle  underlying  the  right  to 
make  a  will,  especially  if  it  runs  counter  to  the  sub¬ 
stantive  right  of  the  family.  For  after  all  no  respect 
would  be  forthcoming  for  his  wishes  after  his  death, 
if  not  from  the  family’s  love  and  veneration  for  its 
deceased  fellow-member.  Such  arbitrariness  by  it¬ 
self  contains  nothing  worthy  of  higher  respect  than 
the  right  of  the  family  as  such — on  the  contrary. 

The  other  ground  for  the  validity  of  testamentary 
disposition  would  consist  simply  in  its  arbitrary 
recognition  by  others.  But  such  an  argument  may 
prima  facie  be  admitted  only  when  family  ties,  to 
which  testamentary  disposition  is  intrinsic,  become 
remoter  and  more  ineffective.  If  they  are  actually 
present,  however,  without  being  effective,  the  situ¬ 
ation  is  unethical ;  and  to  give  extended  validity  to 
arbitrary  dispositions  at  the  expense  of  family  ties 
eo  ipso  weakens  the  ethical  character  of  the  latter. 

To  make  the  father’s  arbitrary  will  within  the  fam¬ 
ily  the  main  principle  of  inheritance  was  part  of  the 
harsh  and  unethical  legal  system  of  Rome  to  which 
reference  has  been  made  already.  That  system  even 
gave  a  father  power  to  sell  his  son,  and  if  the  son 
was  manumitted  by  a  third  party,  he  came  under 
his  father’s  potestas  once  more.  Not  until  he  was 
manumitted  a  third  time  was  he  actually  and  finally 
free.  The  son  never  attained  his  majority  de  jure 
nor  did  he  become  a  person  in  law ;  the  only  prop¬ 
erty  he  could  hold  was  booty  won  in  war  ( peculium 
castrense).  If  he  passed  out  of  his  father’s  potestas 
after  being  thrice  sold  and  manumitted,  he  did  not 
inherit  along  with  those  who  had  continued  in  bond¬ 
age  to  the  head  of  the  family,  unless  the  will  spe¬ 
cifically  so  provided.  Similarly,  a  wife  1  remained 

1  i.e.  a  matrona,  not  a  wife  who  in  manum  convenit,  in 
mancipio  est,  and  whose  marriage  was  a  slavery  to  her 
husband. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


attached  to  her  family  of  origin  rather  than  to  the 
new  family  which  by  her  marriage  she  had  helped  to 
found,  and  which  was  now  properly  her  own,  and 
she  was  therefore  precluded  from  inheriting  any 
share  of  the  goods  of  what  was  properly  her  own 
family,  for  neither  wife  nor  mother  shared  in  the 
distribution  of  an  estate. 

Later,  with  the  growing  feeling  for  rationality,  the 
unethical  provisions  of  laws  such  as  these  and  oth¬ 
ers  were  evaded  in  the  course  of  their  administra¬ 
tion,  for  example  with  the  help  of  the  expression 
bonorum  possessio  1  instead  of  hereditas,  and  through 
the  fiction  of  nicknaming  a  filia  a  filius.  This  was  re¬ 
ferred  to  above  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  3)  as  the 
sad  necessity  to  which  the  judge  was  reduced  in  the 
face  of  bad  laws — the  necessity  of  smuggling  reason 
into  them  on  the  sly,  or  at  least  into  some  of  their 
consequences.  Connected  with  this  were  the  terrible 
instability  of  the  chief  political  institutions  and  a 
riot  of  legislation  to  stem  the  outbreak  of  resulting 
evils. 

From  Roman  history  and  the  writings  of  Lucian 
and  others,  we  are  sufficiently  familiar  with  the  un¬ 
ethical  consequences  of  giving  the  head  of  a  Roman 
family  the  right  to  name  whom  he  pleased  as  his 
heir. 

Marriage  is  ethical  life  at  the  level  of  immediacy ; 
in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  therefore,  it  must  be 
a  mixture  of  a  substantial  tie  with  natural  contin¬ 
gency  and  inner  arbitrariness.  Now  when  by  the 
slave-status  of  children,  by  legal  provisions  such  as 
those  mentioned  above  as  well  as  others  consequen¬ 
tial  upon  them,  and  in  addition  by  the  ease  of  Ro¬ 
man  divorce,  pride  of  place  is  given  to  arbitrariness 
instead  ol  to  the  right  of  the  substantial  (so  that 
even  Cicero — and  what  fine  writing  about  the  Hon- 
estum  and  Decorum  there  is  in  his  De  Officiis  and  in 
all  sorts  of  other  places ! — even  Cicero  divorced  his 
wife  as  a  business  speculation  in  order  to  pay  his 
debts  with  his  new  wife’s  dowry),  then  a  legal  road 
is  paved  to  the  corruption  of  manners,  or  rather  the 
laws  themselves  necessitate  such  corruption. 

The  institution  of  heirs-at-law  with  a  view  to  pre¬ 
serving  the  family  and  its  splendor  by  means  of 
fideicommissa  and  substitutiones  (in  order  to  favour 
sons  by  excluding  daughters  from  inheriting,  or  to 
favour  the  eldest  son  by  excluding  the  other  chil¬ 
dren)  is  an  infringement  of  the  principle  of  the  free¬ 
dom  of  property  (see  Paragraph  62),  like  the  ad¬ 
mission  of  any  other  inequality  in  the  treatment  of 
heirs.  And  besides,  such  an  institution  depends  on  an 
arbitrariness  which  in  and  by  itself  has  no  right  to 
recognition,  or  more  precisely  on  the  thought  of 
wishing  to  preserve  intact  not  so  much  this  family 
but  rather  this  clan  or  “house.”  Yet  it  is  not  this  clan 
or  “house,”  but  the  family  proper  which  is  the  Idea 
and  which  therefore  possesses  the  right  to  recogni¬ 
tion,  and  both  the  ethical  disposition  and  family 
trees  are  much  more  likely  to  be  preserved  by  free- 

1  The  fact  that  there  is  a  further  distinction  between  this 
and  possessio  bonorum  is  a  piece  of  the  erudition  which 
constitutes  the  juristic  expert. 


63 

dom  of  property  and  equality  of  inheritance  than 
by  the  reverse  of  these. 

Institutions  of  this  kind,  like  the  Roman,  wholly 
ignore  the  right  due  to  marriage,  because  by  a  mar¬ 
riage  the  foundation  of  a  unique  actual  family  is  eo 
ipso  completed  (see  Paragraph  172),  and  because 
what  is  called,  in  contrast  with  the  new  family,  the 
family  in  the  wide  sense,  i.e.  the  stirps  or  gens,  be¬ 
comes  only  an  abstraction  (see  Paragraph  177) 
growing  less  and  less  actual  the  further  it  recedes  in¬ 
to  the  background  as  one  generation  succeeds  anoth¬ 
er.  Love,  the  ethical  moment  in  marriage,  is  by  its 
very  nature  a  feeling  for  actual  living  individuals, 
not  for  an  abstraction.  This  abstraction  of  the  Un¬ 
derstanding  [the  gens ]  appears  in  history  as  the 
principle  underlying  the  contribution  of  the  Roman 
Empire  to  world  history  (see  Paragraph  357). 2  In 
the  higher  sphere  of  the  state,  a  right  of  primogeni¬ 
ture  arises  together  with  estates  rigidly  entailed ;  it 
arises,  however,  not  arbitrarily  but  as  the  inevitable 
outcome  of  the  Idea  of  the  state.  On  this  point  see 
below,  Paragraph  306.  [A.] 

Transition  of  the  Family  into  Civil  Society 

1 81.  The  family  disintegrates  (both  essentially, 
through  the  working  of  the  principle  of  person¬ 
ality,  and  also  in  the  course  of  nature)  into  a 
plurality  of  families,  each  of  which  conducts  it¬ 
self  as  in  principle  a  self-subsistent  concrete 
person  and  therefore  as  externally  related  to  its 
neighbours.  In  other  words,  the  moments  bound 
together  in  the  unity  of  the  family,  since  the 
family  is  the  ethical  Idea  still  in  its  concept, 
must  be  released  from  the  concept  to  self- 
subsistent  objective  reality.  This  is  the  stage  of 
difference.  This  gives  us,  to  use  abstract  language 
in  the  first  place,  the  determination  of  particu¬ 
larity  which  is  related  to  universality  but  in 
such  a  way  that  universality  is  its  basic  prin¬ 
ciple,  though  still  only  an  inward  principle;  for 
that  reason,  the  universal  merely  shows  in  the 
particular  as  its  form.  Hence  this  relation  of 
reflection  prima  facie  portrays  the  disappear¬ 
ance  of  ethical  life  or,  since  this  life  as  the  es¬ 
sence  necessarily  shows  itself,3  this  relation  con¬ 
stitutes  the  world  of  ethical  appearance — civil 
society. 

The  expansion  of  the  family,  as  its  transition  into  a 
new  principle,  is  in  the  external  world  sometimes  its 
peaceful  expansion  until  it  becomes  a  people,  i.e.  a 
nation,  which  thus  has  a  common  natural  origin,  or 
sometimes  the  federation  of  scattered  groups  of  fam¬ 
ilies  under  the  influence  of  an  overlord’s  power  or  as 
a  result  of  a  voluntary  association  produced  by  the 
tie  of  needs  and  the  reciprocity  of  their  satisfaction. 
[A.] 

2  All  editions  read  “356.” — Ed. 

8Cf.  Enc.  [1st.  edn.],  §§64  ff.,  §§  81  ff.  [3rd  edn. 
§§  115  ff.,  §§  131  ff. j. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


Sub-section  II 

CIVIL  SOCIETY 

182.  The  concrete  person,1  who  is  himself  the 
object  of  his  particular  aims,  is,  as  a  totality  of 
wants  and  a  mixture  of  caprice  and  physical 
necessity,  one  principle  of  civil  society.  But  the 
particular  person  is  essentially  so  related  to 
other  particular  persons  that  each  establishes 
himself  and  finds  satisfaction  by  means  of  the 
others,  and  at  the  same  time  purely  and  simply 
by  means  of  the  form  of  universality,  the  second 
principle  here.  [A.] 

183.  In  the  course  of  the  actual  attainment  of 
selfish  ends — an  attainment  conditioned  in  this 
way  by  universality — there  is  formed  a  system 
of  complete  interdependence,  wherein  the  liveli¬ 
hood,  happiness,  and  legal  status  of  one  man*is 
interwoven  with  the  livelihood,  happiness,  and 
rights  of  all.  On  this  system,  individual  happi¬ 
ness,  &c.,  depend,  and  only  in  this  connected 
system  are  they  actualized  and  secured.  This 
system  may  be  prima  facie  regarded  as  the  ex¬ 
ternal  state,  the  state  based  on  need,  the  state 
as  the  Understanding  envisages  it. 

184.  The  Idea  in  this  its  stage  of  division  im¬ 
parts  to  each  of  its  moments  a  characteristic 
embodiment;  to  particularity  it  gives  the  right 
to  develop  and  launch  forth  in  all  directions; 
and  to  universality  the  right  to  prove  itself  not 
only  the  ground  and  necessary  form  of  particu¬ 
larity,  but  also  the  authority  standing  over  it 
and  its  final  end.  It  is  the  system  of  the  ethical 
order,  split  into  its  extremes  and  lost,  which 
constitutes  the  Idea’s  abstract  moment,  its  mo¬ 
ment  of  reality.  Here  the  Idea  is  present  only  as 
a  relative  totality  and  as  the  inner  necessity  be¬ 
hind  this  outward  appearance.  [A.] 

185.  Particularity  by  itself,  given  free  rein  in 
every  direction  to  satisfy  its  needs,  accidental 
caprices,  and  subjective  desires,  destroys  itself 
and  its  substantive  concept  in  this  process  of 
gratification.  At  the  same  time,  the  satisfaction 
of  need,  necessary  and  accidental  alike,  is  acci¬ 
dental  because  it  breeds  new  desires  without 
end,  is  in  thoroughgoing  dependence  on  caprice 
and  external  accident,  and  is  held  in  check  by 
the  power  of  universality.  In  these  contrasts  and 
their  complexity,  civil  society  affords  a  spectacle 
of  extravagance  and  want  as  well  as  of  the  physi¬ 
cal  and  ethical  degeneration  common  to  them 
both. 

1  See  Paragraphs  230  ff. — Ed. 


The  development  of  particularity  to  self-subsist¬ 
ence  (compare  Remark  to  Paragraph  124)  is  the 
moment  which  appeared  in  the  ancient  world  as  an 
invasion  of  ethical  corruption  and  as  the  ultimate 
cause  of  that  world’s  downfall.  Some  of  these  an¬ 
cient  states  were  built  on  the  patriarchal  and  reli¬ 
gious  principle,  others  on  the  principle  of  an  ethical 
order  which  was  more  explicitly  intellectual,  though 
still  comparatively  simple ;  in  either  case  they  rested 
on  primitive  unsophisticated  intuition.  Hence  they 
could  not  withstand  the  disruption  of  this  state  of 
mind  when  self-consciousness  was  infinitely  reflected 
into  itself ;  when  this  reflection  began  to  emerge,  they 
succumbed  to  it,  first  in  spirit  and  then  in  substance, 
because  the  simple  principle  underlying  them  lacked 
the  truly  infinite  power  to  be  found  only  in  that 
unity  which  allows  both  sides  of  the  antithesis  of 
reason  to  develop  themselves  separately  in  all  their 
strength  and  which  has  so  overcome  the  antithesis 
that  it  maintains  itself  in  it  and  integrates  it  in  it¬ 
self. 

In  his  Republic ,  Plato  displays  the  substance  of 
ethical  life  in  its  ideal  beauty  and  truth ;  but  he  could 
only  cope  with  the  principle  of  self-subsistent  par¬ 
ticularity,  which  in  his  day  had  forced  its  way  into 
Greek  ethical  life,  by  setting  up  in  opposition  to  it 
his  purely  substantial  state.  He  absolutely  excluded 
it  from  his  state,  even  in  its  very  beginnings  in  pri¬ 
vate  property  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  46)  and 
the  family,  as  well  as  in  its  more  mature  form  as  the 
subjective  will,  the  choice  of  a  social  position,  and 
so  forth.  It  is  this  defect  which  is  responsible  both 
for  the  misunderstanding  of  the  deep  and  substan¬ 
tial  truth  of  Plato’s  state  and  also  for  the  usual  view 
of  it  as  a  dream  of  abstract  thinking,  as  what  is 
often  called  a  “mere  ideal.”  The  principle  of  the  self- 
subsistent  inherently  infinite  personality  of  the  in¬ 
dividual,  the  principle  of  subjective  freedom,  is  de¬ 
nied  its  right  in  the  purely  substantial  form  which 
Plato  gave  to  mind  in  its  actuality.  This  principle 
dawned  in  an  inward  form  in  the  Christian  religion 
and  in  an  external  form  (and  therefore  in  one  linked 
with  abstract  universality)  in  the  Roman  world.  It 
is  historically  subsequent  to  the  Greek  world,  and 
the  philosophic  reflection  which  descends  to  its  depth 
is  likewise  subsequent  to  the  substantial  Idea  of 
Greek  philosophy.  [A.] 

186.  But  in  developing  itself  independently  to 
totality,  the  principle  of  particularity  passes 
over  into  universality,  and  only  there  does  it 
attain  its  truth  and  the  right  to  which  its  posi¬ 
tive  actuality  is  entitled.  This  unity  is  not  the 
identity  which  the  ethical  order  requires,  be¬ 
cause  at  this  level,  that  of  division  (see  Para¬ 
graph  184),  both  principles  are  self-subsistent. 
It  follows  that  this  unity  is  present  here  not  as 
freedom  but  as  necessity,  since  it  is  by  compul¬ 
sion  that  the  particular  rises  to  the  form  of  uni¬ 
versality  and  seeks  and  gains  its  stability  in  that 
form. 


ETHICAL  LIFE  65 


187.  Individuals  in  their  capacity  as  burghers1 
in  this  state  are  private  persons  whose  end  is 
their  own  interest.  This  end  is  mediated  through 
the  universal  which  thus  appears  as  a  means  to 
its  realization.  Consequently,  individuals  can  at¬ 
tain  their  ends  only  in  so  far  as  they  themselves 
determine  their  knowing,  willing,  and  acting  in 
a  universal  way  and  make  themselves  links  in 
this  chain  of  social  connexions.  In  these  circum¬ 
stances,  the  interest  of  the  Idea — an  interest  of 
which  these  members  of  civil  society  are  as  such 
unconscious — lies  in  the  process  whereby  their 
singularity  and  their  natural  condition  are  raised, 
as  a  result  of  the  necessities  imposed  by  nature 
as  well  as  of  arbitrary  needs,  to  formal  freedom 
and  formal  universality  of  knowing  and  willing 
— the  process  whereby  their  particularity  is  edu¬ 
cated  up  to  subjectivity. 

The  idea  that  the  state  of  nature  is  one  of  inno¬ 
cence  and  that  there  is  a  simplicity  of  manners  in 
uncivilized  ( ungebildeter )  peoples,  implies  treating 
education  ( Bildung )  as  something  purely  external, 
the  ally  of  corruption.  Similarly,  the  feeling  that 
needs,  their  satisfaction,  the  pleasures  and  comforts 
of  private  life,  and  so  forth,  are  absolute  ends,  im¬ 
plies  treating  education  as  a  mere  means  to  these 
ends.  Both  these  views  display  lack  of  acquaintance 
with  the  nature  of  mind  and  the  end  of  reason. Mind 
attains  its  actuality  only  by  creating  a  dualism  with¬ 
in  itself,  by  submitting  itself  to  physical  needs  and 
the  chain  of  these  external  necessities,  and  so  impos¬ 
ing  on  itself  this  barrier  and  this  finitude,  and  finally 
by  maturing  ( bildet )  itself  inwardly  even  when  un¬ 
der  this  barrier  until  it  overcomes  it  and  attains  its 
objective  reality  in  the  finite.  The  end  of  reason, 
therefore,  is  neither  the  manners  of  an  unsophisti¬ 
cated  state  of  nature,  nor,  as  particularity  develops, 
the  pleasure  for  pleasure’s  sake  which  education  pro¬ 
cures.  On  the  contrary,  its  end  is  to  banish  natural 
simplicity,  whether  the  passivity  which  is  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  the  self,  or  the  crude  type  of  knowing  and 
wiling,  i.e.  immediacy  and  singularity,  in  which 
mind  is  absorbed.  It  aims  in  the  first  instance  at  se¬ 
curing  for  this,  its  external  condition,  the  rationality 
of  which  it  is  capable,  i.e.  the  form  of  universality 
or  the  Understanding  (Verstandigkeit)  .By  this  means 
alone  does  mind  become  at  home  with  itself  within 
this  pure  externality.  There,  then,  mind’s  freedom 
is  existent  and  mind  becomes  objective  to  itself  in 
this  element  which  is  implicitly  inimical  to  mind’s 
appointed  end,  freedom ;  it  has  to  do  there  only  with 
what  it  has  itself  produced  and  stamped  with  its  seal. 
It  is  in  this  way  then  that  the  form  of  universality 
comes  explicitly  into  existence  in  thought,  and  this 
form  is  the  only  worthy  element  for  the  existence  of 
the  Idea.  The  final  purpose  of  education,  therefore, 
is  liberation  and  the  struggle  for  a  higher  liberation 
still;  education  is  the  absolute  transition  from  an 
ethical  substantiality  which  is  immediate  and  nat- 

1  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  190. — Ed. 


ural  to  the  one  which  is  intellectual  and  so  both  in¬ 
finitely  subjective  and  lofty  enough  to  have  attained 
universality  of  form.  In  the  individual  subject,  this 
liberation  is  the  hard  struggle  against  pure  subjec¬ 
tivity  of  demeanour,  against  the  immediacy  of  de¬ 
sire,  against  the  empty  subjectivity  of  feeling  and 
the  caprice  of  inclination.  The  disfavour  showered 
on  education  is  due  in  part  to  its  being  this  hard 
struggle;  but  it  is  through  this  educational  struggle 
that  the  subjective  will  itself  attains  objectivity 
within,  an  objectivity  in  which  alone  it  is  for  its 
part  capable  and  worthy  of  being  the  actuality  of 
the  Idea. 

Moreover,  this  form  of  universality — the  Under¬ 
standing,  to  which  particularity  has  worked  its  way 
and  developed  itself,  brings  it  about  at  the  same 
time  that  particularity  becomes  individuality  genu¬ 
inely  existent  in  its  own  eyes.  And  since  it  is  from 
this  particularity  that  the  universal  derives  the  con¬ 
tent  which  fills  it  as  well  as  its  character  as  infinite 
self-determination,  particularity  itself  is  present  in 
ethical  life  as  infinitely  independent  free  subjectivity. 
This  is  the  position  which  reveals  education  as  a 
moment  immanent  in  the  Absolute  and  which  makes 
plain  its  infinite  value.  [A.] 

188.  Civil  society  contains  three  moments: 

(A)  The  mediation  of  need  and  one  man’s  satis¬ 
faction  through  his  work  and  the  satisfaction 
of  the  needs  of  all  others — the  System  of  Needs. 

(B)  The  actuality  of  the  universal  principle  of 
freedom  therein  contained — the  protection  of 
property  through  the  Administration  of  Justice. 

(C)  Provision  against  contingencies  still  lurk¬ 
ing  in  systems  (A)  and  (B),  and  care  for  par¬ 
ticular  interests  as  a  common  interest,  by  means 
of  the  Police  and  the  Corporation. 

A.  The  System  of  Needs 

189.  Particularity  is  in  the  first  instance  char¬ 
acterized  in  general  by  its  contrast  with  the  uni¬ 
versal  principle  of  the  will  and  thus  is  subjective 
need  (see  Paragraph  59). 2  This  attains  its  ob¬ 
jectivity,  i.e.  its  satisfaction,  by  means  of  (a) 
external  things,  which  at  this  stage  are  likewise 
the  property  and  product  of  the  needs  and  wills 
of  others,  and  (f 3 )  work  and  effort,  the  middle 
term  between  the  subjective  and  the  objective. 
The  aim  here  is  the  satisfaction  of  subjective 
particularity,  but  the  universal  asserts  itself  in 
the  bearing  which  this  satisfaction  has  on  the 
needs  of  others  and  their  freearbitrary  wills.  The 
show  of  rationality  thus  produced  in  this  sphere 
of  finitude  is  the  Understanding,  and  this  is  the 
aspect  which  is  of  most  importance  in  consider¬ 
ing  this  sphere  and  which  itself  constitutes  the 
reconciling  element  within  it. 

Political  economy  is  the  science  which  starts  from 

2  All  editions  read  “60.” — Ed. 


66  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


this  view  of  needs  and  labour  but  then  has  the  task 
of  explaining  mass-relationships  and  mass-move¬ 
ments  in  their  complexity  and  their  qualitative  and 
quantitative  character.  This  is  one  of  the  sciences 
which  have  arisen  out  of  the  conditions  of  the  mod¬ 
ern  world.  Its  development  affords  the  interesting 
spectacle  (as  in  Smith,  Say,  and  Ricardo)  of  thought 
working  upon  the  endless  mass  of  details  which  con¬ 
front  it  at  the  outset  and  extracting  therefrom  the 
simple  principles  of  the  thing,  the  Understanding 
effective  in  the  thing  and  directing  it.  It  is  to  find 
reconciliation  here  to  discover  in  the  sphere  of  needs 
this  show  of  rationality  lying  in  the  thing  and  ef¬ 
fective  there ;  but  if  we  look  at  it  from  the  opposite 
point  of  view,  this  is  the  field  in  which  the  Under¬ 
standing  with  its  subjective  aims  and  moral  fancies 
vents  its  discontent  and  moral  frustration.  [A.] 

(a)  The  Kind  of  Need  and  Satisfaction 
[typical  of  civil  society] 

190.  An  animal’s  needs  and  its  ways  and  means 
of  satisfying  them  are  both  alike  restricted  in 
scope.  Though  man  is  subject  to  this  restriction 
too,  yet  at  the  same  time  he  evinces  his  tran¬ 
scendence  of  it  and  his  universality,  first  by  the 
multiplication  of  needs  and  means  of  satisfying 
them,  and  secondly  by  the  differentiation  and 
division  of  concrete  need  into  single  parts  and 
aspects  which  in  turn  become  different  needs, 
particularized  and  so  more  abstract. 

In  [abstract]  right,  what  we  had  before  us  was  the 
person;  in  the  sphere  of  morality,  the  subject;  in 
the  family,  the  family-member ;  in  civil  society  as  a 
whole,  the  burgher  or  bourgeois.  Here  at  the  stand¬ 
point  of  needs  (compare  Remark  to  Paragraph  123) 
what  we  have  before  us  is  the  composite  idea  which 
we  call  man.  Thus  this  is  the  first  time,  and  indeed 
properly  the  only  time,  to  speak  of  man  in  this 
sense.1  [A.] 

191.  Similarly,  the  means  to  particularized 
needs  and  all  the  various  ways  of  satisfying  these 
are  themselves  divided  and  multiplied  and  so  in 
turn  become  proximate  ends  and  abstract  needs. 
This  multiplication  goes  on  ad  infinitum;  taken 
as  a  whole,  it  is  refinement,  i.e.  a  discrimination 
between  these  multiplied  needs,  and  judgement 
on  the  suitability  of  means  to  their  ends.  [A.] 

192.  Needs  and  means,  as  things  existent  real- 
iter,  become  something  which  has  being  for  oth¬ 
ers  by  whose  needs  and  work  satisfaction  for  all 
alike  is  conditioned.  When  needs  and  means  be¬ 
come  abstract  in  quality  (see  Paragraph  191), 
abstraction  is  also  a  character  of  the  reciprocal 
relation  of  individuals  to  one  another.2  This  ab¬ 
stract  character,  universality,  is  the  character 

1See  Remark  to  Paragraph  209. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraphs  48,  49,  and  71. — Ed. 


of  being  recognized  and  is  the  moment  which 
makes  concrete,  i.e.  social,  the  isolated  and  ab¬ 
stract  needs  and  their  ways  and  means  of  satis¬ 
faction.  [A.] 

193.  This  social  moment  thus  becomes  a  par¬ 
ticular  end-determinant  for  means  in  themselves 
and  their  acquisition,  as  well  as  for  the  manner 
in  which  needs  are  satisfied.  Further,  it  directly 
involves  the  demand  for  equality  of  satisfaction 
with  others.  The  need  for  this  equality  and  for 
emulation,  which  is  the  equalizing  of  oneself 
with  others,  as  well  as  the  other  need  also  pres¬ 
ent  here,  the  need  of  the  particular  to  assert 
itself  in  some  distinctive  way,  become  them¬ 
selves  a  fruitful  source  of  the  multiplication  of 
needs  and  their  expansion. 

194.  Since  in  social  needs,  as  the  conjunction 
of  immediate  or  natural  needs  with  mental  needs 
arising  from  ideas,  it  is  needs  of  the  latter  type 
which  because  of  their  universality  make  them¬ 
selves  preponderant,  this  social  moment  has  in 
it  the  aspect  of  liberation,  i.e.  the  strict  natural 
necessity  of  need  is  obscured  and  man  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  his  own  opinion,  indeed  with  an 
opinion  which  is  universal,  and  with  a  necessity 
of  his  own  making  alone,  instead  of  with  an  ex¬ 
ternal  necessity,  an  inner  contingency,  and  mere 
caprice. 

The  idea  has  been  advanced  that  in  respect  of  his 
needs  man  lived  in  freedom  in  the  so-called  “state  of 
nature”  when  his  needs  were  supposed  to  be  con¬ 
fined  to  what  are  known  as  the  simple  necessities  of 
nature,  and  when  he  required  for  their  satisfaction 
only  the  means  which  the  accidents  of  nature  di¬ 
rectly  assured  to  him.  This  view  takes  no  account 
of  the  moment  of  liberation  intrinsic  to  work,  on 
which  see  the  following  Paragraphs.  And  apart  from 
this,  it  is  false,  because  to  be  confined  to  mere  phys¬ 
ical  needs  as  such  and  their  direct  satisfaction 
would  simply  be  the  condition  in  which  the  mental 
is  plunged  in  the  natural  and  so  would  be  one  of 
savagery  and  unfreedom,  while  freedom  itself  is  to 
be  found  only  in  the  reflection  of  mind  into  itself,  in 
mind’s  distinction  from  nature,  and  in  the  reflex  of 
mind  in  nature. 

195.  This  liberation  is  abstract  since  the  par¬ 
ticularity  of  the  ends  remains  their  basic  con¬ 
tent.  When  social  conditions  tend  to  multiply 
and  subdivide  needs,  means,  and  enjoyments  in¬ 
definitely — a  process  which,  like  the  distinction 
between  natural  and  refined  needs,  has  no  qual¬ 
itative  limits — this  is  luxury.  In  this  same  proc¬ 
ess,  however,  dependence  and  want  increase 
ad  infinitum,  and  the  material  to  meet  these  is 
permanently  barred  to  the  needy  man  because  it 
consists  of  external  objects  with  the  special  char- 


67 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


acter  of  being  property,  the  embodiment  of  the 
free  will  of  others,  and  hence  from  his  point  of 
view  its  recalcitrance  is  absolute.1  [A.] 

Q 3 )  The  Kind  of  Work  [typical  of  civil  society] 

196.  The  means  of  acquiring  and  preparing  the 
particularized  means  appropriate  to  our  similar¬ 
ly  particularized  needs  is  work.  Through  work 
the  raw  material  directly  supplied  by  nature  is 
specifically  adapted  to  these  numerous  ends  by 
all  sorts  of  different  processes.  Now  this  forma¬ 
tive  change  confers  value  on  means  and  gives 
them  their  utility,  and  hence  man  in  what  he 
consumes  is  mainly  concerned  with  the  products 
of  men.  It  is  the  products  of  human  effort  which 
man  consumes.  [A.] 

197.  The  multiplicity  of  objects  and  situations 
which  excite  interest  is  the  stage  on  which  theo¬ 
retical  education  develops.  This  education  con¬ 
sists  in  possessing  not  simply  a  multiplicity  of 
ideas  and  facts,  but  also  a  flexibility  and  rapidity 
of  mind,  ability  to  pass  from  one  idea  to  another, 
to  grasp  complex  and  general  relations,  and  so  on. 
It  is  the  education  of  the  understanding  in  every 
way,  and  so  also  the  building  up  of  language. 
Practical  education,  acquired  through  working, 
consists  first  in  the  automatically  recurrent  need 
for  something  to  do  and  the  habit  of  simply  be¬ 
ing  busy;  next,  in  the  strict  adaptation  of  one’s 
activity  according  not  only  to  the  nature  of  the 
material  worked  on,  but  also,  and  especially,  to 
the  pleasure  of  other  workers;  and  finally,  in  a 
habit,  produced  by  this  discipline,  of  objective 
activity  and  universally  recognized  aptitudes. 
[A.]  ' 

198.  The  universal  and  objective  element  in 
work,  on  the  other  hand,  lies  in  the  abstracting 
process  which  effects  the  subdivision  of  needs 
and  means  and  thereby  eo  ipso  subdivides  pro¬ 
duction  and  brings  about  the  division  of  labour. 
By  this  division,  the  work  of  the  individual  be¬ 
comes  less  complex,  and  consequently  his  skill 
at  his  section  of  the  job  increases,  like  his  out¬ 
put.  At  the  same  time,  this  abstraction  of  one 
man’s  skill  and  means  of  production  from  an¬ 
other’s  completes  and  makes  necessary  every¬ 
where  the  dependence  of  men  on  one  another 
and  their  reciprocal  relation  in  the  satisfaction 
of  their  other  needs.  Further,  the  abstraction  of 
one  man’s  production  from  another’s  makes 
work  more  and  more  mechanical,  until  finally 
man  is  able  to  step  aside  and  install  machines  in 
his  place. 

1  See  Paragraphs  241-2. — Ed. 


(y)  Capital  [and  class-divisions]  2 

199.  When  men  are  thus  dependent  on  one  an¬ 
other  and  reciprocally  related  to  one  another  in 
their  work  and  the  satisfaction  of  their  needs, 
subjective  self-seeking  turns  into  a  contribution 
to  the  satisfaction  of  the  needs  of  everyone  else. 
That  is  to  say,  by  a  dialectical  advance,  subjec¬ 
tive  self-seeking  turns  into  the  mediation  of  the 
particular  through  the  universal,  with  the  result 
that  each  man  in  earning,  producing,  and  enjoy¬ 
ing  on  his  own  account  is  eo  ipso  producing  and 
earning  for  the  enjoyment  of  everyone  else.  The 
compulsion  which  brings  this  about  is  rooted  in 
the  complex  interdependence  of  each  on  all, 
and  it  now  presents  itself  to  each  as  the  universal 
permanent  capital  (see  Paragraph  170)  which 
gives  each  the  opportunity,  by  the  exercise  of 
his  education  and  skill,  to  draw  a  share  from 
it  and  so  be  assured  of  his  livelihood,  while  what 
he  thus  earns  by  means  of  his  work  maintains 
and  increases  the  general  capital. 

200.  A  particular  man’s  resources,  or  in  other 
words  his  opportunity  of  sharing  in  the  general 
resources,  are  conditioned,  however,  partly  by 
his  own  unearned  principal  (his  capital),  and 
partly  by  his  skill ;  this  in  turn  is  itself  depend¬ 
ent  not  only  on  his  capital,  but  also  on  accidental 
circumstances  whose  multiplicity  introduces  dif¬ 
ferences  in  the  development  of  natural,  bodily, 
and  mental  characteristics,  which  were  already 
in  themselves  dissimilar.  In  this  sphere  of  par¬ 
ticularity,  these  differences  are  conspicuous  in 
every  direction  and  on  every  level,  and,  together 
with  the  arbitrariness  and  accident  which  this 
sphere  contains  as  well,  they  have  as  their  in¬ 
evitable  consequence  disparities  of  individual 
resources  and  ability. 

The  objective  right  of  the  particularity  of  mind  is 
contained  in  the  Idea.  Men  are  made  unequal  by 
nature,  where  inequality  is  in  its  element,  and  in 
civil  society  the  right  of  particularity  is  so  far  from 
annulling  this  natural  inequality  that  it  produces  it 
out  of  mind  and  raises  it  to  an  inequality  of  skill 
and  resources,  and  even  to  one  of  moral  and  intel¬ 
lectual  attainment.  To  oppose  to  this  right  a  demand 
for  equality  is  a  folly  of  the  Understanding  which 
takes  as  real  and  rational  its  abstract  equality  and 
its  “ought-to-be.” 

This  sphere  of  particularity,  which  fancies  itself 
the  universal,  is  still  only  relatively  identical  with 
the  universal,  and  consequently  it  still  retains  in  it¬ 
self  the  particularity  of  nature,  i.e.  arbitrariness,  or 
in  other  words  the  relics  of  the  state  of  nature.  Fur¬ 
ther,  it  is  reason,  immanent  in  the  restless  system 
of  human  needs,  which  articulates  it  into  an  organic 

2  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  326  and  to  303. — Ed. 


68  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


whole  with  different  members  (see  the  following 
Paragraph) . 

201.  The  infinitely  complex,  criss-cross,  move¬ 
ments  of  reciprocal  production  and  exchange, 
and  the  equally  infinite  multiplicity  of  means 
therein  employed,  become  crystallized,  owing  to 
the  universality  inherent  in  their  content,  and 
distinguished  into  general  groups.  As  a  result, 
the  entire  complex  is  built  up  into  particular 
systems  of  needs,  means,  and  types  of  work  rela¬ 
tive  to  these  needs,  modes  of  satisfaction  and  of 
theoretical  and  practical  education,  i.e.  into  sys¬ 
tems,  to  one  or  other  of  which  individuals  are  as¬ 
signed — in  other  words, into  class-divisions.  [A.] 

202.  The  classes  are  specifically  determined  in 
accordance  with  the  concept  as  (a)  the  sub¬ 
stantial  or  immediate  [or  agricultural]  class; 
( b )  the  reflecting  or  formal  [or  business]  class; 
and  finally,  (c)  the  universal  class  [the  class  of 
civil  servants]. 

203.  (a)  The  substantial  [or  agricultural]  class 
has  its  capital  in  the  natural  products  of  the  soil 
which  it  cultivates — soil  which  is  capable  of  ex¬ 
clusively  private  ownership  and  which  demands 
formation  in  an  objective  way  and  not  mere 
haphazard  exploitation.  In  face  of  the  connex¬ 
ion  of  [agricultural]  work  and  its  fruits  with 
separate  and  fixed  times  of  the  year,  and  the  de¬ 
pendence  of  harvests  on  the  variability  of  nat¬ 
ural  processes,  the  aim  of  need  in  this  class  turns 
into  provision  for  the  future;  but  owing  to  the 
conditions  here,  the  agricultural  mode  of  sub¬ 
sistence  remains  one  which  owes  comparatively 
little  to  reflection  and  independence  of  will,  and 
this  mode  of  life  is  in  general  such  that  this  class 
has  the  substantial  disposition  of  an  ethical  life 
which  is  immediate,  resting  on  family  relation¬ 
ship  and  trust. 

The  real  beginning  and  original  foundation  of  states 
has  been  rightly  ascribed  to  the  introduction  of  agri¬ 
culture  along  with  marriage,  because  the  principle 
of  agriculture  brings  with  it  the  formation  of  the 
land  and  consequentially  exclusively  private  property 
(compare  Remark  to  Paragraph  170) ;  the  nomadic 
life  of  savages,  who  seek  their  livelihood  from  place 
to  place,  it  brings  back  to  the  tranquillity  of  private 
rights  and  the  assured  satisfaction  of  their  needs. 
Along  with  these  changes,  sexual  love  is  restricted  to 
marriage,  and  this  bond  in  turn  grows  into  an  en¬ 
during  league,  inherently  universal,  while  needs  ex¬ 
pand  into  care  for  a  family,  and  personal  possessions 
into  famib'  goods.  Security,  consolidation,  lasting 
satisfaction  of  needs,  and  so  forth — things  which  are 
the  most  obvious  recommendations  of  marriage  and 
agriculture — are  nothing  but  forms  of  universality, 
modes  in  which  rationality,  the  final  end  and  aim, 
asserts  itself  in  these  spheres. 


In  this  matter,  nothing  is  of  more  interest  than  the 
ingenious  and  learned  explanations  which  my  dis¬ 
tinguished  friend,  Herr  Creuzer,  has  given  1  of  the 
agrarian  festivals,  images,  and  sanctuaries  of  the  an¬ 
cients.  He  shows  that  it  was  because  the  ancients 
themselves  had  become  conscious  of  the  divine  ori¬ 
gin  of  agriculture  and  other  institutions  associated 
with  it  that  they  held  them  in  such  religious  venera¬ 
tion. 

In  course  of  time,  the  character  of  this  class  as 
“substantial”  undergoes  modifications  through  the 
working  of  the  civil  law,  in  particular  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  justice,  as  well  as  through  the  working  of 
education,  instruction,  and  religion.  These  modifica¬ 
tions,  which  occur  in  the  other  classes  also,  do  not 
affect  the  substantial  content  of  the  class  but  only 
its  form  and  the  development  of  its  power  of  reflec¬ 
tion.  [A.] 

204.  (b)  The  business  class  has  for  its  task  the 
adaptation  of  raw  materials,  and  for  its  means 
of  livelihood  it  is  thrown  back  on  its  work,  on 
reflection  and  intelligence,  and  essentially  on 
the  mediation  of  one  man’s  needs  and  work  with 
those  of  others.  For  what  this  class  produces 
and  enjoys,  it  has  mainly  itself,  its  own  industry, 
to  thank.  The  task  of  this  class  is  subdivided 
into 

(a)  work  to  satisfy  single  needs  in  a  compara¬ 
tively  concrete  way  and  to  supply  single  orders 
— craftsmanship; 

(/ 3 )  work  of  a  more  abstract  kind,  mass- 
production  to  satisfy  single  needs,  but  needs  in 
more  universal  demand — manufacture; 

(y)  the  business  of  exchange,  whereby  sepa¬ 
rate  utilities  are  exchanged  the  one  for  the 
other,  principally  through  the  use  of  the  uni¬ 
versal  medium  of  exchange,  money,  which  ac¬ 
tualizes  the  abstract  value  of  all  commodities — 
trade.  [A.] 

205.  ( c )  The  universal  class  [the  class  of  civil 
servants]  has  for  its  task  the  universal  interests 
of  the  community.  It  must  therefore  be  relieved 
from  direct  labour  to  supply  its  needs,  either  by 
having  private  means  or  by  receiving  an  allow¬ 
ance  from  the  state  which  claims  its  industry, 
with  the  result  that  private  interest  finds  its 
satisfaction  in  its  work  for  the  universal. 

206.  It  is  in  accordance  with  the  concept  that 
class-organization,  as  particularity  become  ob¬ 
jective  to  itself,  is  split  in  this  way  into  its  gen¬ 
eral  divisions.  But  the  question  of  the  particular 
class  to  which  an  individual  is  to  belong  is  one 
on  which  natural  capacity,  birth,  and  other  cir¬ 
cumstances  have  their  influence,  though  the  es- 

1  Notably  in  the  fourth  volume  of  his  Mythologie  und 
Symbolik. 


ETHICAL  LIFE  69 


sential  and  final  determining  factors  are  subjec¬ 
tive  opinion  and  the  individual’s  arbitrary  will, 
which  win  in  this  sphere  their  right,  their  merit, 
and  their  dignity.  Hence  what  happens  here  by 
inner  necessity  occurs  at  the  same  time  by  the 
mediation  of  the  arbitrary  will,  and  to  the  con¬ 
scious  subject  it  has  the  shape  of  being  the  work 
of  his  own  will. 

In  this  respect  too  there  is  a  conspicuous  difference, 
in  relation  to  the  principle  of  particularity  and  the 
subject’s  arbitrary  will,  between  the  political  life  of 
the  east  and  the  west,  and  also  between  that  of  the 
ancient  and  the  modern  world.  In  the  former,  the 
division  of  the  whole  into  classes  came  about  ob¬ 
jectively  of  itself,  because  it  is  inherently  rational ; 
but  the  principle  of  subjective  particularity  was  at 
the  same  time  denied  its  rights,  in  that,  for  example, 
the  allotment  of  individuals  to  classes  was  left  to  the 
ruling  class,  as  in  Plato’s  Republic /  or  to  the  acci¬ 
dent  of  birth,  as  in  the  Indian  caste-system.  Thus 
subjective  particularity  was  not  incorporated  into 
the  organization  of  society  as  a  whole ;  it  was  not 
reconciled  in  the  whole,  and  therefore — since  as  an 
essential  moment  it  emerges  there  in  any  event — it 
shows  itself  there  as  something  hostile,  as  a  corrup¬ 
tion  of  the  social  order  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph 
185).  Either  it  overthrows  society,  as  happened  in 
the  Greek  states  and  in  the  Roman  Republic;  or 
else,  should  society  preserve  itself  in  being  as  a  force 
or  as  a  religious  authority,  for  instance,  it  appears 
as  inner  corruption  and  complete  degeneration,  as 
was  the  case  to  some  extent  in  Sparta  and  is  now 
altogether  the  case  in  India. 

But  when  subjective  particularity  is  upheld  by  the 
objective  order  in  conformity  with  it  and  is  at  the 
same  time  allowed  its  rights,  then  it  becomes  the  ani¬ 
mating  principle  of  the  entire  civil  society,  of  the 
development  alike  of  mental  activity,  merit,  and 
dignity.  The  recognition  and  the  right  that  what  is 
brought  about  by  reason  of  necessity  in  civil  society 
and  the  state  shall  at  the  same  time  be  effected  by 
the  mediation  of  the  arbitrary  will  is  the  more  pre¬ 
cise  definition  of  what  is  primarily  meant  by  free¬ 
dom  in  common  parlance  (see  Paragraph  121). 

207.  A  man  actualizes  himself  only  in  becom¬ 
ing  something  definite,  i.e.  something  specifical¬ 
ly  particularized ;  this  means  restricting  himself 
exclusively  to  one  of  the  particular  spheres  of 
need.  In  this  class  system,  the  ethical  frame  of 
mind  therefore  is  rectitude  and  esprit  de  corps , 
i.e.  the  disposition  to  make  oneself  a  member 
of  one  of  the  moments  of  civil  society  by  one’s 
own  act,  through  one’s  energy,  industry,  and 
skill,  to  maintain  oneself  in  this  position,  and  to 
fend  for  oneself  only  through  this  process  of 
mediating  oneself  with  the  universal,  while  in 
this  way  gaining  recognition  both  in  one’s  own 
eyes  and  in  the  eyes  of  others.  Morality  has  its 

1  Book  iii  [415]. 


proper  place  in  this  sphere  where  the  paramount 
thing  is  reflection  on  one’s  doings,  and  the  quest 
of  happiness  and  private  wants,  and  where  the 
contingency  in  satisfying  these  makes  into  a 
duty  even  a  single  and  contingent  act  of  assist¬ 
ance. 

At  first  (i.e.  especially  in  youth)  a  man  chafes  at 
the  idea  of  resolving  on  a  particular  social  position, 
and  looks  upon  this  as  a  restriction  on  his  universal 
character  and  as  a  necessity  imposed  on  him  purely 
ab  extra.  This  is  because  his  thinking  is  still  of  that 
abstract  kind  which  refuses  to  move  beyond  the  uni¬ 
versal  and  so  never  reaches  the  actual.  It  does  not 
realize  that  if  the  concept  is  to  be  determinate,  it 
must  first  of  all  advance  into  the  distinction  between 
the  concept  and  its  real  existence  and  thereby  into 
determinacy  and  particularity  (see  Paragraph  7) .  It 
is  only  thus  that  the  concept  can  win  actuality  and 
ethical  objectivity.  [A.] 

208.  As  the  private  particularity  of  knowing 
and  willing,  the  principle  of  this  system  of  needs 
contains  absolute  universality,  the  universality 
of  freedom,  only  abstractly  and  therefore  as  the 
right  of  property.  At  this  point,  however,  this 
right  is  no  longer  merely  implicit  but  has  at¬ 
tained  its  recognized  actuality  as  the  protection 
of  property  through  the  administration  of  jus¬ 
tice. 

B.  The  Administration  of  Justice 

209.  The  relatedness  arising  from  the  recipro¬ 
cal  bearing  on  one  another  of  needs  and  work  to 
satisfy  these  is  first  of  all  reflected  into  itself  as 
infinite  personality,  as  abstract  right.2  But  it  is 
this  very  sphere  of  relatedness — a  sphere  of 
education — which  gives  abstract  right  the  deter¬ 
minate  existence  of  being  something  universally 
recognized,  known,  and  willed,  and  having  a 
validity  and  an  objective  actuality  mediated  by 
this  known  and  willed  character. 

It  is  part  of  education,  of  thinking  as  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  the  single  in  the  form  of  universality,  that  the 
ego  comes  to  be  apprehended  as  a  universal  person 
in  which  all  are  identical.  A  man  counts  as  a  man 
in  virtue  of  his  manhood  alone,  not  because  he  is  a 
Jew,  Catholic,  Protestant,  German,  Italian,  &c.  This 
is  an  assertion  which  thinking  ratifies  and  to  be  con¬ 
scious  of  it  is  of  infinite  importance.  It  is  defective 
only  when  it  is  crystallized,  e.g.  as  a  cosmopolitan¬ 
ism  in  opposition  to  the  concrete  life  of  the  state. 
[A.] 

210.  The  objective  actuality  of  the  right  con¬ 
sists,  first,  in  its  existence  for  consciousness,  in 
its  being  known  in  some  way  or  other;  secondly, 
in  its  possessing  the  power  which  the  actual  pos¬ 
sesses,  in  its  being  valid,  and  so  also  in  its  be- 

2  See  Paragraph  187. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


coming  known  as  universally  valid. 

(a)  Right  as  Law 

21 1.  The  principle  of  rightness  becomes  the 
law  ( Gesetz )  when,  in  its  objective  existence,  it 
is  posited  ( gesetzt ),  i.e.  when  thinking  makes  it 
determinate  for  consciousness  and  makes  it 
known  as  what  is  right  and  valid;  and  in  ac¬ 
quiring  this  determinate  character,  the  right  be¬ 
comes  positive  law  in  general. 

To  posit  something  as  universal,  i.e.  to  bring  it  be¬ 
fore  consciousness  as  universal,  is,  I  need  hardly  say, 
to  think  (compare  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  13  and 
21).  Thereby  its  content  is  reduced  to  its  simplest 
form  and  so  is  given  its  final  determinacy.  In  becom¬ 
ing  law,  what  is  right  acquires  for  the  first  time  not 
only  the  torm  proper  to  its  universality,  but  also 
its  true  determinacy.  Hence  making  a  law  is  not  to 
be  represented  as  merely  the  expression  of  a  rule  of 
behaviour  valid  for  everyone,  though  that  is  one 
moment  in  legislation;  the  more  important  mo¬ 
ment,  the  inner  essence  of  the  matter,  is  knowledge 
of  the  content  of  the  law  in  its  determinate  uni¬ 
versality. 

Since  it  is  only  animals  which  have  their  law  as  in¬ 
stinct,  while  it  is  man  alone  who  has  law  as  custom, 
even  systems  of  customary  law  contain  the  moment 
of  being  thoughts  and  being  known.  Their  differ¬ 
ence  from  positive  law  consists  solely  in  this,  that  they 
are  known  only  in  a  subjective  and  accidental  way, 
with  the  result  that  in  themselves  they  are  less  deter¬ 
minate  and  the  universality  of  thought  is  less  clear 
in  them.  (And  apart  from  this,  knowledge  of  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  law  either  in  general  or  in  its  details,  is  the 
accidental  possession  of  a  few.)  The  supposition  that 
it  is  customary  law,  on  the  strength  of  its  character 
as  custom,  which  possesses  the  privilege  of  having 
become  part  of  life  is  a  delusion,  since  the  valid 
laws  of  a  nation  do  not  cease  to  be  its  customs  by 
being  written  and  codified — and  besides,  it  is  as  a 
rule  precisely  those  versed  in  the  deadest  of  topics 
and  the  deadest  of  thoughts  who  talk  nowadays  of 
“life”  and  of  “becoming  part  of  life.”  When  a  na¬ 
tion  begins  to  acquire  even  a  little  culture,  its  cus¬ 
tomary  law  must  soon  come  to  be  collected  and  put 
together.  Such  a  collection  is  a  legal  code,  but  one 
which,  as  a  mere  collection,  is  markedly  formless,  in¬ 
determinate,  and  fragmentary.  The  main  difference 
between  it  and  a  code  properly  so-called  is  that  in 
the  latter  the  principles  of  jurisprudence  in  their  uni¬ 
versality,  and  so  in  their  determinacy,  have  been 
apprehended  in  terms  of  thought  and  expressed.  Eng¬ 
lish  national  law  or  municipal  law  is  contained,  as  is 
well  known,  in  statutes  (written  laws)  and  in  so- 
called  “unwritten”  laws.  This  unwritten  law,  how¬ 
ever,  is  as  good  as  written,  and  knowledge  of  it  may, 
and  indeed  must,  be  acquired  simply  by  reading  the 
numerous  quartos  which  it  fills.  The  monstrous  con¬ 
fusion,  however,  which  prevails  both  in  English  law 
and  its  administration  is  graphically  portrayed  by 
those  acquainted  with  the  matter.  In  particular, 


they  comment  on  the  fact  that,  since  this  unwritten 
law  is  contained  in  court  verdicts  and  judgements, 
the  judges  are  continually  legislators.  The  authority 
of  precedent  is  binding  on  them,  since  their  predeces¬ 
sors  have  done  nothing  but  give  expression  to  the  un¬ 
written  law;  and  yet  they  are  just  as  much  exempt 
from  its  authority,  because  they  are  themselves  re¬ 
positories  of  the  unwritten  law  and  so  have  the  right 
to  criticize  previous  judgements  and  pronounce 
whether  they  accorded  with  the  unwritten  law  or 
not. 

A  similar  confusion  might  have  arisen  in  the  legal 
system  of  the  later  Roman  Empire  owing  to  the  dif¬ 
ferent  but  authoritative  judgements  of  all  the  famous 
jurists.  An  Emperor  met  the  situation,  however,  by 
a  sensible  expedient  when,  by  what  was  called  the 
Law  of  Citations,  he  set  up  a  kind  of  College  of  the 
jurists  who  were  longest  deceased.  There  was  a 
President,  and  the  majority  vote  was  accepted.1 

No  greater  insult  could  be  offered  to  a  civilized 
people  or  to  its  lawyers  than  to  deny  them  ability 
to  codify  their  law ;  for  such  ability  cannot  be  that 
of  constructing  a  legal  system  with  a  novel  content, 
but  only  that  of  apprehending,  i.e.  grasping  in 
thought,  the  content  of  existing  laws  in  its  determi¬ 
nate  universality  and  then  applying  them  to  particu¬ 
lar  cases.  [A.] 

212.  It  is  only  because  of  this  identity  between 
its  implicit  and  its  posited  character  that  posi¬ 
tive  law  has  obligatory  force  in  virtue  of  its 
rightness.  In  being  posited  in  positive  law,  the 
right  acquires  determinate  existence.  Into  such 
existence  there  may  enter  the  contingency  of 
self-will  and  other  particular  circumstances  and 
hence  there  may  be  a  discrepancy  between  the 
content  of  the  law  and  the  principle  of  right¬ 
ness. 

In  positive  law,  therefore,  it  is  the  legal  which  is 
the  source  of  our  knowledge  of  what  is  right,  or, 
more  exactly,  of  our  legal  rights  (Rechtens) .  Thus 
the  science  of  positive  law  is  to  that  extent  an  his¬ 
torical  science  with  authority  as  its  guiding  princi¬ 
ple.  Anything  over  and  above  this  historical  study 
is  matter  for  the  Understanding  and  concerns  the 
collection  of  laws,  their  classification  on  external 
principles,  deductions  from  them,  their  application 
to  fresh  details,  &c.  When  the  Understanding  med¬ 
dles  with  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself,  its  theories, 
e.g.  of  criminal  law,  show  what  its  deductive  argu¬ 
mentation  can  concoct. 

The  science  of  positive  law  has  not  only  the  right, 
but  even  the  inescapable  duty,  to  study  given  laws, 
to  deduce  from  its  positive  data  their  progress  in  his¬ 
tory,  their  applications  and  subdivisions,  down  to 
the  last  detail,  and  to  exhibit  their  implications.  On 
the  other  hand,  if,  after  all  these  deductions  have 
been  proved,  the  further  question  about  the  ration¬ 
ality  of  a  specific  law  is  still  raised,  the  question  may 

1  Hugo:  Lehr  buck  der  Geschichtedes  romischen  Rechts, 
§  354  [§  385  in  the  7th  edn.]. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


seem  perverse  to  those  who  are  busied  with  these 
pursuits,  but  their  astonishment  at  it  should  at 
least  stop  short  of  dismay. 

With  this  Remark,  compare  what  was  said  in  the 
Remark  to  Paragraph  3  about  “understanding”  the 
law. 

213.  Right  becomes  determinate  in  the  first 
place  when  it  has  the  form  of  being  posited  as 
positive  law;  it  also  becomes  determinate  in 
content  by  being  applied  both  to  the  material  of 
civil  society  (i.e.  to  the  endlessly  growing  com¬ 
plexity  and  subdivision  of  social  ties  and  the 
different  species  of  property  and  contract  within 
the  society)  and  also  to  ethical  ties  based  on  the 
heart,  on  love  and  trust,  though  only  in  so  far 
as  these  involve  abstract  right  as  one  of  their 
aspects  (see  Paragraph  159).  Morality  and  mor¬ 
al  commands  concern  the  will  on  its  most  pri¬ 
vate,  subjective,  and  particular  side,  and  so  can¬ 
not  be  a  matter  for  positive  legislation.  Further 
material  for  the  determinate  content  of  law  is 
provided  by  the  rights  and  duties  which  have 
their  source  in  the  administration  of  justice  it¬ 
self,  in  the  state,  and  so  forth.  [A.] 

214.  But  apart  from  being  applied  to  particular 
instances,  right  by  being  embodied  in  positive 
law  becomes  applicable  to  the  single  case.  Hence 
it  enters  the  sphere  where  quantity,  not  the  con¬ 
cept,  is  the  principle  of  determination.  This  is 
the  sphere  of  the  quantitative  as  such,  of  the 
quantitative  as  that  which  determines  the  rela¬ 
tive  value  in  exchange  of  qualia.  In  this  sphere, 
the  concept  merely  lays  down  a  general  limit, 
within  which  vacillation  is  still  allowed.  This 
vacillation  must  be  terminated,  however,  in  the 
interest  of  getting  something  done,  and  for  this 
reason  there  is  a  place  within  that  limit  for  con¬ 
tingent  and  arbitrary  decisions. 

The  purely  positive  side  of  law  lies  chiefly  in  this 
focusing  of  the  universal  not  merely  on  a  particular 
instance,  but  on  an  isolated  case,  i.e.  in  its  direct  ap¬ 
plication.  Reason  cannot  determine,  nor  can  the  con¬ 
cept  provide  any  principle  whose  application  could 
decide  whether  justice  requires  for  an  offence  (i)  a 
corporal  punishment  of  forty  lashes  or  thirty-nine, 
or  (ii)  a  fine  of  five  dollars  or  four  dollars  ninety- 
three,  four,  &c.,  cents,  or  (iii)  imprisonment  of  a 
year  or  three  hundred  and  sixty-four,  three,  &c., 
days,  or  a  year  and  one,  two,  or  three  days.  And  yet 
injustice  is  done  at  once  if  there  is  one  lash  too  many, 
or  one  dollar  or  one  cent,  one  week  in  prison  or  one 
day,  too  many  or  too  few. 

Reason  itself  requires  us  to  recognize  that  contin¬ 
gency,  contradiction,  and  show  have  a  sphere  and 
a  right  of  their  own,  restricted  though  it  be,  and  it 
is  irrational  to  strive  to  resolve  and  rectify  contra¬ 
dictions  within  that  sphere.  Here  the  only  interest 


71 

present  is  that  something  be  actually  done,  that  the 
matter  be  settled  and  decided  somehow,  no  matter 
how  (within  a  certain  limit) .  This  decision  pertains 
to  abstract  subjectivity,  to  formal  self-certainty, 
which  may  decide  either  by  simply  holding  to  its 
power  (within  that  limit)  of  settling  the  matter  by 
merely  terminating  deliberation  and  thereby  dismiss¬ 
ing  it  out  of  hand,  or  else  by  adopting  some  reason 
for  decision  such  as  keeping  to  round  numbers  or  al¬ 
ways  adopting,  say  thirty -nine. 

It  is  true  that  the  law  does  not  settle  these  ultimate 
decisions  required  by  actual  life ;  it  leaves  them  in¬ 
stead  to  the  judge’s  discretion,  merely  limiting  him 
by  a  maximum  and  minimum.  But  this  does  not  af¬ 
fect  the  point  at  issue,  because  the  maximum  and 
minimum  are  themselves  in  every  instance  only 
round  numbers  once  more.  To  fix  them,  therefore, 
does  not  exempt  the  judge  from  making  a  finite, 
purely  positive,  decision,  since  on  the  contrary  such 
a  decision  is  still  left  to  him  by  the  necessities  of  the 
case.  [A.] 

(ft)  Law  determinately  existent 

215.  If  laws  are  to  have  a  binding  force,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that,  in  view  of  the  right  of  self-conscious¬ 
ness  (see  Paragraph  132  and  the  Remark  there¬ 
to)  they  must  be  made  universally  known. 

To  hang  the  laws  so  high  that  no  citizen  could 
read  them  (as  Dionysius  the  Tyrant  did)  is  injustice 
of  one  and  the  same  kind  as  to  bury  them  in  row 
upon  row  of  learned  tomes,  collections  of  dissenting 
judgements  and  opinions,  records  of  customs,  &c., 
and  in  a  dead  language  too,  so  that  knowledge  of  the 
law  of  the  land  is  accessible  only  to  those  who  have 
made  it  their  professional  study.  Rulers  who  have 
given  a  national  law  to  their  peoples  in  the  form  of 
a  well-arranged  and  clear-cut  legal  code — or  even 
a  mere  formless  collection  of  laws,  like  Justinian’s — 
have  been  the  greatest  benefactors  of  their  peoples 
and  have  received  thanks  and  praise  for  their  benefi¬ 
cence.  But  the  truth  is  that  their  work  was  at  the 
same  time  a  great  act  of  justice.  [A.] 

216.  For  a  public  legal  code,  simple  general 
laws  are  required,  and  yet  the  nature  of  the 
finite  material  to  which  law  is  applied  leads  to 
the  further  determining  of  general  laws  ad 
infinitum.  On  the  one  hand,  the  law  ought  to  be 
a  comprehensive  whole,  closed  and  complete; 
and  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  the  need  for  further 
determinations  is  continual.  But  since  this  an¬ 
tinomy  arises  only  when  universal  principles, 
which  remain  fixed  and  unchanged,  are  applied 
to  particular  types  of  case,  the  right  to  a  com¬ 
plete  legal  code  remains  unimpaired,  like  the 
right  that  these  simple  general  principles  should 
be  capable  of  being  laid  down  and  understood 
apart  and  in  distinction  from  their  application 
to  such  particular  types. 

A  fruitful  source  of  complexity  in  legislation  is  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


gradual  intrusion  of  reason,  of  what  is  inherently 
and  actually  right,  into  primitive  institutions  which 
have  something  wrong  at  their  roots  and  so  are  pure¬ 
ly  historical  survivals.  This  occurred  in  Roman  law, 
as  was  remarked  above  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph 
180),  in  medieval  feudal  law,  &c.  It  is  essential  to 
notice,  however,  that  the  very  nature  of  the  finite 
material  to  which  law  is  applied  necessarily  entails 
an  infinite  progress  in  the  application  to  it  of  princi¬ 
ples  universal  in  themselves  and  inherently  and  ac¬ 
tually  rational. 

It  is  misunderstanding  which  has  given  rise  alike  to 
the  demand — a  morbid  craving  of  German  scholars 
chiefly — that  a  legal  code  should  be  something  ab¬ 
solutely  complete,  incapable  of  any  fresh  determina¬ 
tion  in  detail,  and  also  to  the  argument  that  because 
a  code  is  incapable  of  such  completion,  therefore  we 
ought  not  to  produce  something  “incomplete,”  i.e. 
we  ought  not  to  produce  a  code  at  all.  The  misunder¬ 
standing  rests  in  both  cases  on  a  misconception  of  the 
nature  of  a  finite  subject-matter  like  private  law, 
whose  so-called  “completeness”  is  a  perennial  ap¬ 
proximation  to  completeness,  on  a  misconception  of 
the  difference  between  the  universal  of  reason  and 
the  universal  of  the  Understanding,  and  also  on  the 
application  of  the  latter  to  the  material  of  finitude 
and  atomicity  which  goes  on  for  ever. — Le  plus 
grand  ennemi  du  Bien,  c’est  le  Meilleur  is  the  utter¬ 
ance  of  true  common  sense  against  the  common 
sense  of  idle  argumentation  and  abstract  reflection. 
[A.] 

217.  The  principle  of  rightness  passes  over  in 
civil  society  into  law.  My  individual  right,  whose 
embodiment  has  hitherto  been  immediate  and 
abstract,  now  similarly  becomes  embodied  in 
the  existent  will  and  knowledge  of  everyone,  in 
the  sense  that  it  becomes  recognized.  Hence 
property  acquisitions  and  transfers  must  now 
be  undertaken  and  concluded  only  in  the  form 
which  that  embodiment  gives  to  them.  In  civil 
society,  property  rests  on  contract  and  on  the 
formalities  which  make  ownership  capable  of 
proof  and  valid  in  law. 

Original,  i.e.  direct,  titles  and  means  of  acquisition 
(see  Paragraphs  54  ff.)  are  simply  discarded  in  civil 
society  and  appear  only  as  isolated  accidents  or  as 
subordinated  factors  of  property  transactions.  It  is 
either  feeling,  refusing  to  move  beyond  the  subjec¬ 
tive,  or  reflection,  clinging  to  its  abstract  essences, 
which  casts  formalities  aside,  while  the  dry-as-dust 
Understanding  may  for  its  part  cling  to  formalities 
instead  of  the  real  thing  and  multiply  them  indefi¬ 
nitely. 

Apart  from  this,  however,  the  march  of  mental  de¬ 
velopment  is  the  long  and  hard  struggle  to  free  aeon- 
tent  from  its  sensuous  and  immediate  form,  endow 
it  with  its  appropriate  form  of  thought,  and  thereby 
give  it  simple  and  adequate  expression.  It  is  because 
this  is  the  case  that  when  the  development  of  law  is 
just  beginning,  ceremonies  and  formalities  are  more 


circumstantial  and  count  rather  as  the  thing  itself 
than  as  its  symbol. Thus  even  in  Roman  law,  a  num¬ 
ber  of  forms  and  especially  phrases  were  retained 
from  old-fashioned  ceremonial  usages, instead  of  be¬ 
ing  replaced  by  intelligible  forms  and  phrases  ade¬ 
quately  expressing  them.  [A.] 

218.  Since  property  and  personality  have  legal 
recognition  and  validity  in  civil  society,  wrong¬ 
doing  now  becomes  an  infringement,  not  merely 
of  what  is  subjectively  infinite,  but  of  the  uni¬ 
versal  thing  which  is  existent  with  inherent  sta¬ 
bility  and  strength.  Hence  a  new  attitude  arises : 
the  action  is  seen  as  a  danger  to  society  and 
thereby  the  magnitude  of  the  wrongdoing  is  in¬ 
creased.1  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the  fact 
that  society  has  become  strong  and  sure  of  itself 
diminishes  the  external  importance  of  the  injury 
and  so  leads  to  a  mitigation  of  its  punishment. 

The  fact  that  an  injury  to  one  member  of  society  is 
an  injury  to  all  others  does  not  alter  the  conception 
of  wrongdoing,  but  it  does  alter  it  in  respect  of  its 
outward  existence  as  an  injury  done,  an  injury  which 
now  affects  the  mind  and  consciousness  of  civil  so¬ 
ciety  as  a  wdiole,  not  merely  the  external  embodi¬ 
ment  of  the  person  directly  injured.  In  heroic  times, 
as  we  see  in  the  tragedy  of  the  ancients,  the  citizens 
did  not  feel  themselves  injured  by  wrongs  which 
members  of  the  royal  houses  did  to  one  another. 

Implicitly,  crime  is  an  infinite  injury;  but  as  an 
existent  fact  it  must  be  measured  in  quantity  and 
quality  (see  Paragraph  96),  and  since  its  field  of  ex¬ 
istence  here  has  the  essential  character  of  affecting 
an  idea  and  consciousness  of  the  validity  of  the  laws, 
its  danger  to  civil  society  is  a  determinant  of  the 
magnitude  of  a  crime,  or  even  one  of  its  qualitative 
characteristics. 

Now  this  quality  or  magnitude  varies  with  the 
state  of  civil  society;  and  this  is  the  justification 
for  sometimes  attaching  the  penalty  of  death  to  a 
theft  of  a  few  pence  or  a  turnip,  and  at  other  times 
a  light  penalty  to  a  theft  of  a  hundred  or  more 
times  that  amount.  If  we  consider  its  danger  to  so¬ 
ciety,  this  seems  at  first  sight  to  aggravate  the  crime ; 
but  in  fact  it  is  just  this  which  has  been  the  prime 
cause  of  the  mitigation  of  its  punishment.  A  penal 
code,  then,  is  primarily  the  child  of  its  age  and  the 
state  of  civil  society  at  the  time.  [A.] 

(y)  The  Court  of  Justice 

219.  By  taking  the  form  of  law,  right  steps  into 
a  determinate  mode  of  being.  It  is  then  some¬ 
thing  on  its  own  account,  and  in  contrast  with 
particular  willing  and  opining  of  the  right,  it  is 
self-subsistent  and  has  to  vindicate  itself  as 
something  universal.  This  is  achieved  by  recog¬ 
nizing  it  and  making  it  actual  in  a  particular 
case  without  the  subjective  feeling  of  private 
interest ;  and  this  is  the  business  of  a  public  au- 

1  Compare  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  96  and  319. — Ed. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


thority — the  court  of  justice. 

The  historical  origin  of  the  judge  and  his  court 
may  have  had  the  form  of  a  patriarch’s  gift  to  his 
people  or  of  force  or  free  choice ;  but  this  makes  no 
difference  to  the  concept  of  the  thing.  To  regard 
the  introduction  of  a  legal  system  as  no  more  than 
an  optional  act  of  grace  or  favour  on  the  part  of 
monarchs  and  governments  (as  Herr  von  Haller1 
does  in  his  Restauration  der  Staatswissenschaft )  is 
a  piece  of  the  mere  thoughtlessness  which  has  no 
inkling  of  the  point  at  issue  in  a  discussion  of  law 
and  the  state.  The  point  is  that  legal  and  political 
institutions  are  rational  in  principle  and  therefore 
absolutely  necessary,  and  the  question  of  the  form 
in  which  they  arose  or  were  introduced  is  entirely 
irrelevant  to  a  consideration  of  their  rational  basis. 

At  the  other  extreme  from  Herr  von  Haller’s  point 
of  view  is  the  barbarous  notion  that  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  justice  is  now,  as  it  was  in  the  days  when 
might  was  right,  an  improper  exercise  of  force,  a 
suppression  of  freedom,  and  a  despotism.  The  ad¬ 
ministration  of  justice  must  be  regarded  as  the  ful¬ 
filment  of  a  duty  by  the  public  authority,  no  less 
than  as  the  exercise  of  a  right ;  and  so  far  as  it  is  a 
right,  it  does  not  depend  upon  an  optional  delegation 
to  one  authority  by  the  individual  members  of  so¬ 
ciety. 

220.  When  the  right  against  crime  has  the  form 
of  revenge  (see  Paragraph  102),  it  is  only  right 
implicit,  not  right  in  the  form  of  right,  i.e.  no 
act  of  revenge  is  justified.  Instead  of  the  in¬ 
jured  party,  the  injured  universal  now  comes 
on  the  scene,  and  this  has  its  proper  actuality 
in  the  court  of  law.  It  takes  over  the  pursuit 
and  the  avenging  of  crime,  and  this  pursuit  con¬ 
sequently  ceases  to  be  the  subjective  and  con¬ 
tingent  retribution  of  revenge  and  is  transformed 
into  the  genuine  reconciliation  of  right  with  it¬ 
self,  i.e.  into  punishment.  Objectively,  this  is  the 
reconciliation  of  the  law  with  itself ;  by  the  an¬ 
nulment  of  the  crime,  the  law  is  restored  and  its 
authority  is  thereby  actualized.  Subjectively,  it 
is  the  reconciliation  of  the  criminal  with  him¬ 
self,  i.e.  with  the  law  known  by  him  as  his  own 
and  as  valid  for  him  and  his  protection;  when 
this  law  is  executed  upon  him,  he  himself  finds  in 
this  process  the  satisfaction  of  justice  and  noth¬ 
ing  save  his  own  act. 

221.  A  member  of  civil  society  has  the  right  in 
judicio  stare  and,  correspondingly,  the  duty  of 
acknowledging  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court  and 
accepting  its  decision  as  final  when  his  own 
rights  are  in  dispute.  [A.] 

222.  In  court  the  specific  character  which  right¬ 
ness  acquires  is  that  it  must  be  demonstrable. 
When  parties  go  to  law,  they  are  put  in  the  posi- 

1  See  Hegel’s  footnote  to  Paragraph  258. — Ed. 


tion  of  having  to  make  good  their  evidence  and 
their  claims  and  to  make  the  judge  acquainted 
with  the  facts.  These  steps  in  a  legal  process  are 
themselves  rights,  and  their  course  must  there¬ 
fore  be  fixed  by  law.  They  also  constitute  an  es¬ 
sential  part  of  jurisprudence.  [A.] 

223.  These  steps  in  a  legal  process  are  subdi¬ 
vided  continually  within  no  fixed  limits  into 
more  and  more  actions,  each  being  distinct  in 
itself  and  a  right.  Hence  a  legal  process,  in  itself 
in  any  case  a  means,  now  begins  to  be  something 
external  to  its  end  and  contrasted  with  it.  This 
long  course  of  formalities  is  a  right  of  the  par¬ 
ties  at  law  and  they  have  the  right  to  traverse  it 
from  beginning  to  end.  Still,  it  may  be  turned 
into  an  evil,  and  even  an  instrument  of  wrong, 
and  for  this  reason  it  is  by  law  made  the  duty  of 
the  parties  to  submit  themselves  to  the  simple 
process  of  arbitration  (before  a  tribunal  of  arbi¬ 
trators)  and  to  the  attempt  to  reconcile  their 
differences  out  of  court,  in  order  that  they — and 
right  itself,  as  the  substance  of  the  thing  and 
so  the  thing  really  at  issue — may  be  protected 
against  legal  processes  and  their  misuse. 

Equity  involves  a  departure  from  formal  rights 
owing  to  moral  or  other  considerations  and  is  con¬ 
cerned  primarily  with  the  content  of  the  lawsuit.  A 
court  of  equity,  however,  comes  to  mean  a  court 
which  decides  in  a  single  case  without  insisting  on 
the  formalities  of  a  legal  process  or,  in  particular,  on 
the  objective  evidence  which  the  letter  of  the  law 
may  require.  Further,  it  decides  on  the  merits  of  the 
single  case  as  a  unique  one,  not  with  a  view  to  dis¬ 
posing  of  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  create  a  binding 
legal  precedent  for  the  future. 

224.  Amongst  the  rights  of  the  subjective  con¬ 
sciousness  are  not  only  the  publication  of  the 
laws  (see  Paragraph  215)  but  also  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  ascertaining  the  actualization  of  the  law 
in  a  particular  case  (the  course  of  the  proceed¬ 
ings,  the  legal  argument,  &c.) — i.e.  the  publicity 
of  judicial  proceedings.  The  reason  for  this  is 
that  a  trial  is  implicitly  an  event  of  universal 
validity,  and  although  the  particular  content  of 
the  action  affects  the  interests  of  the  parties 
alone,  its  universal  content,  i.e.  the  right  at  is¬ 
sue  and  the  judgement  thereon,  affects  the  in¬ 
terests  of  everybody. 

If  the  members  of  the  bench  deliberate  amongst 
themselves  about  the  judgement  which  they  are  to 
deliver,  such  deliberations  express  opinions  and  views 
still  personal  and  so  naturally  are  not  public.  [A.] 

225.  By  the  judgement  of  the  court,  the  law  is 
applied  to  a  single  case,  and  the  work  of  judge¬ 
ment  has  two  distinct  aspects:  first,  ascertain- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


ment  of  the  nature  of  the  case  as  a  unique, 
single,  occurrence  (e.g.  whether  a  contract,  &c., 
&c.,  has  been  made,  whether  a  trespass  has  been 
committed,  and  if  so  by  whom)  and,  in  criminal 
cases,  reflection  to  determine  the  essential,  crim¬ 
inal,  character  of  the  deed  (see  Remark  to  Para¬ 
graph  1 1 9);  secondly,  the  subsumption  of  the 
case  under  the  law  that  right  must  be  restored. 
Punishment  in  criminal  cases  is  a  conception 
falling  under  this  law.  Decisions  on  these  two 
different  aspects  are  given  by  different  function¬ 
aries. 

In  the  Roman  judicial  system,  this  distinction  of 
functions  appeared  in  that  the  Praetor  pronounced 
judgement  on  the  assumption  that  the  facts  were  so 
and  so,  and  then  appointed  a  special  judex  to  inquire 
into  the  facts. 

In  English  law,  it  is  left  to  the  insight  or  option  of 
the  prosecutor  to  determine  the  precise  character  of 
a  criminal  act  (e.g.  whether  it  is  murder  or  man¬ 
slaughter)  and  the  court  is  powerless  to  alter  the 
indictment  if  it  finds  the  prosecutor’s  choice  wrong. 

226.  First,  the  conduct  of  the  entire  process  of 
inquiry,  secondly,  the  detailed  stages  of  the  ac¬ 
tion  between  the  parties  (these  stages  them¬ 
selves  being  rights — see  Paragraph  222),  and 
then  also  the  second  of  the  aspects  of  the  work 
of  judgement  mentioned  in  the  previous  Para¬ 
graph,  are  all  a  task  which  properly  belongs  to 
the  judge  at  law.  He  is  the  organ  of  the  law,  and 
the  case  must  be  prepared  for  him  in  such  a  way 
as  to  make  possible  its  subsumption  under  some 
principle ;  that  is  to  say,  it  must  be  stripped  of 
its  apparent,  empirical,  character  and  exalted  in¬ 
to  a  recognized  fact  of  a  general  type. 

227.  The  first  aspect  of  the  work  of  judgement, 
i.e.  the  knowledge  of  the  facts  of  the  case  as  a 
unique,  single,  occurrence,  and  the  description 
of  its  general  character,  involves  in  itself  no 
pronouncement  on  points  of  law.  This  is  knowl¬ 
edge  attainable  by  any  educated  man.  In  settling 
the  character  of  an  action,  the  subjective  mo¬ 
ment,  i.e.  the  agent’s  insight  and  intention  (see 
the  Second  Part1),  is  the  essential  thing;  and 
apart  from  this,  the  proof  depends  not  on  ob¬ 
jects  of  reason  or  abstractions  of  the  Under¬ 
standing,  but  only  on  single  details  and  cir¬ 
cumstances,  objects  of  sensuous  intuition  and 
subjective  certainty,  and  therefore  does  not 
contain  in  itself  any  absolute,  objective,  pro¬ 
bative  factor.  It  follows  that  judgement  on 
the  facts  lies  in  the  last  resort  with  subjective 
conviction  and  conscience  ( animi  sententia2), 

1  Especially  Paragraph  119. — Ed. 

2  “I  swear  to  the  best  of  my  belief,”  or  “on  my  con¬ 
science.” — Ed. 


while  the  proof,  resting  as  it  does  on  the  state¬ 
ments  and  affidavits  of  others,  receives  its  final 
though  purely  subjective  verification  from  the 
oath. 

In  this  matter  it  is  of  the  first  importance  to  fix 
our  eyes  on  the  type  of  proof  here  in  question  and  to 
distinguish  it  from  knowledge  and  proof  of  another 
sort.  To  establish  by  proof  a  rational  category,  like 
the  concept  of  right  itself,  means  to  apprehend  its 
necessity,  and  so  demands  a  method  other  than  that 
requisite  for  the  proof  of  a  geometrical  theorem. 
Further,  in  this  latter  case,  the  figure  is  determined 
by  the  Understanding  and  made  abstract  in  advance 
according  to  a  rule.  But  in  the  case  of  something 
empirical  in  content,  like  a  fact,  the  material  of 
knowledge  is  a  given  sensuous  intuition  and  subjec¬ 
tive  sense-certainty,  and  statements  and  affidavits 
about  such  material.  It  is  then  a  question  of  draw¬ 
ing  conclusions  and  putting  two  and  two  together 
out  of  depositions  of  that  kind,  attestations  and  oth¬ 
er  details,  &c.  The  objective  truth  which  emerges 
from  material  of  this  kind  and  the  method  appropri¬ 
ate  to  it  leads,  when  attempts  are  made  to  determine 
it  rigidly  and  objectively,  to  half-proofs  and  then, 
by  further  sincere  deductions  from  these — deduc¬ 
tions  which  at  the  same  time  involve  formal  illogi¬ 
cality — to  extraordinary  punishments.  But  such  ob¬ 
jective  truth  means  something  quite  different  from 
the  truth  of  a  rational  category  or  a  proposition 
whose  content  the  Understanding  has  determined 
for  itself  abstractly  in  advance.  To  show  that,  since 
the  strictly  legal  character  of  a  court  covers  com¬ 
petence  to  ascertain  this  sort  of  truth  about  empir¬ 
ical  events,  it  thereby  properly  qualifies  a  court  for 
this  task  and  so  gives  it  an  inherent  exclusive  right 
to  perform  it  and  lays  on  it  the  necessity  of  perform¬ 
ing  it — that  is  the  best  approach  to  settling  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  how  far  decisions  on  points  of  fact,  as  well 
as  on  points  of  law,  should  be  ascribed  to  courts  as 
strictly  juristic  bodies.  [A.] 

228.  When  judgement  is  pronounced — so  far 
as  the  function  of  judgement  is  the  subsumption 
under  the  law  of  the  case  whose  nature  has  been 
settled — the  right  due  to  the  parties  on  the  score 
of  their  self-consciousness  is  preserved  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  law  because  the  law  is  known  and  so 
is  the  law  of  the  parties  themselves,  and  in  re¬ 
lation  to  the  subsumption,  because  the  trial  is 
public.  But  when  a  verdict  is  given  on  the  par¬ 
ticular,  subjective,  and  external  facts  of  the  case 
(knowledge  of  which  falls  under  the  first  of  the 
aspects  described  in  Paragraph  225),  this  right 
is  satisfied  by  the  confidence  which  the  parties 
feel  in  the  subjectivity  of  those  who  give  the 
verdict.  This  confidence  is  based  primarily  on 
the  similarity  between  them  and  the  parties  in 
respect  of  their  particularity,  i.e.  their  social 
position,  &c. 

The  right  of  self-consciousness,  the  moment  of 


ETHICAL  LIFE  75 


subjective  freedom,  may  be  regarded  as  the  funda¬ 
mental  thing  to  keep  before  us  in  considering  the 
necessity  for  publicity  in  legal  proceedings  and  for 
the  so-called  jury-courts,  and  this  in  the  last  resort 
is  the  essence  of  whatever  may  be  advanced  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  these  institutions  on  the  score  of  their  utility. 
Other  points  of  view  and  reasoning  about  their  sev¬ 
eral  advantages  and  disadvantages  may  give  rise  to 
an  argumentative  exchange,  but  reasoning  of  this 
kind,  like  all  deductive  reasoning,  is  either  secondary 
and  inconclusive,  or  else  drawn  from  other  and  per¬ 
haps  higher  spheres  than  that  of  advantage.  It  may 
be  the  case  that  if  the  administration  of  justice  were 
entirely  in  the  hands  of  professional  lawyers,  and 
there  were  no  lay  institutions  like  juries,  it  would 
in  theory  be  managed  just  as  well,  if  not  better.  It 
may  be  so,  but  even  if  this  possibility  rises  by  gen¬ 
eral  consent  to  probability,  or  even  certainty,  it  still 
does  not  matter,  for  on  the  other  side  there  is  always 
the  right  of  self-consciousness,  insisting  on  its  claims 
and  dissatisfied  if  laymen  play  no  part. 

Owing  to  the  character  of  the  entire  body  of  the 
laws,  knowledge  both  of  what  is  right  and  also  of 
the  course  of  legal  proceedings  may  become,  together 
with  the  capacity  to  prosecute  an  action  at  law,  the 
property  of  a  class  which  makes  itself  an  exclusive 
clique  by  the  use  of  a  terminology  like  a  foreign 
tongue  to  those  whose  rights  are  at  issue.  If  this 
happens,  the  members  of  civil  society,  who  depend 
for  their  livelihood  on  their  industry,  on  their  own 
knowledge  and  will,  are  kept  strangers  to  the  law, 
not  only  to  those  parts  of  it  affecting  their  most 
personal  and  intimate  affairs,  but  also  to  its  sub¬ 
stantive  and  rational  basis,  the  right  itself,  and  the 
result  is  that  they  become  the  wards,  or  even  in  a 
sense  the  bondsmen,  of  the  legal  profession.  They 
may  indeed  have  the  right  to  appear  in  court  in  per¬ 
son  and  to  “stand”  there  (in  judicio  stare),  but  their 
bodily  presence  is  a  trifle  if  their  minds  are  not  to 
be  there  also,  if  they  are  not  to  follow  the  proceed¬ 
ings  with  their  own  knowledge,  and  if  the  justice 
they  receive  remains  in  their  eyes  a  doom  pronounced 
ab  extra. 

229.  In  civil  society,  the  Idea  is  lost  in  particu¬ 
larity  and  has  fallen  asunder  with  the  separation 
of  inward  and  outward.  In  the  administration  of 
justice,  however,  civil  society  returns  to  its  con¬ 
cept,  to  the  unity  of  the  implicit  universal  with 
the  subjective  particular,  although  here  the  lat¬ 
ter  is  only  that  present  in  single  cases  and  the 
universality  in  question  is  that  of  abstract  right. 
The  actualization  of  this  unity  through  its  ex¬ 
tension  to  the  whole  ambit  of  particularity  is 

(i)  the  specific  function  of  the  Police,  though 
the  unification  which  it  effects  is  only  relative ; 

(ii)  it  is  the  Corporation  which  actualizes  the 
unity  completely,  though  only  in  a  whole  which, 
while  concrete,  is  restricted.1  [A.] 

1  See  Paragraph  235. — Ed. 


C.  The  Police  and  the  Corporation 

230.  In  the  system  of  needs,  the  livelihood  and 
welfare  of  every  single  person  is  a  possibility 
whose  actual  attainment  is  just  as  much  condi¬ 
tioned  by  his  caprices  and  particular  endow¬ 
ment  as  by  the  objective  system  of  needs. 
Through  the  administration  of  justice,  offences 
against  property  or  personality  are  annulled. 
But  the  right  actually  present  in  the  particular 
requires,  first,  that  accidental  hindrances  to  one 
aim  or  another  be  removed,  and  undisturbed 
safety  of  person  and  property  be  attained;  and 
secondly,  that  the  securing  of  every  single  per¬ 
son’s  livelihood  and  welfare  be  treated  and  ac¬ 
tualized  as  a  right,  i.e.  that  particular  welfare  as 
such  be  so  treated. 

(a)  Police  [or  the  public  authority] 

231.  Inasmuch  as  it  is  still  the  particular  will 
which  governs  the  choice  of  this  or  that  end, 
the  universal  authority  by  which  security  is  en¬ 
sured  remains  in  the  first  instance,  (a)  restricted 
to  the  sphere  of  contingencies,  and  ( b )  an  ex¬ 
ternal  organization. 

232.  Crime  is  contingency  as  subjective  willing 
of  evil  and  this  is  what  the  universal  authority 
must  prevent  or  bring  to  justice.  But,  crime 
apart,  the  subjective  willing  which  is  permissible 
in  actions  lawful  per  se  and  in  the  private  use  of 
property,  also  comes  into  external  relation  with 
other  single  persons,  as  well  as  with  public  in¬ 
stitutions,  other  than  law-courts,  established  for 
realizing  a  common  end.  This  universal  aspect 
makes  private  actions  a  matter  of  contingency 
which  escapes  the  agent’s  control  and  which 
either  does  or  may  injure  others  and  wrong 
them. 

233.  There  is  here  only  a  possibility  of  injury; 
but  the  actual  non-occurrence  of  injury  is  at 
this  stage  not  just  another  contingency.  The 
point  is  that  the  actions  of  individuals  may  al¬ 
ways  be  wrongful,  and  this  is  the  ultimate  rea¬ 
son  for  police  control  and  penal  justice. 

234.  The  relations  between  external  existents 
fall  into  the  infinite  of  the  Understanding;  there 
is,  therefore,  no  inherent  line  of  distinction  be¬ 
tween  what  is  and  what  is  not  injurious,  even 
where  crime  is  concerned,  or  between  what  is 
and  what  is  not  suspicious,  or  between  what  is 
to  be  forbidden  or  subjected  to  supervision  and 
what  is  to  be  exempt  from  prohibition,  from 
surveillance  and  suspicion,  from  inquiry  and  the 
demand  to  render  an  account  of  itself.  These  de¬ 
tails  are  determined  by  custom,  the  spirit  of  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


rest  of  the  constitution,  contemporary  condi¬ 
tions,  the  crisis  of  the  hour,  and  so  forth.  [A.] 

235.  In  the  indefinite  multiplication  and  inter¬ 
connexion  of  day-to-day  needs,  (a)  the  acquisi¬ 
tion  and  exchange  of  the  means  to  their  satisfac¬ 
tion — a  satisfaction  which  everyone  confidently 
expects  to  be  possible  of  attainment  without 
hindrance,  and  (b)  the  endeavours  made  and 
the  transactions  carried  out  in  order  to  shorten 
the  process  of  attainment  as  much  as  possible, 
give  rise  to  factors  which  are  a  common  interest, 
and  when  one  man  occupies  himself  with  these 
his  work  is  at  the  same  time  done  for  all.  The 
situation  is  productive  too  of  contrivances  and 
organizations  which  may  be  of  use  to  the  com¬ 
munity  as  a  whole.  These  universal  activities  and 
organizations  of  general  utility  call  for  the  over¬ 
sight  and  care  of  the  public  authority. 

236.  The  differing  interests  of  producers  and 
consumers  may  come  into  collision  with  each 
other;  and  although  a  fair  balance  between 
them  on  the  whole  may  be  brought  about  auto¬ 
matically,  still  their  adjustment  also  requires  a 
control  which  stands  above  both  and  is  con¬ 
sciously  undertaken.  The  right  to  the  exercise 
of  such  control  in  a  single  case  (e.g.  in  the  fixing 
of  the  prices  of  the  commonest  necessaries  of 
life)  depends  on  the  fact  that,  by  being  publicly 
exposed  for  sale,  goods  in  absolutely  universal 
daily  demand  are  offered  not  so  much  to  an  in¬ 
dividual  as  such  but  rather  to  a  universal  pur¬ 
chaser,  the  public;  and  thus  both  the  defence  of 
the  public’s  right  not  to  be  defrauded,  and  also 
the  management  of  goods  inspection,  may  lie, 
as  a  common  concern,  with  a  public  authority. 
But  public  care  and  direction  are  most  of  all 
necessary  in  the  case  of  the  larger  branches  of 
industry,  because  these  are  dependent  on  con¬ 
ditions  abroad  and  on  combinations  of  distant 
circumstances  which  cannot  be  grasped  as  a 
whole  by  the  individuals  tied  to  these  industries 
for  their  living. 

At  the  other  extreme  to  freedom  of  trade  and  com¬ 
merce  in  civil  society  is  public  organization  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  everything  and  determine  everyone’s  labour 
— take  for  example  in  ancient  times  the  labour  on 
the  pyramids  and  the  other  huge  monuments  in 
Egypt  and  Asia  which  were  constructed  for  public 
ends,  and  the  worker’s  task  was  not  mediated 
through  his  private  choice  and  particular  interest. 
This  interest  invokes  freedom  of  trade  and  com¬ 
merce  against  control  from  above;  but  the  more 
blindly  it  sinks  into  self-seeking  aims,  the  more  it 
requires  such  control  to  bring  it  back  to  the  univer¬ 
sal.  Control  is  also  necessary  to  diminish  the  danger 
of  upheavals  arising  from  clashing  interests  and  to 


abbreviate  the  period  in  which  their  tension  should 
be  eased  through  the  working  of  a  necessity  of  which 
they  themselves  know  nothing.  [A.] 

237.  Now  while  the  possibility  of  sharing  in  the 
general  wealth  is  open  to  individuals  and  is  as¬ 
sured  to  them  by  the  public  authority,  still  it  is 
subject  to  contingencies  on  the  subjective  side 
(quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  this  assurance 
must  remain  incomplete),  and  the  more  it  pre¬ 
supposes  skill,  health,  capital,  and  so  forth  as  its 
conditions,  the  more  is  it  so  subject. 

238.  Originally  the  family  is  the  substantive 
whole  whose  function  it  is  to  provide  for  the  in¬ 
dividual  on  his  particular  side  by  giving  him 
either  the  means  and  the  skill  necessary  to  en¬ 
able  him  to  earn  his  living  out  of  the  resources 
of  society,  or  else  subsistence  and  maintenance 
in  the  event  of  his  suffering  a  disability.  But 
civil  society  tears  the  individual  from  his  fam¬ 
ily  ties,  estranges  the  members  of  the  family 
from  one  another,  and  recognizes  them  as  self- 
subsistent  persons.  Further,  for  the  paternal  soil 
and  the  external  inorganic  resources  of  nature 
from  which  the  individual  formerly  derived  his 
livelihood, it  substitutes  its  own  soil  andsubjects 
the  permanent  existence  of  even  the  entire  fam¬ 
ily  to  dependence  on  itself  and  to  contingency. 
Thus  the  individual  becomes  a  son  of  civil  so¬ 
ciety  which  has  as  many  claims  upon  him  as  he 
has  rights  against  it.  [A.] 

239.  In  its  character  as  a  universal  family, 
civil  society  has  the  right  and  duty  of  superin¬ 
tending  and  influencing  education,  inasmuch  as 
education  bears  upon  the  child’s  capacity  to  be¬ 
come  a  member  of  society.  Society’s  right  here 
is  paramount  over  the  arbitrary  and  contingent 
preferences  of  parents,  particularly  in  cases 
where  education  is  to  be  completed  not  by  the 
parents  but  by  others.  To  the  same  end,  society 
must  provide  public  educational  facilities  so  far 
as  is  practicable.  [A.] 

240.  Similarly,  society  has  the  right  and  duty 
of  acting  as  trustee  to  those  whose  extravagance 
destroys  the  security  of  their  own  subsistence 
or  their  families’.  It  must  substitute  for  extrava¬ 
gance  the  pursuit  of  the  ends  of  society  and  the 
individuals  concerned.  [A.] 

241.  Not  only  caprice,  however,  but  also 
contingencies,  physical  conditions,  and  factors 
grounded  in  external  circumstances  (see  Para¬ 
graph  200)  may  reduce  men  to  poverty.  The 
poor  still  have  the  needs  common  to  civil  so¬ 
ciety,  and  yet  since  society  has  withdrawn  from 
them  the  natural  means  of  acquisition  (see  Para- 


ETHICAL  LIFE  77 


graph  217)  and  broken  the  bond  of  the  family — 
in  the  wider  sense  of  the  clan  (see  Paragraph 
18 1 ) — their  poverty  leaves  them  more  or  less 
deprived  of  all  the  advantages  of  society,  of  the 
opportunity  of  acquiring  skill  or  education  of 
any  kind,  as  well  as  of  the  administration  of 
justice,  the  public  health  services,  and  often  even 
of  the  consolations  of  religion,  and  so  forth. 
The  public  authority  takes  the  place  of  the 
family  where  the  poor  are  concerned  in  respect 
not  only  of  their  immediate  want  but  also  of 
laziness  of  disposition,  malignity,  and  the  other 
vices  which  arise  out  of  their  plight  and  their 
sense  of  wrong. 

242.  Poverty  and,  in  general,  the  distress  of 
every  kind  to  which  every  individual  is  ex¬ 
posed  from  the  start  in  the  cycle  of  his  natural 
life  has  a  subjective  side  which  demands  similar¬ 
ly  subjective  aid,  arising  both  from  the  special 
circumstances  of  a  particular  case  and  also  from 
love  and  sympathy.  This  is  the  place  where 
morality  finds  plenty  to  do  despite  all  public 
organization.  Subjective  aid,  however,  both  in 
itself  and  in  its  operation,  is  dependent  on  con¬ 
tingency  and  consequently  society  struggles  to 
make  it  less  necessary,  by  discovering  the  gen¬ 
eral  causes  of  penury  and  general  means  of  its 
relief,  and  by  organizing  relief  accordingly. 

Casual  almsgiving  and  casual  endowments,  e.g.  for 
the  burning  of  lamps  before  holy  images,  &c.,  are  sup¬ 
plemented  by  public  alms-houses,  hospitals,  street¬ 
lighting,  and  so  forth.  There  is  still  quite  enough 
left  over  and  above  these  things  for  charity  to  do  on 
its  own  account.  A  false  view  is  implied  both  when 
charity  insists  on  having  this  poor  relief  reserved 
solely  to  private  sympathy  and  the  accidental  oc¬ 
currence  of  knowledge  and  a  charitable  disposition, 
and  also  when  it  feels  injured  or  mortified  by  uni¬ 
versal  regulations  and  ordinances  which  are  obliga¬ 
tory.  Public  social  conditions  are  on  the  contrary  to 
be  regarded  as  all  the  more  perfect  the  less  (in  com¬ 
parison  with  what  is  arranged  publicly)  is  left  for 
an  individual  to  do  by  himself  as  his  private  inclina¬ 
tion  directs. 

243.  When  civil  society  is  in  a  state  of  unim¬ 
peded  activity,  it  is  engaged  in  expanding  inter¬ 
nally1  in  population  and  industry.  The  amassing 
of  wealth  is  intensified  by  generalizing  (a)  the 
linkage  of  men  by  their  needs,  and  ( b )  the 
methods  of  preparing  and  distributing  the  means 
to  satisfy  these  needs,  because  it  is  from  this 
double  process  of  generalization  that  the  larg¬ 
est  profits  are  derived.  That  is  one  side  of  the 
picture.  The  other  side  is  the  subdivision  and  re¬ 
striction  of  particular  jobs.  This  results  in  the 

1  See  Paragraph  246. — Ed. 


dependence  and  distress  of  the  class  tied  to  work 
of  that  sort,  and  these  again  entail  inability  to 
feel  and  enjoy  the  broader  freedoms  and  espe¬ 
cially  the  intellectual  benefits  of  civil  society. 

244.  When  the  standard  of  living  of  a  large 
mass  of  people  falls  below  a  certain  subsistence 
level — a  level  regulated  automatically  as  the 
one  necessary  for  a  member  of  the  society — and 
when  there  is  a  consequent  loss  of  the  sense  of 
right  and  wrong,  of  honesty  and  the  self-respect 
which  makes  a  man  insist  on  maintaining  him¬ 
self  by  his  own  work  and  effort,  the  result  is  the 
creation  of  a  rabble  of  paupers.  At  the  same  time 
this  brings  with  it,  at  the  other  end  of  the  social 
scale,  conditions  which  greatly  facilitate  the  con¬ 
centration  of  disproportionate  wealth  in  a  few 
hands.  [A.] 

245.  When  the  masses  begin  to  decline  into 
poverty,  (a)  the  burden  of  maintaining  them  at 
their  ordinary  standard  of  living  might  be  di¬ 
rectly  laid  on  the  wealthier  classes,  or  they  might 
receive  the  means  of  livelihood  directly  from 
other  public  sources  of  wealth  (e.g.  from  the  en¬ 
dowments  of  rich  hospitals,  monasteries,  and 
other  foundations).  In  either  case,  however,  the 
needy  would  receive  subsistence  directly,  not  by 
means  of  their  work,  and  this  would  violate  the 
principle  of  civil  society  and  the  feeling  of  in¬ 
dividual  independence  and  self-respect  in  its  in¬ 
dividual  members,  (b)  As  an  alternative,  they 
might  be  given  subsistence  indirectly  through  be¬ 
ing  given  work,  i.e.  the  opportunity  to  work.  In 
this  event  the  volume  of  production  would  be 
increased,  but  the  evil  consists  precisely  in  an 
excess  of  production  and  in  the  lack  of  a  pro¬ 
portionate  number  of  consumers  who  are  them¬ 
selves  also  producers,  and  thus  it  is  simply  in¬ 
tensified  by  both  of  the  methods  (a)  and  ( b ) 
by  which  it  is  sought  to  alleviate  it.  It  hence 
becomes  apparent  that  despite  an  excess  of 
wealth  civil  society  is  not  rich  enough,  i.e.  its 
own  resources  are  insufficient  to  check  excessive 
poverty  and  the  creation  of  a  penurious  rabble. 

In  the  example  of  England  we  may  study  these 
phenomena  on  a  large  scale  and  also  in  particular 
the  results  of  poor-rates,  immense  foundations,  un¬ 
limited  private  beneficence,  and  above  all  the  abo¬ 
lition  of  the  Guild  Corporations.  In  Britain,  partic¬ 
ularly  in  Scotland,  the  most  direct  measure  against 
poverty  and  especially  against  the  loss  of  shame 
and  self-respect — the  subjective  bases  of  society — 
as  well  as  against  laziness  and  extravagence,  &c.,  the 
begetters  of  the  rabble,  has  turned  out  to  be  to  leave 
the  poor  to  their  fate  and  instruct  them  to  beg  in  the 
streets. 


78  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


246.  This  inner  dialectic  of  civil  society  thus 
drives  it — or  at  any  rate  drives  a  specific  civil 
society — to  push  beyond  its  own  limits  and  seek 
markets,  and  so  its  necessary  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence,  in  other  lands  which  are  either  deficient  in 
the  goods  it  has  over-produced,  or  else  generally 
backward  in  industry,  &c. 

247.  The  principle  of  family  life  is  dependence 
on  the  soil,  on  land,  terra  firma.  Similarly,  the 
natural  element  for  industry,  animating  its  out¬ 
ward  movement,  is  the  sea.  Since  the  passion 
for  gain  involves  risk,  industry  though  bent  on 
gain  yet  lifts  itself  above  it;  instead  of  remain¬ 
ing  rooted  to  the  soil  and  the  limited  circle  of 
civil  life  with  its  pleasures  and  desires,  it  em¬ 
braces  the  element  of  flux,  danger,  and  destruc¬ 
tion.  Further,  the  sea  is  the  greatest  means  of 
communication,1  and  trade  by  sea  creates  com¬ 
mercial  connexions  between  distant  countries 
and  so  relations  involving  contractual  rights. 
At  the  same  time,  commerce  of  this  kind  is  the 
most  potent  instrument  of  culture,  and  through 
it  trade  acquires  its  significance  in  the  history  of 
the  world. 

Rivers  are  not  natural  boundaries  of  separation, 
which  is  what  they  have  been  accounted  to  be  in 
modern  times.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  truer  to  say  that 
they,  and  the  sea  likewise,  link  men  together.  Horace 
is  wrong  when  he  says: 

deus  abscidit 

prudens  Oceano  dissociabili 
terras .2 

The  proof  of  this  lies  not  merely  in  the  fact  that  the 
basins  of  rivers  are  inhabited  by  a  single  clan  or 
tribe,  but  also,  for  example,  in  the  ancient  bonds  be¬ 
tween  Greece,  Ionia,  and  Magna  Graecia,  between 
Brittany  and  Britain,  between  Denmark  and  Norway, 
Sweden,  Finland,  Livonia,  &c.,  bonds,  further,  which 
are  especially  striking  in  contrast  with  the  compar¬ 
atively  slight  intercourse  between  the  inhabitants  of 
the  littoral  and  those  of  the  hinterland.  To  realize 
what  an  instrument  of  culture  lies  in  the  link  with 
the  sea,  consider  countries  where  industry  flourishes 
and  contrast  their  relation  to  the  sea  with  that  of 
countries  which  have  eschewed  sea-faring  and  which, 
like  Egypt  and  India,  have  become  stagnant  and 
sunk  in  the  most  frightful  and  scandalous  supersti¬ 
tion.  Notice  also  how  all  great  progressive  peoples 
press  onward  to  the  sea. 

248.  This  far-flung  connecting  link  affords  the 
means  for  the  colonizing  activity — sporadic  or 
systematic — to  which  the  mature  civil  society  is 

1  Cf.  Kant, Critique  of  Aesthetic  Judgment,  %  29.  Also, 
Hegel,  Philosophy  of  History,  the  section  on  the  “Ge¬ 
ographical  Basis  of  History,”  especially  pp.  195  ff. — Ed. 

2  Odes,  I.  iii  [11.  2 1-3,  “God  of  set  purpose  has  sundered 
the  lands  by  the  estranging  sea”]. 


driven  and  by  which  it  supplies  to  a  part  of  its 
population  a  return  to  life  on  the  family  basis 
in  a  new  land  and  so  also  supplies  itself  with  a 
new  demand  and  field  for  its  industry.  [A.] 

249.  While  the  public  authority  must  also  un¬ 
dertake  the  higher  directive  function  of  pro¬ 
viding  for  the  interests  which  lead  beyond  the 
borders  of  its  society  (see  Paragraph  246),  its 
primary  purpose  is  to  actualize  and  maintain  the 
universal  contained  within  the  particularity  of 
civil  society,  and  its  control  takes  the  form  of 
an  external  system  and  organization  for  the  pro¬ 
tection  and  security  of  particular  ends  and  in¬ 
terests  en  masse,  inasmuch  as  these  interests 
subsist  only  in  this  universal.  This  universal  is 
immanent  in  the  interests  of  particularity  itself 
and,  in  accordance  with  the  Idea,  particularity 
makes  it  the  end  and  object  of  its  own  willing 
and  activity.  In  this  way  ethical  principles  circle 
back  and  appear  in  civil  society  as  a  factor  im¬ 
manent  in  it;  this  constitutes  the  specific  char¬ 
acter  of  the  Corporation. 

(/ 3 )  The  Corporation 

250.  In  virtue  of  the  substantiality  of  its  natu¬ 
ral  and  family  life,  the  agricultural  class  has  di¬ 
rectly  within  itself  the  concrete  universal  in 
which  it  lives.  The  class  of  civil  servants  is  uni¬ 
versal  in  character  and  so  has  the  universal  ex¬ 
plicitly  as  its  ground  and  as  the  aim  of  its  activ¬ 
ity.  The  class  between  them,  the  business  class, 
is  essentially  concentrated  on  the  particular,  and 
hence  it  is  to  it  that  Corporations  are  specially 
appropriate. 

251.  The  labour  organization  of  civil  society  is 
split,  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  its  par¬ 
ticulars,  into  different  branches.  The  implicit 
likeness  of  such  particulars  to  one  another  be¬ 
comes  really  existent  in  an  association,  as  some¬ 
thing  common  to  its  members.  Hence  a  selfish 
purpose,  directed  towards  its  particular  self- 
interest,  apprehends  and  evinces  itself  at  the 
same  time  as  universal ;  and  a  member  of  civil 
society  is  in  virtue  of  his  own  particular  skill 
a  member  of  a  Corporation,  whose  universal 
purpose  is  thus  wholly  concrete  and  no  wider  in 
scope  than  the  purpose  involved  in  business,  its 
proper  task  and  interest. 

252.  In  accordance  with  this  definition  of  its 
functions,  a  Corporation  has  the  right,  under 
the  surveillance  of  the  public  authority,  (a) 
to  look  after  its  own  interests  within  its  own 
sphere,  ( b )  to  co-opt  members,  qualified  objec¬ 
tively  by  the  requisite  skill  and  rectitude,  to  a 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


79 


number  fixed  by  the  general  structure  of  society, 
(c)  to  protect  its  members  against  particular 
contingencies,  ( d )  to  provide  the  education  req¬ 
uisite  to  fit  others  to  become  members.  In  short, 
its  right  is  to  come  on  the  scene  like  a  second 
family  for  its  members,  while  civil  society  can 
only  be  an  indeterminate  sort  of  family  because 
it  comprises  everyone  and  so  is  farther  removed 
from  individuals  and  their  special  exigencies. 

The  Corporation  member  is  to  be  distinguished 
from  a  day  labourer  or  from  a  man  who  is  prepared 
to  undertake  casual  employment  on  a  single  oc¬ 
casion.  The  former  who  is,  or  will  become,  master 
of  his  craft,  is  a  member  of  the  association  not  for 
casual  gain  on  single  occasions  but  for  the  whole 
range,  the  universality,  of  his  personal  livelihood. 

Privileges,  in  the  sense  of  the  rights  of  a  branch  of 
civil  society  organized  into  a  Corporation,  are  dis¬ 
tinct  in  meaning  from  privileges  proper  in  the  ety¬ 
mological  sense.  The  latter  are  casual  exceptions  to 
universal  rules;  the  former,  however,  are  only  the 
crystallization,  as  regulations,  of  characteristics  in¬ 
herent  in  an  essential  branch  of  society  itself  owing 
to  its  nature  as  particular. 

253.  In  the  Corporation,  the  family  has  its 
stable  basis  in  the  sense  that  its  livelihood  is 
assured  there,  conditionally  upon  capability,  i.e. 
it  has  a  stable  capital  (see  Paragraph  170).  In 
addition,  this  nexus  of  capability  and  livelihood 
is  a  recognized  fact,  with  the  result  that  the  Cor¬ 
poration  member  needs  no  external  marks  be¬ 
yond  his  own  membership  as  evidence  of  his 
skill  and  his  regular  income  and  subsistence,  i.e. 
as  evidence  that  he  is  a  somebody.1  It  is  also 
recognized  that  he  belongs  to  a  whole  which  is 
itself  an  organ  of  the  entire  society,  and  that  he 
is  actively  concerned  in  promoting  the  compara¬ 
tively  disinterested  end  of  this  whole.  Thus  he 
commands  the  respect  due  to  one  in  his  social 
position. 

The  institution  of  Corporations  corresponds,  on  ac¬ 
count  of  its  assurance  of  capital,  to  the  introduction 
of  agriculture  and  private  property  in  another  sphere 
(see  Remark  to  Paragraph  203) . 

When  complaints  are  made  about  the  luxury  of 
the  business  classes  and  their  passion  for  extrava¬ 
gance — which  have  as  their  concomitant  the  cre¬ 
ation  of  a  rabble  of  paupers  (see  Paragraph  244)  — 
we  must  not  forget  that  besides  its  other  causes  (e.g. 
increasing  mechanization  of  labour)  this  phenome¬ 
non  has  an  ethical  ground,  as  was  indicated  above.2 
Unless  he  is  a  member  of  an  authorized  Corpora¬ 
tion  (and  it  is  only  by  being  authorized  that  an  as¬ 
sociation  becomes  a  Corporation),  an  individual  is 
without  rank  or  dignity,  his  isolation  reduces  his 
business  to  mere  self-seeking,  and  his  livelihood  and 

1See  Addition  to  Paragraph  207. — Ed. 

2  See  Paragraphs  184,  185,  and  243. — Ed. 


satisfaction  become  insecure.  Consequently,  he  has 
to  try  to  gain  recognition  for  himself  by  giving  ex¬ 
ternal  proofs  of  success  in  his  business,  and  to  these 
proofs  no  limits  can  be  set.  He  cannot  live  in  the 
manner  of  his  class,  for  no  class  really  exists  for  him, 
since  in  civil  society  it  is  only  something  common  to 
particular  persons  which  really  exists,  i.e.  something 
legally  constituted  and  recognized.  Hence  he  can¬ 
not  achieve  for  himself  a  way  of  life  proper  to  his 
class  and  less  idiosyncratic. 

Within  the  Corporation  the  help  which  poverty  re¬ 
ceives  loses  its  accidental  character  and  the  humili¬ 
ation  wrongfully  associated  with  it.  The  wealthy 
perform  their  duties  to  their  fellow  associates  and 
thus  riches  cease  to  inspire  either  pride  or  envy,  pride 
in  their  owners,  envy  in  others.  In  these  conditions 
rectitude  obtains  its  proper  recognition  and  respect. 

254.  The  so-called  “natural”  right  of  exercising 
one’s  skill  and  thereby  earning  what  there  is  to 
be  earned  is  restricted  within  the  Corporation 
only  in  so  far  as  it  is  therein  made  rational  in¬ 
stead  of  natural.  That  is  to  say,  it  becomes  freed 
from  personal  opinion  and  contingency,  saved 
from  endangering  either  the  individual  work¬ 
man  or  others,  recognized,  guaranteed,  and  at 
the  same  time  elevated  to  conscious  effort  for  a 
common  end. 

255.  As  the  family  was  the  first,  so  the  Cor¬ 
poration  is  the  second  ethical  root  of  the  state, 
the  one  planted  in  civil  society.  The  former  con¬ 
tains  the  moments  of  subjective  particularity 
and  objective  universality  in  a  substantial  unity. 
But  these  moments  are  sundered  in  civil  society 
to  begin  with;  on  the  one  side  there  is  the  par¬ 
ticularity  of  need  and  satisfaction,  reflected  in¬ 
to  itself,  and  on  the  other  side  the  universality 
of  abstract  rights.  In  the  Corporation  these  mo¬ 
ments  are  united  in  an  inward  fashion,  so  that  in 
this  union  particular  welfare  is  present  as  a 
right  and  is  actualized. 

The  sanctity  of  marriage  and  the  dignity  of  Cor¬ 
poration  membership  are  the  two  fixed  points  round 
which  the  unorganized  atoms  of  civil  society  re¬ 
volve.  [A.] 

256.  The  end  of  the  Corporation  is  restricted 
and  finite,  while  the  public  authority  was  an  ex¬ 
ternal  organization  involving  a  separation  and  a 
merely  relative  identity  of  controller  and  con¬ 
trolled.  The  end  of  the  former  and  the  external¬ 
ity  and  relative  identity  of  the  latter  find  their 
truth  in  the  absolutely  universal  end  and  its  ab¬ 
solute  actuality.  Hence  the  sphere  of  civil  so¬ 
ciety  passes  over  into  the  state. 

The  town  is  the  seat  of  the  civil  life  of  business. 
There  reflection  arises,  turns  in  upon  itself,  and  pur¬ 
sues  its  atomizing  task ;  each  man  maintains  himself 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


80 

in  and  through  his  relation  to  others  who,  like  him¬ 
self,  are  persons  possessed  of  rights.  The  country,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  the  seat  of  an  ethical  life  resting  on 
nature  and  the  family.  Town  and  country  thus  con¬ 
stitute  the  two  moments,  still  ideal1  moments,  whose 
true  ground  is  the  state,  although  it  is  from  them 
that  the  state  springs. 

The  philosophic  proof  of  the  concept  of  the  state 
is  this  development  of  ethical  life  from  its  immediate 
phase  through  civil  society,  the  phase  of  division,  to 
the  state,  which  then  reveals  itself  as  the  true  ground 
of  these  phases.  A  proof  in  philosophic  science  can 
only  be  a  development  of  this  kind. 

Since  the  state  appears  as  a  result  in  the  advance  of 
the  philosophic  concept  through  displaying  itself  as 
the  true  ground  [of  the  earlier  phases],  that  show 
of  mediation  is  now  cancelled  and  the  state  has  be¬ 
come  directly  present  before  us.  Actually,  therefore, 
the  state  as  such  is  not  so  much  the  result  as  the  be¬ 
ginning.  It  is  within  the  state  that  the  family  is  first 
developed  into  civil  society,  and  it  is  the  Idea  of  the 
state  itself  which  disrupts  itself  into  these  two  mo¬ 
ments.  Through  the  development  of  civil  society, 
the  substance  of  ethical  life  acquires  its  infinite  form, 
which  contains  in  itself  these  two  moments:  (i) 
infinite  differentiation  down  to  the  inward  experience 
of  independent  self-consciousness,  and  (2)  the  form 
of  universality  involved  in  education,  the  form  of 
thought  whereby  mind  is  objective  and  actual  to  it¬ 
self  as  an  organic  totality  in  laws  and  institutions 
which  are  its  will  in  terms  of  thought. 

Sub-section  III 

THE  STATE 

257.  The  state  is  the  actuality  of  the  ethical 
Idea.  It  is  ethical  mind  qua  the  substantial  will 
manifest  and  revealed  to  itself,  knowing  and 
thinking  itself,  accomplishing  what  it  knows  and 
in  so  far  as  it  knows  it.  The  state  exists  immedi¬ 
ately  in  custom,  mediately  in  individual  self- 
consciousness,  knowledge,  and  activity,  while 
self-consciousness  in  virtue  of  its  sentiment  to¬ 
wards  the  state  finds  in  the  state,  as  its  essence 
and  the  end  and  product  of  its  activity,  its  sub¬ 
stantive  freedom. 

The  Penates  are  inward  gods,  gods  of  the  under¬ 
world  ;  the  mind  of  a  nation2  (Athene  for  instance) 
is  the  divine,  knowing  and  willing  itself.  Family  pi¬ 
ety  is  feeling,  ethical  behaviour  directed  by  feeling ; 
political  virtue  is  the  willing  of  the  absolute  end 
in  terms  of  thought. 

258.  The  state  is  absolutely  rational  inasmuch 
as  it  is  the  actuality  of  the  substantial  will  which 
it  possesses  in  the  particular  self-consciousness 
once  that  consciousness  has  been  raised  to  con- 

1  See  Paragraph  278. — Ed. 

2  With  this  Remark,  compare  Remarks  to  Paragraphs 
163  and  166. — Ed. 


sciousness  of  its  universality.  This  substantial 
unity  is  an  absolute  unmoved  end  in  itself,  in 
which  freedom  comes  into  its  supreme  right.  On 
the  other  hand  this  final  end  has  supreme  right 
against  the  individual,  whose  supreme  duty  is  to 
be  a  member  of  the  state. 

If  the  state  is  confused  with  civil  society,  and  if  its 
specific  end  is  laid  down  as  the  security  and  protec¬ 
tion  of  property  and  personal  freedom,  then  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  individuals  as  such  becomes  the  ulti¬ 
mate  end  of  their  association,  and  it  follows  that 
membership  of  the  state  is  something  optional.  But 
the  state’s  relation  to  the  individual  is  quite  different 
from  this.  Since  the  state  is  mind  objectified,  it  is 
only  as  one  of  its  members  that  the  individual  him¬ 
self  has  objectivity,  genuine  individuality,  and  an 
ethical  life.  Unification  pure  and  simple  is  the  true 
content  and  aim  of  the  individual,  and  the  individ¬ 
ual’s  destiny  is  the  living  of  a  universal  life.  His 
further  particular  satisfaction,  activity,  and  mode  of 
conduct  have  this  substantive  and  universally  valid 
life  as  their  starting  point  and  their  result. 

Rationality,  taken  generally  and  in  the  abstract, 
consists  in  the  thoroughgoing  unity  of  the  universal 
and  the  single.  Rationality,  concrete  in  the  state, 
consists  (a)  so  far  as  its  content  is  concerned,  in  the 
unity  of  objective  freedom  (i.e.  freedom  of  the  uni¬ 
versal  or  substantial  will)  and  subjective  freedom 
(i.e.  freedom  of  everyone  in  his  knowing  and  in  his 
volition  of  particular  ends)  ;  and  consequently,  ( b ) 
so  far  as  its  form  is  concerned,  in  self-determining 
action  on  laws  and  principles  w  hich  are  thoughts  and 
so  universal.  This  Idea  is  the  absolutely  eternal  and 
necessary  being  of  mind.3 

But  if  we  ask  what  is  or  has  been  the  historical  ori¬ 
gin  of  the  state  in  general,  still  more  if  we  ask  about 
the  origin  of  any  particular  state,  of  its  rights  and 
institutions,  or  again  if  we  inquire  whether  the  state 
originally  arose  out  of  patriarchal  conditions  or  out 
of  fear  or  trust,  or  out  of  Corporations,  &c.,  or  final¬ 
ly  if  we  ask  in  what  light  the  basis  of  the  state’s 
rights  has  been  conceived  and  consciously  estab¬ 
lished,  whether  this  basis  has  been  supposed  to  be 
positive  divine  right,  or  contract,  custom,  &c. — all 
these  questions  are  no  concern  of  the  Idea  of  the 
state.  We  are  here  dealing  exclusively  with  the  philo¬ 
sophic  science  of  the  state,  and  from  that  point  of 
view  all  these  things  are  mere  appearance  and  there¬ 
fore  matters  for  history.  So  far  as  the  authority  of 
any  existing  state  has  anything  to  do  with  reasons, 
these  reasons  are  culled  from  the  forms  of  the  law 
authoritative  within  it. 

The  philosophical  treatment  of  these  topics  is  con¬ 
cerned  only  with  their  inward  side,  with  the  thought 
of  their  concept.  The  merit  of  Rousseau’s  contribu¬ 
tion  to  the  search  for  this  concept  is  that,  by  ad¬ 
ducing  the  will  as  the  principle  of  the  state,  he  is  ad¬ 
ducing  a  principle  which  has  thought  both  for  its 
form  and  its  content,  a  principle  indeed  which  is 
thinking  itself,  not  a  principle,  like  gregarious  in- 

3  See  Paragraphs  302-4. — Ed. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


stinct,  for  instance,  or  divine  authority,  which  has 
thought  as  its  form  only.  Unfortunately,  however, 
as  Fichte  did  later,  he  takes  the  will  only  in  a  deter¬ 
minate  form  as  the  individual  will,  and  he  regards 
the  universal  will  not  as  the  absolutely  rational  ele¬ 
ment  in  the  will,  but  only  as  a  “general”  will  which 
proceeds  out  of  this  individual  will  as  out  of  a  con¬ 
scious  will.  The  result  is  that  he  reduces  the  union 
of  individuals  in  the  state  to  a  contract  and  there¬ 
fore  to  something  based  on  their  arbitrary  wills, 
their  opinion,  and  their  capriciously  given  express 
consent;  and  abstract  reasoning  proceeds  to  draw 
the  logical  inferences  which  destroy  the  absolutely 
divine  principle  of  the  state,  together  with  its  maj¬ 
esty  and  absolute  authority.  For  this  reason,  when 
these  abstract  conclusions  came  into  power,  they  af¬ 
forded  for  the  first  time  in  human  history  the  pro¬ 
digious  spectacle  of  the  overthrow  of  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  a  great  actual  state  and  its  complete  recon¬ 
struction  ab  initio  on  the  basis  of  pure  thought  alone, 
after  the  destruction  of  all  existing  and  given  ma¬ 
terial.  The  will  of  its  re-founders  was  to  give  it  what 
they  alleged  was  a  purely  rational  basis,  but  it  was 
only  abstractions  that  were  being  used;  the  Idea 
was  lacking ;  and  the  experiment  ended  in  the  maxi¬ 
mum  of  frightfulness  and  terror. 

Confronted  with  the  claims  made  for  the  individ¬ 
ual  will,  we  must  remember  the  fundamental  con¬ 
ception  that  the  objective  will  is  rationality  implicit 
or  in  conception,  whether  it  be  recognized  or  not  by 
individuals,  whether  their  whims  be  deliberately  for 
it  or  not.  We  must  remember  that  its  opposite,  i.e. 
knowing  and  willing,  or  subjective  freedom  (the 
only  thing  contained  in  the  principle  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  will)  comprises  only  one  moment,  and  therefore 
a  one-sided  moment,  of  the  Idea  of  the  rational  will, 
i.e.  of  the  will  which  is  rational  solely  because  what 
it  is  implicitly,  that  it  also  is  explicitly. 

The  opposite  to  thinking  of  the  state  as  something 
to  be  known  and  apprehended  as  explicitly  rational 
is  taking  external  appearances — i.e.  contingencies 
such  as  distress,  need  for  protection,  force,  riches, 
&c. — not  as  moments  in  the  state’s  historical  de¬ 
velopment,  but  as  its  substance.  Here  again  what 
constitutes  the  guiding  thread  of  discovery  is  the  in¬ 
dividual  in  isolation — not,  however,  even  so  much 
as  the  thought  of  this  individuality,  but  instead  on¬ 
ly  empirical  individuals,  with  attention  focused  on 
their  accidental  characteristics,  their  strength  and 
weakness,  riches  and  poverty,  &c.  This  ingenious 
idea  of  ignoring  the  absolute  infinity  and  rationality 
in  the  state  and  excluding  thought  from  apprehen¬ 
sion  of  its  inward  nature  has  assuredly  never  been 
put  forward  in  such  an  unadulterated  form  as  in 
Herr  von  Haller’s  Restauration  der  Staatswissen- 
schaft.  I  say  “unadulterated,”  because  in  all  other 
attempts  to  grasp  the  essence  of  the  state,  no  matter 
on  what  one-sided  or  superficial  principles,  this  very 
intention  of  comprehending  the  state  rationally  has 
brought  with  it  thoughts,  i.e.  universal  determina¬ 
tions.  Herr  von  Haller,  however,  with  his  eyes  open, 
has  not  merely  renounced  the  rational  material  of 


81 

which  the  state  consists,  as  well  as  the  form  of 
thought,  but  he  has  even  gone  on  with  passionate 
fervour  to  inveigh  against  the  form  and  the  material 
so  set  aside.  Part  of  what  Herr  von  Haller  assures 
us  is  the  “wide-spread”  effect  of  his  principles,  this 
Restauration  undoubtedly  owes  to  the  fact  that,  in 
his  exposition,  he  has  deliberately  dispensed  with 
thought  altogether,  and  has  deliberately  kept  his 
whole  book  all  of  a  piece  with  its  lack  of  thought. 
For  in  this  way  he  has  eliminated  the  confusion  and 
disorder  which  lessen  the  force  of  an  exposition  where 
the  accidental  is  treated  along  with  hints  of  the  sub¬ 
stantial,  where  the  purely  empirical  and  external 
are  mixed  with  a  reminiscence  of  the  universal  and 
rational,  and  where  in  the  midst  of  wretched  inani¬ 
ties  the  reader  is  now  and  again  reminded  of  the 
loftier  sphere  of  the  infinite.  For  the  same  reason 
again  his  exposition  is  consistent.  He  takes  as  the 
essence  of  the  state,  not  what  is  substantive  but  the 
sphere  of  accident,  and  consistency  in  dealing  with 
a  sphere  of  that  kind  amounts  to  the  complete  in¬ 
consistency  of  utter  thoughtlessness  which  jogs 
along  without  looking  behind,  and  is  just  as  much 
at  home  now  with  the  exact  opposite  of  what  it  ap¬ 
proved  a  moment  ago.1  [A.] 

1 1  have  described  the  book  sufficiently  to  show  that  it 
is  of  an  original  kind.  There  might  be  something  noble 
in  the  author’s  indignation  by  itself,  since  it  was  kindled 
by  the  false  theories,  mentioned  above,  emanating  prin¬ 
cipally  from  Rousseau,  and  especially  by  the  attempt  to 
realize  them  in  practice.  But  to  save  himself  from  these 
theories,  Herr  von  Haller  has  gone  to  the  other  extreme 
by  dispensing  with  thought  altogether  and  consequently 
it  cannot  be  said  that  there  is  anything  of  intrinsic  val¬ 
ue  in  his  virulent  hatred  of  all  laws  and  legislation,  of  all 
expressly  and  legally  determinate  rights.  The  hatred  of 
law,  of  right  made  determinate  in  law,  is  the  shibboleth 
whereby  fanaticism,  flabby-mindedness,  and  the  hypoc¬ 
risy  of  good  intentions  are  clearly  and  infallibly  recog¬ 
nized  for  what  they  are,  disguise  themselves  as  they  may. 

Originality  like  Herr  von  Haller’s  is  always  a  curious 
phenomenon,  and  for  those  of  my  readers  who  are  not 
yet  acquainted  with  his  book  I  will  quote  a  few  specimen 
passages.  This  is  how  he  lays  down  (vol.  i,  pp.  342  ff. 
[pp.  361  ff.])  his  most  important  basic  proposition: 
“Just  as,  in  the  inorganic  world,  the  greater  dislodges 
the  less  and  the  mighty  the  weak  .  .  .  ,  so  in  the  animal 
kingdom,  and  then  amongst  human  beings,  the  same  law 
appears  in  nobler”  (often,  too.  surely  in  ignobler?) 
“forms,” and  [p.  375]  “this,  therefore, is  the  eternal,  un¬ 
alterable,  ordinance  of  God,  that  the  mightier  rules,  must 
rule,  and  will  always  rule.”  It  is  clear  enough  from  this, 
let  alone  from  what  follows,  in  what  sense  “might”  is 
taken  here.  It  is  not  the  might  of  justice  and  ethics,  but 
only  the  irrational  power  of  brute  force.  Herr  von  Haller 
then  goes  on  {ibid.,  pp.  365  ff-  [PP-  380  ff.])  to  support 
this  doctrine  on  various  grounds,  amongst  them  that 
“nature  with  amazing  wisdom  has  so  ordered  it  that  the 
mere  sense  of  personal  superiority  irresistibly  ennobles 
the  character  and  encourages  the  development  of  just 
those  virtues  which  are  most  necessary  for  dealing  with 
subordinates.”  He  asks  with  a  great  elaboration  of  un¬ 
dergraduate  rhetoric  [ibid.']  “whether  it  is  the  strong 
or  the  weak  in  the  kingdom  of  science  who  more  misuse 
their  trust  and  their  authority  in  order  to  achieve  their 
petty  selfish  ends  and  the  ruin  of  the  credulous;  wheth¬ 
er  to  be  a  past  master  in  legal  learning  is  not  to  be  a 
pettifogger,  a  leguleius,  one  who  cheats  the  hopes  of  un¬ 
suspecting  clients,  who  makes  white  black  and  black 
white,  who  misapplies  the  law  and  makes  it  a  vehicle  for 
wrongdoing,  who  brings  to  beggary  those  who  need  his 
assistance  and  rends  them  as  the  hungry  vulture  rends 


82  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


259.  The  Idea  of  the  state 

(a)  has  immediate  actuality  and  is  the  indi¬ 
vidual  state  as  a  self-dependent  organism — the 
Constitution  or  Constitutional  Law; 

( b )  passes  over  into  the  relation  of  one  state 
to  other  states — International  Law; 

(1 c )  is  the  universal  Idea  as  a  genus  and  as  an 
absolute  power  over  individual  states — the  mind 
which  gives  itself  its  actuality  in  the  process  of 
World-History.  [A.] 

A.  Constitutional  Law 

260.  The  state  is  the  actuality  of  concrete  free¬ 
dom.  But  concrete  freedom  consists  in  this,  that 
personal  individuality  and  its  particular  inter- 


the  innocent  lamb,”  &c.,  &c.  Herr  von  Haller  forgets 
here  that  the  point  of  this  rhetoric  is  to  support  his  prop¬ 
osition  that  the  rule  of  the  mightier  is  an  everlasting  or¬ 
dinance  of  God:  so  presumably  it  is  by  the  same  ordi¬ 
nance  that  the  vulture  rends  the  innocent  lamb,  and  that 
hence  the  mighty  are  quite  right  to  treat  their  unsuspect¬ 
ing  clients  as  the  weak  and  to  make  use  of  knowledge  of 
the  law  to  empty  their  pockets.  It  would  be  too  much, 
however,  to  ask  that  two  thoughts  should  be  put  to¬ 
gether  where  there  is  really  not  a  single  one. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  Herr  von  Haller  is  an  ene¬ 
my  of  codes  of  law.  In  his  view,  the  laws  of  the  land,  are 
on  the  one  hand,  in  principle  “unnecessary,  because  they 
spring  self-explanatory  from  the  laws  of  nature.”  If  men 
had  remained  satisfied  w  ith  “self-explanatory”  as  the  ba¬ 
sis  of  their  thinking,  then  they  would  have  been  spared 
the  endless  labour  devoted,  since  ever  there  were  states, 
to  legislation  and  legal  codes,  and  which  is  still  devoted 
thereto  and  to  the  study  of  positive  law.  “On  the  other 
hand,  laws  are  not  exactly  promulgated  for  private  indi¬ 
viduals,  but  as  instructions  to  puisne  judges,  acquaint¬ 
ing  them  with  the  will  of  the  high  court”  [vol.  ii,  part  i, 
chap.  32].  Apart  from  that,  the  provision  of  law-courts 
is  (vol.  i,  p.  297  [pp.  309  ff.],  vol.  ii,  part  i,  p.  254  [pp. 
264-9]  and  all  over  the  place)  not  a  state  duty,  but  a 
favour,  help  rendered  by  the  authorities,  and  “quite  su¬ 
pererogatory”;  it  is  not  the  most  perfect  method  of 
guaranteeing  men’s  rights;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  an  in¬ 
secure  and  uncertain  method,  “the  only  one  left  to  us 
by  our  modern  lawyers.  They  have  reft  us  of  the  other 
three  methods,  of  just  those  which  lead  most  swiftly  and 
surely  to  the  goal,  those  which, unlike  law-courts,  friend¬ 
ly  nature  has  given  to  man  for  the  safeguarding  of  his 
rightful  freedom.”  And  these  three  methods  are — what 
do  you  suppose? —  “(1)  Personal  acceptance  and  incul¬ 
cation  of  the  law  of  nature;  (2)  Resistance  to  wrong; 
(3)  Flight,  when  there  is  no  other  remedy.”  Lawyers  are 
unfriendly  indeed,  it  appears,  in  comparison  with  the 
friendliness  of  nature!  “But”  (vol.  i,  p.  292  [p.  305]) 
“the  natural,  divine,  law,  given  to  everyone  by  nature 
the  all-bountiful,  is:  Honour  everyone  as  thine  equal” 
(on  the  author’s  piinciples  this  should  read  “Honour 
not  the  man  who  is  thine  equal,  but  the  one  who  is 
mightier”);  “hurt  no  man  who  hurts  thee  not;  demand 
from  him  nothing  but  what  he  owes”  (but  what  does  he 
owe?);  “nay  more,  love  thy  neighbour  and  serve  him 
when  thou  canst.”  The  “implanting  of  this  law”  is  to 
make  a  legislator  and  a  constitution  superfluous.  It  would 
be  curious  to  see  how  Herr  von  Haller  makes  it  intelli¬ 
gible  why  legislators  and  constitutions  have  appeared  in 
the  world  despite  this  “implanting.” 

In  vol.  iii,  pp.  362  [361]  ff.,  the  author  comes  to  the 
“so-called  national  liberties,”  by  which  he  means  the 
laws  and  constitutions  of  nation  states.  Every  legally 
constituted  right  is  in  this  wide  sense  of  the  word  a  “lib¬ 
erty.”  Of  these  laws  he  says,  inter  alia ,  that  “their  con¬ 
tent  is  usually  very  insignificant,  although  in  books  a 


ests  not  only  achieve  their  complete  develop¬ 
ment  and  gain  explicit  recognition  for  their  right 
(as  they  do  in  the  sphere  of  the  family  and  civil 
society)  but,  for  one  thing,  they  also  pass  over 
of  their  own  accord  into  the  interest  of  the  uni¬ 
versal,  and,  for  another  thing,  they  know  and 
will  the  universal ;  they  even  recognize  it  as  their 
own  substantive  mind;  they  take  it  as  their  end 
and  aim  and  are  active  in  its  pursuit.  The  result 
is  that  the  universal  does  not  prevail  or  achieve 
completion  except  along  with  particular  inter¬ 
ests  and  through  the  co-operation  of  particular 
knowing  and  willing;  and  individuals  likewise 
do  not  live  as  private  persons  for  their  own  ends 
alone,  but  in  the  very  act  of  willing  these  they 

high  value  may  be  placed  on  documentary  liberties  of 
that  kind.”  When  we  then  realize  that  the  author  is 
speaking  here  of  the  national  liberties  of  the  German 
Estates,  of  the  English  people  (e.g.  Magna  Carta  [p. 
367]  “which  is  little  read,  and  on  account  of  its  archaic 
phraseology  still  less  understood,”  the  Bill  of  Rights, 
and  so  forth),  of  the  people  of  Hungary,  &c.,  we  are  sur¬ 
prised  to  find  that  these  possessions,  formerly  so  highly 
prized,  are  only  insignificant;  and  no  less  surprised  to 
learn  that  it  is  only  in  books  that  these  nations  place  a 
value  on  laws  whose  co-operation  has  entered  into  every 
coat  that  is  worn  and  every  crust  that  is  eaten,  and  still 
enters  into  every  day  and  hour  of  the  lives  of  everyone. 

To  carry  quotation  further,  Herr  von  Haller  speaks 
particularly  ill  (vol.  i,  pp.  185  ff.  [pp.  192-3])  of  the 
Prussian  General  Legal  Code,  because  of  the  “incred¬ 
ible”  influence  on  it  of  the  errors  of  false  philosophy 
(though  in  this  instance  at  any  rate  the  fault  cannot  be 
ascribed  to  Kant's  philosophy,  a  topic  on  which  Herr 
von  Haller  is  at  his  angriest),  especially  where  it  speaks 
of  the  state,  the  resources  of  the  state,  the  end  of  the 
state,  the  head  of  the  state,  his  duties,  and  those  of 
civil  servants,  and  so  forth.  Herr  von  Haller  finds  par¬ 
ticularly  mischievous  [vol.  i,  pp.  198-9]  “the  right  of  de¬ 
fraying  the  expenses  of  the  state  by  levying  taxes  on  the 
private  wealth  of  individuals,  on  their  businesses,  on 
goods  produced  or  consumed.  Under  those  circumstances, 
neither  the  king  himself  (since  the  resources  of  the  state 
belong  to  the  state  and  are  not  the  private  property  of  the 
king),  nor  the  Prussian  citizens  can  call  anything  their 
own,  neither  their  person  nor  their  property;  and  all 
subjects  are  bondslaves  to  the  law,  since  they  may  not 
withdraw  themselves  from  the  service  of  the  state.” 

In  this  welter  of  incredible  crudity,  what  is  perhaps 
most  comical  of  all  is  the  emotion  with  which  Herr  von 
Haller  describes  his  unspeakable  pleasure  in  his  discov¬ 
eries  (vol.  i,  Preface  [pp.  xxv-xxvii]) — “a  joy  such  as 
only  the  friend  of  truth  can  feel  when  after  honest  search 
he  has  become  confident  that  he  has  found  as  it  were” 
(yes  indeed!  “as  it  were”  is  right!)  “the  voice  of  na¬ 
ture,  the  very  word  of  God.”  (The  truth  is  that  the  word 
of  God  very  clearly  distinguishes  its  revelations  from 
the  voices  of  nature  and  unregenerate  man.)  “The  au¬ 
thor  could  have  sunk  to  the  ground  in  open  amazement, 
a  stream  of  joyful  tears  burst  from  his  eyes,  and  living 
religious  feeling  sprang  up  in  him  there  and  then.”  Herr 
von  Haller  might  have  discovered  by  his  “religious  feel¬ 
ing”  that  he  should  rather  bewail  his  condition  as  the 
hardest  chastisement  of  God.  For  the  hardest  thing  which 
man  can  experience  is  to  be  so  far  excluded  from  thought 
and  reason,  from  respect  for  the  laws,  and  from  knowing 
how  infinitely  important  and  divine  it  is  that  the  duties 
of  the  state  and  the  rights  of  the  citizens,  as  well  as  the 
rights  of  the  state  and  the  duties  of  the  citizens,  should 
be  defined  by  law — to  be  so  far  excluded  from  all  this 
that  absurdity  can  foist  itself  upon  him  as  the  word  of 
God. 


ETHICAL  LIFE  83 


will  the  universal  in  the  light  of  the  universal, 
and  their  activity  is  consciously  aimed  at  none 
but  the  universal  end.  The  principle  of  modern 
states  has  prodigious  strength  and  depth  because 
it  allows  the  principle  of  subjectivity  to  prog¬ 
ress  to  its  culmination  in  the  extreme  of  self- 
subsistent  personal  particularity,  and  yet  at  the 
same  time  brings  it  back  to  the  substantive  unity 
and  so  maintains  this  unity  in  the  principle  of 
subjectivity  itself.  [A.] 

261.  In  contrast  with  the  spheres  of  private 
rights  and  private  welfare  (the  family  and  civil 
society),  the  state  is  from  one  point  of  view  an 
external  necessity  and  their  higher  authority; 
its  nature  is  such  that  their  laws  and  interests 
are  subordinate  to  it  and  dependent  on  it.  On  the 
other  hand,  however,  it  is  the  end  immanent 
within  them,  and  its  strength  lies  in  the  unity  of 
its  own  universal  end  and  aim  with  the  particu¬ 
lar  interest  of  individuals,  in  the  fact  that  in¬ 
dividuals  have  duties  to  the  state  in  proportion 
as  they  have  rights  against  it  (see  Paragraph 

155)- 

In  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  3  above,  reference 
was  made  to  the  fact  that  it  was  Montesquieu  above 
all  who, in  his  famous  work  The  Spirit  of  Laws, kept 
in  sight  and  tried  to  work  out  in  detail  both  the 
thought  of  the  dependence  of  laws — in  particular, 
laws  concerning  the  rights  of  persons — on  the  spe¬ 
cific  character  of  the  state,  and  also  the  philosophic 
notion  of  always  treating  the  part  in  its  relation  to 
the  whole. 

Duty  is  primarily  a  relation  to  something  which 
from  my  point  of  view  is  substantive,  absolutely 
universal.  A  right,  on  the  other  hand,  is  simply  the 
embodiment  of  this  substance  and  thus  is  the  par¬ 
ticular  aspect  of  it  and  enshrines  my  particular  free¬ 
dom.  Hence  at  abstract  levels,  right  and  duty  appear 
parcelled  out  on  different  sides  or  in  different  per¬ 
sons.  In  the  state,  as  something  ethical,  as  the  inter¬ 
penetration  of  the  substantive  and  the  particular, 
my  obligation  to  what  is  substantive  is  at  the  same 
time  the  embodiment  of  my  particular  freedom. 
This  means  that  in  the  state  duty  and  right  are 
united  in  one  and  the  same  relation.  But  further, 
since  none  the  less  the  distinct  moments  acquire  in 
the  state  the  shape  and  reality  peculiar  to  each,  and 
since  therefore  the  distinction  between  right  and 
duty  enters  here  once  again,  it  follows  that  while 
implicitly,  i.e.  in  form,  identical,  they  at  the  same 
time  differ  in  content.  In  the  spheres  of  personal 
rights  and  morality,  the  necessary  bearing  of  right 
and  duty  on  one  another  falls  short  of  actualization ; 
and  hence  there  is  at  that  point  only  an  abstract 
similarity  of  content  between  them,  i.e.  in  those  ab¬ 
stract  spheres,  what  is  one  man’s  right  ought  also  to 
be  another’s,  and  what  is  one  man’s  duty  ought  also 
to  be  another’s.  The  absolute  identity  of  right  and 
duty  in  the  state  is  present  in  these  spheres  not  as  a 


genuine  identity  but  only  as  a  similarity  of  content, 
because  in  them  this  content  is  determined  as  quite 
general  and  is  simply  the  fundamental  principle  of 
both  right  and  duty,  i.e.  the  principle  that  men,  as 
persons,  are  free.  Slaves,  therefore,  have  no  duties 
because  they  have  no  rights,  and  vice  versa.  (Reli¬ 
gious  duties  are  not  here  in  point.1) 

In  the  course  of  the  inward  development  of  the 
concrete  Idea,  however,  its  moments  become  dis¬ 
tinguished  and  their  specific  determinacy  becomes 
at  the  same  time  a  difference  of  content.  In  the  fami¬ 
ly,  the  content  of  a  son’s  duties  to  his  father  differs 
from  the  content  of  his  rights  against  him ;  the  con¬ 
tent  of  the  rights  of  a  member  of  civil  society  is  not 
the  same  as  the  content  of  his  duties  to  his  prince 
and  government. 

This  concept  of  the  union  of  duty  and  right  is  a 
point  of  vital  importance  and  in  it  the  inner  strength 
of  states  is  contained. 

Duty  on  its  abstract  side  goes  no  farther  than  the 
persistent  neglect  and  proscription  of  a  man’s  par¬ 
ticular  interest,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  the  inessen¬ 
tial,  even  the  discreditable,  moment  in  his  life.  Duty, 
taken  concretely  as  Idea,  reveals  the  moment  of  par¬ 
ticularity  as  itself  essential  and  so  regards  its  satis¬ 
faction  as  indisputably  necessary.  In  whatever  way 
an  individual  may  fulfil  his  duty,  he  must  at  the 
same  time  find  his  account  therein  and  attain  his 
personal  interest  and  satisfaction.  Out  of  his  posi¬ 
tion  in  the  state,  a  right  must  accrue  to  him  where¬ 
by  public  affairs  shall  be  his  own  particular  affair. 
Particular  interests  should  in  fact  not  be  set  aside  or 
completely  suppressed ;  instead,  they  should  be  put 
in  correspondence  with  the  universal,  and  thereby 
both  they  and  the  universal  are  upheld.  The  isolated 
individual,  so  far  as  his  duties  are  concerned,  is  in 
subjection ;  but  as  a  member  of  civil  society  he  finds 
in  fulfilling  his  duties  to  it  protection  of  his  person 
and  property,  regard  for  his  private  welfare,  the 
satisfaction  of  the  depths  of  his  being,  the  conscious¬ 
ness  and  feeling  of  himself  as  a  member  of  the 
whole;  and,  in  so  far  as  he  completely  fulfils  his 
duties  by  performing  tasks  and  services  for  the  state, 
he  is  upheld  and  preserved.  Take  duty  abstractly, 
and  the  universal’s  interest  would  consist  simply  in 
the  completion  as  duties  of  the  tasks  and  services 
which  it  exacts.  [A.] 

262.  The  actual  Idea  is  mind,  which,  sunder¬ 
ing  itself  into  the  two  ideal  spheres  of  its  con¬ 
cept,  family  and  civil  society,  enters  upon  its 
finite  phase,  but  it  does  so  only  in  order  to  rise 
above  its  ideality  and  become  explicit  as  in¬ 
finite  actual  mind.  It  is  therefore  to  these  ideal 
spheres  that  the  actual  Idea  assigns  the  material 
of  this  its  finite  actuality,  viz.  human  beings  as 
a  mass,  in  such  a  way  that  the  function  assigned 
to  any  given  individual  is  visibly  mediated  by 
circumstances,  his  caprice  and  his  personal 

1  See  Hegel’s  second  footnote  to  the  Remark  to  Para¬ 
graph  270. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


choice  of  his  station  in  life  (see  Paragraph  185 
and  the  Remark  thereto).  [A.] 

263.  In  these  spheres  in  which  its  moments, 
particularity  and  individuality,  have  their  im¬ 
mediate  and  reflected  reality,  mind  is  present  as 
their  objective  universality  glimmering  in  them 
as  the  power  of  reason  in  necessity  (see  Para¬ 
graph  184),  i.e.  as  the  institutions  considered 
above.  [A.] 

264.  Mind  is  the  nature  of  human  beings  en 
masse  and  their  nature  is  therefore  twofold:  (i) 
at  one  extreme,  explicit  individuality  of  con¬ 
sciousness  and  will,  and  (ii)  at  the  other  ex¬ 
treme,  universality  which  knows  and  wills  what 
is  substantive.  Hence  they  attain  their  right  in 
both  these  respects  only  in  so  far  as  both  their 
private  personality  and  its  substantive  basis  are 
actualized.  Now  in  the  family  and  civil  society 
they  acquire  their  right  in  the  first  of  these  re¬ 
spects  directly  and  in  the  second  indirectly,  in 
that  (i)  they  find  their  substantive  self-con¬ 
sciousness  in  social  institutions  which  are  the 
universal  implicit  in  their  particular  interests, 
and  (ii)  the  Corporation  supplies  them  with  an 
occupation  and  an  activity  directed  on  a  univer¬ 
sal  end. 

265.  These  institutions  are  the  components  of 
the  constitution  (i.e.  of  rationality  developed 
and  actualized)  in  the  sphere  of  particularity. 
They  are,  therefore,  the  firm  foundation  not  only 
of  the  state  but  also  of  the  citizen’s  trust  in  it 
and  sentiment  towards  it.  They  are  the  pillars 
of  public  freedom  since  in  them  particular  free¬ 
dom  is  realized  and  rational,  and  therefore  there 
is  implicitly  present  even  in  them  the  union  of 
freedom  and  necessity.  [A.] 

266.  But  mind  is  objective  and  actual  to  itself 
not  merely  as  this  necessity  and  as  a  realm  of 
appearance,  but  also  as  the  ideality  and  the  heart 
of  this  necessity.  Only  in  this  way  is  this  sub¬ 
stantive  universality  aware  of  itself  as  its  own 
object  and  end,  with  the  result  that  the  necessity 
appears  to  itself  in  the  shape  of  freedom  as 
well. 

267.  This  necessity  in  ideality  is  the  inner  self¬ 
development  of  the  Idea.  As  the  substance  of 
the  individual  subject,  it  is  his  political  senti¬ 
ment  [patriotism]  ;  in  distinction  therefrom,  as 
the  substance  of  the  objective  world,  it  is  the 
organism  of  the  state,  i.e.  it  is  the  strictly  polit¬ 
ical  state1  and  its  constitution.  [A.] 

1  See  Paragraphs  273,  276. — Ed. 


268.  The  political  sentiment,  patriotism  pure 
and  simple,  is  assured  conviction  with  truth  as 
its  basis — mere  subjective  assurance  is  not  the 
outcome  of  truth  but  is  only  opinion — and  a 
volition  which  has  become  habitual.  In  this 
sense  it  is  simply  a  product  of  the  institutions 
subsisting  in  the  state,  since  rationality  is  actu¬ 
ally  present  in  the  state,  while  action  in  conform¬ 
ity  with  these  institutions  gives  rationality  its 
practical  proof.  This  sentiment  is,  in  general, 
trust  (which  may  pass  over  into  a  greater  or 
lesser  degree  of  educated  insight),  or  the  con¬ 
sciousness  that  my  interest,  both  substantive 
and  particular,  is  contained  and  preserved  in 
another’s  (i.e.  in  that  state’s)  interest  and  end, 
i.e.  in  the  other’s  relation  to  me  as  an  individual. 
In  this  way,  this  very  other  is  immediately  not 
an  other  in  my  eyes,  and  in  being  conscious  of 
this  fact,  I  am  free. 

Patriotism  is  often  understood  to  mean  only  a 
readiness  for  exceptional  sacrifices  and  actions.  Es¬ 
sentially,  however,  it  is  the  sentiment  which,  in  the 
relationships  of  our  daily  life  and  under  ordinary 
conditions,  habitually  recognizes  that  the  commu¬ 
nity  is  one’s  substantive  groundwork  and  end.  It  is 
out  of  this  consciousness,  which  during  life’s  daily 
round  stands  the  test  in  all  circumstances,  that  there 
subsequently  also  arises  the  readiness  for  extraordi¬ 
nary  exertions.  But  since  men  would  often  rather 
be  magnanimous  than  law-abiding,  they  readily  per¬ 
suade  themselves  that  they  possess  this  exceptional 
patriotism  in  order  to  be  sparing  in  the  expression 
of  a  genuine  patriotic  sentiment  or  to  excuse  their 
lack  of  it.  If  again  this  genuine  patriotism  is  looked 
upon  as  that  which  may  begin  of  itself  and  arise 
from  subjective  ideas  and  thoughts,  it  is  being  con¬ 
fused  with  opinion,  because  so  regarded  patriotism 
is  deprived  of  its  true  ground,  objective  reality.  [A.] 

269.  The  patriotic  sentiment  acquires  its  spe¬ 
cifically  determined  content  from  the  various 
members  of  the  organism  of  the  state.  This 
organism  is  the  development  of  the  Idea  to  its 
differences  and  their  objective  actuality.  Hence 
these  different  members  are  the  various  powers 
of  the  state  with  their  functions  and  spheres  of 
action,  by  means  of  which  the  universal  contin¬ 
ually  engenders  itself,  and  engenders  itself  in  a 
necessary  way  because  their  specific  character 
is  fixed  by  the  nature  of  the  concept.  Through¬ 
out  this  process  the  universal  maintains  its  iden¬ 
tity,  since  it  is  itself  the  presupposition  of  its 
own  production.  This  organism  is  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  state.  [A.] 

270.  (1)  The  abstract  actuality  or  the  sub¬ 
stantiality  of  the  state  consists  in  the  fact  that 
its  end  is  the  universal  interest  as  such  and  the 
conservation  therein  of  particular  interests  since 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


the  universal  interest  is  the  substance  of  these. 
(2)  But  this  substantiality  of  the  state  is  also 
its  necessity,  since  its  substantiality  is  divided 
into  the  distinct  spheres  of  its  activity  which 
correspond  to  the  moments  of  its  concept,  and 
these  spheres,  owing  to  this  substantiality,  are 
thus  actually  fixed  determinate  characteristics 
of  the  state,  i.e.  its  powers.  (3)  But  this  very 
substantiality  of  the  state  is  mind  knowing  and 
willing  itself  after  passing  through  the  forming 
process  of  education.  The  state,  therefore,  knows 
what  it  wills  and  knows  it  in  its  universality,  i.e. 
as  something  thought.  Hence  it  works  and  acts 
by  reference  to  consciously  adopted  ends,  known 
principles,  and  laws  which  are  not  merely  implic¬ 
it  but  are  actually  present  to  consciousness; 
and  further,  it  acts  with  precise  knowledge  of 
existing  conditions  and  circumstances, inasmuch 
as  its  actions  have  a  bearing  on  these. 

This  is  the  place  to  allude  to  the  relation  of  the 
state  to  religion,  because  it  is  often  reiterated  nowa¬ 
days  that  religion  is  the  basis  of  the  state,  and  be¬ 
cause  those  who  make  this  assertion  even  have  the 
impertinence  to  suggest  that,  once  it  is  made,  politi¬ 
cal  science  has  said  its  last  word.  No  doctrine  is  more 
fitted  to  produce  so  much  confusion,  more  fitted  in¬ 
deed  to  exalt  confusion  itself  to  be  the  constitution 
of  the  state  and  the  proper  form  of  knowledge. 

In  the  first  place,  it  may  seem  suspicious  that  reli¬ 
gion  is  principally  sought  and  recommended  for 
times  of  public  calamity,  disorder,  and  oppression, 
and  that  people  are  referred  to  it  as  a  solace  in  face 
of  wrong  or  as  a  hope  in  compensation  for  loss. 
Then  further,  while  the  state  is  mind  on  earth  ( der 
Geist  der  in  der  Welt  steht),  religion  may  sometimes 
be  looked  upon  as  commanding  downright  indiffer¬ 
ence  to  earthly  interests,  the  march  of  events,  and 
current  affairs,  and  so  to  turn  men’s  attention  to 
religion  does  not  seem  to  be  the  way  to  exalt  the  in¬ 
terest  and  business  of  the  state  into  the  fundamental 
and  serious  aim  of  life.  On  the  contrary,  this  sug¬ 
gestion  seems  to  assert  that  politics  is  wholly  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  caprice  and  indifference,  either  because  this 
way  of  talking  merely  amounts  to  saying  that  it  is 
only  the  aims  of  passion  and  lawless  force,  &c.,  which 
bear  sway  in  the  state,  or  because  this  recommenda¬ 
tion  of  religion  is  supposed  to  be  of  self-sufficient 
validity,  and  religion  is  to  claim  to  decide  the  law 
and  administer  it.  While  it  might  seem  a  bitter  jest 
to  stifle  all  animus  against  tyranny  by  asserting  that 
the  oppressed  find  their  consolation  in  religion,  it 
still  must  not  be  forgotten  that  religion  may  take  a 
form  leading  to  the  harshest  bondage  in  the  fetters 
of  superstitution  and  man’s  degraded  subservience 
to  animals.  (The  Egyptians  and  the  Hindus,  for  in¬ 
stance,  revere  animals  as  beings  higher  than  them¬ 
selves.)  This  phenomenon  may  at  least  make  it  evi¬ 
dent  that  we  ought  not  to  speak  of  religion  at  all  in 
general  terms  and  that  we  really  need  a  power  to 
protect  us  from  it  in  some  of  its  forms  and  to  es- 


85 

pouse  against  them  the  rights  of  reason  and  self- 
consciousness. 

The  essence  of  the  relation  between  religion  and 
the  state  can  be  determined,  however,  only  if  we  re¬ 
call  the  concept  of  religion.  The  content  of  religion 
is  absolute  truth,  and  consequently  the  religious  is 
the  most  sublime  of  all  dispositions.  As  intuition, 
feeling,  representative  knowledge,  its  task  is  con¬ 
centrated  upon  God  as  the  unrestricted  principle 
and  cause  on  which  everything  hangs.  It  thus  in¬ 
volves  the  demand  that  everything  else  shall  be  seen 
in  this  light  and  depend  on  it  for  corroboration, 
justification,  and  verification.  It  is  in  being  thus  re¬ 
lated  to  religion  that  state,  laws,  and  duties  all  alike 
acquire  for  consciousness  their  supreme  confirma¬ 
tion  and  their  supreme  obligatoriness,  because  even 
the  state,  laws,  and  duties  are  in  their  actuality 
something  determinate  which  passes  over  into  a  high¬ 
er  sphere  and  so  into  that  on  which  it  is  grounded.1 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  in  religion  there  lies  the 
place  where  man  is  always  assured  of  finding  a  con¬ 
sciousness  of  the  unchangeable,  of  the  highest  free¬ 
dom  and  satisfaction,  even  within  all  the  mutability 
of  the  world  and  despite  the  frustration  of  his  aims 
and  the  loss  of  his  interests  and  possessions.2  Now 
if  religion  is  in  this  way  the  groundwork  which  in¬ 
cludes  the  ethical  realm  in  general,  and  the  state’s 
fundamental  nature — the  divine  will — in  particular, 
it  is  at  the  same  time  only  a  groundwork ;  and  it  is 
at  this  point  that  state  and  religion  begin  to  diverge. 
The  state  is  the  divine  will,  in  the  sense  that  it  is 
mind  present  on  earth,  unfolding  itself  to  be  the  ac¬ 
tual  shape  and  organization  of  a  world.  Those  who 
insist  on  stopping  at  the  form  of  religion,  as  opposed 
to  the  state,  are  acting  like  those  logicians  who  think 
they  are  right  if  they  continually  stop  at  the  essence 
and  refuse  to  advance  beyond  that  abstraction  to 
existence,  or  like  those  moralists  (see  Remark  to 
Paragraph  140)  who  will  only  good  in  the  abstract 
and  leave  it  to  caprice  to  decide  what  is  good.  Reli¬ 
gion  is  a  relation  to  the  Absolute,  a  relation  which 
takes  the  form  of  feeling,  representative  thinking, 
faith ;  and,  brought  within  its  all-embracing  circum¬ 
ference,  everything  becomes  only  accidental  and 
transient.  Now  if,  in  relation  to  the  state,  we  cling  to 
this  form  of  experience  and  make  it  the  authority 
for  the  state  and  its  essential  determinant,  the  state 
must  become  a  prey  to  weakness,  insecurity,  and 

1  See  Enc.  [1st  edn.],  §  453  [3rd  edn.  §  553]. 

2  Religion,  knowledge,  and  science  have  as  their  princi¬ 
ple  a  form  peculiar  to  each  and  different  from  that  of 
the  state.  They  therefore  enter  the  state  partly  as  means 
— means  to  education  and  [a  higher]  mentality — partly 
in  so  far  as  they  are  in  essence  ends  in  themselves,  for 
the  reason  that  they  are  embodied  in  existent  institutions. 
In  both  these  respects  the  principles  of  the  state  have,  in 
their  application,  a  bearing  on  them.  A  comprehensive, 
concrete  treatise  on  the  state  would  also  have  to  deal 
with  those  spheres  of  life  as  well  as  with  art  and  such 
things  as  mere  geographical  matters,  and  to  consider 
their  place  in  the  state  and  their  bearing  on  it.  In  this 
book,  however,  it  is  the  principle  of  the  state  in  its  own 
special  sphere  which  is  being  fully  expounded  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  Idea,  and  it  is  only  in  passing  that  ref¬ 
erence  can  be  made  to  the  principles  of  religion,  &c.,  and 
to  the  application  of  the  right  of  the  state  to  them. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


86 

disorder,  because  it  is  an  organism  in  which  firmly 
fixed  distinct  powers,  laws,  and  institutions  have 
been  developed.  In  contrast  with  the  form  of  reli¬ 
gion,  a  form  which  draws  a  veil  over  everything  de¬ 
terminate,  and  so  comes  to  be  purely  subjective,  the 
objective  and  universal  element  in  the  state,  i.e.  the 
laws,  acquires  a  negative  instead  of  a  stable  and  au¬ 
thoritative  character,  and  the  result  is  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  maxims  of  conduct  like  the  following:  “To 
the  righteous  man  no  law  is  given ;  only  be  pious, 
and  for  the  rest,  practise  what  thou  wilt;  yield  to 
thine  own  caprice  and  passion,  and  if  thereby  others 
suffer  wrong,  commend  them  to  the  consolations  and 
hopes  of  religion,  or  better  still,  call  them  irreligious 
and  condemn  them  to  perdition.”  This  negative  at¬ 
titude,  however,  may  not  confine  itself  to  an  inner 
disposition  and  attitude  of  mind;  it  may  turn  in¬ 
stead  to  the  outside  world  and  assert  its  authority 
there,  and  then  there  is  an  outbreak  of  the  religious 
fanaticism  which,  like  fanaticism  in  politics, discards 
all  government  and  legal  order  as  barriers  cramping 
the  inner  life  of  the  heart  and  incompatible  with  its 
infinity,  and  at  the  same  time  proscribes  private 
property,  marriage,  the  ties  and  work  involved  in 
civil  society,  &c.,  &c.,  as  degrading  to  love  and  the 
freedom  of  feeling.  But  since  even  then  decisions 
must  somehow  be  made  for  everyday  life  and  prac¬ 
tice,  the  same  doctrine  which  we  had  before  (see 
Remark  to  Paragraph  140,  where  we  dealt  generally 
with  the  subjectivity  of  the  will  which  knows  itself 
to  be  absolute)  turns  up  again  here,  namely  that 
subjective  ideas,  i.e.  opinion  and  capricious  inclina¬ 
tion,  are  to  do  the  deciding. 

In  contrast  with  the  truth  thus  veiled  behind  sub¬ 
jective  ideas  and  feelings,  the  genuine  truth  is  the 
prodigious  transfer  of  the  inner  into  the  outer,  the 
building  of  reason  into  the  real  world,  and  this  has 
been  the  task  of  the  world  during  the  whole  course 
of  its  history.  It  is  by  working  at  this  task  that  civi¬ 
lized  man  has  actually  given  reason  an  embodiment 
in  law  and  government  and  achieved  consciousness 
of  the  fact.  Those  who  “seek  guidance  from  the 
Lord”  and  are  assured  that  the  whole  truth  is  di¬ 
rectly  present  in  their  unschooled  opinions,  fail  to 
apply  themselves  to  the  task  of  exalting  their  sub¬ 
jectivity  to  consciousness  of  the  truth  and  to  knowl¬ 
edge  of  duty  and  objective  right.  The  only  possible 
fruits  of  their  attitude  are  folly,  abomination,  and 
the  demolition  of  the  whole  ethical  order,  and  these 
fruits  must  inevitably  be  reaped  if  the  religious  dis¬ 
position  holds  firmly  and  exclusively  to  its  intuitive 
form  and  so  turns  against  the  real  world  and  the 
truth  present  in  it  in  the  form  of  the  universal,  i.e. 
of  the  laws.  Still,  there  is  no  necessity  for  this  dis¬ 
position  to  turn  outward  and  actualize  itself  in  this 
way.  With  its  negative  standpoint,  it  is  of  course  also 
open  to  it  to  remain  something  inward,  to  accom¬ 
modate  itself  to  government  and  law,  and  to  ac¬ 
quiesce  in  these  with  sneers  and  idle  longings,  or 
with  a  sigh  of  resignation.  It  is  not  strength  but 
weakness  which  has  turned  religious  feeling  nowa¬ 
days  into  piety  of  a  polemical  kind,  whether  the 


polemic  be  connected  with  some  genuine  need  or  sim¬ 
ply  with  unsatisfied  vanity.  Instead  of  subduing 
one’s  opinions  by  the  labour  of  study, and  subjecting 
one’s  will  to  discipline  and  so  elevating  it  to  free 
obedience,  the  line  of  least  resistance  is  to  renounce 
knowledge  of  objective  truth.  Along  this  line  we 
may  preserve  a  feeling  of  abject  humility  and  so  al¬ 
so  of  self-conceit,  and  claim  to  have  ready  to  hand 
in  godliness  everything  requisite  for  seeing  into  the 
heart  of  law  and  government,  for  passing  sentence 
on  them,  and  laying  down  what  their  character 
should  and  must  be  ;  and  of  course  if  we  take  this 
line,  the  source  of  our  claims  is  a  pious  heart,  and 
they  are  therefore  infallible,  and  unimpeachable, 
and  the  upshot  is  that  since  we  make  religion  the 
basis  of  our  intentions  and  assertions,  they  cannot 
be  criticized  on  the  score  of  their  shallowness  or  their 
immorality. 

But  if  religion  be  religion  of  a  genuine  kind,  it  does 
not  run  counter  to  the  state  in  a  negative  or  po¬ 
lemical  way  like  the  kind  just  described.  It  rather 
recognizes  the  state  and  upholds  it,  and  furthermore 
it  has  a  position  and  an  external  organization  of  its 
own.  The  practice  of  its  worship  consists  in  ritual 
and  doctrinal  instruction,  and  for  this  purpose  pos¬ 
sessions  and  property  are  required,  as  well  as  indi¬ 
viduals  dedicated  to  the  service  of  the  flock.  There 
thus  arises  a  relation  between  the  state  and  the 
church.  To  determine  this  relation  is  a  simple  mat¬ 
ter.  In  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  state  discharges  a 
duty  by  affording  every  assistance  and  protection 
to  the  church  in  the  furtherance  of  its  religious  ends ; 
and,  in  addition,  since  religion  is  an  integrating  fac¬ 
tor  in  the  state,  implanting  a  sense  of  unity  in  the 
depths  of  men’s  minds,  the  state  should  even  require 
all  its  citizens  to  belong  to  a  church — a  church  is  all 
that  can  be  said,  because  since  the  content  of  a 
man’s  faith  depends  on  his  private  ideas,  the  state 
cannot  interfere  with  it.  A  state  which  is  strong  be¬ 
cause  its  organization  is  mature  may  be  all  the  more 
liberal  in  this  matter;  it  may  entirely  overlook  de¬ 
tails  of  religious  practice  which  affect  it,  and  may 
even  tolerate  a  sect  (though,  of  course,  all  depends  on 
its  numbers)  which  on  religious  grounds  declines  to 
recognize  even  its  direct  duties  to  the  state.  The  rea¬ 
son  for  the  state’s  liberal  attitude  here  is  that  it 
makes  over  the  members  of  such  sects  to  civil  society 
and  its  laws,  and  is  content  if  they  fulfil  their  direct 
duties  to  the  state  passively,  for  instance  by  such 
means  as  commutation  or  the  performance  of  a  dif¬ 
ferent  service.1 

1  Quakers,  Anabaptists,  &c.,  may  be  said  to  be  active 
members  only  of  civil  society,  and  they  may  be  regarded 
as  private  persons  standing  in  merely  private  relations 
toothers.  Even  when  this  position  has  been  allowed  them, 
they  have  been  exempted  from  taking  the  oath.  They  ful¬ 
fil  their  direct  duties  to  the  state  in  a  passive  way;  one 
of  the  most  important  of  these  duties,  the  defence  of 
the  state  against  its  enemies,  they  refuse  outright  to  ful¬ 
fil,  and  their  refusal  may  perhaps  be  admitted  provided 
they  perform  some  other  service  instead.  To  sects  of 
this  kind,  the  state’s  attitude  is  toleration  in  the 
strict  sense  of  the  word,  because  since  they  decline  to 
recognize  their  duty  to  the  state,  they  may  not  claim 
the  rights  of  citizenship.  On  one  occasion  when  the  abo- 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


But  since  the  church  owns  property  and  carries  on 
besides  the  practice  of  worship,  and  since  therefore 
it  must  have  people  in  its  service,  it  forsakes  the  in¬ 
ner  for  the  worldly  life  and  therefore  enters  the  do¬ 
main  of  the  state,  and  eo  ipso  comes  under  its  laws. 
The  oath  and  ethical  ties  generally,  like  the  marriage 
bond,  entail  that  inner  permeation  and  elevation  of 
sentiment  which  acquires  its  deepest  confirmation 
through  religion.  But  since  ethical  ties  are  in  essence 
ties  within  the  actual  rational  order,  the  first  thing 
is  to  affirm  within  that  order  the  rights  which  it  in¬ 
volves.  Confirmation  of  these  rights  by  the  church 
is  secondary  and  is  only  the  inward,  comparatively 
abstract,  side  of  the  matter. 

As  for  the  other  ways  in  which  an  ecclesiastical 
communion  gives  expression  to  itself,  so  far  as  doc¬ 
trine  is  concerned  the  inward  preponderates  over 
the  outward  to  a  greater  extent  than  is  the  case  with 
acts  of  worship  and  other  lines  of  conduct  connected 
with  these,  in  which  the  legal  side  at  least  seems  at 
once  to  be  a  matter  for  the  state.  (It  is  true,  of 
course,  that  churches  have  managed  to  exempt  their 
ministers  and  property  from  the  power  and  juris¬ 
diction  of  the  state,  and  they  have  even  arrogated  to 
themselves  jurisdiction  over  laymen  as  well  in  mat¬ 
ters  in  which  religion  co-operates,  such  as  divorce 
and  the  taking  of  the  oath,  &c.)  Public  control  of 
actions  of  this  kind  is  indeterminate  in  extent,  but 
this  is  due  to  the  nature  of  public  control  itself  and 
obtains  similarly  in  purely  civil  transactions  (see 
Paragraph  234).  When  individuals,  holding  religious 
views  in  common,  form  themselves  into  a  church,  a 
Corporation,  they  fall  under  the  general  control  and 

lition  of  the  slave-trade  was  being  pressed  with  great 
vigour  in  the  American  Congress,  a  member  from  one 
of  the  Southern  States  made  the  striking  retort:  “Give 
us  our  slaves,  and  you  may  keep  your  Quakers.”  Only 
if  the  state  is  otherwise  strong  can  it  overlook  and  suf¬ 
fer  such  anomalies,  because  it  can  then  rely  principally 
on  the  strength  of  custom  and  the  inner  rationality  of  its 
institutions  to  diminish  and  close  the  gap  between  the 
existence  of  anomalies  and  the  full  assertion  of  its  own 
strict  rights.  Thus  technically  it  may  have  been  right  to 
refuse  a  grant  of  even  civil  rights  to  the  Jews  on  the 
ground  that  they  should  be  regarded  as  belonging  not 
merely  to  a  religious  sect  but  to  a  foreign  race.  But  the 
fierce  outcry  raised  against  the  Jews,  from  that  point  of 
view  and  others,  ignores  the  fact  that  they  are,  above  all, 
men;  and  manhood,  so  far  from  being  a  mere  superficial, 
abstract  quality  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  209),  is  on 
the  contrary  itself  the  basis  of  the  fact  that  what  civil 
rights  rouse  in  their  possessors  is  the  feeling  of  oneself 
as  counting  in  civil  society  as  a  person  with  rights,  and 
this  feeling  of  selfhood,  infinite  and  free  from  all  re¬ 
strictions,  is  the  root  from  which  the  desired  similarity 
in  disposition  and  ways  of  thinking  comes  into  being.  To 
exclude  the  Jews  from  civil  rights,  on  the  other  hand, 
would  rather  be  to  confirm  the  isolation  with  which  they 
have  been  reproached — a  result  for  which  the  state  refus¬ 
ing  them  rights  would  be  blamable  and  reproachable,  be¬ 
cause  by  so  refusing,  it  would  have  misunderstood  its 
own  basic  principle,  its  nature  as  an  objective  and  pow¬ 
erful  institution  (compare  the  end  of  the  Remark  to 
Paragraph  268).  The  exclusion  of  the  Jews  from  civil 
rights  may  be  supposed  to  be  a  right  of  the  highest  kind 
and  may  be  demanded  on  that  ground;  but  experience 
has  shown  that  so  to  exclude  them  is  the  silliest  folly, 
and  the  way  in  which  governments  now  treat  them  has 
proved  itself  to  be  both  prudent  and  dignified. 


87 

oversight  of  the  higher  state  officials.  Doctrine  as 
such,  however,  has  its  domain  in  conscience  and  falls 
within  the  right  of  the  subjective  freedom  of  self- 
consciousness,  the  sphere  of  the  inner  life,  which  as 
such  is  not  the  domain  of  the  state.  Yet  the  state, 
too,  has  a  doctrine,  since  its  organization  and  what¬ 
ever  rights  and  constitution  are  authoritative  with¬ 
in  it  exist  essentially  in  the  form  of  thought  as  law. 
And  since  the  state  is  not  a  mechanism  but  the  ra¬ 
tional  life  of  self-conscious  freedom,  the  system  of 
the  ethical  world,  it  follows  that  an  essential  mo¬ 
ment  in  the  actual  state  is  the  mental  attitude  of  the 
citizens,  and  so  their  consciousness  of  the  principles 
which  this  attitude  implies.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
doctrine  of  the  church  is  not  purely  and  simply  an 
inward  concern  of  conscience.  As  doctrine  it  is  rath¬ 
er  the  expression  of  something,  in  fact  the  expression 
of  a  subject-matter  which  is  most  closely  linked,  or 
even  directly  concerned,  with  ethical  principles  and 
the  law  of  the  land.  Hence  at  this  point  the  paths  of 
church  and  state  either  coincide  or  diverge  at  right 
angles.  The  difference  of  their  two  domains  may  be 
pushed  by  the  church  into  sheer  antagonism  since, 
by  regarding  itself  as  enshrining  the  content  of  reli¬ 
gion — a  content  which  is  absolute — it  may  claim  as 
its  portion  mind  in  general  and  so  the  whole  ethical 
sphere,  and  conceive  the  state  as  a  mere  mechanical 
scaffolding  for  the  attainment  of  external,  non¬ 
mental,  ends.  It  may  take  itself  to  be  the  Kingdom 
of  God,  or  at  least  as  the  road  to  it  or  its  vestibule, 
while  it  regards  the  state  as  the  kingdom  of  this 
world,  i.e.  of  the  transient  and  the  finite.  In  a  word, 
it  may  think  that  it  is  an  end  in  itself,  while  the 
state  is  a  mere  means.  These  claims  produce  the  de¬ 
mand,  in  connexion  with  doctrinal  instruction,  that 
the  state  should  not  only  allow  the  church  to  do  as  it 
likes  with  complete  freedom,  but  that  it  should  pay 
unconditional  respect  to  the  church’s  doctrines  as 
doctrines,  whatever  their  character,  because  their 
determination  is  supposed  to  be  the  task  of  the  church 
alone.  The  church  bases  this  claim  on  the  wide 
ground  that  the  whole  domain  of  mind  ( Geist )  is 
its  property.  But  science  and  all  types  of  knowledge 
also  have  a  footing  in  that  domain  and,  like  a  church, 
they  build  themselves  into  a  whole  with  a  guiding 
principle  of  its  own,  and,  with  even  better  justifica¬ 
tion,  may  regard  themselves  as  occupying  the  posi¬ 
tion  which  the  church  claims.  Hence  science  also 
may  in  the  same  way  demand  to  be  independent  of 
the  state,  which  is  then  supposed  to  be  a  mere  means 
with  the  task  of  providing  for  science  as  though 
science  were  an  end  in  itself. 

Further,  for  determining  the  relation  between 
church  and  state,  it  makes  no  difference  whether  the 
leaders  of  congregations  or  individuals  ordained  to 
the  service  of  the  church  feel  impelled  to  withdraw 
from  the  state  and  lead  a  sort  of  secluded  life  of 
their  own,  so  that  only  the  other  church  members 
are  subject  to  the  state’s  control,  or  whether  they  re¬ 
main  within  the  state  except  in  their  capacity  as  ec¬ 
clesiastics,  a  capacity  which  they  take  to  be  but  one 
side  of  their  life.  The  most  striking  thing  about  such 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


88 

a  conception  of  the  church’s  relation  to  the  state  is 
that  it  implies  the  idea  that  the  state’s  specific  func¬ 
tion  consists  in  protecting  and  securing  everyone’s 
life,  property,  and  caprice,  in  so  far  as  these  do  not 
encroach  upon  the  life,  property,  and  caprice  of  oth¬ 
ers.1  The  state  from  this  point  of  view  is  treated 
simply  as  an  organization  to  satisfy  men’s  neces¬ 
sities.  In  this  way  the  element  of  absolute  truth,  of 
mind  in  its  higher  development,  is  placed,  as  sub¬ 
jective  religious  feeling  or  theoretical  science,  be¬ 
yond  the  reach  of  the  state.  The  state,  as  the  laity 
pure  and  simple,  is  confined  to  paying  its  respects  to 
this  element  and  so  is  entirely  deprived  of  any 
strictly  ethical  character.  Now  it  is,  of  course,  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  history  that  in  times  and  under  conditions  of 
barbarism,  all  higher  forms  of  intellectual  life  had 
their  seat  only  in  the  church,  while  the  state  was  a 
mere  mundane  rule  of  force,  caprice,  and  passion.  At 
such  times  it  was  the  abstract  opposition  of  state 
and  church  which  was  the  main  underlying  principle 
of  history  (see  Paragraph  359). 2  But  it  is  far  too 
blind  and  shallow  a  proceeding  to  declare  that  this 
situation  is  the  one  which  truly  corresponds  with 
the  Idea.  The  development  of  this  Idea  has  proved 
this  rather  to  be  the  truth,  that  mind,  as  free  and  ra¬ 
tional,  is  implicitly  ethical,  while  the  Idea  in  its 
truth  is  rationality  actualized ;  and  this  it  is  which 
exists  as  the  state.  Further,  this  Idea  has  made  it  no 
less  clearly  evident  that  the  ethical  truth  in  it  is 
present  to  conscious  thought  as  a  content  worked  up 
into  the  form  of  universality,  i.e.  as  law — in  short, 
that  the  state  knows  its  aims,  apprehends  and  gives 
practical  proof  of  them  with  a  clear-cut  conscious¬ 
ness  and  in  accordance  with  principles.  Now,  as  I 
said  earlier,  religion  has  the  truth  as  its  universal 
subject-matter,  but  it  possesses  it  only  as  a  given 
content  which  has  not  been  apprehended  in  its  fun¬ 
damental  characteristics  as  a  result  of  thinking  and 
the  use  of  concepts.  Similarly,  the  relation  of  the 
individual  to  this  subject-matter  is  an  obligation 
grounded  on  authority,  while  the  “witness  of  his 
own  spirit  and  heart,”  i.e.  that  wherein  the  moment 
of  freedom  resides,  is  faith  and  feeling.  It  is  philo¬ 
sophic  insight  which  sees  that  while  church  and  state 
differ  in  form,  they  do  not  stand  opposed  in  content, 
for  truth  and  rationality  are  the  content  of  both. 
Thus  when  the  church  begins  to  teach  doctrines 
(though  there  are  and  have  been  some  churches  with 
a  ritual  only,  and  others  in  which  ritual  is  the  chief 
thing,  while  doctrine  and  a  more  educated  conscious¬ 
ness  are  only  secondary),  and  when  these  doctrines 
touch  on  objective  principles,  on  thoughts  of  the 
ethical  and  the  rational,  then  their  expression  eo  ipso 
brings  the  church  into  the  domain  of  the  state.  In 
contrast  with  the  church’s  faith  and  authority  in 
matters  affecting  ethical  principles,  rightness,  laws, 
institutions,  in  contrast  with  the  church’s  subjective 

t  1  This  is  a  reference  to  the  dictum  quoted  from  Kant 
in  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  29  (Messineo). — Ed. 

2  All  editions  read  “358.”  The  reference  a  few  sen¬ 
tences  below  to  the  “witness  of  his  own  spirit  and  heart” 
is  a  reference  to  the  Lutheran  doctrine  mentioned  to¬ 
wards  the  end  of  the  Preface.  Cf.  Paragraph  147. — Ed. 


conviction,  the  state  is  that  which  knows.  Its  prin¬ 
ciple  is  such  that  its  content  is  in  essence  no  longer 
clothed  with  the  form  of  feeling  and  faith  but  is  de¬ 
terminate  thought. 

If  the  content  of  absolute  truth  appears  in  the 
form  of  religion  as  a  particular  content,  i.e.  as  the 
doctrines  peculiar  to  the  church  as  a  religious  com¬ 
munity,  then  these  doctrines  remain  out  of  the  reach 
of  the  state  (in  Protestantism  they  are  out  of  the 
reach  of  priests  too  because,  as  there  is  no  laity 
there,  so  there  is  no  priesthood  to  be  an  exclusive 
depository  of  church  doctrine).3  Since  ethical  prin¬ 
ciples  and  the  organization  of  the  state  in  general 
are  drawn  into  the  domain  of  religion  and  not  only 
may,  but  also  should,  be  established  by  reference 
thereto,  this  reference  gives  religious  credentials  to 
the  state  itself.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the 
state  retains  the  right  and  the  form  of  self-conscious, 
objective,  rationality,  the  right  to  make  this  form 
count  and  to  maintain  it  against  pretensions  spring¬ 
ing  from  truth  in  a  subjective  dress,  no  matter  how 
such  truth  may  girdle  itself  with  certitude  and  au¬ 
thority. 

The  state  is  universal  in  form,  a  form  whose  essen¬ 
tial  principle  is  thought.  This  explains  why  it  was  in 
the  state  that  freedom  of  thought  and  science  had 
their  origin.  It  was  a  church,  on  the  other  hand, 
which  burnt  Giordano  Bruno,  forced  Galileo  to  re¬ 
cant  on  his  knees  his  exposition  of  the  Copernican 
view  of  the  solar  system,  and  so  forth.4  Science  too, 

3  Cf.  Hegel,  Philosophy  oj  History,  p.  350 _ Ed. 

*  “When  Galileo  published  the  discoveries”  about  the 
phases  of  Venus,  &c.,  which  he  had  made  with  the  aid  of 
the  telescope,  “he  showed  that  they  incontestably  proved 
the  motion  of  the  earth.  But  this  idea  of  the  motion  of 
the  earth  was  declared  heretical  by  an  assembly  of  Car¬ 
dinals,  and  Galileo,  its  most  famous  advocate,  was  haled 
before  the  Inquisition  and  compelled  to  recant  it,  under 
pain  of  severe  imprisonment.  One  of  the  strongest  of 
passions  is  the  love  of  truth  in  a  man  of  genius.  .  .  . 
Convinced  of  the  motion  of  the  earth  as  a  result  of  his 
own  observations,  Galileo  meditated  a  long  while  on  a 
new  work  in  which  he  had  resolved  to  develop  all  the 
proofs  in  its  favour.  But  in  order  at  the  same  time  to 
escape  from  the  persecution  of  which  otherwise  he  would 
inevitably  have  been  the  victim,  he  hit  upon  the  device 
of  expounding  them  in  the  form  of  dialogues  between 
three  speakers.  ...  It  is  obvious  enough  in  them  that 
the  advantage  lies  with  the  advocate  of  the  Copernican 
system;  but  since  Galileo  did  not  decide  between  the 
speakers,  and  gave  as  much  weight  as  possible  to  the 
objections  raised  by  the  partisans  of  Ptolemy,  he  might 
well  have  expected  to  be  left  to  enjoy  undisturbed  the 
peace  to  which  his  advanced  age  and  his  labours  had 
entitled  him.  ...  In  his  seventieth  year  he  was  haled 
once  more  before  the  tribunal  of  the  Inquisition.  ...  He 
was  imprisoned  and  required  to  recant  his  opinions  a 
second  time  under  threat  of  the  penalty  fixed  for  a  re¬ 
lapse  into  heresy.  ...  He  was  made  to  sign  an  abjura¬ 
tion  in  the  following  terms:  “I,  Galileo,  appearing  in 
person  before  the  court  in  my  seventieth  year,  kneeling, 
and  with  my  eyes  on  the  holy  Gospels  which  I  hold  in 
my  hands,  abjure,  damn,  and  execrate  with  my  whole 
heart  and  true  belief  the  absurd,  false,  and  heretical 
doctrine  of  the  motion  of  the  earth.  .  .  .”  What  a  spec¬ 
tacle!  An  aged,  venerable  man,  famous  throughout  a  long 
life  exclusively  devoted  to  the  study  of  nature,  abjuring 
on  his  knees,  against  the  witness  of  his  own  conscience, 
the  truth  which  he  had  demonstrated  so  convincingly! 
By  the  judgement  of  the  Inquisition  he  was  condemned 
to  perpetual  imprisonment.  A  year  later  he  was  set  at 


ETHICAL  LIFE  89 


therefore,  has  its  place  on  the  side  of  the  state  since 
it  has  one  element,  its  form,  in  common  with  the 
state,  and  its  aim  is  knowledge,  knowledge  of  ob¬ 
jective  truth  and  rationality  in  terms  of  thought. 
Such  knowledge  may,  of  course,  fall  from  the  heights 
of  science  into  opinion  and  deductive  argumenta¬ 
tion,  and,  turning  its  attention  to  ethical  matters 
and  the  organization  of  the  state,  set  itself  against 
their  basic  principles.  And  it  may  perhaps  do  this 
while  making  for  this  opining — as  if  it  were  reason 
and  the  right  of  subjective  self-consciousness — the 
same  pretentious  claim  as  the  church  makes  for  its 
own  sphere,  the  claim,  namely,  to  be  free  from  re¬ 
straint  in  its  opinions  and  convictions. 

This  principle  of  the  subjectivity  of  knowing  has 
been  dealt  with  above  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph 
140).  It  is  here  only  necessary  to  add  a  note  on  the 
twofold  attitude  of  the  state  to  this  opining.  On  the 
one  hand,  in  so  far  as  opining  is  mere  opining,  a 
purely  subjective  matter,  it  is  without  any  genuine 
inherent  force  or  power,  plume  itself  as  it  may ;  and 
from  this  point  of  view  the  state  may  be  as  totally 
indifferent  to  it  as  the  painter  who  sticks  to  the 
three  primary  colours  on  his  palette  is  indifferent  to 
the  academic  wisdom  which  tells  him  there  are  sev¬ 
en.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  when  this  opining 
of  bad  principles  embodies  itself  in  a  general  organ¬ 
ization  corrosive  of  the  actual  order,  the  state  has  to 
set  its  face  against  it  and  protect  objective  truth  and 
the  principles  of  ethical  life  (and  it  must  do  the  same 
in  face  of  the  formulae  of  unconditioned  subjectivity 
if  these  have  proposed  to  take  the  starting  point  of 
science  as  their  basis,  and  turn  state  educational  in¬ 
stitutions  against  the  state  by  encouraging  them  to 
make  against  it  claims  as  pretentious  as  those  of  a 
church) ;  while,  vice  versa, in  face  of  a  church  claim¬ 
ing  unrestricted  and  unconditional  authority,  the 
state  has  in  general  to  make  good  the  formal  right 
of  self-consciousness  to  its  own  insight,  its  own  con¬ 
viction,  and,  in  short,  its  own  thought  of  what  is  to 
hold  good  as  objective  truth. 

Mention  may  also  be  made  of  the  “unity  of  state 
and  church” — a  favourite  topic  of  modern  discus¬ 
sion  and  held  up  by  some  as  the  highest  of  ideals.* 1 
While  state  and  church  are  essentially  one  in  truth 
of  principle  and  disposition,  it  is  no  less  essential 
that,  despite  this  unity,  the  distinction  between  their 
forms  of  consciousness  should  be  externalized  as  a 
distinction  between  their  special  modes  of  existence. 
This  often  desired  unity  of  church  and  state  is  found 
under  oriental  despotisms,  but  an  oriental  despotism 
is  not  a  state,  or  at  any  rate  not  the  self-conscious 
form  of  state  which  is  alone  worthy  of  mind,  the 
form  which  is  organically  developed  and  where  there 
are  rights  and  a  free  ethical  life.  Further,  if  the  state 
is  to  come  into  existence  as  the  se\i-knowing  ethical 

liberty  through  the  intercession  of  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Florence.  ...  He  died  in  1642.  .  .  .  Europe  mourned  his 
loss.  It  had  been  enlightened  by  his  labours  and  was  ex¬ 
asperated  by  the  judgement  passed  by  a  detested  tribunal 
on  a  man  of  his  greatness.”  (Laplace:  Exposition  du 
systbne  du  monde ,  Book  V,  chap.  4.) 

1  See  Addition  to  Paragraph  141. — Ed. 


actuality  of  mind,  it  is  essential  that  its  form  should 
be  distinct  from  that  of  authority  and  faith.  But 
this  distinction  emerges  only  in  so  far  as  the  church 
is  subjected  to  inward  divisions.  It  is  only  thereafter 
that  the  state,  in  contrast  with  the  particular  sects, 
has  attained  to  universality  of  thought — its  formal 
principle — and  is  bringing  this  universality  into  exist¬ 
ence.  (In  order  to  understand  this,  it  is  necessary  to 
know  not  only  what  universality  is  in  itself,  but  also 
what  its  existence  is.2)  Hence  so  far  from  its  being  or 
its  having  been  a  misfortune  for  the  state  that  the 
church  is  disunited,  it  is  only  as  a  result  of  that  dis¬ 
union  that  the  state  has  been  able  to  reach  its  ap¬ 
pointed  end  as  a  self-consciously  rational  and  ethical 
organization.  Moreover,  this  disunion  is  the  best 
piece  of  good  fortune  which  could  have  befallen  ei¬ 
ther  the  church  or  thought  so  far  as  the  freedom  and 
rationality  of  either  is  concerned.  [A.] 

271.  The  constitution  of  the  state  is,  in  the  first 
place,  the  organization  of  the  state  and  the  self- 
related  process  of  its  organic  life,  a  process 
whereby  it  differentiates  its  moments  within  it¬ 
self  and  develops  them  to  self-subsistence.  Sec¬ 
ondly,  the  state  is  an  individual,  unique  and  ex¬ 
clusive,  and  therefore  related  to  others.  Thus 
it  turns  its  differentiating  activity  outward  and 
accordingly  establishes  within  itself  the  ideality 
of  its  subsisting  inward  differentiations.  [A.] 

1.  The  Constitution  ( on  its  internal  side  only) 

272.  The  constitution  is  rational3  in  so  far  as 
the  state  inwardly  differentiates  and  determines 
its  activity  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  the 
concept.  The  result  of  this  is  that  each  of  these 
powers  is  in  itself  the  totality  of  the  constitu¬ 
tion,  because  each  contains  the  other  moments 
and  has  them  effective  in  itself,  and  because  the 
moments,  being  expressions  of  the  differentia¬ 
tion  of  the  concept,  simply  abide  in  their  ideal¬ 
ity  and  constitute  nothing  but  a  single  individual 
whole. 

In  our  day  there  has  come  before  the  public  an 
endless  amount  of  babble  about  the  constitution,  as 
about  reason  itself,  and  the  stalest  babble  of  all  has 
been  produced  in  Germany,  thanks  to  those  who 
have  persuaded  themselves  that  they  have  the  best, 
or  even  the  sole,  understanding  of  what  a  constitu¬ 
tion  is.  Elsewhere,  particularly  in  governments,  mis¬ 
understanding  is  supposed  to  reign.  And  these  gen¬ 
tlemen  are  convinced  that  they  have  an  unassailable 
justification  for  what  they  say  because  they  claim 
that  religion  and  piety  are  the  basis  of  all  this  shal¬ 
low  thinking  of  theirs.  It  is  no  wonder  that  this  bab¬ 
ble  has  made  reasonable  men  just  as  sick  of  the  words 
“reason,”  “enlightenment,”  “right,”  &c.,  as  of  the 
words  “constitution”  and  “freedom,”  and  a  man 
might  well  be  ashamed  now  to  go  on  discussing  the 

2Cf.  Hegel,  Philosophy  of  History ,  pp.  348  ff. — Ed. 

8  See  Paragraphs  275,  300,  and  269. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


constitution  of  the  state  at  all !  However,  we  may 
at  least  hope  that  this  surfeit  will  be  effective  in  pro¬ 
ducing  the  general  conviction  that  philosophical 
knowledge  of  such  topics  cannot  arise  from  argu¬ 
mentation,  deduction,  calculations  of  purpose  and 
utility,  still  less  from  the  heart,  love,  and  inspira¬ 
tion,  but  only  from  the  concept.  We  may  also  hope 
that  those  who  hold  that  the  divine  is  inconceivable 
and  the  knowledge  of  truth  a  wild-goose  chase  will 
feel  themselves  bound  to  refrain  from  taking  part 
in  the  discussion.  The  products  of  their  hearts  and 
their  inspirations  are  either  undigested  chatter  or 
mere  edification,  and  whatever  the  worth  of  these 
neither  can  pretend  to  notice  from  philosophy. 

Amongst  current  ideas,  mention  may  be  made  (in 
connexion  with  Paragraph  269)  of  the  necessity  for 
a  division  of  powers  within  the  state.1  This  point  is 
of  the  highest  importance  and,  if  taken  in  its  true 
sense,  may  rightly  be  regarded  as  the  guarantee  of 
public  freedom.  It  is  an  idea,  however,  with  which 
the  very  people  who  pretend  to  talk  out  of  their  in¬ 
spiration  and  love  neither  have,  nor  desire  to  have, 
any  acquaintance,  since  it  is  precisely  there  that  the 
moment  of  rational  determinacy  lies.  That  is  to  say, 
the  principle  of  the  division  of  powers  contains  the 
essential  moment  of  difference,  of  rationality  real¬ 
ized.  But  when  the  abstract  Understanding  handles 
it,  it  reads  into  it  the  false  doctrine  of  the  absolute 
self-subsistence  of  each  of  the  powers  against  the 
others,  and  then  one-sidedly  interprets  their  relation 
to  each  other  as  negative,  as  a  mutual  restriction. 
This  view  implies  that  the  attitude  adopted  by  each 
power  to  the  others  is  hostile  and  apprehensive,  as 
if  the  others  were  evils,  and  that  their  function  is  to 
oppose  one  another  and  as  a  result  of  this  counter¬ 
poise  to  effect  an  equilibrium  on  the  whole,  but  nev¬ 
er  a  living  unity.  It  is  only  the  inner  self-determina¬ 
tion  of  the  concept,  not  any  other  consideration, 
whether  of  purpose  or  advantage,  that  is  the  abso¬ 
lute  source  of  the  division  of  powers,  and  in  virtue 
of  this  alone  is  the  organization  of  the  state  some¬ 
thing  inherently  rational  and  the  image  of  eternal 
reason. 

How  the  concept  and  then,  more  concretely,  how 
the  Idea,  determine  themselves  inwardly  and  so 
posit  their  moments — universality,  particularity,  and 
individuality — in  abstraction  from  one  another,  is 
discoverable  from  my  logic,  though  not  of  course 
from  the  logic  current  elsewhere.  To  take  the  mere¬ 
ly  negative  as  a  starting-point  and  to  exalt  to  the 
first  place  the  volition  of  evil  and  the  mistrust  of 
this  volition,  and  then  on  the  basis  of  this  presup¬ 
position  slyly  to  construct  dikes  whose  efficiency 
simply  necessitates  corresponding  dikes  over  against 
them,  is  characteristic  in  thought  of  the  negative 
Understanding  and  in  sentiment  of  the  outlook  of 
the  rabble  (see  Paragraph  244). 

If  the  powers  (e.g.  what  are  called  the  “Executive” 
and  the  “Legislature”)  become  self-subsistent,  then 
as  we  have  recently  seen  on  a  grand  scale,  the  de¬ 
struction  of  the  state  is  forthwith  a  fait  accompli . 

1  Cf.  Montesquieu,  The  Spirit  of  Laws,  xi.  6. — Ed, 


Alternatively,  if  the  state  is  maintained  in  essentials, 
it  is  strife  which  through  the  subjection  by  one  pow¬ 
er  of  the  others,  produces  unitv  at  least,  however 
defective,  and  so  secures  the  bare  essential,  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  the  state.  [A.] 

273.  The  state  as  a  political  entity  is  thus  cleft 
into  three  substantive  divisions : 

(a)  the  power  to  determine  and  establish  the 
universal — the  Legislature ; 

( b )  the  power  to  subsume  single  cases  and  the 
spheres  of  particularity  under  the  universal — 
the  Executive; 

(c)  the  power  of  subjectivity,  as  the  will  with 
the  power  of  ultimate  decision — the  Crown.  In 
the  crown,  the  different  powers  are  bound  into 
an  individual  unity  which  is  thus  at  once  the 
apex  and  basis  of  the  whole,  i.e.  of  constitu¬ 
tional  monarchy. 

The  development  of  the  state  to  constitutional 
monarchy  is  the  achievement  of  the  modern  world, 
a  world  in  which  the  substantial  Idea  has  won  the 
infinite  form  [of  subjectivity — see  Paragraph  144]. 
The  history  of  this  inner  deepening  of  the  world 
mind — or  in  other  words  this  free  maturation  in 
course  of  which  the  Idea,  realizing  rationality  in  the 
external,  releases  its  moments  (and  they  are  only  its 
moments)  from  itself  as  totalities,  and  just  for  that 
reason  still  retains  them  in  the  ideal  unity  of  the  con¬ 
cept — the  history  of  this  genuine  formation  of  ethi¬ 
cal  life  is  the  content  of  the  whole  course  of  world- 
history. 

The  ancient  division  of  constitutions  into  mon¬ 
archy,  aristocracy,  and  democracy,  is  based  upon 
the  notion  of  substantial,  still  undivided,  unity,  a 
unity  which  has  not  yet  come  to  its  inner  differenti¬ 
ation  (to  a  matured,  internal  organization)  and 
which  therefore  has  not  yet  attained  depth  or  con¬ 
crete  rationality.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  an¬ 
cient  world,  therefore,  this  division  is  the  true  and 
correct  one,  since  for  a  unity  of  that  still  substantial 
type,  a  unity  inwardly  too  immature  to  have  at¬ 
tained  its  absolutely  complete  development,  differ¬ 
ence  is  essentially  an  external  difference  and  appears 
at  first  as  a  difference  in  the  number  2  of  those  in 
whom  that  substantial  unity  is  supposed  to  be  im¬ 
manent.3  These  forms,  which  on  this  principle  be¬ 
long  to  different  wholes,  are  given  in  limited  mon¬ 
archy  the  humbler  position  of  moments  in  a  whole. 
The  monarch  is  a  single  person ;  the  few  come  on  the 
scene  with  the  executive,  and  the  many  en  masse 
with  the  legislative.  But,  as  has  been  indicated,4 
purely  quantitative  distinctions  like  these  are  only 
superficial  and  do  not  afford  the  concept  of  the 
thing.  Equally  inadequate  is  the  mass  of  contempo¬ 
rary  talk  about  the  democratic  and  aristocratic  ele¬ 
ments  in  monarchy,  because  when  the  elements  spec¬ 
ified  in  such  talk  are  found  in  a  monarchy  there  is 

2  See  Enc.  [1st  edn.],  §  52  [3rd  edn.  §  99]. 

3Cf.  Aristotle,  Politics ,  i279a26  ff. — Ed. 

4  In,  e.g.,  Paragraph  214. — Ed. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


no  longer  anything  democratic  or  aristocratic  about 
them.  There  are  notions  of  constitutions  in  which 
the  state  is  portrayed  from  top  to  bottom  as  an  ab¬ 
straction  which  is  supposed  to  rule  and  command, 
and  how  many  individuals  are  at  the  head  of  such  a 
state,  whether  one  or  a  few  or  all,  is  a  question  left 
undecided  and  regarded  as  a  matter  of  indifference. 
[E.g.:]  “All  these  forms,”  says  Fichte,  . .  are  justi¬ 
fied,  provided  there  be  an  ephorate”  (a  scheme  de¬ 
vised  by  Fichte  to  be  a  counterpoise  to  the  chief 
power  in  the  state)  “and  may  ...  be  the  means  of 
introducing  universal  rights  into  the  state  and  main¬ 
taining  them  there.”  1  A  view  of  this  kind — and  the 
device  of  the  ephorate  also — is  begotten  by  the  su¬ 
perficial  conception  of  the  state  to  which  reference 
has  just  been  made.  It  is  true  enough  that  in  quite 
simple  social  conditions  these  differences  of  consti¬ 
tutional  form  have  little  or  no  meaning.  For  in¬ 
stance,  in  the  course  of  his  legislation  Moses  pre¬ 
scribed  that,  in  the  event  of  his  people’s  desiring  a 
king,  its  institutions  should  remain  unchanged  ex¬ 
cept  for  the  new  requirement  that  the  king  should 
not  “multiply  horses  to  himself  .  .  .  nor  wives  .  .  . 
nor  silver  and  gold.”  2  Besides,  in  a  sense  one  may  of 
course  say  that  the  Idea  too  is  indifferent  to  these 
forms  (including  monarchy,  but  only  when  it  is  re¬ 
stricted  in  meaning  by  being  defined  as  an  alterna¬ 
tive  on  a  parity  with  aristocracy  and  democracy). 
But  the  Idea  is  indifferent  to  them,  not  in  Fichte’s 
but  in  the  opposite  sense,  because  every  one  of  them 
is  inadequate  to  it  in  its  rational  development  (see 
Paragraph  272)  and  in  none  of  them,  taken  singly, 
could  the  Idea  attain  its  right  and  its  actuality.  Con¬ 
sequently,  it  is  quite  idle  to  inquire  which  of  the 
three  is  most  to  be  preferred.  Such  forms  must  be 
discussed  historically  or  not  at  all. 

Still,  here  again,  as  in  so  many  other  places,  we 
must  recognize  the  depth  of  Montesquieu’s  insight 
in  his  now  famous  treatment  of  the  basic  principles 
of  these  forms  of  government.  To  recognize  the  ac¬ 
curacy  of  his  account,  however,  we  must  not  mis¬ 
understand  it.  As  is  well  known,  he  held  that  “vir¬ 
tue”  3  was  the  principle  of  democracy  [and  rightly], 
since  it  is  in  fact  the  case  that  that  type  of  constitu¬ 
tion  rests  on  sentiment,  i.e.  on  the  purely  substantial 
form  in  which  the  rationality  of  the  absolute  will 
still  exists  in  democracy.  But  Montesquieu  goes  on  to 
say  that  in  the  seventeenth  century  England  pro¬ 
vided  “a  fine  spectacle  of  the  way  in  which  efforts 
to  found  a  democracy  were  rendered  ineffective  by 
a  lack  of  virtue  in  the  leaders.”  And  again  he  adds 
“when  virtue  vanishes  from  the  republic,  ambition 
enters  hearts  which  are  capable  of  it  and  greed  mas¬ 
ters  everyone  ...  so  that  the  state  becomes  every¬ 
one’s  booty  and  its  strength  now  consists  only  in 
the  power  of  a  few  citizens  and  the  licence  of  all  a- 
like.”  These  quotations  call  for  the  comment  that  in 
more  mature  social  conditions  and  when  the  powers 
of  particularity  have  developed  and  become  free,  a 

1  Science  of  Rights  [§  16,  sub-section  6,  p.  248]. 

2  Deut.  17.  16  ff. 

3  Cf.  Montesquieu,  The  Spirit  of  Laws ,  iii.  3.  See  Re¬ 
mark  to  Paragraph  185. — Ed. 


form  of  rational  law  other  than  the  form  of  senti¬ 
ment  is  required,  because  virtue  in  the  heads  of  the 
state  is  not  enough  if  the  state  as  a  whole  is  to  gain 
the  power  to  resist  disruption  and  to  bestow  on  the 
powers  of  particularity,  now  become  mature,  both 
their  positive  and  their  negative  rights.  Similarly,  we 
must  remove  the  misunderstanding  of  supposing 
that  because  the  sentiment  of  virtue  is  the  substan¬ 
tial  form  of  a  democratic  republic,  it  is  evidently  su¬ 
perfluous  in  monarchy  or  even  absent  from  it  alto¬ 
gether,4  and,  finally,  we  may  not  suppose  that  there 
is  an  opposition  and  an  incompatibility  between  vir¬ 
tue  and  the  legally  determinate  agency  of  a  state 
whose  organization  is  fully  articulated. 

The  fact  that  “moderation” 5  is  cited  as  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  aristocracy  implies  the  beginning  at  this 
point  of  a  divorce  between  public  authority  and  pri¬ 
vate  interest.  And  yet  at  the  same  time  these  touch 
each  other  so  directly  that  this  constitution  by  its 
very  nature  stands  on  the  verge  of  lapsing  forthwith 
into  tyranny  or  anarchy — the  harshest  of  political 
conditions — and  so  into  self-annihilation.  See  Ro¬ 
man  history,  for  example. 

The  fact  that  Montesquieu  discerns  “honour”  6  as 
the  principle  of  monarchy  at  once  makes  it  clear 
that  by  “monarchy”  he  understands,  not  the  patri¬ 
archal  or  any  ancient  type,  nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  type  organized  into  an  objective  constitution,7 
but  only  feudal  monarchy,  the  type  in  which  the  re¬ 
lationships  recognized  in  its  constitutional  law  are 
crystallized  into  the  rights  of  private  property  and 
the  privileges  of  individuals  and  Corporations.  In 
this  type  of  constitution,  political  life  rests  on  privi¬ 
leged  persons  and  a  great  part  of  what  must  be  done 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  state  is  settled  at  their 
pleasure.  The  result  is  that  their  services  are  the  ob¬ 
jects  not  of  duty  but  only  of  ideas  and  opinions. 
Thus  it  is  not  duty  but  only  honour  which  holds  the 
state  together. 

Another  question  readily  presents  itself  here:  “Who 
is  to  frame  the  constitution?”  This  question  seems 
clear,  but  closer  inspection  shows  at  once  that  it  is 
meaningless,  for  it  presupposes  that  there  is  no  con¬ 
stitution  there,  but  only  an  agglomeration  of  atomic 
individuals.  How  an  agglomeration  of  individuals 
could  acquire  a  constitution,  whether  automatically 
or  by  someone’s  aid,  whether  as  a  present  or  by 
force  or  by  thought,  it  would  have  to  be  allowed  to 
settle  for  itself,  since  with  an  agglomeration  the  con¬ 
cept  has  nothing  to  do.  But  if  the  question  presup¬ 
poses  an  already  existent  constitution,  then  it  is  not 
about  framing,  but  only  about  altering  the  constitu¬ 
tion,  and  the  very  presupposition  of  a  constitution 
directly  implies  that  its  alteration  may  come  about 
only  by  constitutional  means.  In  any  case,  however, 
it  is  absolutely  essential  that  the  constitution  should 
not  be  regarded  as  something  made,  even  though  it 
has  come  into  being  in  time.  It  must  be  treated 
rather  as  something  simply  existent  in  and  by  itself, 

*  Cf.  Montesquieu,  The  Spirit  of  Laws,  iii.  5. — Ed. 

6  ibid.,  iii.  4. — Ed. 

6  ibid.,  iii.  7. — Ed. 

7  See  Paragraph  272. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


as  divine  therefore,  and  constant,  and  so  as  exalted 
above  the  sphere  of  things  that  are  made.  [A.] 

274.  Mind  is  actual  only  as  that  which  it  knows 
itself  to  be,  and  the  state,  as  the  mind  of  a  na¬ 
tion,  is  both  the  law  permeating  all  relationships 
within  the  state  and  also  at  the  same  time  the 
manners  and  consciousness  of  its  citizens.  It  fol¬ 
lows,  therefore,  that  the  constitution  of  any 
given  nation  depends  in  general  on  the  charac¬ 
ter  and  development  of  its  self-consciousness.1 
In  its  self-consciousness  its  subjective  freedom 
is  rooted  and  so,  therefore,  is  the  actuality  of  its 
constitution. 

The  proposal  to  give  a  constitution — even  one  more 
or  less  rational  in  content — to  a  nation  a  priori 
would  be  a  happy  thought  overlooking  precisely 
that  factor  in  a  constitution  which  makes  it  more 
than  an  ens  rationis.  Hence  every  nation  has  the 
constitution  appropriate  to  it  and  suitable  for  it. 
[A.] 

(a)  The  Crown 

275.  The  power  of  the  crown  contains  in  itself 
the  three  moments  of  the  whole  (see  Paragraph 
272),  viz.  (a)  the  universality  of  the  constitu¬ 
tion  and  the  laws;  (/?)  counsel,  which  refers  the 
Particular  to  the  universal;  and  (y)  the  moment 
of  ultimate  decision,  as  the  self-determination  to 
which  everything  else  reverts  and  from  which 
everything  else  derives  the  beginning  of  its  ac¬ 
tuality.  This  absolute  self-determination  consti¬ 
tutes  the  distinctive  principle  of  the  power  of 
the  crown  as  such,  and  with  this  principle  our 
exposition  is  to  begin.  [A.] 

276.  (1)  The  fundamental  characteristic  of  the 
state  as  a  political  entity  is  the  substantial  unity, 
i.e.  the  ideality,  of  its  moments.  ( a )  In  this 
unity,  the  particular  powers  and  their  activities 
are  dissolved  and  yet  retained.  They  are  re¬ 
tained,  however,  only  in  the  sense  that  their  au¬ 
thority  is  no  independent  one  but  only  one  of 
the  order  and  breadth  determined  by  the  Idea 
of  the  whole;  from  its  might  they  originate,  and 
they  are  its  flexible  limbs  while  it  is  their  single 
self.  [A.] 

277.  (/?)  The  particular  activities  and  agencies 
of  the  state  are  its  essential  moments  and  there¬ 
fore  are  proper  to  it.  The  individual  function¬ 
aries  and  agents  are  attached  to  their  office  not 
on  the  strength  of  their  immediate  personality, 
but  only  on  the  strength  of  their  universal  and 
objective  qualities.  Hence  it  is  in  an  external 
and  contingent  way  that  these  offices  are  linked 
with  particular  persons,  and  therefore  the  func- 

1  Cf.  Montesquieu,  The  Spirit  of  Laws,  i.  3. — Ed. 


tions  and  powers  of  the  state  cannot  be  private 
property.  [A.] 

278.  These  two  points  (a)  and  ( f3 )  constitute 
the  sovereignty  of  the  state.  That  is  to  say,  sov¬ 
ereignty  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  particular 
functions  and  powers  of  the  state  are  not  self- 
subsistent  or  firmly  grounded  either  on  their  own 
account  or  in  the  particular  will  of  the  individual 
functionaries,  but  have  their  roots  ultimately 
in  the  unity  of  the  state  as  their  single  self. 

This  is  the  sovereignty  of  the  state  at  home.  Sov¬ 
ereignty  has  another  side,  i.e.  sovereignty  vis-a-vis 
foreign  states,  on  which  see  below.2 

In  feudal  times,  the  state  was  certainly  sovereign 
vis-a-vis  other  states;  at  home  however,  not  only 
was  the  monarch  not  sovereign  at  all,  but  the  state 
itself  was  not  sovereign  either.  For  one  thing,  the 
particular  functions  and  powers  of  the  state  and 
civil  society  were  arranged  (compare  Remark  to 
Paragraph  273)  into  independent  Corporations  and 
societies,  so  that  the  state  as  a  whole  was  rather  an 
aggregate  than  an  organism ;  and,  for  another  thing, 
office  was  the  private  property  of  individuals,  and 
hence  what  they  were  to  do  in  their  public  capacity 
was  left  to  their  own  opinion  and  caprice. 

The  idealism  which  constitutes  sovereignty  is  the 
same  characteristic  as  that  in  accordance  with  which 
the  so-called  “parts”  of  an  animal  organism  are  not 
parts  but  members,  moments  in  an  organic  whole, 
whose  isolation  and  independence  spell  disease.3  The 
principle  here  is  the  same  as  that  which  came  before 
us  (see  Paragraph  7)  in  the  abstract  concept  of  the 
will  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  279)  as  self-related 
negativity,  and  therefore  as  the  universality  of  the 
will  determining  itself  to  individuality  and  so  can¬ 
celling  all  particularity  and  determinacy,  as  the  ab¬ 
solute  self-determining  ground  of  all  volition.  To 
understand  this,  one  must  have  mastered  the  whole 
conception  of  the  substance  and  genuine  subjectivity 
of  the  concept. 

The  fact  that  the  sovereignty  of  the  state  is  the 
ideality  of  all  particular  authorities  within  it  gives 
rise  to  the  easy  and  also  very  common  misunder¬ 
standing  that  this  ideality  is  only  might  and  pure 
arbitrariness  while  “sovereignty”  is  a  synonym  for 
“despotism.”  But  despotism  means  any  state  of  af¬ 
fairs  where  law  has  disappeared  and  where  the  par¬ 
ticular  will  as  such,  whether  of  a  monarch  or  a  mob 
(ochlocracy) ,  counts  as  law  or  rather  takes  the  place 
of  law ;  while  it  is  precisely  in  legal,  constitutional, 
government  that  sovereignty  is  to  be  found  as  the 
moment  of  ideality — the  ideality  of  the  particular 
spheres  and  functions.  That  is  to  say,  sovereignty 
brings  it  about  that  each  of  these  spheres  is  not 
something  independent,  self-subsistent  in  its  aims 
and  modes  of  working,  something  immersed  solely 
in  itself,  but  that  instead,  even  in  these  aims  and 
modes  of  working,  each  is  determined  by  and  de- 

2  Paragraphs  321  ff. — Ed. 

8  See  Enc.  [1st  edn.],  §  293  [3rd  edn.  §  371]. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


pendent  on  the  aim  of  the  whole  (the  aim  which  has 
been  denominated  in  general  terms  by  the  rather 
vague  expression  “welfare  of  the  state”). 

This  ideality  manifests  itself  in  a  twofold  way: 

(i)  In  times  of  peace,  the  particular  spheres  and 
functions  pursue  the  path  of  satisfying  their  par¬ 
ticular  aims  and  minding  their  own  business,  and  it 
is  in  part  only  by  way  of  the  unconscious  necessity 
of  the  thing  that  their  self-seeking  is  turned  into  a 
contribution  to  reciprocal  support  and  to  the  sup¬ 
port  of  the  whole  (see  Paragraph  183).  In  part, 
however,  it  is  by  the  direct  influence  of  higher  au¬ 
thority  that  they  are  not  only  continually  brought 
back  to  the  aims  of  the  whole  and  restricted  accord¬ 
ingly  (see  Paragraph  289),  but  are  also  constrained 
to  perform  direct  services  for  the  support  of  the 
whole. 

(ii)  In  a  situation  of  exigency,  however,  whether 
in  home  or  foreign  affairs,  the  organism  of  which 
these  particular  spheres  are  members  fuses  into  the 
single  concept  of  sovereignty.  The  sovereign  is  en¬ 
trusted  with  the  salvation  of  the  state  at  the  sacri¬ 
fice  of  these  particular  authorities  whose  powers  are 
valid  at  other  times,  and  it  is  then  that  that  ideality 
comes  into  its  proper  actuality  (see  Paragraph  321). 

279.  (2)  Sovereignty,  at  first  simply  the  uni¬ 
versal  thought  of  this  ideality,  comes  into  exist¬ 
ence  only  as  subjectivity  sure  of  itself,  as  the 
will’s  abstract  and  to  that  extent  ungrounded 
self-determination  in  which  finality  of  decision 
is  rooted.  This  is  the  strictly  individual  aspect 
of  the  state,  and  in  virtue  of  this  alone  is  the 
state  one.  The  truth  of  subjectivity,  however,  is 
attained  only  in  a  subject,  and  the  truth  of  per¬ 
sonality  only  in  a  person ;  and  in  a  constitution 
which  has  become  mature  as  a  realization  of 
rationality,  each  of  the  three  moments  of  the 
concept  has  its  explicitly  actual  and  separate 
formation.  Hence  this  absolutely  decisive  mo¬ 
ment  of  the  whole  is  not  individuality  in  gen¬ 
eral,  but  a  single  individual,  the  monarch. 

The  immanent  development  of  a  science,  the  der¬ 
ivation  1  of  its  entire  content  from  the  concept  in 
its  simplicity  (a  science  otherwise  derived,  whatever 
its  merit,  does  not  deserve  the  name  of  a  philosophi¬ 
cal  science)  exhibits  this  peculiarity,  that  one  and 
the  same  concept — the  will  in  this  instance — which 
begins  by  being  abstract  (because  it  is  at  the  begin¬ 
ning)  ,  maintains  its  identity  even  while  it  consoli¬ 
dates  its  specific  determinations,  and  that  too  solely 
by  its  own  activity,  and  in  this  way  gains  a  concrete 
content.  Hence  it  is  the  basic  moment  of  personality, 
abstract  at  the  start  in  immediate  rights,  which  has 
matured  itself  through  its  various  forms  of  sub¬ 
jectivity,  and  now — at  the  stage  of  absolute  rights, 
of  the  state,  of  the  completely  concrete  objectivity 
of  the  will — has  become  the  personality  of  the  state, 
its  certainty  of  itself.  This  last  reabsorbs  all  particu- 

1  Hegel  emphatically  repudiates  apriorism  in  the  Pref¬ 
ace  to  the  Philosophy  of  Right. — Ed. 


93 

larity  into  its  single  self,  cuts  short  the  weighing  of 
pros  and  cons  between  which  it  lets  itself  oscillate 
perpetually  now  this  way  and  now  that,  and  by  say¬ 
ing  “I  will”  makes  its  decision  and  so  inaugurates  all 
activity  and  actuality. 

Further,  however,  personality,  like  subjectivity  in 
general,  as  infinitely  self-related,  has  its  truth  (to  be 
precise,  its  most  elementary,  immediate,  truth)  only 
in  a  person,  in  a  subject  existing  “for”  himself,  and 
what  exists  “for”  itself  is  just  simply  a  unit.  It  is 
only  as  a  person,  the  monarch,  that  the  personality 
of  the  state  is  actual.  Personality  expresses  the  con¬ 
cept  as  such ;  but  the  person  enshrines  the  actuality 
of  the  concept,  and  only  when  the  concept  is  deter¬ 
mined  as  person  is  it  the  Idea  or  truth.  A  so-called 
“artificial  person,”  be  it  a  society,  a  community,  or 
a  family,  however  inherently  concrete  it  may  be, 
contains  personality  only  abstractly,  as  one  moment 
of  itself.  In  an  “artificial  person,”  personality  has 
not  achieved  its  true  mode  of  existence.  The  state, 
however,  is  precisely  this  totality  in  which  the  mo¬ 
ments  of  the  concept  have  attained  the  actuality  cor¬ 
respondent  to  their  degree  of  truth.  All  these  cate¬ 
gories,  both  in  themselves  and  in  their  external 
formations,  have  been  discussed  in  the  whole  course 
of  this  treatise.  They  are  repeated  here,  however,  be¬ 
cause  while  their  existence  in  their  particular  ex¬ 
ternal  formations  is  readily  granted,  it  does  not  fol¬ 
low  at  all  that  they  are  recognized  and  apprehended 
again  when  they  appear  in  their  true  place,  not  iso¬ 
lated,  but  in  their  truth  as  moments  of  the  Idea. 

The  conception  of  the  monarch  is  therefore  of  all 
conceptions  the  hardest  for  ratiocination,  i.e.  for  the 
method  of  reflection  employed  by  the  Understand¬ 
ing.  This  method  refuses  to  move  beyond  isolated 
categories  and  hence  here  again  knows  only  raison- 
nement,  finite  points  of  view,  and  deductive  argu¬ 
mentation.  Consequently  it  exhibits  the  dignity  of 
the  monarch  as  something  deduced,  not  only  in  its 
form,  but  in  its  essence.  The  truth  is,  however,  that 
to  be  something  not  deduced  but  purely  self-origi¬ 
nating  is  precisely  the  conception  of  monarchy.  Akin, 
then,  to  this  reasoning  is  the  idea  of  treating  the 
monarch’s  right  as  grounded  in  the  authority  of 
God,  since  it  is  in  its  divinity  that  its  unconditional 
character  is  contained.  We  are  familiar,  however, 
with  the  misunderstandings  connected  with  this  idea, 
and  it  is  precisely  this  “divine”  element  which  it  is 
the  task  of  a  philosophic  treatment  to  comprehend. 

We  may  speak  of  the  “sovereignty  of  the  peo¬ 
ple”  in  the  sense  that  any  people  whatever  is  self- 
subsistent  vis-a-vis  other  peoples,  and  constitutes  a 
state  of  its  own,  like  the  British  people  for  instance. 
But  the  peoples  of  England,  Scotland,  or  Ireland, 
or  the  peoples  of  Venice,  Genoa,  Ceylon,  &c.,  are 
not  sovereign  peoples  at  all  now  that  they  have 
ceased  to  have  rulers  or  supreme  governments  of 
their  own. 

We  may  also  speak  of  sovereignty  in  home  affairs 
residing  in  the  people,  provided  that  we  are  speak¬ 
ing  generally  about  the  whole  state  and  meaning 
only  what  was  shown  above  (see  Paragraphs  277, 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


278),  namely  that  it  is  to  the  state  that  sovereignty 
belongs. 

The  usual  sense,  however,  in  which  men  have  re¬ 
cently  begun  to  speak  of  the  “sovereignty  of  the 
people”  is  that  it  is  something  opposed  to  the  sov¬ 
ereignty  existent  in  the  monarch.  So  opposed  to  the 
sovereignty  of  the  monarch,  the  sovereignty  of  the 
people  is  one  of  the  confused  notions  based  on  the 
wild  idea  of  the  “people.”  Taken  without  its  mon¬ 
arch  and  the  articulation  of  the  whole  which  is  the 
indispensable  and  direct  concomitant  of  monarchy, 
the  people  is  a  formless  mass  and  no  longer  a  state. 
It  lacks  every  one  of  those  determinate  characteris¬ 
tics — sovereignty,  government,  judges,  magistrates, 
class-divisions,  &c., — which  are  to  be  found  only  in 
a  whole  which  is  inwardly  organized.  By  the  very 
emergence  into  a  people’s  life  of  moments  of  this 
kind  which  have  a  bearing  on  an  organization,  on 
political  life,  a  people  ceases  to  be  that  indetermi¬ 
nate  abstraction  which,  when  represented  in  a  quite 
general  wTay,  is  called  the  “people.” 

If  by  “sovereignty  of  the  people”  is  understood  a 
republican  form  of  government,  or  to  speak  more 
specifically  (since  under  “republic”  are  comprised 
all  sorts  of  other  mixed  forms  of  government,  which 
are  purely  empirical,  let  alone  irrelevant  in  a  phil¬ 
osophical  treatise)  a  democratic  form,  then  all  that 
is  needed  in  reply  has  been  said  already  (in  the  Re¬ 
mark  to  Paragraph  273)  ;  and  besides,  such  a  notion 
cannot  be  further  discussed  in  face  of  the  Idea  of 
the  state  in  its  full  development. 

If  the  “people”  is  represented  neither  as  a  patriar¬ 
chal  clan,  nor  as  living  under  the  simple  conditions 
which  make  democracy  or  aristocracy  possible  as 
forms  of  government  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  273), 
nor  as  living  under  some  other  unorganized  and  hap¬ 
hazard  conditions,  but  instead  as  an  inwardly  de¬ 
veloped,  genuinely  organic  totality,  then  sovereign¬ 
ty  is  there  as  the  personality  of  the  whole,  and  this 
personality  is  there,  in  the  real  existence  adequate 
to  its  concept,  as  the  person  of  the  monarch. 

At  the  stage  at  which  constitutions  are  divided,  as 
above  mentioned,1  into  democracy,  aristocracy,  and 
monarchy,  the  point  of  view  taken  is  that  of  a  still 
substantial  unity,  abiding  in  itself,  without  having 
yet  embarked  on  its  infinite  differentiation  and  the 
plumbing  of  its  own  depths.  At  that  stage,  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  the  final,  self-determining,  decision  of  the 
will  does  not  come  on  the  scene  explicitly  in  its  own 
proper  actuality  as  an  organic  moment  immanent  in 
the  state.  None  the  less,  even  in  those  comparatively 
immature  constitutional  forms,  there  must  always 
be  individuals  at  the  head.  Leaders  must  either  be 
available  already,  as  they  are  in  monarchies  of  that 
type,  or,  as  happens  in  aristocracies,  but  more  par¬ 
ticularly  in  democracies,  they  may  rise  to  the  top, 
as  statesmen  or  generals,  by  chance  and  in  accordance 
with  the  particular  needs  of  the  hour.  This  must  hap¬ 
pen,  since  everything  done  and  everything  actual  is 
inaugurated  and  brought  to  completion  by  the  single 
decisive  act  of  a  leader.  But  comprised  in  a  union  of 

xIn  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  273. — Ed. 


powers  which  remains  undifferentiated,  this  sub¬ 
jectivity  of  decision  is  inevitably  either  contingent  in 
its  origin  and  appearance,  or  else  is  in  one  way  or  an¬ 
other  subordinate  to  something  else.  Hence  in  such 
states,  the  power  of  the  leaders  was  conditioned,  and 
only  in  something  beyond  them  could  there  be 
found  a  pure  unambiguous  decision,  a  fatum,  deter¬ 
mining  affairs  from  without.  As  a  moment  of  the 
Idea,  this  decision  had  to  come  into  existence,  though 
rooted  in  something  outside  the  circle  of  human  free¬ 
dom  with  which  the  state  is  concerned.  Herein  lies 
the  origin  of  the  need  for  deriving  the  last  word  on 
great  events  and  important  affairs  of  state  from  ora¬ 
cles,  a  “divine  sign”  (in  the  case  of  Socrates),  the 
entrails  of  animals,  the  feeding  and  flight  of  birds, 
See.  It  was  when  men  had  not  yet  plumbed  the  depths 
of  self-consciousness  or  risen  out  of  their  undiffer¬ 
entiated  unity  of  substance  to  their  independence 
that  they  lacked  strength  to  look  within  their  own 
being  for  the  final  word. 

In  the  “divine  sign”  of  Socrates  2  (compare  Re¬ 
mark  to  Paragraph  138)  we  see  the  will  which  for¬ 
merly  had  simply  transferred  itself  beyonditself  now 
beginning  to  apply  itself  to  itself  and  so  to  recognize 
its  own  inward  nature.  This  is  the  beginning  of  a 
self-knowTing  and  so  of  a  genuine  freedom.  This  re¬ 
alized  freedom  of  the  Idea  consists  precisely  in  giving 
to  each  of  the  moments  of  rationality  its  own  self- 
conscious  actuality  here  and  now.  Hence  it  is  this 
freedom  which  makes  the  ultimate  self-determining 
certitude — the  culmination  of  the  concept  of  the  will 
— the  function  of  a  single  consciousness.  This  ulti¬ 
mate  self-determination,  however,  can  fall  within 
the  sphere  of  human  freedom  only  in  so  far  as  it  has 
the  position  of  a  pinnacle,  explicity  distinct  from, 
and  raised  above,  all  that  is  particular  and  condi¬ 
tional,  for  only  so  is  it  actual  in  a  way  adequate  to 
its  concept.  [A.] 

280.  (3)  This  ultimate  self  in  which  the  will 
of  the  state  is  concentrated  is,  when  thus  taken 
in  abstraction,  a  single  self  and  therefore  is 
immediate  individuality.3  Hence  its  “natural” 
character  is  implied  in  its  very  conception.  The 
monarch,  therefore,  is  essentially  characterized 
as  this  individual,  in  abstraction  from  all  his 
other  characteristics,  and  this  individual  is 
raised  to  the  dignity  of  monarchy  in  an  immedi¬ 
ate,  natural,  fashion,  i.e.  through  his  birth  in  the 
course  of  nature. 

This  transition  of  the  concept  of  pure  self-deter¬ 
mination  into  the  immediacy  of  being  and  so  into 
the  realm  of  nature  is  of  a  purely  speculative  char¬ 
acter,  and  apprehension  of  it  therefore  belongs  to 
logic.  Moreover,  this  transition  is  on  the  whole  the 
same  as  that  familiar  to  us  in  the  nature  of  willing, 
and  there  the  process  is  to  translate  something  from 

2  Cf.  Plato,  Apology,  31  ff. — Ed. 

3  See  the  end  of  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  279.  For  the 
connection  between  “immediacy”  and  “nature,”  see  Para¬ 
graphs  11,  34,  43,  158,  and  the  Additions  to  Paragraphs 
10  and  18. — Ed. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


subjectivity  (i.e.  some  purpose  held  before  the  mind) 
into  existence  (see  Paragraph  8).  But  the  proper 
form  of  the  Idea  and  of  the  transition  here  under 
consideration  is  the  immediate  conversion  of  the 
pure  self-determination  of  the  will  (i.e.  of  the  sim¬ 
ple  concept  itself)  into  a  single  and  natural  existent 
without  the  mediation  of  a  particular  content  (like 
a  purpose  in  the  case  of  action) . 

In  the  so-called  “ontological”  proof  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  God,  we  have  the  same  conversion  of  the  ab¬ 
solute  concept  into  existence.  This  conversion  has 
constituted  the  depth  of  the  Idea  in  the  modern 
world,  although  recently  it  has  been  declared  incon¬ 
ceivable,1  with  the  result  that  knowledge  of  truth 
has  been  renounced,  since  truth  is  simply  the  unity 
of  concept  and  existence  (see  Paragraph  23).  Since 
the  Understanding  has  no  inner  consciousness  of 
this  unity  and  refuses  to  move  beyond  the  separa¬ 
tion  of  these  two  moments  of  the  truth,  it  may  per¬ 
haps,  so  far  as  God  is  concerned,  still  permit  a  “faith” 
in  this  unity.  But  since  the  idea  of  the  monarch  is 
regarded  as  being  quite  familiar  to  ordinary  con¬ 
sciousness,  the  Understanding  clings  here  all  the  more 
tenaciously  to  its  separatism  and  the  conclusions 
which  its  astute  ratiocination  deduces  therefrom.  As 
a  result,  it  denies  that  the  moment  of  ultimate  de¬ 
cision  in  the  state  is  linked  implicitly  and  actually 
(i.e.  in  the  rational  concept)  with  the  immediate 
birthright  of  the  monarch.  Consequently  it  infers, 
first,  that  this  link  is  a  matter  of  accident,  and  fur¬ 
ther — since  it  has  claimed  that  the  absolute  diversity 
of  these  moments  is  the  rational  thing — that  such  a 
link  is  irrational,  and  then  there  follow  the  other  de¬ 
ductions  disruptive  of  the  Idea  of  the  state.2  [A.] 

281.  Both  moments  in  their  undivided  unity — 
(a)  the  will’s  ultimate  ungrounded  self,  and  ( b ) 
therefore  its  similarly  ungrounded  objective 
existence  (existence  being  the  category  which 
is  at  home  in  nature) — constitute  the  Idea  of 
something  against  which  caprice  is  powerless,3 
the  “majesty”  of  the  monarch.  In  this  unity  lies 
the  actual  unity  of  the  state,  and  it  is  only 
through  this,  its  inward  and  outward  immediacy, 
that  the  unity  of  the  state  is  saved  from  the  risk 
of  being  drawn  down  into  the  sphere  of  particu¬ 
larity  and  its  caprices,  ends,  and  opinions,  and 
saved  too  from  the  war  of  factions  round  the 
throne  and  from  the  enfeeblement  and  over¬ 
throw  of  the  power  of  the  state. 

The  rights  of  birth  and  inheritance  constitute  the 
basis  of  legitimacy,  the  basis  of  a  right  not  purely 
positive  but  contained  in  the  Idea. 

If  succession  to  the  throne  is  rigidly  determined, 
i.e.  if  it  is  hereditary,  then  faction  is  obviated  at  a 
demise  of  the  crown ;  this  is  one  aspect  of  hereditary 
succession  and  it  has  long  been  rightly  stressed  as  a 

1  Cf.  Kant,  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,  p.  10. — Ed. 

2  See  the  reference  to  salut  du  peuple  in  the  Remark  to 
the  next  Paragraph. — Ed. 

3  See  Paragraph  283. — Ed. 


point  in  its  favour.  This  aspect,  however,  is  only 
consequential,  and  to  make  it  the  reason  for  heredi¬ 
tary  succession  is  to  drag  down  the  majesty  of  the 
throne  into  the  sphere  of  argumentation,  to  ignore 
its  true  character  as  ungrounded  immediacy  and  ul¬ 
timate  inwardness,  and  to  base  it  not  on  the  Idea 
of  the  state  immanent  within  it,  but  on  something 
external  to  itself,  on  some  extraneous  notion  such  as 
the  “welfare  of  the  state”  or  the  “welfare  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.”  Once  it  has  been  so  based,  its  hereditary  char¬ 
acter  may  of  course  be  deduced  by  the  use  of  medii 
termini.  But  other  medii  termini  are  equally  avail¬ 
able,  and  so  therefore  are  different  conclusions,  and 
it  is  only  too  well  known  what  conclusions  have  in 
fact  been  drawn  from  this  “welfare  of  the  people” 
{salut  du  peuple ).  Hence  the  majesty  of  the  mon¬ 
arch  is  a  topic  for  thoughtful  treatment  by  philoso¬ 
phy  alone,  since  every  method  of  inquiry,  other  than 
the  speculative  method  of  the  infinite  Idea  which  is 
purely  self -grounded,  annuls  the  nature  of  majesty 
altogether. 

An  elective  monarchy  seems  of  course  to  be  the 
most  natural  idea,  i.e.  the  idea  which  superficial 
thinking  finds  handiest.  Because  it  is  the  concerns 
and  interests  of  his  people  for  which  a  monarch  has 
to  provide,  so  the  argument  runs,  it  must  be  left  to 
the  people  to  entrust  with  its  welfare  whomsoever  it 
pleases,  and  only  with  the  grant  of  this  trust  does 
his  right  to  rule  arise.  This  view,  like  the  notion  of 
the  monarch  as  the  highest  executive  official  in  the 
state,  or  the  notion  of  a  contractual  relation  between 
him  and  his  people,  &c.,  &c.,  is  grounded  on  the  will 
interpreted  as  the  whim,  opinion,  and  caprice  of  the 
Many. 4  A  will  of  this  character  counts  as  the  first 
thing  in  civil  society  (as  was  pointed  out  long  ago)  5 
or  rather  it  tries  to  count  as  the  only  thing  there,  but 
it  is  not  the  guiding  principle  of  the  family,  still  less 
of  the  state,  and  in  short  it  stands  opposed  to  the 
Idea  of  ethical  life. 

It  is  truer  to  say  that  elective  monarchy  is  the 
worst  of  institutions,  and  its  results  suffice  to  reveal 
this  to  ratiocination.  To  ratiocination,  however,  these 
results  have  the  appearance  of  something  merely 
possible  and  probable,  though  they  are  in  fact  in¬ 
herent  in  the  very  essence  of  this  institution.  In  an 
elective  monarchy,  I  mean,  the  nature  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  between  king  and  people  implies  that  the  ulti¬ 
mate  decision  is  left  with  the  particular  will,  and 
hence  the  constitution  becomes  a  Compact  of  Elec¬ 
tion,  i.e.  a  surrender  of  the  power  of  the  state  at  the 
discretion  of  the  particular  will.  The  result  of  this 
is  that  the  particular  offices  of  state  turn  into  pri¬ 
vate  property,  the  sovereignty  of  the  state  is  en¬ 
feebled  and  lost,  and  finally  the  state  disintegrates 
within  and  is  overthrown  from  without.6  [A.] 

282.  The  right  to  pardon  criminals  arises  from 
the  sovereignty  of  the  monarch,  since  it  is  this 
alone  which  is  empowered  to  actualize  mind’s 

4  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  301. — Ed. 

5  In  the  section  on  Civil  Society;  see,  e.g.,  Paragraphs 
183  and  206. — Ed. 

6  Cf.  Hegel,  Philosophy  of  History,  p.  355. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


power  of  making  undone  what  has  been  done  and 
wiping  out  a  crime  by  forgiving  and  forgetting  it. 

The  right  of  pardon  is  one  of  the  highest  recogni¬ 
tions  of  the  majesty  of  mind.  Moreover  it  is  one  of 
those  cases  where  a  category  which  belongs  to  a 
higher  sphere  is  applied  to  or  reflected  in  the  sphere 
below.1  Applications  of  higher  categories  to  a  lower 
sphere,  however,  concern  the  particular  science 
which  has  to  handle  its  subject-matter  in  all  its  em¬ 
pirical  details  (see  [the  second]  footnote  to  the  Re¬ 
mark  to  Paragraph  270).  Another  instance  of  the 
same  kind  of  thing  is  the  subsumption  under  the  con¬ 
cept  of  crime  (which  came  before  us  earlier — see 
Paragraphs  95-102)  of  injuries  against  the  state  in 
generator  against  the  sovereignty,  majesty, and  per¬ 
son  of  the  prince.  In  fact  these  acquire  the  character 
of  crime  of  the  worst  kind,  requiring  a  special  pro¬ 
cedure,  &c.  [A.] 

283.  The  second  moment  in  the  power  of  the 
crown  is  the  moment  of  particularity,  or  the 
moment  of  a  determinate  content  and  its  sub¬ 
sumption  under  the  universal.  When  this  ac¬ 
quires  a  special  objective  existence,  it  becomes 
the  supreme  council  and  the  individuals  who 
compose  it.  They  bringbefore  the  monarch  for  his 
decision  the  content  of  current  affairs  of  state 
or  the  legal  provisions  required  to  meet  existing 
needs,  together  with  their  objective  aspects,  i.e. 
the  grounds  on  which  decision  is  to  be  based,  the 
relative  laws,  circumstances,  &c.  The  individuals 
who  discharge  these  duties  are  in  direct  contact 
with  the  person  of  the  monarch  and  therefore 
their  choice  and  dismissal  alike  rest  with  his 
unrestricted  caprice. 

284.  It  is  only  for  the  objective  side  of  decision, 
i.e.  for  knowledge  of  the  problem  and  the  attend¬ 
ant  circumstances,  and  for  the  legal  and  other 
reasons  which  determine  its  solution,  that  men 
are  answerable;  in  other  words,  it  is  these  alone 
which  are  capable  of  objective  proof.  It  is  for 
this  reason  that  these  may  fall  within  the  prov¬ 
ince  of  a  council  which  is  distinct  from  the  per¬ 
sonal  will  of  the  monarch  as  such.  Hence  it  is 
only  councils  or  their  individual  members  that 
are  made  answerable.  The  personal  majesty  of 
the  monarch,  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  final 
subjectivity  of  decision,  is  above  all  answerabil¬ 
ity  for  acts  of  government. 

285.  The  third  moment  in  the  power  of  the 
crown  concerns  the  absolute  universality  which 
subsists  subjectively  in  the  conscience  of  the 
monarch  and  objectively  in  the  whole  of  the 
constitution  and  the  laws.  Hence  the  power  of 
the  crown  presupposes  the  other  moments  in  the 
state  just  as  it  is  presupposed  by  each  of  them. 

1  See  the  end  of  the  Remark  to  Paragraph  137. — Ed. 


286.  The  objective  guarantee  of  the  power  of 
the  crown,  of  the  hereditary  right  of  succession 
to  the  throne,  and  so  forth,  consists  in  the  fact 
that  just  as  monarchy  has  its  own  actuality  in 
distinction  from  that  of  the  other  rationally  de¬ 
termined  moments  in  the  state,  so  these  others 
explicitly  possess  the  rights  and  duties  appro¬ 
priate  to  their  own  character.  In  the  rational 
organism  of  the  state,  each  member,  by  main¬ 
taining  itself  in  its  own  position,  eo  ipso  main¬ 
tains  the  others  in  theirs. 

One  of  the  results  of  more  recent  history  is  the 
development  of  a  monarchical  constitution  with  suc¬ 
cession  to  the  throne  firmly  fixed  on  hereditary  prin¬ 
ciples  in  accordance  with  primogeniture.  With  this 
development,  monarchy  has  been  brought  back  to 
the  patriarchal  principle  in  which  it  had  its  histori¬ 
cal  origin,  but  its  determinate  character  is  now  high¬ 
er,  because  the  monarch  is  the  absolute  apex  of  an 
organically  developed  state.  This  historical  result 
is  of  the  utmost  importance  for  public  freedom  and 
for  rationality  in  the  constitution,  but,  as  was  re¬ 
marked  above,2  it  is  often  grossly  misunderstood  de¬ 
spite  the  respect  paid  to  it. 

The  history  of  despotisms,  as  of  the  now  obsolete, 
purely  feudal,  monarchies,  is  a  tale  of  the  vicissitudes 
of  revolt,  monarchical  tyranny,  civil  war,  the  ruin 
of  princes  of  the  blood  and  whole  dynasties,  and, 
consequentially,  the  general  devastation  and  over¬ 
throw  of  the  state  in  both  its  home  and  foreign  con¬ 
cerns.  This  is  all  due  to  the  fact  that,  in  monarchies  of 
that  type,  the  division  of  the  business  of  the  state  is 
purely  mechanical,  the  various  sections  being  merely 
handed  over  to  pashas,  vassals,  &c.  The  difference 
between  the  departments  is  simply  one  of  greater  or 
lesser  power  instead  of  being  one  of  form  and  spe¬ 
cific  character.  Hence  each  department  maintains  it¬ 
self  and  in  doing  so  is  productive  only  of  itself  and 
not  of  the  others  at  the  same  time ;  each  is  independ¬ 
ent  and  autonomous  and  completely  incorporates  in 
itself  all  the  moments  of  the  concept.  When  there. is 
an  organic  relation  subsisting  between  members,  not 
parts,  then  each  member  by  fulfilling  the  functions 
of  its  own  sphere  is  eo  ipso  maintaining  the  others ; 
what  each  fundamentally  aims  at  and  achieves  in 
maintaining  itself  is  the  maintenance  of  the  others. 

The  guarantees  in  question  here  for  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  the  succession  to  the  throne  or  for  the  pow¬ 
er  of  the  crown  generally,  or  for  justice,  public  free¬ 
dom,  &c.,  are  modes  of  securing  these  things  by 
means  of  institutions.  For  subjective  guarantees  we 
may  look  to  the  affection  of  the  people,  to  character, 
oaths  of  allegiance,  power,  and  so  forth,  but,  when 
the  constitution  is  being  discussed,  it  is  only  objec¬ 
tive  guarantees  that  are  relevant.  And  such  guaran¬ 
tees  are  institutions,  i.e.  mutually  conditioning  mo¬ 
ments,  organically  interconnected.  Hence  public  free¬ 
dom  in  general  and  an  hereditary  monarchy  guaran¬ 
tee  each  other ;  they  stand  or  fall  together  of  neces- 

2  See  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  279  and  281. — Ed. 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


sity,  because  public  freedom  means  a  rational  con¬ 
stitution,  while  the  hereditary  character  of  the  pow¬ 
er  of  the  crown  is,  as  has  been  shown,1  the  moment 
lying  in  the  concept  of  that  power. 

(ft)  The  Executive 

287.  There  is  a  distinction  between  the  mon¬ 
arch’s  decisions  and  their  execution  and  applica¬ 
tion,  or  in  general  between  his  decisions  and  the 
continued  execution  or  maintenance  of  past  de¬ 
cisions,  existing  laws,  regulations,  organizations 
for  the  securing  of  common  ends,  and  so  forth. 
This  task  of  merely  subsuming  the  particular 
under  the  universal  is  comprised  in  the  execu¬ 
tive  power,  which  also  includes  the  powers  of 
the  judiciary  and  the  police.  The  latter  have  a 
more  immediate  bearing  on  the  particular  con¬ 
cerns  of  civil  society  and  they  make  the  univer¬ 
sal  interest  authoritative  over  its  particular  aims. 

288.  Particular  interests  which  are  common  to 
everyone  fall  within  civil  society  and  lie  outside 
the  absolutely  universal  interest  of  the  state 
proper  (see  Paragraph  256).  The  administra¬ 
tion  of  these  is  in  the  hands  of  Corporations 
(see  Paragraph  251,  commercial  and  profes¬ 
sional  as  well  as  municipal,  and  their  officials, 
directors,  managers,  and  the  like.  It  is  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  these  officials  to  manage  the  private  prop¬ 
erty  and  interests  of  these  particular  spheres 
and,  from  that  point  of  view,  their  authority 
rests  on  the  confidence  of  their  commonalties 
and  professional  equals.  On  the  other  hand, 
however,  these  circles  of  particular  interests 
must  be  subordinated  to  the  higher  interests  of 
the  state,  and  hence  the  filling  of  positions  of 
responsibility  in  Corporations,  &c.,  will  general¬ 
ly  be  effected  by  a  mixture  of  popular  election 
by  those  interested  with  appointment  and  rati¬ 
fication  by  higher  authority. 

289.  The  maintenance  of  the  state’s  universal 
interest,  and  of  legality,  in  this  sphere  of  partic¬ 
ular  rights,  and  the  work  of  bringing  these  rights 
back  to  the  universal,  require  to  be  superin¬ 
tended  by  holders  of  the  executive  power,  by 
(a)  the  executive  civil  servants,  and  ( b )  the 
higher  advisory  officials  (who  are  organized  in¬ 
to  committees).  These  converge  in  their  su¬ 
preme  heads  who  are  in  direct  contact  with  the 
monarch. 

Just  as  civil  society  is  the  battlefield  where  every¬ 
one’s  individual  private  interest  meets  everyone 
else’s,  so  here  we  have  the  struggle  (a)  of  private 
interests  against  particular  matters  of  common  con¬ 
cern  and  ( b )  of  both  of  these  together  against  the 
organization  of  the  state  and  its  higher  outlook.  At 

1See  Paragraph  280. — Ed. 


97 

the  same  time  the  corporation  mind,  engendered 
when  the  particular  spheres  gain  their  title  to  rights, 
is  now  inwardly  converted  into  the  mind  of  the  state, 
since  it  finds  in  the  state  the  means  of  maintaining 
its  particular  ends.  This  is  the  secret  of  the  patriot¬ 
ism  of  the  citizens  in  the  sense  that  they  know  the 
state  as  their  substance,  because  it  is  the  state  that 
maintains  their  particular  spheres  of  interest  togeth¬ 
er  with  the  title,  authority,  and  welfare  of  these.  In 
the  corporation  mind  the  rooting  of  the  particular 
in  the  universal  is  directly  entailed,  and  for  this  rea¬ 
son  it  is  in  that  mind  that  the  depth  and  strength 
which  the  state  possesses  in  sentiment  is  seated. 

The  administration  of  a  Corporation’s  business  by 
its  own  officials  is  frequently  clumsy,  because  al¬ 
though  they  keep  before  their  minds  and  are  ac¬ 
quainted  with  its  special  interests  and  affairs,  they 
have  a  far  less  complete  appreciation  of  the  connex¬ 
ion  of  those  affairs  with  more  remote  conditions  and 
the  outlook  of  the  state.  In  addition,  other  circum¬ 
stances  contribute  to  the  same  result,  e.g.  close  pri¬ 
vate  relationships  and  other  factors  putting  officials 
on  a  footing  of  equality  with  those  who  should  be 
their  subordinates,  the  rather  numerous  ways  in 
which  officials  lack  independence,  and  so  on.  This 
sphere  of  private  interests,  however,  may  be  regarded 
as  the  one  left  to  the  moment  of  formal  freedom,2 
the  one  which  affords  a  playground  for  personal 
knowledge,  personal  decisions  and  their  execution, 
petty  passions  and  conceits.  This  is  all  the  more  per¬ 
missible,  the  more  trivial,  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  more  universal  affairs  of  state,  is  the  intrinsic 
worth  of  the  business  which  in  this  way  comes  to 
ruin  or  is  managed  less  well  or  more  laboriously, 
&c.  And  further,  it  is  all  the  more  permissible,  the 
more  this  laborious  or  foolish  management  of  such 
trivial  affairs  stands  in  direct  relation  with  the  self- 
satisfaction  and  vanity  derived  therefrom. 

290.  Division  of  labour  (see  Paragraph  198) 
occurs  in  the  business  of  the  executive  also.  For 
this  reason,  the  organization  of  officials  has  the 
abstract  though  difficult  task  of  so  arranging 
that  (a)  civil  life  shall  be  governed  in  a  concrete 
manner  from  below  where  it  is  concrete,  but 
that  ( b )  none  the  less  the  business  of  govern¬ 
ment  shall  be  divided  into  its  abstract  branches 
manned  by  special  officials  as  different  centres 
of  administration,  and  further  that  ( c )  the 
operations  of  these  various  departments  shall 
converge  again  when  they  are  directed  on  civil 
life  from  above,  in  the  same  way  as  they  con¬ 
verge  into  a  general  supervision  in  the  supreme 
executive.3  [A.] 

291.  The  nature  of  the  executive  functions  is 
that  they  are  objective  and  that  in  their  sub¬ 
stance  they  have  been  explicitly  fixed  by  pre- 

2  See  Paragraphs  182  ff. — Ed. 

8  Cf.  Hegel,  Philosophy  of  History,  p.  367.  See  Re¬ 
mark  to  Paragraph  288  and  Paragraph  295. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


vious  decisions  (see  Paragraph  287)  ;  these  func¬ 
tions  have  to  be  fulfilled  and  carried  out  by  in¬ 
dividuals.  Between  an  individual  and  his  office 
there  is  no  immediate  natural  link.  Hence  in¬ 
dividuals  are  not  appointed  to  office  on  account 
of  their  birth  or  native  personal  gifts.  The  objec¬ 
tive  factor  in  their  appointment  is  knowledge 
and  proof  of  ability.  Such  proof  guarantees  that 
the  state  will  get  what  it  requires;  and  since  it 
is  the  sole  condition  of  appointment,  it  also  guar¬ 
antees  to  every  citizen  the  chance  of  joining  the 
class  of  civil  servants. 

292.  Since  the  objective  qualification  for  the 
civil  service  is  not  genius  (as  it  is  for  work  as  an 
artist,  for  example),  there  is  of  necessity  an  in¬ 
definite  plurality  of  eligible  candidates  whose 
relative  excellence  is  not  determinable  with  ab¬ 
solute  precision.  The  selection  of  one  of  the  can¬ 
didates,  his  nomination  to  office,  and  the  grant 
to  him  of  full  authority  to  transact  public  busi¬ 
ness — all  this,  as  the  linking  of  two  things,  a 
man  and  his  office,  which  in  relation  to  each  other 
must  always  be  fortuitous,  is  the  subjective  as¬ 
pect  of  election  to  office,  and  it  must  lie  with  the 
crown  as  the  power  in  the  state  which  is  sover¬ 
eign  and  has  the  last  word. 

293.  The  particular  public  functions  which  the 
monarch  entrusts  to  officials  constitute  one  part 
of  the  objective  aspect  of  the  sovereignty  resid¬ 
ing  in  the  crown.  Their  specific  discrimination 
is  therefore  given  in  the  nature  of  the  thing.  And 
while  the  actions  of  the  officials  are  the  fulfil¬ 
ment  of  their  duty,  their  office  is  also  a  right  ex¬ 
empt  from  contingency. 

294.  Once  an  individual  has  been  appointed  to 
his  official  position  by  the  sovereign’s  act  (see 
Paragraph  292),  the  tenure  of  his  post  is  condi¬ 
tional  on  his  fulfilling  its  duties.  Such  fulfil¬ 
ment  is  the  very  essence  of  his  appointment, 
and  it  is  only  consequential  that  he  finds  in  his 
office  his  livelihood  and  the  assured  satisfaction 
of  his  particular  interests  (see  Paragraph  264), 
and  further  that  his  external  circumstances  and 
his  official  work  are  freed  from  other  kinds  of 
subjective  dependence  and  influence. 

The  state  does  not  count  on  optional,  discretionary, 
services  (e.g.  on  justice  administered  by  knights  er¬ 
rant).  It  is  just  because  such  services  are  optional 
and  discretionary  that  the  state  cannot  rely  on  them, 
for  casual  servants  may  fail  for  private  reasons  to 
fulfil  their  duties  completely,  or  they  may  arbitra¬ 
rily  decide  not  to  fulfil  them  at  all  but  pursue  their 
private  ends  instead.  The  opposite  extreme  to  a 
knight  errant,  so  far  as  the  service  of  the  state  goes, 
would  be  an  official  who  clung  to  his  office  purely 


and  simply  to  make  a  living  without  any  real  sense 
of  duty  and  so  without  any  real  right  to  go  on  hold¬ 
ing  it. 

What  the  service  of  the  state  really  requires  is  that 
men  shall  forgo  the  selfish  and  capricious  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  their  subjective  ends ;  by  this  very  sacrifice, 
they  acquire  the  right  to  find  their  satisfaction  in, 
but  only  in,  the  dutiful  discharge  of  their  public 
functions.  In  this  fact,  so  far  as  public  business  is 
concerned,  there  lies  the  link  between  universal  and 
particular  interests  which  constitutes  both  the  con¬ 
cept  of  the  state  and  its  inner  stability  (see  Para¬ 
graph  260). 

It  follows  that  a  man’s  tenure  of  his  civil  service 
post  is  not  contractual  (see  Paragraph  75) ,  although 
his  appointment  involves  a  consent  and  an  under¬ 
taking  on  both  sides.  A  civil  servant  is  not  appointed, 
like  an  agent,  to  perform  a  single  casual  act  of  serv¬ 
ice  ;  on  the  contrary,  he  concentrates  his  main  inter¬ 
ests  (not  only  his  particular  interests  but  his  mental 
interests  also)  on  his  relation  to  his  work.  Similarly, 
the  work  imposed  upon  him  and  entrusted  to  him  is 
not  merely  a  particular  thing,  external  in  character ; 
the  value  of  such  a  thing  is  something  inward  and 
therefore  distinct  from  its  outward  character,  so 
that  it  is  in  no  way  impaired  if  what  has  been  stipu¬ 
lated  is  not  fulfilled  (see  Paragraph  77).  The  work 
of  a  civil  servant,  however,  is  as  such  a  value  in  and 
for  itself.  Hence  the  wrong  committed  through  its 
non-performance,  or  positive  misperformance  (i.e. 
through  an  action  contrary  to  official  duty,  and  both 
of  these  are  of  that  type),  is  an  infringement  of  the 
universal  content  itself  (i.e.  is  a  negatively  infinite 
judgement — see  Paragraph  95)  and  so  is  a  trespass 
or  even  a  crime. 

The  assured  satisfaction  of  particular  needs  re¬ 
moves  the  external  compulsion  which  may  tempt  a 
man  to  seek  ways  and  means  of  satisfying  them  at 
the  expense  of  his  official  duties.  Those  who  are  en¬ 
trusted  with  affairs  of  state  find  in  its  universal 
power  the  protection  they  need  against  another  sub¬ 
jective  phenomenon,  namely  the  personal  passions 
of  the  governed,  whose  private  interests,  &c.,  suffer 
injury  as  the  interest  of  the  state  is  made  to  prevail 
against  them. 

295.  The  security  of  the  state  and  its  subjects 
against  the  misuse  of  power  by  ministers  and 
their  officials  lies  directly  in  their  hierarchical 
organization  and  their  answerability;  but  it  lies 
too  in  the  authority  given  to  societies  and  Cor¬ 
porations,  because  in  itself  this  is  a  barrier 
against  the  intrusion  of  subjective  caprice  into 
the  power  entrusted  to  a  civil  servant,  and  it 
completes  from  below  the  state  control  which 
does  not  reach  down  as  far  as  the  conduct  of 
individuals. 

The  conduct  and  culture  of  officials  is  the  sphere 
where  the  laws  and  the  government’s  decisions  come 
into  contact  with  individuals  and  are  actually  made 
good.  Hence  it  is  on  the  conduct  of  officials  that 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


there  depend  not  only  the  contentment  of  citizens 
and  their  confidence  in  the  government,  but  also  the 
execution — or  alternatively  the  distortion  and  frus¬ 
tration — of  state  projects;  at  any  rate,  this  is  the 
case  in  the  sense  that  feeling  and  sentiment  may 
easily  rate  the  manner  of  execution  as  highly  as  the 
very  content  of  the  command  to  be  executed,  even 
though  the  content  may  in  fact  be  the  imposition  of 
a  tax.  Owing  to  the  direct  and  personal  nature  of 
this  contact  with  individuals,  control  from  above 
can  attain  its  ends  in  this  respect  only  to  a  rather 
incomplete  extent.  Moreover,  its  ends  may  also  be 
hindered  by  interests  common  to  officials  who  form 
a  clique  over  against  their  inferiors  on  one  side  and 
their  superiors  on  the  other.  In  states  whose  institu¬ 
tions  may  perhaps  be  imperfectly  developed  in  oth¬ 
er  respects  also,  the  removal  of  hindrances  like  these 
requires  and  justifies  the  higher  intervention  of  the 
sovereign  (as  for  example  of  Frederick  the  Great  in 
the  notorious  affair  of  Arnold  the  miller). 

296.  But  the  fact  that  a  dispassionate,  upright, 
and  polite  demeanour  becomes  customary  [in 
civil  servants]  is  (i)  partly  a  result  of  direct 
education  in  thought  and  ethical  conduct.  Such 
an  education  is  a  mental  counterpoise  to  the 
mechanical  and  semi-mechanical  activity  in¬ 
volved  in  acquiring  the  so-called  “sciences”  of 
matters  connected  with  administration,  in  the 
requisite  business  training,  in  the  actual  work 
done,  &c.  (ii)  The  size  of  the  state,  however,  is 
an  important  factor  in  producing  this  result, 
since  it  diminishes  the  stress  of  family  and  other 
personal  ties,  and  also  makes  less  potent  and  so 
less  keen  such  passions  as  hatred,  revenge,  &c. 
In  those  who  are  busy  with  the  important  ques¬ 
tions  arising  in  a  great  state,  these  subjective 
interests  automatically  disappear,  and  the  habit 
is  generated  of  adopting  universal  interests, 
points  of  view,  and  activities. 

297.  Civil  servants  and  the  members  of  the 
executive  constitute  the  greater  part  of  the  mid¬ 
dle  class,  the  class  in  which  the  consciousness  of 
right  and  the  developed  intelligence  of  the  mass 
of  the  people  is  found.  The  sovereign  working 
on  the  middle  class  at  the  top,  and  Corporation 
rights  working  on  it  at  the  bottom,  are  the  in¬ 
stitutions  which  effectually  prevent  it  from  ac¬ 
quiring  the  isolated  position  of  an  aristocracy 
and  using  its  education  and  skill  as  means  to  an 
arbitrary  tyranny. 

At  one  time  the  administration  of  justice,  which  is 
concerned  with  the  private  interests  of  all  members 
of  the  state,  was  in  this  way  turned  into  an  instru¬ 
ment  of  profit  and  tyranny,  when  the  knowledge  of 
the  law  was  buried  in  pedantry  and  a  foreign  tongue, 
and  knowledge  of  legal  processes  was  similarly 
buried  in  involved  formalities.  [A.] 


99 

(y)  The  Legislature 

298.  The  legislature  is  concerned  (a)  with  the 
laws  as  such  in  so  far  as  they  require  fresh  and 
extended  determination;  and  (b)  with  the  con¬ 
tent  of  home  affairs  affecting  the  entire  state. 
The  legislature  is  itself  a  part  of  the  constitu¬ 
tion  which  is  presupposed  by  it  and  to  that  ex¬ 
tent  lies  absolutely  outside  the  sphere  directly 
determined  by  it ;  none  the  less,  the  constitution 
becomes  progressively  more  mature  in  the  course 
of  the  further  elaboration  of  the  laws  and  the 
advancing  character  of  the  universal  business  of 
government.  [A.] 

299.  Legislative  business  is  more  precisely  de¬ 
termined,  in  relation  to  private  individuals,  un¬ 
der  these  two  heads:  (a)  provision  by  the  state 
for  their  well-being  and  happiness,  and  (ft)  the 
exaction  of  services  from  them.  The  former 
comprises  the  laws  dealing  with  all  sorts  of  pri¬ 
vate  rights,  the  rights  of  communities,  Corpora¬ 
tions,  and  organizations  affecting  the  entire  state, 
and  further  it  indirectly  (see  Paragraph  298) 
comprises  the  whole  of  the  constitution.  As  for 
the  services  to  be  exacted,  it  is  only  if  these  are 
reduced  to  terms  of  money,  the  really  existent 
and  universal  value  of  both  things  and  services, 
that  they  can  be  fixed  justly  and  at  the  same 
time  in  such  a  way  that  any  particular  tasks  and 
services  which  an  individual  may  perform  come 
to  be  mediated  through  his  own  arbitrary  will. 

The  proper  object  of  universal  legislation  may  be 
distinguished  in  a  general  way  from  the  proper  func¬ 
tion  of  administrative  officials  or  of  some  kind  of 
state  regulation,  in  that  the  content  of  the  former  is 
wholly  universal,  i.e.  determinate  laws,  while  it  is 
what  is  particular  in  content  which  falls  to  the  lat¬ 
ter,  together  with  ways  and  means  of  enforcing  the 
law.  This  distinction,  however,  is  not  a  hard  and 
fast  one,  because  a  law,  by  being  a  law,  is  ab  initio 
something  more  than  a  mere  command  in  general 
terms  (such  as  uThou  shalt  not  kill” — compare  Re¬ 
mark  ( d )  to  Paragraph  140) .  A  law  must  in  itself  be 
something  determinate,  but  the  more  determinate  it 
is,  the  more  readily  are  its  terms  capable  of  being 
carried  out  as  they  stand.  At  the  same  time,  how¬ 
ever,  to  give  to  laws  such  a  fully  detailed  determi- 
nacy  would  give  them  empirical  features  subject  in¬ 
evitably  to  alteration  in  the  course  of  their  being 
actually  carried  out,  and  this  would  contravene  their 
character  as  laws.  The  organic  unity  of  the  powers 
of  the  state  itself  implies  that  it  is  one  single  mind 
which  both  firmly  establishes  the  universal  and  also 
brings  it  into  its  determinate  actuality  and  carries 
it  out. 

In  the  state  it  may  happen,  to  begin  with,1  that 
the  numerous  aptitudes,  possessions,  pursuits,  and 

1  i.e.,  before  war  breaks  out.  War-time  services  are 
considered  in  Paragraphs  324  ff. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


talents  of  its  members,  together  with  the  infinitely 
varied  richness  of  life  intrinsic  to  these — all  of  which 
are  at  the  same  time  linked  with  their  owner’s  men¬ 
tality — are  not  subject  to  direct  levy  by  the  state.  It 
lays  claim  only  to  a  single  form  of  riches,  namely 
money.  (Services  requisitioned  for  the  defence  of 
the  state  in  war  arise  for  the  first  time  in  connexion 
with  the  duty  considered  in  the  next  subdivision  of 
this  book.)  In  fact,  however,  money  is  not  one  par¬ 
ticular  type  of  wealth  amongst  others,  but  the  uni¬ 
versal  form  of  all  types  so  far  as  they  are  expressed 
in  an  external  embodiment  and  so  can  be  taken  as 
“things.”  1  Only  by  being  translated  into  terms  of 
this  extreme  culmination  of  externality  can  services 
exacted  by  the  state  be  fixed  quantitatively  and  so 
justly  and  equitably. 

In  Plato’s  Republic ,  the  Guardians  are  left  to  allot 
individuals  to  their  particular  classes  and  impose  on 
them  their  particular  tasks  (compare  Remark  to 
Paragraph  185).  Under  the  feudal  monarchies  the 
services  required  from  vassals  were  equally  indeter¬ 
minate,  but  they  had  also  to  serve  in  their  particular 
capacity,  e.g.  as  judges.  The  same  particular  char¬ 
acter  pertains  to  tasks  imposed  in  the  East  and  in 
Egypt  in  connexion  with  colossal  architectural  un¬ 
dertakings,  and  so  forth.  In  these  circumstances  the 
principle  of  subjective  freedom  is  lacking,  i.e.  the 
principle  that  the  individual’s  substantive  activity — 
which  in  any  case  becomes  something  particular  in 
content  in  services  like  those  mentioned — shall  be 
mediated  through  his  particular  volition.  This  is  a 
right  which  can  be  secured  only  when  the  demand 
for  service  takes  the  form  of  a  demand  for  some¬ 
thing  of  universal  value,  and  it  is  this  right  which 
has  brought  with  it  this  conversion  of  the  state’s  de¬ 
mands  into  demands  for  cash.  [A.] 

300.  In  the  legislature  as  a  whole  the  other 
powers  are  the  first  two  moments  which  are  ef¬ 
fective,  (i)  the  monarchy  as  that  to  which  ulti¬ 
mate  decisions  belong;  (ii)  the  executive  as  the 
advisory  body  since  it  is  the  moment  possessed 
of  (a)  a  concrete  knowledge  and  oversight  of 
the  whole  state  in  its  numerous  facets  and  the 
actual  principles  firmly  establishedwithinit,and 
(ft)  a  knowledge  in  particular  of  what  the  state’s 
power  needs.  The  last  moment  in  the  legislature 
is  the  Estates.2  [A.] 

301.  The  Estates  have  the  function  of  bringing 
public  affairs  into  existence  not  only  implicitly, 
but  also  actually,  i.e.  of  bringing  into  existence 
the  moment  of  subjective  formal  freedom,  the 
public  consciousness  as  an  empirical  universal, 
of  which  the  thoughts  and  opinions  of  the  Many 
are  particulars. 

The  phrase  “the  Many”  ( ol  ttoWoI )  denotes  empi¬ 
rical  universality  more  strictly  than  “All,”  which  is 
in  current  use.  If  it  is  said  to  be  obvious  that  this 

*  See  Paragraphs  42  ff. — Ed. 

2  See  Remark  to  Paragraph  303. 


“all”  prima  facie  excludes  at  least  children,  women, 
&c.,  then  it  is  surely  still  more  obvious  that  the  quite 
definite  word  “all”  should  not  be  used  when  some¬ 
thing  quite  indefinite  is  meant. 

Current  opinion  has  put  into  general  circulation 
such  a  host  of  perverse  and  false  ideas  and  ways  of 
speaking  about  “People,”  “Constitution,”  and  “Es¬ 
tates”  that  it  would  be  a  waste  of  energy  to  try  to 
specify,  expound,  and  correct  them.  The  idea  upper¬ 
most  in  men’s  minds  when  they  speak  about  the 
necessity  or  the  expediency  of  “summoning  the  Es¬ 
tates”  is  generally  something  of  this  sort:  (i)  The 
deputies  of  the  people,  or  even  the  people  themselves, 
must  know  best  what  is  in  their  best  interest,  and 
(ii)  their  will  for  its  promotion  is  undoubtedly  the 
most  disinterested.  So  far  as  the  first  of  these  points 
is  concerned,  however,  the  truth  is  that  if  “people” 
means  a  particular  section  of  the  citizens,  then  it 
means  precisely  that  section  which  does  not  know 
what  it  wills.  To  know  what  one  wills,  and  still  more 
to  know  what  the  absolute  will,  Reason,  wills,  is  the 
fruit  of  profound  apprehension  and  insight,  pre¬ 
cisely  the  things  which  are  not  popular. 

The  Estates  are  a  guarantee  of  the  general  welfare 
and  public  freedom.  A  little  reflection  will  show  that 
this  guarantee  does  not  lie  in  their  particular  power 
of  insight,  because  the  highest  civil  servants  neces¬ 
sarily  have  a  deeper  and  more  comprehensive  in¬ 
sight  into  the  nature  of  the  state’s  organization  and 
requirements.  They  are  also  more  habituated  to  the 
business  of  government  and  have  greater  skill  in  it, 
so  that  even  without  the  Estates  they  are  able  to  do 
what  is  best,  just  as  they  also  continually  have  to  do 
while  the  Estates  are  in  session.  No,  the  guarantee 
lies  on  the  contrary  (a)  in  the  additional  insight  of 
the  deputies,  insight  in  the  first  place  into  the  activ¬ 
ity  of  such  officials  as  are  not  immediately  under  the 
eye  of  the  higher  functionaries  of  state,  and  in  par¬ 
ticular  into  the  more  pressing  and  more  specialized 
needs  and  deficiencies  which  are  directly  in  their 
view;  (/3)  in  the  fact  that  the  anticipation  of 
criticism  from  the  Many,  particularly  of  public  criti¬ 
cism,  has  the  effect  of  inducing  officials  to  devote 
their  best  attention  beforehand  to  their  duties  and 
the  schemes  under  consideration,  and  to  deal  with 
these  only  in  accordance  with  the  purest  motives. 
This  same  compulsion  is  effective  also  on  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  Estates  themselves. 

As  for  the  conspicuously  good  will  for  the  general 
welfare  which  the  Estates  are  supposed  to  possess, 
it  has  been  pointed  out  already  (in  the  Remark  to 
Paragraph  272)  that  to  regard  the  will  of  the  execu¬ 
tive  as  bad,  or  as  less  good  [than  that  of  the  ruled] 
is  a  presupposition  characteristic  of  the  rabble  or  of 
the  negative  outlook  generally.  This  presupposition 
might  at  once  be  answered  on  its  own  ground  by  the 
counter-charge  that  the  Estates  start  from  isolated 
individuals,  from  a  private  point  of  view,  from  par¬ 
ticular  interests,  and  so  are  inclined  to  devote  their 
activities  to  these  at  the  expense  of  the  general  in¬ 
terests,  while  per  contra  the  other  moments  in  the 
power  of  the  state  explicitly  take  up  the  standpoint 


IOI 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


of  the  state  from  the  start  and  devote  themselves  to 
the  universal  end. 

As  for  the  general  guarantee  which  is  supposed  to 
lie  peculiarly  in  the  Estates,  each  of  the  other  politi¬ 
cal  institutions  shares  with  the  Estates  in  being  a 
guarantee  of  public  welfare  and  rational  freedom, 
and  some  of  these  institutions,  as  for  instance  the 
sovereignty  of  the  monarch,  hereditary  succession  to 
the  throne,  the  judicial  system,  &c.,  guarantee  these 
things  far  more  effectively  than  the  Estates  can. 

Hence  the  specific  function  which  the  concept  as¬ 
signs  to  the  Estates  is  to  be  sought  in  the  fact  that  in 
them  the  subjective  moment  in  universal  freedom— 
the  private  judgement  and  private  will  of  the  sphere 
called  “civil  society”  in  this  book — comes  into  exist¬ 
ence  integrally  related  to  the  state.  This  moment  is 
a  determination  of  the  Idea  once  the  Idea  has  de¬ 
veloped  to  totality,  a  moment  arising  as  a  result  of 
an  inner  necessity  not  to  be  confused  with  external 
necessities  and  expediencies.  The  proof  of  this  fol¬ 
lows,  like  all  the  rest  of  our  account  of  the  state, 
from  adopting  the  philosophical  point  of  view.  [A.] 

302.  Regarded  as  a  mediating  organ,  the  Es¬ 
tates  stand  between  the  government  in  general 
on  the  one  hand  and  the  nation  broken  up  into 
particulars  (people  and  associations)  on  the 
other.  Their  function  requires  them  to  possess 
a  political  and  administrative  sense  and  temper, 
no  less  than  a  sense  for  the  interests  of  indi¬ 
viduals  and  particular  groups.  At  the  same  time 
the  significance  of  their  position  is  that,  in  com¬ 
mon  with  the  organized  executive,  they  are  a 
middle  term  preventing  both  the  extreme  isola¬ 
tion  of  the  power  of  the  crown,  which  otherwise 
might  seem  a  mere  arbitrary  tyranny,  and  also 
the  isolation  of  the  particular  interests  of  per¬ 
sons,  societies,  and  Corporations.  Further,  and 
more  important,  they  prevent  individuals  from 
having  the  appearance  of  a  mass  or  an  aggregate 
and  so  from  acquiring  an  unorganized  opinion 
and  volition  and  from  crystallizing  into  a  power¬ 
ful  bloc  in  opposition  to  the  organized  state. 

It  is  one  of  the  most  important  discoveries  of  logic 
that  a  specific  moment  which,  by  standing  in  an  op¬ 
position,  has  the  position  of  an  extreme,  ceases  to  be 
such  and  is  a  moment  in  an  organic  whole  by  being 
at  the  same  time  a  mean.  In  connexion  with  our 
present  topic  it  is  all  the  more  important  to  empha¬ 
size  this  aspect  of  the  matter  because  of  the  popular, 
but  most  dangerous,  prejudice  which  regards  the 
Estates  principally  from  the  point  of  view  of  their 
opposition  to  the  executive,  as  if  that  were  their  es¬ 
sential  attitude.  If  the  Estates  become  an  organ  in 
the  whole  by  being  taken  up  into  the  state,  they 
evince  themselves  solely  through  their  mediating 
function.  In  this  way  their  opposition  to  the  execu¬ 
tive  is  reduced  to  a  show.  There  may  indeed  be  an 
appearance  of  opposition  between  them,  but  if  they 
were  opposed,  not  merely  superficially,  but  actually 


and  in  substance,  then  the  state  would  be  in  the 
throes  of  destruction.  That  the  clash  is  not  of  this 
kind  is  evident  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  because 
the  Estates  have  to  deal,  not  with  the  essential  ele¬ 
ments  in  the  organism  of  the  state,  but  only  with 
rather  specialized  and  trifling  matters,  while  the  pas¬ 
sion  which  even  these  arouse  spends  itself  in  party 
cravings  in  connexion  with  purely  subjective  inter¬ 
ests  such  as  appointments  to  the  higher  offices  of 
state.  [A.] 

303.  The  universal  class,  or,  more  precisely, 
the  class  of  civil  servants,  must,  purely  in  virtue 
of  its  character  as  universal,  have  the  universal 
as  the  end  of  its  essential  activity.  In  the  Es¬ 
tates,  as  an  element  in  the  legislative  power,  the 
unofficial  class  acquires  its  political  significance 
and  efficacy;  it  appears, therefore, in  the  Estates 
neither  as  a  mere  indiscriminate  multitude  nor 
as  an  aggregate  dispersed  into  its  atoms,  but  as 
what  it  already  is,  namely  a  class  subdivided  into 
two,  one  sub-class  [the  agricultural  class]  being 
based  on  a  tie  of  substance  between  its  members, 
and  the  other  [the  business  class]  on  particular 
needs  and  the  work  whereby  these  are  met  (see 
Paragraph  201  ff.).  It  is  only  in  this  way  that 
there  is  a  genuine  link  between  the  particular 
which  is  effective  in  the  state  and  the  universal. 

This  runs  counter  to  another  prevalent  idea,  the 
idea  that  since  it  is  in  the  legislature  that  the  unof¬ 
ficial  class  rises  to  the  level  of  participating  in  mat¬ 
ters  of  state,  it  must  appear  there  in  the  form  of  in¬ 
dividuals,  whether  individuals  are  to  choose  repre¬ 
sentatives  for  this  purpose,  or  whether  every  single 
individual  is  to  have  a  vote  in  the  legislature  himself. 
This  atomistic  and  abstract  point  of  view  vanishes 
at  the  stage  of  the  family,  as  well  as  that  of  civil  so¬ 
ciety  where  the  individual  is  in  evidence  only  as  a 
member  of  a  general  group.  The  state,  however,  is 
essentially  an  organization  each  of  whose  members 
is  in  itself  a  group  of  this  kind,  and  hence  no  one  of 
its  moments  should  appear  as  an  unorganized  aggre¬ 
gate.  The  Many,  as  units — a  congenial  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  “people,”  are  of  course  something  connected, 
but  they  are  connected  only  as  an  aggregate,  a  form¬ 
less  mass  whose  commotion  and  activity  could  there¬ 
fore  only  be  elementary,  irrational,  barbarous,  and 
frightful.  When  we  hear  speakers  on  the  constitution 
expatiating  about  the  “people” — this  unorganized 
collection — we  know  from  the  start  that  we  have 
nothing  to  expect  but  generalities  and  perverse  dec¬ 
lamations. 

The  circles  of  association  in  civil  society  are  already 
communities.  To  picture  these  communities  as  once 
more  breaking  up  into  a  mere  conglomeration  of  in¬ 
dividuals  as  soon  as  they  enter  the  field  of  politics, 
i.e.  the  field  of  the  highest  concrete  universality,  is 
eo  ipso  to  hold  civil  and  political  life  apart  from  one 
another  and  as  it  were  to  hang  the  latter  in  the  air, 
because  its  basis  could  then  only  be  the  abstract  in- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


dividuality  of  caprice  and  opinion,  and  hence  it 
would  be  grounded  on  chance  and  not  on  what  is 
absolutely  stable  and  justified. 

So-called  “theories”  of  this  kind  involve  the  idea 
that  the  classes  ( Stande )  of  civil  society  and  the  Es¬ 
tates  ( Stande ) ,  which  are  the  “classes”  given  a  polit¬ 
ical  significance,  stand  wide  apart  from  each  other. 
But  the  German  language,  by  calling  them  both 
Stande  has  still  maintained  the  unity  which  in  any 
case  they  actually  possessed  in  former  times. 

304.  The  Estates,  as  an  element  in  political  life, 
still  retain  in  their  own  function  the  class  dis¬ 
tinctions  already  present  in  the  lower  spheres  of 
civil  life.  The  position  of  the  classes  is  abstract 
to  begin  with,  i.e.  in  contrast  with  the  whole 
principle  of  monarchy  or  the  crown,  their  posi¬ 
tion  is  that  of  an  extreme — empirical  universal¬ 
ity.  This  extreme  opposition  implies  the  possi¬ 
bility,  though  no  more,  of  harmonization,  and 
the  equally  likely  possibility  of  set  hostility. 
This  abstract  position  changes  into  a  rational 
relation  (into  a  syllogism,  see  Remark  to  Para¬ 
graph  302)  only  if  the  middle  term  between  the 
opposites  comes  into  existence.  From  the  point 
of  view  of  the  crown,  the  executive  already  has 
this  character  (see  Paragraph  300).  So,  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  classes,  one  moment  in 
them  must  be  adapted  to  the  task  of  existing  as 
in  essence  the  moment  of  mediation. 

305.  The  principle  of  one  of  the  classes  of  civil 
society  is  in  itself  capable  of  adaptation  to  this 
political  position.  The  class  in  question  is  the 
one  whose  ethical  life  is  natural,  whose  basis  is 
family  life,  and,  so  far  as  its  livelihood  is  con¬ 
cerned,  the  possession  of  land.  Its  particular 
members  attain  their  position  by  birth,  just  as 
the  monarch  does,  and,  in  common  with  him, 
they  possess  a  will  which  rests  on  itself  alone.1 

306.  This  class  is  more  particularly  fitted  for 
political  position  and  significance  in  that  its 
capital  is  independent  alike  of  the  state’s  capital, 
the  uncertainty  of  business,  the  quest  for  profit, 
and  any  sort  of  fluctuation  in  possessions.  It  is 
likewise  independent  of  favour,  whether  from 
the  executive  or  the  mob.  It  is  even  fortified 
against  its  own  wilfulness,  because  those  mem¬ 
bers  of  this  class  who  are  called  to  political  life 
are  not  entitled,  as  other  citizens  are,  either  to 
dispose  of  their  entire  property  at  will,  or  to  the 
assurance  that  it  will  pass  to  their  children, 
whom  they  love  equally,  in  similarly  equal  divi¬ 
sions.  Hence  their  wealth  becomes  inalienable, 
entailed,  and  burdened  by  primogeniture.  [A.] 

307.  The  right  of  this  section  of  the  agricul¬ 
tural  class  is  thus  based  in  a  way  on  the  natural 

1  See  Paragraph  199. — Ed. 


principle  of  the  family.  But  this  principle  is  at 
the  same  time  reversed  owing  to  hard  sacrifices 
made  for  political  ends,  and  thereby  the  activity 
of  this  class  is  essentially  directed  to  those  ends. 
As  a  consequence  of  this,  this  class  is  summoned 
and  entitled  to  its  political  vocation  by  birth 
without  the  hazards  of  election.  It  therefore  has 
the  fixed,  substantive  position  between  the  sub¬ 
jective  wilfulness  or  contingency  of  both  ex¬ 
tremes;  and  while  it  mirrors  in  itself  (see  Para¬ 
graph  305)  the  moment  of  the  monarchical 
power,  it  also  shares  in  other  respects  the  needs 
and  rights  of  the  other  extreme  [i.e.  civil  soci¬ 
ety]  and  hence  it  becomes  a  support  at  once  of 
the  throne  and  society. 

308.  The  second  section  of  the  Estates  com¬ 
prises  the  fluctuating  element  in  civil  society. 
This  element  can  enter  politics  only  through  its 
deputies ;  the  multiplicity  of  its  members  is  an 
external  reason  for  this,  but  the  essential  reason 
is  the  specific  character  of  this  element  and  its 
activity.  Since  these  deputies  are  the  deputies  of 
civil  society,  it  follows  as  a  direct  consequence 
that  their  appointment  is  made  by  the  society  as 
a  society.  That  is  to  say,  in  making  the  appoint¬ 
ment,  society  is  not  dispersed  into  atomic  units, 
collected  to  perform  only  a  single  and  temporary 
act,  and  kept  together  for  a  moment  and  no 
longer.  On  the  contrary,  it  makes  the  appoint¬ 
ment  as  a  society,  articulated  into  associations, 
communities,  and  Corporations,  which  although 
constituted  already  for  other  purposes,  acquire 
in  this  way  a  connexion  with  politics.  The  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  Estates  and  their  assembly  finds  a 
constitutional  guarantee  of  its  own  in  the  fact 
that  this  class  is  entitled  to  send  deputies  at  the 
summons  of  the  crown,  while  members  of  the 
former  class  are  entitled  to  present  themselves 
in  person  in  the  Estates  (see  Paragraph  307). 

To  hold  that  every  single  person  should  share  in  de¬ 
liberating  and  deciding  on  political  matters  of  gen¬ 
eral  concern  on  the  ground  that  all  individuals  are 
members  of  the  state,  that  its  concerns  are  their 
concerns,  and  that  it  is  their  right  that  what  is  done 
should  be  done  with  their  knowledge  and  volition, 
is  tantamount  to  a  proposal  to  put  the  democratic 
element  without  any  rational  form  into  the  organism 
of  the  state,  although  it  is  only  in  virtue  of  the  pos¬ 
session  of  such  a  form  that  the  state  is  an  organism 
at  all.  This  idea  comes  readily  to  mind  because  it 
does  not  go  beyond  the  abstraction  of  “being  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  state,”  and  it  is  superficial  thinking  which 
clings  to  abstractions.  The  rational  consideration  of 
a  topic,  the  consciousness  of  the  Idea, is  concrete,  and 
to  that  extent  coincides  with  a  genuine  practical 
sense.  Such  a  sense  is  itself  nothing  but  the  sense  of 
rationality  or  the  Idea,  though  it  is  not  to  be  con- 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


fused  with  mere  business  routine  or  the  horizon  of  a 
restricted  sphere.  The  concrete  state  is  the  whole, 
articulated  into  its  particular  groups.  The  member 
of  a  state  is  a  member  of  such  a  group,  i.c.  of  a  social 
class,  and  it  is  only  as  characterized  in  this  objective 
way  that  he  comes  under  consideration  when  we  are 
dealing  with  the  state.  His  mere  character  as  univer¬ 
sal  implies  that  he  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  both 
a  private  person  and  also  a  thinking  consciousness,  a 
will  which  wills  the  universal.  This  consciousness 
and  will,  however,  lose  their  emptiness  and  acquire  a 
content  and  a  living  actuality  only  when  they  are 
filled  with  particularity,  and  particularity  means 
determinacy  as  particular  and  a  particular  class- 
status  ;  or,  to  put  the  matter  otherwise,  abstract  in¬ 
dividuality  is  a  generic  essence,  but  has  its  immanent 
universal  actuality  as  the  generic  essence  next  high¬ 
er  in  the  scale.  Hence  the  single  person  attains  his  ac¬ 
tual  and  living  destiny  for  universality  only  when  he 
becomes  a  member  of  a  Corporation,  a  society,  &c. 
(see  Paragraph  251),  and  thereby  it  becomes  open 
to  him,  on  the  strength  of  his  skill,  to  enter  any 
class  for  which  he  is  qualified,  the  class  of  civil  serv¬ 
ants  included. 

Another  presupposition  of  the  idea  that  all  should 
participate  in  the  business  of  the  state  is  that  every¬ 
one  is  at  home  in  this  business — a  ridiculous  notion, 
however  commonly  we  may  hear  it  sponsored.  Still, 
in  public  opinion  (see  Paragraph  316)  a  field  is  open 
to  everyone  where  he  can  express  his  purely  personal 
political  opinions  and  make  them  count. 

309.  Since  deputies  are  elected  to  deliberate 
and  decide  on  public  affairs,  the  point  about 
their  election  is  that  it  is  a  choice  of  individuals 
on  the  strength  of  confidence  felt  in  them,  i.e.  a 
choice  of  such  individuals  as  have  a  better  un¬ 
derstanding  of  these  affairs  than  their  electors 
have  and  such  also  as  essentially  vindicate  the 
universal  interest,  not  the  particular  interest  of 
a  society  or  a  Corporation  in  preference  to  that 
interest.  Hence  their  relation  to  their  electors  is 
not  that  of  agents  with  a  commission  or  specific 
instructions.  A  further  bar  to  their  being  so  is 
the  fact  that  their  assembly  is  meant  to  be  a 
living  body  in  which  all  members  deliberate  in 
common  and  reciprocally  instruct  and  convince 
each  other.  [A.] 

310.  The  guarantee  that  deputies  will  have  the 
qualifications  and  disposition  that  accord  with 
this  end — since  independent  means  attains  its 
right  in  the  first  section  of  the  Estates — is  to  be 
found  so  far  as  the  second  section  is  concerned 
— the  section  drawn  from  the  fluctuating  and 
changeable  element  in  civil  society — above  all 
in  the  knowledge  (of  the  organization  and  in¬ 
terests  of  the  state  and  civil  society),  the  tem¬ 
perament,  and  the  skill  which  a  deputy  acquires 
as  a  result  of  the  actual  transaction  of  business  in 


103 

managerial  or  official  positions,  and  then  evinces 
in  his  actions.  As  a  result,  he  also  acquires  and 
develops  a  managerial  and  political  sense,  tested 
by  his  experience,  and  this  is  a  further  guarantee 
of  his  suitability  as  a  deputy. 

Subjective  opinion,  naturally  enough,  finds  super¬ 
fluous  and  even  perhaps  offensive  the  demand  for 
such  guarantees,  if  the  demand  is  made  with  reference 
to  what  is  called  the  “people.”  The  state,  however, 
is  characterized  by  objectivity,  not  by  a  subjective 
opinion  and  its  self-confidence.  Hence  it  can  recog¬ 
nize  in  individuals  only  their  objectively  recogniz¬ 
able  and  tested  character,  and  it  must  be  all  the  more 
careful  on  this  point  in  connexion  with  the  second 
section  of  the  Estates,  since  this  section  is  rooted  in 
interests  and  activities  directed  towards  the  particu¬ 
lar,  i.e.  in  the  sphere  where  chance,  mutability,  and 
caprice  enjoy  their  right  of  free  play. 

The  external  guarantees  property  qualification,  is, 
if  taken  by  itself,  evidently  just  as  one-sided  in  its 
externality  as,  at  the  other  extreme,  are  purely  sub¬ 
jective  confidence  and  the  opinion  of  the  electorate. 
Both  alike  are  abstractions  in  contrast  with  the  con¬ 
crete  qualifications  requisite  for  deliberation  on  af¬ 
fairs  of  state  and  comprised  in  the  points  indicated 
in  Paragraph  302.  This  apart,  however,  a  property 
qualification  has  a  sphere,  where  it  may  work  ef¬ 
fectively,  in  the  choice  of  the  heads  and  other  offi¬ 
cers  of  the  associations  and  societies,  especially  if 
many  of  these  posts  are  honorary,  and  in  direct  ref¬ 
erence  to  Estates  business  if  the  members  draw  no 
salary. 

31 1.  A  further  point  about  the  election  of 
deputies  is  that,  since  civil  society  is  the  elector¬ 
ate,  the  deputies  should  themselves  be  con¬ 
versant  with  and  participate  in  its  special  needs, 
difficulties,  and  particular  interests.  Owing  to 
the  nature  of  civil  society,  its  deputies  are  the 
deputies  of  the  various  Corporations  (see  Para¬ 
graph  308),  and  this  simple  mode  of  appoint¬ 
ment  obviates  any  confusion  due  to  conceiving 
the  electorate  abstractly  and  as  an  agglomera¬ 
tion  of  atoms.  Hence  the  deputies  eo  ipso  adopt 
the  point  of  view  of  society,  and  their  actual 
election  is  therefore  either  something  wholly 
superfluous  or  else  reduced  to  a  trivial  play  of 
opinion  and  caprice. 

It  is  obviously  of  advantage  that  the  deputies  should 
include  representatives  of  each  particular  main 
branch  of  society  (e.g.  trade,  manufactures,  &c.,  &c.) 
— representatives  who  are  thoroughly  conversant 
with  it  and  who  themselves  belong  to  it.  The  idea  of 
free  unrestricted  election  leaves  this  important  con¬ 
sideration  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  chance.  All  such 
branches  of  society,  however,  have  equal  rights  of 
representation.  Deputies  are  sometimes  regarded  as 
“representatives” ;  but  they  are  representatives  in  an 
organic,  rational  sense  only  if  they  are  representatives 
not  of  individuals  or  a  conglomeration  of  them,  but 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


of  one  of  the  essential  spheres  of  society  and  its 
large-scale  interests.  Hence  representation  cannot 
now  be  taken  to  mean  simply  the  substitution  of 
one  man  for  another;  the  point  is  rather  that  the  in¬ 
terest  itself  is  actually  present  in  its  representative, 
while  he  himself  is  there  to  represent  the  objective 
element  of  his  own  being. 

As  for  popular  suffrage,  it  may  be  further  remarked 
that  especially  in  large  states  it  leads  inevitably  to 
electoral  indifference,  since  the  casting  of  a  single 
vote  is  of  no  significance  where  there  is  a  multitude 
of  electors.  Even  if  a  voting  qualification  is  highly 
valued  and  esteemed  by  those  who  are  entitled  to  it, 
they  still  do  not  enter  the  polling  booth.  Thus  the 
result  of  an  institution  of  this  kind  is  more  likely  to 
be  the  opposite  of  what  was  intended ;  election  ac¬ 
tually  falls  into  the  power  of  a  few,  of  a  caucus,  and 
so  of  the  particular  and  contingent  interest  which  is 
precisely  what  was  to  have  been  neutralized. 

312.  Each  class  in  the  Estates  (see  Paragraphs 
305-8)  contributes  something  peculiarly  its  own 
to  the  work  of  deliberation.  Further,  one  mo¬ 
ment  in  the  class-element  has  in  the  sphere  of 
politics  the  special  function  of  mediation,1  medi¬ 
ation  between  two  existing  things.  Hence  this 
moment  must  likewise  acquire  a  separate  exist¬ 
ence  of  its  own.  For  this  reason  the  assembly  of 
the  Estates  is  divided  into  two  houses. 

313.  This  division,  by  providing  chambers  of 
the  first  and  second  instance,  is  a  surer  guaran¬ 
tee  for  ripeness  of  decision  and  it  obviates  the 
accidental  character  which  a  snap  division  has 
and  which  a  numerical  majority  may  acquire. 
But  the  principal  advantage  of  this  arrangement 
is  that  there  is  less  chance  of  the  Estates  being 
in  direct  opposition  to  the  executive;  or  that,  if 
the  mediating  element  is  at  the  same  time  on 
the  side  of  the  lower  house,  the  weight  of  the 
lower  house’s  opinion  is  all  the  stronger,  because 
it  appears  less  partisan  and  its  opposition  ap¬ 
pears  neutralized. 

314.  The  purpose  of  the  Estates  as  an  institu¬ 
tion  is  not  to  be  an  inherent  sine  qua  non  of 
maximum  efficiency  in  the  consideration  and 
dispatch  of  state  business,  since  in  fact  it  is 
only  an  added  efficiency  that  they  can  supply 
(see  Paragraph  301).  Their  distinctive  purpose 
is  that  in  their  pooled  political  knowledge,  de¬ 
liberations,  and  decisions,  the  moment  of  formal 
freedom  shall  come  into  its  right  in  respect  of 
those  members  of  civil  society  who  are  without 
any  share  in  the  executive.  Consequently,  it  is 
knowledge  of  public  business  above  all  which  is 
extended  by  the  publicity  of  Estates  debates. 

1  See  Paragraphs  301,  304,  305,  313,  and  the  Remark 
to  Paragraph  24. — Ed. 


315.  The  opening  of  this  opportunity  to  know 
has  a  more  universal  aspect  because  by  this 
means  public  opinion  first  reaches  thoughts  that 
are  true  and  attains  insight  into  the  situation 
and  concept  of  the  state  and  its  affairs,  and  so 
first  acquires  ability  to  estimate  these  more  ra¬ 
tionally.  By  this  means  also,  it  becomes  ac¬ 
quainted  with  and  learns  to  respect  the  work, 
abilities,  virtues,  and  dexterity  of  ministers  and 
officials.  While  such  publicity  provides  these 
abilities  with  a  potent  means  of  development 
and  a  theatre  of  higher  distinction,  it  is  at  the 
same  time  another  antidote  to  the  self-conceit 
of  individuals  singly  and  en  masse ,  and  another 
means — indeed  one  of  the  chief  means — of  their 
education.  [A.] 

316.  The  formal  subjective  freedom  of  indi¬ 
viduals  consists  in  their  having  and  expressing 
their  own  private  judgements,  opinions,  and  rec¬ 
ommendations  on  affairs  of  state.  This  freedom 
is  collectively  manifested  as  what  is  called“pub- 
lic  opinion,”  in  which  what  is  absolutely  univer¬ 
sal,  the  substantive  and  the  true,  is  linked  with 
its  opposite,  the  purely  particular  and  private 
opinions  of  the  Many.  Public  opinion  as  it  exists 
is  thus  a  standing  self-contradiction,  knowledge 
as  appearance,  the  essential  just  as  directly  pres¬ 
ent  as  the  inessential.  [A.] 

317.  Public  opinion,  therefore,  is  a  repository 
not  only  of  the  genuine  needs  and  correct  tend¬ 
encies  of  common  life,  but  also,  in  the  form  of 
common  sense  (i.e.  all-pervasive  fundamental 
ethical  principles  disguised  as  prejudices),  of 
the  eternal,  substantive  principles  of  justice,  the 
true  content  and  result  of  legislation,  the  whole 
constitution,  and  the  general  position  of  the 
state.  At  the  same  time,  when  this  inner  truth 
emerges  into  consciousness  and,  embodied  in 
general  maxims,  enters  representative  thinking 
— whether  it  be  there  on  its  own  account  or  in 
support  of  concrete  arguments  about  felt  wants, 
public  affairs,  the  organization  of  the  state,  and 
relations  of  parties  within  it — it  becomes  in¬ 
fected  by  all  the  accidents  of  opinion,  by  its 
ignorance  and  perversity,  by  its  mistakes  and 
falsity  of  judgement.  Since  in  considering  such 
opinion  we  have  to  do  with  the  consciousness  of 
an  insight  and  conviction  peculiarly  one’s  own, 
the  more  peculiarly  one’s  own  an  opinion  may 
be  the  worse  its  content  is,  because  the  bad  is 
that  which  is  wholly  private  and  personal  in  its 
content ;  the  rational,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the 
absolutely  universal,  while  it  is  on  peculiarity 
that  opining  prides  itself. 


ETHICAL  LIFE  105 


Hence  it  is  not  simply  due  to  a  subjective  difference 
of  view  that  we  find  it  said  that  vox  popali,  vox  Dei , 
and  on  the  other  hand,  as  Ariosto  has  it, 

Che  7  volgare  ignorante  ogn’  un  riprenda 

E  parli  pin  di  quel  che  meno  intenda 
or,  as  Goethe  puts  it,  “the  masses  are  respectable 
hands  at  fighting,  but  miserable  hands  at  judging.” 
Both  types  of  assertion  are  true  at  one  and  the  same 
time  of  public  opinion,  and  since  it  is  such  a  hotch¬ 
potch  of  truth  and  endless  error,  it  cannot  be  gen¬ 
uinely  serious  about  both  of  these.  But  about  which 
is  it  serious?  The  question  may  seem  hard  to  answer 
and  it  will  actually  be  hard  if  we  cling  simply  to  the 
words  in  which  public  opinion  is  directly  expressed. 
The  substantial,  however,  is  the  heart  of  public  opin¬ 
ion,  and  therefore  it  is  with  that  alone  that  it  is  truly 
serious.  What  the  substantial  is,  though,  is  not  dis¬ 
coverable  from  public  opinion,  because  its  very  sub¬ 
stantiality  implies  that  it  is  known  in  and  from  it¬ 
self  alone.  The  passion  with  which  an  opinion  is 
urged  or  the  seriousness  with  which  it  is  maintained 
or  attacked  and  disputed  is  no  criterion  of  its  real 
content ;  and  yet  the  last  thing  which  opinion  could 
be  made  to  see  is  that  its  seriousness  is  nothing  se¬ 
rious. 

A  great  genius  propounded  as  a  problem  for  a  pub¬ 
lic  essay  competition  the  question  “whether  it  be 
permissible  to  deceive  a  people.”  The  answer  must 
have  been  that  a  people  does  not  allow  itself  to  be 
deceived  about  its  substantive  basis,  the  essence  and 
specific  character  of  its  mind.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  se//-deceived  about  the  manner  of  its  knowledge 
of  these  things  and  about  its  corresponding  judgement 
of  its  actions,  experiences,  &c.  [A.] 

318.  Public  opinion  therefore  deserves  to  be  as 
much  respected  as  despised — despised  for  its 
concrete  expression  and  for  the  concrete  con¬ 
sciousness  it  expresses,  respected  for  its  essen¬ 
tial  basis,  a  basis  which  only  glimmers  more  or 
less  dimly  in  that  concrete  expression.  But  in 
itself  it  has  no  criterion  of  discrimination,  nor 
has  it  the  ability  to  extract  the  substantive  ele¬ 
ment  it  contains  and  raise  it  to  precise  knowl¬ 
edge.  Thus  to  be  independent  of  public  opinion 
is  the  first  formal  condition  of  achieving  any¬ 
thing  great  or  rational  whether  in  life  or  in  sci¬ 
ence.  Great  achievement  is  assured,  however,  of 
subsequent  recognition  and  grateful  acceptance 
by  public  opinion,  which  in  due  course  will  make 
it  one  of  its  own  prejudices.  [A.] 

3 1 9.  Freedom  of  public  communication — of  the 
two  modes  of  communication,  the  press  and  the 
spoken  word,  the  first  exceeds  the  second  in 
range  of  contact  but  lags  behind  it  in  vivacity — 
satisfaction  of  the  goading  desire  to  say  one’s 
say  and  to  have  said  it,  is  directly  assured  by  the 
laws  and  by-laws  which  control  or  punish  its  ex¬ 
cesses.  But  it  is  assured  indirectly  by  the  in¬ 


nocuous  character  which  it  acquires  as  a  result 
principally  of  the  rationality  of  the  constitution, 
the  stability  of  government,  and  secondly  of  the 
publicity  of  Estates  Assemblies.  The  reason  why 
the  latter  makes  free  speech  harmless  is  that 
what  is  voiced  in  thes^  Assemblies  is  a  sound 
and  mature  insight  into  the  concerns  of  the 
state,  with  the  result  that  members  of  the  gen¬ 
eral  public  are  left  with  nothing  of  much  im¬ 
portance  to  say,  and  above  all  are  deprived  of 
the  opinion  that  what  they  say  is  of  peculiar 
importance  and  efficacy.  A  further  safeguard  of 
free  speech  is  the  indifference  and  contempt 
speedily  and  necessarily  visited  on  shallow  and 
cantankerous  talking. 

To  define  freedom  of  the  press  as  freedom  to  say 
and  write  whatever  we  please  is  parallel  to  the  as¬ 
sertion  that  freedom  as  such  means  freedom  to  do  as 
we  please.  Talk  of  this  kind  is  due  to  wholly  uned¬ 
ucated,  crude,  and  superficial  ideas.  Moreover,  it  is 
in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing  that  abstract  think¬ 
ing  should  nowhere  be  so  stubborn,  so  unintelligent, 
as  in  this  matter  of  free  speech,  because  what  it  is 
considering  is  the  most  fleeting,  the  most  contingent, 
and  the  most  personal  side  of  opinion  in  its  infinite 
diversity  of  content  and  tergiversation.  Beyond  the 
direct  incitation  to  theft,  murder,  rebellion,  &c.,  there 
lies  its  artfully  constructed  expression — an  expres¬ 
sion  which  seems  in  itself  quite  general  and  vague, 
while  all  the  time  it  conceals  a  meaning  anything 
but  vague  or  else  is  compatible  with  inferences  which 
are  not  actually  expressed,  and  it  is  impossible  to  de¬ 
termine  whether  they  rightly  follow  from  it,  or 
whether  they  were  meant  to  be  inferred  from  it.  This 
vagueness  of  matter  and  form  precludes  laws  on 
these  topics  from  attaining  the  requisite  determi- 
nacy  of  law,  and  since  the  trespass,  wrong,  and  in¬ 
jury  here  are  so  extremely  personal  and  subjective 
in  form,  judgement  on  them  is  reduced  equally  to  a 
wholly  subjective  verdict.  Such  an  injury  is  directed 
against  the  thoughts,  opinions,  and  wills  of  others, 
but  apart  from  that,  these  form  the  element  in  which 
alone  it  is  actually  anything.  But  this  element  is  the 
sphere  of  the  freedom  of  others,  and  it  therefore  de¬ 
pends  on  them  whether  the  injurious  expression  of 
opinion  is  or  is  not  actually  an  effective  act. 

Laws  then  [against  libel,  &c.]  may  be  criticized  by 
exhibiting  their  indeterminacy  as  well  as  by  argu¬ 
ing  that  they  leave  it  open  to  the  speaker  or  writer 
to  devise  turns  of  phrase  or  tricks  of  expression,  and 
so  evade  the  laws  or  claim  that  judicial  decisions  are 
mere  subjective  verdicts.  Further,  however,  against 
the  view  that  the  expression  of  opinion  is  an  act 
with  injurious  effects,  it  may  be  maintained  that  it 
is  not  an  act  at  all,  but  only  opining  and  thinking, 
or  only  talking.  And  so  we  have  before  us  a  claim 
that  mere  opining  and  talking  is  to  go  unpunished  be¬ 
cause  it  is  of  a  purely  subjective  character  both  in 
form  and  content,  because  it  does  not  mean  any¬ 
thing  and  is  of  no  importance.  And  yet  in  the  same 


I06  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


breath  we  have  the  claim  that  this  same  opining  and 
talking  should  be  held  in  high  esteem  and  respect— 
the  opining  because  it  is  personal  property  and  in 
fact  pre-eminently  the  property  of  mind ;  the  talking 
because  it  is  only  this  same  property  being  expressed 
and  used. 

But  the  substance  of  the  matter  is  and  remains  that 
traducing  the  honour  of  anyone,  slander,  abuse,  the 
contemptuous  caricature  of  government,  its  minis¬ 
ters,  officials,  and  in  particular  the  person  of  the 
monarch,  defiance  of  the  laws,  incitement  to  rebel¬ 
lion,  &c.,  &c„  are  all  crimes  or  misdemeanours  in  one 
or  other  of  their  numerous  gradations.  The  rather 
high  degree  of  indeterminability  which  such  actions 
acquire  on  account  of  the  element  in  which  they  are 
expressed  does  not  annul  this  fundamental  character 
of  theirs.  Its  only  effect  is  that  the  subjective  field 
in  which  they  are  committed  also  determines  the  na¬ 
ture  and  form  of  the  reaction  to  the  offence.  It  is 
the  field  in  which  the  offence  was  committed  which 
itself  necessitates  subjectivity  of  view,  contingency, 
&c.,  in  the  reaction  to  the  offence,  whether  the  reac¬ 
tion  takes  the  form  of  punishment  proper  or  of  po¬ 
lice  action  to  prevent  crimes.  Here,  as  always,  ab¬ 
stract  thinking  sets  itself  to  explain  away  the  funda¬ 
mental  and  concrete  nature  of  the  thing  by  concen¬ 
trating  on  isolated  aspects  of  its  external  appearance 
and  on  abstractions  drawn  therefrom. 

The  sciences,  however,  are  not  to  be  found  any¬ 
where  in  the  field  of  opinion  and  subjective  views, 
provided  of  course  that  they  be  sciences  in  other  re- 
pects.  Their  exposition  is  not  a  matter  of  clever  turns 
of  phrase,  allusiveness,  half-utterances,  and  semi¬ 
reticences,  but  consists  in  the  unambiguous,  determi¬ 
nate,  and  open  expression  of  their  meaning  and  pur¬ 
port.  It  follows  that  they  do  not  fall  under  the  cate¬ 
gory  of  public  opinion  (see  Paragraph  316).  Apart 
from  this,  however,  as  I  said  just  now,  the  element 
in  which  views  and  their  expression  become  actions 
in  the  full  sense  and  exist  effectively,  consists  of  the 
intelligence,  principles,  and  opinions  of  others.  Hence 
this  aspect  of  these  actions,  i.e.  their  effectiveness 
proper  and  their  danger  to  individuals,  society,  and 
the  state  (compare  Paragraph  218),  depends  on  the 
character  of  the  ground  on  which  they  fall,  just  as  a 
spark  falling  on  a  heap  of  gunpowder  is  more  dan¬ 
gerous  than  if  it  falls  on  hard  ground  where  it  van¬ 
ishes  without  trace.  Thus,  just  as  the  right  of  science 
to  express  itself  depends  on  and  is  safeguarded  by  its 
subject-matter  and  content,  so  an  illegitimate  ex¬ 
pression  may  also  acquire  a  measure  of  security,  or 
at  least  sufferance,  in  the  scorn  which  it  has  brought 
upon  itself.  An  offence  of  this  sort  is  punishable  on 
its  own  account  too,  but  part  of  it  may  be  accounted 
that  kind  of  nemesis  which  inner  impotence,  feeling 
itself  oppressed  by  the  preponderating  abilities  and 
virtues  of  others,  is  impelled  to  vent  in  order  to  come 
to  itself  again  in  face  of  such  superiority,  and  to  re¬ 
store  some  self-consciousness  to  its  own  nullity.  It 
was  a  nemesis  of  a  more  harmless  type  which  Roman 
soldiers  vented  against  their  generals  when  they  sang 
scurrilous  songs  about  them  in  triumphal  processions 


in  order  in  a  way  to  get  even  with  them  for  all  the 
hard  service  and  discipline  they  had  undergone,  and 
especially  for  the  omission  of  their  names  from  the 
triumphal  honours.  The  former  type  of  nemesis,  the 
bad  and  hateful  type,  is  deprived  of  its  effect  by  be¬ 
ing  treated  with  scorn,  and  hence,  like  the  public, 
which  perhaps  forms  a  circle  of  spectators  of  scurril¬ 
ity,  it  is  restricted  to  futile  malice  and  to  the  self- 
condemnation  which  it  implicitly  contains. 

320.  Subjectivity  is  manifested  in  its  most  ex¬ 
ternal  form  as  the  undermining  of  the  estab¬ 
lished  life  of  the  state  by  opinion  and  ratiocina¬ 
tion  when  they  endeavour  to  assert  the  author¬ 
ity  of  their  own  fortuitous  character  and  so 
bring  about  their  own  destruction.  But  its  true 
actuality  is  attained  in  the  opposite  of  this,  i.e. 
in  the  subjectivity  identical  with  the  substantial 
will  of  the  state,  the  subjectivity  which  consti¬ 
tutes  the  concept  of  the  power  of  the  crown 
and  which,  as  the  ideality  of  the  whole  state, 
has  not  up  to  this  point  attained  its  right  or  its 
existence.  [A.] 

2.  Sovereignty  vis-a-vis  foreign  States 

321.  Sovereignty  at  home  (see  Paragraph  278) 
is  this  ideality  in  the  sense  that  the  moments  of 
mind  and  its  actuality,  the  state,  have  become 
developed  in  their  necessity  and  subsist  as  the 
organs  of  the  state.  Mind  in  its  freedom  is  an 
infinitely  negative  relation  to  itself  and  hence 
its  essential  character  from  its  own  point  of 
view  is  its  singleness,  a  singleness  which  has  in¬ 
corporated  these  subsistent  differences  into  it¬ 
self  and  so  is  a  unit,  exclusive  of  other  units.  So 
characterized,  the  state  has  individuality,  and 
individuality  is  in  essence  an  individual,  and  in 
the  sovereign  an  actual,  immediate  individual 
(see  Paragraph  279). 

322.  Individuality  is  awareness  of  one’s  exist¬ 
ence  as  a  unit  in  sharp  distinction  from  others. 
It  manifests  itself  here  in  the  state  as  a  relation 
to  other  states,  each  of  which  is  autonomous 
vis-a-vis  the  others.  This  autonomy  embodies 
mind’s  actual  awareness  of  itself  as  a  unit  and 
hence  it  is  the  most  fundamental  freedom  which 
a  people  possesses  as  well  as  its  highest  dignity. 

Those  who  talk  of  the  “wishes”  of  a  collection  of 
people  constituting  a  more  or  less  autonomous  state 
with  its  own  centre,  of  its  “wishes”  to  renounce  this 
centre  and  its  autonomy  in  order  to  unite  with  others 
to  form  a  new  whole,  have  very  little  knowledge  of 
the  nature  of  a  collection  or  of  the  feeling  of  self¬ 
hood  which  a  nation  possesses  in  its  independence. 

Thus  the  dominion  which  a  state  has  at  its  first 
entry  into  history  is  this  bare  autonomy,  even  if  it 
be  quite  abstract  and  without  further  inner  develop¬ 
ment.  For  this  reason,  to  have  an  individual  at  its 


ETHICAL  LIFE  107 


head — a  patriarch,  a  chieftain,  &c. — is  appropriate 
to  this  original  appearance  of  the  state. 

323.  This  negative  relation  of  the  state  to  itself 
is  embodied  in  the  world  as  the  relation  of  one 
state  to  another  and  as  if  the  negative  were 
something  external.  In  the  world  of  existence, 
therefore,  this  negative  relation  has  the  shape 
of  a  happening  and  an  entanglement  with  chance 
events  coming  from  without.  But  in  fact  this 
negative  relation  is  that  moment  in  the  state 
which  is  most  supremely  its  own,  the  state’s  ac¬ 
tual  infinity  as  the  ideality  of  everything  finite 
within  it.  It  is  the  moment  wherein  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  the  state — i.e.  its  absolute  power 
against  everything  individual  and  particular, 
against  life,  property,  and  their  rights,  even 
against  societies  and  associations — makes  the 
nullity  of  these  finite  things  an  accomplished 
fact  and  brings  it  home  to  consciousness. 

324.  This  destiny  whereby  the  rights  and  in¬ 
terests  of  individuals  are  established  as  a  pass¬ 
ing  phase,  is  at  the  same  time  the  positive  mo¬ 
ment,  i.e.  the  positing  of  their  absolute,  not 
their  contingent  andunstable, individuality.  This 
relation  and  the  recognition  of  it  is  therefore  the 
individual’s  substantive  duty,  the  duty  to  main¬ 
tain  this  substantive  individuality,  i.e.  the  inde¬ 
pendence  and  sovereignty  of  the  state,  at  the 
risk  and  the  sacrifice  of  property  and  life,  as 
well  as  of  opinion  and  everything  else  naturally 
comprised  in  the  compass  of  life. 

An  entirely  distorted  account  of  the  demand  for 
this  sacrifice  results  from  regarding  the  state  as  a 
mere  civil  society  and  from  regarding  its  final  end 
as  only  the  security  of  individual  life  and  property. 
This  security  cannot  possibly  be  obtained  by  the  sac¬ 
rifice  of  what  is  to  be  secured — on  the  contrary. 

The  ethical  moment  in  war  is  implied  in  what  has 
been  said  in  this  Paragraph.  War  is  not  to  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  an  absolute  evil  and  as  a  purely  external  acci¬ 
dent,  which  itself  therefore  has  some  accidental 
cause,  be  it  injustices,  the  passions  of  nations  or  the 
holders  of  power,  &c.,  or  in  short,  something  or  other 
which  ought  not  to  be.  It  is  to  what  is  by  nature  ac¬ 
cidental  that  accidents  happen,  and  the  fate  whereby 
they  happen  is  thus  a  necessity.  Here  as  elsewhere, 
the  point  of  view  from  which  things  seem  pure  acci¬ 
dents  vanishes  if  we  look  at  them  in  the  light  of  the 
concept  and  philosophy,  because  philosophy  knows 
accident  for  a  show  and  sees  in  it  its  essence,  neces¬ 
sity.  It  is  necessary  that  the  finite — property  and  life 
— should  be  definitely  established  as  accidental,  be¬ 
cause  accidentality  is  the  concept  of  the  finite.  From 
one  point  of  view  this  necessity  appears  in  the  form 
of  the  power  of  nature,  and  everything  is  mortal  and 
transient.  But  in  the  ethical  substance,  the  state,  na¬ 
ture  is  robbed  of  this  power,  and  the  necessity  is  ex¬ 


alted  to  be  the  work  of  freedom,  to  be  something 
ethical.  The  transience  of  the  finite  becomes  a  willed 
passing  away,  and  the  negativity  lying  at  the  roots 
of  the  finite  becomes  the  substantive  individuality 
proper  to  the  ethical  substance. 

War  is  the  state  of  affairs  which  deals  in  earnest 
with  the  vanity  of  temporal  goods  and  concerns — a 
vanity  at  other  times  a  common  theme  of  edifying 
sermonizing.  This  is  what  makes  it  the  moment  in 
which  the  ideality  of  the  particular  attains  its  right 
and  is  actualized.  War  has  the  higher  significance 
that  by  its  agency,  as  I  have  remarked  elsewhere, 
“the  ethical  health  of  peoples  is  preserved  in  their 
indifference  to  the  stabilization  of  finite  institutions ; 
just  as  the  blowing  of  the  winds  preserves  the  sea 
from  the  foulness  which  would  be  the  result  of  a 
prolonged  calm,  so  also  corruption  in  nations  would 
be  the  product  of  prolonged,  let  alone  ‘perpetual,’ 
peace.”  This,  however,  is  said  to  be  only  a  philo¬ 
sophic  idea,  or,  to  use  another  common  expression, 
a  “justification  of  Providence,”  and  it  is  maintained 
that  actual  wars  require  some  other  justification. 
On  this  point,  see  below.1 

The  ideality  which  is  in  evidence  in  war,  i.e.  in  an 
accidental  relation  of  a  state  to  a  foreign  state,  is 
the  same  as  the  ideality  in  accordance  with  which  the 
domestic  powers  of  the  state  are  organic  moments  in 
a  whole.  This  fact  appears  in  history  in  various 
forms,  e.g.  successful  wars  have  checked  domestic 
unrest  and  consolidated  the  power  of  the  state  at 
home.  Other  phenomena  illustrate  the  same  point: 
e.g.  peoples  unwilling  or  afraid  to  tolerate  sovereign¬ 
ty  at  home  have  been  subjugated  from  abroad,  and 
they  have  struggled  for  their  independence  with  the 
less  glory  and  success  the  less  they  have  been  able 
previously  to  organize  the  powers  of  the  state  in 
home  affairs — their  freedom  has  died  from  the  fear 
of  dying ;  states  whose  autonomy  has  been  guaran¬ 
teed  not  by  their  armed  forces  but  in  other  ways 
(e.g.  by  their  disproportionate  smallness  in  compar¬ 
ison  with  their  neighbours)  have  been  able  to  sub¬ 
sist  with  a  constitution  of  their  own  which  by  itself 
would  not  have  assured  peace  in  either  home  or  for¬ 
eign  affairs.  [A.] 

325.  Sacrifice  on  behalf  of  the  individuality  of 
the  state  is  the  substantial  tie  between  the  state 
and  all  its  members  and  so  is  a  universal  duty. 
Since  this  tie  is  a  single  aspect  of  the  ideality, 
as  contrasted  with  the  reality,  of  subsistent  par¬ 
ticulars,  it  becomes  at  the  same  time  a  particular 
tie,  and  those  who  are  in  it  form  a  class  of  their 
own  with  the  characteristic  of  courage.2 

326.  The  matter  at  issue  in  disputes  between 
states  may  be  only  one  particular  aspect  of  their 
relation  to  each  other,  and  it  is  for  such  disputes 
that  the  particular  class  devoted  to  the  state's 
defence  is  principally  appointed.  But  if  the  state 
as  such,  if  its  autonomy,  is  in  jeopardy,  all  its 

1  Paragraphs  334-7  and  343. — Ed. 

aCf.  Plato,  Republic,  429. — Ed. 


io8  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


citizens  are  in  duty  bound  to  answer  the  sum¬ 
mons  to  its  defence.  If  in  such  circumstances 
the  entire  state  is  under  arms  and  is  torn  from 
its  domestic  life  at  home  to  fight  abroad,  the  war 
of  defence  turns  into  a  war  of  conquest. 

The  armed  force  of  the  state  becomes  a  standing 
army,  while  its  appointment  to  the  particular  task 
of  state  defence  makes  it  a  class.  This  happens  from 
the  same  necessity  as  compels  other  particular  mo¬ 
ments,  interests,  and  activities  in  the  state  to  crystal¬ 
lize  into  a  given  status  or  class,  e.g.  into  the  status  of 
marriage  or  into  the  business  or  civil  servant  class, 
or  into  the  Estates  of  the  Realm.  Ratiocination,  run¬ 
ning  hither  and  thither  from  ground  to  consequent, 
launches  forth  into  reflections  about  the  relative  ad¬ 
vantages  and  disadvantages  of  standing  armies. 
Opinion  readily  decides  that  the  latter  preponderate, 
partly  because  the  concept  of  a  thing  is  harder  to 
grasp  than  its  single  and  external  aspects,  but  also 
because  particular  interests  and  ends  (the  expense  of 
a  standing  army,  and  its  result,  higher  taxation,  &c.) 
are  rated  in  the  consciousness  of  civil  society  more 
highly  than  what  is  necessary  in  and  by  itself.  In  this 
way  the  latter  comes  to  count  only  as  a  means  to 
particular  ends. 

327.  In  itself,  courage  is  a  formal  virtue,  be¬ 
cause  (i)  it  is  a  display  of  freedom  by  radical 
abstraction  from  all  particular  ends, possessions, 
pleasure,  and  life;  but  (ii)  this  negation  is  a  ne¬ 
gation  of  externalities,  and  their  alienation,  the 
culmination  of  courage,  is  not  intrinsically  of  a 
spiritual  (geistiger)  character;  (iii)  the  coura¬ 
geous  man’s  inner  motive  need  only  be  some 
particular  reason  or  other,  and  even  the  actual 
result  of  what  he  does  need  be  present  solely  to 
the  minds  of  others  and  not  to  his  own.1  [A.] 

328.  The  intrinsic  worth  of  courage  as  a  dis¬ 
position  of  mind  is  to  be  found  in  the  genuine, 
absolute,  final  end,  the  sovereignty  of  the  state. 
The  work  of  courage  is  to  actualize  this  final 
end,  and  the  means  to  this  end  is  the  sacrifice  of 
personal  actuality.  This  form  of  experience  thus 
contains  the  harshness  of  extreme  contradic¬ 
tions:  a  self-sacrifice  which  yet  is  the  real  ex¬ 
istence  of  one’s  freedom;  the  maximum  self¬ 
subsistence  of  individuality,  yet  only  as  a  cog 
playing  its  part  in  the  mechanism  of  an  external 
organization;  absolute  obedience,  renunciation 
of  personal  opinions  and  reasonings,  in  fact  com¬ 
plete  absence  of  mind,  coupled  with  the  most 
intense  and  comprehensive  presence  of  mind 
and  decision  in  the  moment  of  acting;  the  most 
hostile  and  so  most  personal  action  against  indi¬ 
viduals,  coupled  with  an  attitude  of  complete 
indifference  or  even  liking  towards  them  as  in¬ 
dividuals. 

1  See  Paragraph  328  and  the  Remark  thereto. — Ed. 


To  risk  one’s  life  is  better  than  merely  fearing 
death,  but  is  still  purely  negative  and  so  indetermi¬ 
nate  and  without  value  in  itself.  It  is  the  positive  as¬ 
pect,  the  end  and  content,  which  first  gives  signifi¬ 
cance  to  this  spiritedness.  Robbers  and  murderers 
bent  on  crime  as  their  end,  adventurers  pursuing 
ends  planned  to  suit  their  own  whims,  &c.,  these  too 
have  spirit  enough  to  risk  their  lives. 

The  principle  of  the  modern  world — thought  and 
the  universal — has  given  courage  a  higher  form,  be¬ 
cause  its  display  now  seems  to  be  more  mechanical, 
the  act  not  of  this  particular  person,  but  of  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  a  whole.  Moreover,  it  seems  to  be  turned  not 
against  single  persons,  but  against  a  hostile  group, 
and  hence  personal  bravery  appears  impersonal.  It 
is  for  this  reason  that  thought  has  invented  the  gun, 
and  the  invention  of  this  weapon,  which  has  changed 
the  purely  personal  form  of  bravery  into  a  more  ab¬ 
stract  one,  is  no  accident. 

329.  The  state’s  tendency  to  look  abroad  lies  in 
the  fact  that  it  is  an  individual  subject.  Its  rela¬ 
tion  to  other  states  therefore  falls  to  the  power 
of  the  crown.  Hence  it  directly  devolves  on  the 
monarch,  and  on  him  alone,  to  command  the 
armed  forces,  to  conduct  foreign  affairs  through 
ambassadors  &c.,  to  make  war  and  peace,  and  to 
conclude  treaties  of  all  kinds.  [A.] 

B.  International  Law 

330.  International  law  springs  from  the  rela¬ 
tions  between  autonomous  states.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that  what  is  absolute  in  it  retains  the 
form  of  an  ought-to-be,  since  its  actuality  de¬ 
pends  on  different  wills  each  of  which  is  sov¬ 
ereign.  [A.] 

331.  The  nation  state  is  mind  in  its  substantive 
rationality  and  immediate  actuality  and  is  there¬ 
fore  the  absolute  power  on  earth.  It  follows  that 
every  state  is  sovereign  and  autonomous  against 
its  neighbours.  It  is  entitled  in  the  first  place 
and  without  qualification  to  be  sovereign  from 
their  point  of  view,  i.e.  to  be  recognized  by  them 
as  sovereign.  At  the  same  time,  however,  this 
title  is  purely  formal,  and  the  demand  for  this 
recognition  of  the  state,  merely  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  a  state,  is  abstract.  Whether  a  state  is 
in  fact  something  absolute  depends  on  its  con¬ 
tent,  i.e.  on  its  constitution  and  general  situa¬ 
tion;  and  recognition,  implying  as  it  does  an 
identity  of  both  form  and  content,  is  conditional 
on  the  neighbouring  state’s  judgement  and  will. 

A  state  is  as  little  an  actual  individual  without  re¬ 
lations  to  other  states  (see  Paragraph  322)  as  an  in¬ 
dividual  is  actually  a  person  without  rapport  with 
other  persons  (see  Paragraph  71  and  elsewhere2). 

2  e.g.,  Paragraph  40.  On  “recognition”  see  Remark  to 
Paragraph  349. — Ed 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


The  legitimate  authority  of  a  state  and,  more  par¬ 
ticularly,  so  far  as  its  foreign  relations  are  con¬ 
cerned,  of  its  monarch  also,  is  partly  a  purely  do¬ 
mestic  matter  (one  state  should  not  meddle  with 
the  domestic  affairs  of  another) .  On  the  other  hand, 
however,  it  is  no  less  essential  that  this  authority 
should  receive  its  full  and  final  legitimation  through 
its  recognition  by  other  states,  although  this  recog¬ 
nition  requires  to  be  safeguarded  by  the  pro¬ 
viso  that  where  a  state  is  to  be  recognized  by 
others,  it  shall  likewise  recognize  them,  i.e.  respect 
their  autonomy;  and  so  it  comes  about  that  they 
cannot  be  indifferent  to  each  other’s  domestic  affairs. 

The  question  arises  how  far  a  nomadic  people,  for 
instance,  or  any  people  on  a  low  level  of  civilization, 
can  be  regarded  as  a  state.  As  once  was  the  case  with 
the  Jews  and  the  Mohammedan  peoples,  religious 
views  may  entail  art  opposition  at  a  higher  level  be¬ 
tween  one  people  and  its  neighbours  and  so  preclude 
the  general  identity  which  is  requisite  for  recogni¬ 
tion.  [A.] 

332.  The  immediate  actuality  which  any  state 
possesses  from  the  point  of  view  of  other  states 
is  particularized  into  a  multiplicity  of  relations 
which  are  determined  by  the  arbitrary  will  of 
both  autonomous  parties  and  which  therefore 
possess  the  formal  nature  of  contracts  pure  and 
simple.  The  subject-matter  of  these  contracts, 
however,  is  infinitely  less  varied  than  it  is  in 
civil  society,  because  in  civil  society  individuals 
are  reciprocally  interdependent  in  the  most  nu¬ 
merous  respects,  while  autonomous  states  are 
principally  wholes  whose  needs  are  met  within 
their  own  borders. 

333.  The  fundamental  proposition  of  interna¬ 
tional  law  (i.e.  the  universal  law  which  ought  to 
be  absolutely  valid  between  states,  as  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  particular  content  of  positive 
treaties)  is  that  treaties,  as  the  ground  of  obli¬ 
gations  between  states,  ought  to  be  kept.  But 
since  the  sovereignty  of  a  state  is  the  principle 
of  its  relations  to  others,  states  are  to  that  ex¬ 
tent  in  a  state  of  nature  in  relation  to  each  other. 
Their  rights  are  actualized  only  in  their  particu¬ 
lar  wills  and  not  in  a  universal  will  with  consti¬ 
tutional  powers  over  them.  This  universal  pro¬ 
viso  of  international  law  therefore  does  not  go 
beyond  an  ought-to-be,  and  what  really  happens 
is  that  international  relations  in  accordance  with 
treaty  alternate  with  the  severance  of  these  re¬ 
lations. 

There  isno  Praetor  to  judge  between  states ;  at  best 
there  may  be  an  arbitrator  or  a  mediator,  and  even 
he  exercises  his  functions  contingently  only,  i.e.  in 
dependence  on  the  particular  wills  of  the  disputants. 
Kant  had  an  idea  for  securing  “perpetual  peace”  by 
a  League  of  Nations  to  adjust  every  dispute.  It  was 


to  be  a  power  recognized  by  each  individual  state, 
and  was  to  arbitrate  in  all  cases  of  dissension  in  or¬ 
der  to  make  it  impossible  for  disputants  to  resor  t  to 
war  in  order  to  settle  them.  This  idea  presupposes 
an  accord  between  states ;  this  would  rest  on  moral 
or  religious  or  other  grounds  and  considerations,  but 
in  any  case  would  always  depend  ultimately  on  a 
particular  sovereign  will  and  for  that  reason  would 
remain  infected  with  contingency. 

334.  It  follows  that  if  states  disagree  and  their 
particular  wills  cannot  be  harmonized,  the  mat¬ 
ter  can  only  be  settled  by  war.  A  state  through 
its  subjects  has  widespread  connexions  and 
many-sided  interests,  and  these  may  be  readily 
and  considerably  injured;  but  it  remains  in¬ 
herently  indeterminable  which  of  these  injuries 
is  to  be  regarded  as  a  specific  breach  of  treaty  or 
as  an  injury  to  the  honour  and  autonomy  of  the 
state.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  a  state  may  re¬ 
gard  its  infinity  and  honour  as  at  stake  in  each 
of  its  concerns,  however  minute,  and  it  is  all  the 
more  inclined  to  susceptibility  to  injury  the 
more  its  strong  individuality  is  impelled  as  a 
result  of  long  domestic  peace  to  seek  and  create 
a  sphere  of  activity  abroad. 

335.  Apart  from  this,  the  state  is  in  essence 
mind  and  therefore  cannot  be  prepared  to  stop 
at  just  taking  notice  of  an  injury  after  it  has 
actually  occurred.  On  the  contrary,  there  arises 
in  addition  as  a  cause  of  strife  the  idea  of  such 
an  injury  as  the  idea  of  a  danger  threatening 
from  another  state,  together  with  calculations 
of  degrees  of  probability  on  this  side  and  that, 
guessing  at  intentions,  &c.,  &c. 

336.  Since  states  are  related  to  one  another  as 
autonomous  entities  and  so  as  particular  wills 
on  which  the  very  validity  of  treaties  depends, 
and  since  the  particular  will  of  the  whole  is  in 
content  a  will  for  its  own  welfare  pure  and  sim¬ 
ple,  it  follows  that  welfare  is  the  highest  law 
governing  the  relation  of  one  state  to  another. 
This  is  all  the  more  the  case  since  the  Idea  of  the 
state  is  precisely  the  supersession  of  the  clash 
between  right  (i.e.  empty  abstract  freedom)  and 
welfare  (i.e.  the  particular  content  which  fills 
that  void),  and  it  is  when  states  become  con¬ 
crete  wholes  that  they  first  attain  recognition 
(see  Paragraph  331). 

337.  The  substantial  welfare  of  the  state  is  its 
welfare  as  a  particular  state  in  its  specific  inter¬ 
est  and  situation  and  its  no  less  special  foreign 
affairs,  including  its  particular  treaty  relations. 
Its  government  therefore  is  a  matter  of  particu¬ 
lar  wisdom,  not  of  universal  Providence  (com¬ 
pare  Remark  to  Paragraph  324).  Similarly,  its 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


aim  in  relation  to  other  states  and  its  principle 
for  justifying  wars  and  treaties  is  not  a  univer¬ 
sal  thought  (the  thought  of  philanthropy)  but 
only  its  actually  injured  or  threatened  welfare 
as  something  specific  and  peculiar  to  itself. 

At  one  time  the  opposition  between  morals  and 
politics,  and  the  demand  that  the  latter  should  con¬ 
form  to  the  former,  were  much  canvassed.  On  this 
point  only  a  general  remark  is  required  here.  The 
welfare  of  a  state  has  claims  to  recognition  totally 
different  from  those  of  the  welfare  of  the  individual. 
The  ethical  substance,  the  state,  has  its  determinate 
being,  i.e.  its  right,  directly  embodied  in  something 
existent,  something  not  abstract  but  concrete,  and 
the  principle  of  its  conduct  and  behaviour  can  only 
be  this  concrete  existent  and  not  one  of  the  many 
universal  thoughts  supposed  to  be  moral  commands. 
When  politics  is  alleged  to  clash  with  morals  and  so 
to  be  always  wrong,  the  doctrine  propounded  rests 
on  superficial  ideas  about  morality,  the  nature  of 
the  state,  and  the  state’s  relation  to  the  moral  point 
of  view. 

338.  The  fact  that  states  reciprocally  recognize 
each  other  as  states  remains,  even  in  war — the 
state  of  affairs  when  rights  disappear  and  force 
and  chance  hold  sway — a  bond  wherein  each 
counts  to  the  rest  as  something  absolute.  Hence 
in  war,  war  itself  is  characterized  as  something 
which  ought  to  pass  away.  It  implies  therefore 
the  proviso  of  the  jus  gentium  that  the  possibil¬ 
ity  of  peace  be  retained  (and  so,  for  example, 
that  envoys  must  be  respected),  and,  in  general, 
that  war  be  not  waged  against  domestic  institu¬ 
tions,  against  the  peace  of  family  and  private 
life,  or  against  persons  in  their  private  capacity. 
[A.] 

339.  Apart  from  this,  relations  between  states 
(e.g.  in  war-time,  reciprocal  agreements  about 
taking  prisoners;  in  peace-time,  concessions  of 
rights  to  subjects  of  other  states  for  the  purpose 
of  private  trade  and  intercourse,  &c.)  depend 
principally  upon  the  customs  of  nations,  custom 
being  the  inner  universality  of  behaviour  main¬ 
tained  in  all  circumstances.  [A.] 

340.  It  is  as  particular  entities  that  states  en¬ 
ter  into  relations  with  one  another.  Hence  their 
relations  are  on  the  largest  scale  a  maelstrom  of 
external  contingency  and  the  inner  particularity 
of  passions,  private  interests  and  selfish  ends, 
abilities  and  virtues,  vices,  force,  and  wrong.  All 
these  whirl  together,  and  in  their  vortex  the 
ethical  whole  itself,  the  autonomy  of  the  state, 
is  exposed  to  contingency.  The  principles  of  the 
national  minds1  are  wholly  restricted  on  ac¬ 
count  of  their  particularity,  for  it  is  in  this  par- 

1  Cf.  Montesquieu,  The  Spirit  of  Laws.  xix.  4-5. — Ed. 


ticularity  that,  as  existent  individuals,  they 
have  their  objective  actuality  and  their  self- 
consciousness.  Their  deeds  and  destinies  in  their 
reciprocal  relations  to  one  another  are  the  dia¬ 
lectic  of  the  finitude  of  these  minds,  and  out  of 
it  arises  the  universal  mind,  the  mind  of  the 
world,  free  from  all  restriction,  producing  itself 
as  that  which  exercises  its  right — and  its  right 
is  the  highest  right  of  all — over  these  finite 
minds  in  the  “history  of  the  world  which  is  the 
world’s  court  of  judgement.” 

C.  World  History 

341.  The  element  in  which  the  universal  mind 
exists  in  art  is  intuition  and  imagery,  in  religion 
feeling  and  representative  thinking,  in  philoso¬ 
phy  pure  freedom  of  thought.  In  world  history 
this  element  is  the  actuality  of  mind  in  its  whole 
compass  of  internality  and  externality  alike. 
World  history  is  a  court  of  judgement  because  in 
its  absolute  universality,  the  particular — i.e.  the 
Penates ,  civil  society,  and  the  national  minds  in 
their  variegated  actuality — is  present  as  only 
ideal,  and  the  movement  of  mind  in  this  element 
is  the  exhibition  of  that  fact.2 

342.  Further,  world  history  is  not  the  verdict 
of  mere  might,  i.e.  the  abstract  and  non-rational 
inevitability  of  a  blind  destiny.  On  the  contrary, 
since  mind  is  implicitly  and  actually  reason,  and 
reason  is  explicit  to  itself  in  mind  as  knowl¬ 
edge,  world  history  is  the  necessary  develop¬ 
ment,  out  of  the  concept  of  mind’s  freedom 
alone,  of  the  moments  of  reason  and  so  of  the 
self-consciousness  and  freedom  of  mind.  This 
development  is  the  interpretation  and  actualiza¬ 
tion  of  the  universal  mind. 

343.  The  history  of  mind  is  its  own  act.  Mind 
is  only  what  it  does,  and  its  act  is  to  make  itself 
the  object  of  its  own  consciousness.  In  history 
its  act  is  to  gain  consciousness  of  itself  as  mind, 
to  apprehend  itself  in  its  interpretation  of  itself 
to  itself.  This  apprehension  is  its  being  and  its 
principle,  and  the  completion  of  apprehension 
at  one  stage  is  at  the  same  time  the  rejection  of 
that  stage  and  its  transition  to  a  higher.  To  use 
abstract  phraseology,  the  mind  apprehending 
this  apprehension  anew,  or  in  other  words  re¬ 
turning  to  itself  again  out  of  its  rejection  of  this 
lower  stage  of  apprehension,  is  the  mind  of  the 
stage  higher  than  that  on  which  it  stood  in  its 
earlier  apprehension. 

The  question  of  the  perfectibility  and  Education  of 
the  Human  Race  arises  here.  Those  who  have  main¬ 
tained  this  perfectibility  have  divined  something  of 

2  Paragraphs  341-60  are  a  very  compressed  summary 
of  Hegel’s  Philosophy  of  History. — Ed. 


Ill 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


the  nature  of  mind,  something  of  the  fact  that  it  is 
its  nature  to  have  7 v&Oi  aeavrov  as  the  law  of  its  be¬ 
ing,  and,  since  it  apprehends  that  which  it  is,  to  have 
a  form  higher  than  that  which  constituted  its  mere 
being.  But  to  those  who  reject  this  doctrine,  mind 
has  remained  an  empty  word,  and  history  a  super¬ 
ficial  play  of  casual,  so-called  “merely  human,”  striv¬ 
ings  and  passions.  Even  if,  in  connexion  with  history, 
they  speak  of  Providence  and  the  plan  of  Provi¬ 
dence,  and  so  express  a  faith  in  a  higher  power,  their 
ideas  remain  empty  because  they  expressly  declare 
that  for  them  the  plan  of  Providence  is  inscrutable 
and  incomprehensible. 

344.  In  the  course  of  this  work  of  the  world 
mind,  states,  nations,  and  individuals  arise  ani¬ 
mated  by  their  particular  determinate  principle 
which  has  its  interpretation  and  actuality  in 
their  constitutions  and  in  the  whole  range  of 
their  life  and  condition.  While  their  conscious¬ 
ness  is  limited  to  these  and  they  are  absorbed 
in  their  mundane  interests,  they  are  all  the  time 
the  unconscious  tools  and  organs  of  the  world 
mind  at  work  within  them.  The  shapes  which 
they  take  pass  away,  while  the  absolute  mind 
prepares  and  works  out  its  transition  to  its  next 
higher  stage. 

345.  Justice  and  virtue,  wrongdoing,  power  and 
vice,  talents  and  their  achievements,  passions 
strong  and  weak,  guilt  and  innocence,  grandeur 
in  individual  and  national  life,  autonomy,  for¬ 
tune  and  misfortune  of  states  and  individuals, 
all  these  have  their  specific  significance  and 
worth  in  the  field  of  known  actuality;  therein 
they  are  judged  and  therein  they  have  their  par¬ 
tial,  though  only  partial  justification.  World- 
history,  however,  is  above  the  point  of  view 
from  which  these  things  matter.  Each  of  its 
stages  is  the  presence  of  a  necessary  moment  in 
the  Idea  of  the  world  mind,  and  that  moment 
attains  its  absolute  right  in  that  stage.  The  na¬ 
tion  whose  life  embodies  this  moment  secures 
its  good  fortune  and  fame,  and  its  deeds  are 
brought  to  fruition. 

346.  History  is  mind  clothing  itself  with  the 
form  of  events  or  the  immediate  actuality  of 
nature.  The  stages  of  its  development  are  there¬ 
fore  presented  as  immediate  natural  principles. 
These,  because  they  are  natural,  are  a  plurality 
external  to  one  another,  and  they  are  present 
therefore  in  such  a  way  that  each  of  them  is 
assigned  to  one  nation  in  the  external  form  of  its 
geographical  and  anthropological  conditions. 

347.  The  nation  to  which  is  ascribed  a  mo¬ 
ment  of  the  Idea  in  the  form  of  a  natural  prin¬ 
ciple  is  entrusted  with  giving  complete  effect  to 


it  in  the  advance  of  the  self-developing  self- 
consciousness  of  the  world  mind.  This  nation  is 
dominant  in  world  history  during  this  one  epoch, 
and  it  is  only  once  (see  Paragraph  345)1  that  it 
can  make  its  hour  strike.  In  contrast  with  this  its 
absolute  right  of  being  the  vehicle  of  this  pres¬ 
ent  stage  in  the  world  mind’s  development,  the 
minds  of  the  other  nations  are  without  rights,  and 
they,  along  with  those  whose  hour  has  struck 
already,  count  no  longer  in  world  history. 

The  history  of  a  single  world-historical  nation  con¬ 
tains  (a)  the  development  of  its  principle  from  its 
latent  embryonic  stage  until  it  blossoms  into  the  self- 
conscious  freedom  of  ethical  life  and  presses  in  upon 
world  history;  and  ( b )  the  period  of  its  decline  and 
fall,  since  it  is  its  decline  and  fall  that  signalizes  the 
emergence  in  it  of  a  higher  principle  as  the  pure 
negative  of  its  own.  When  this  happens,  mind  passes 
over  into  the  new  principle  and  so  marks  out  an¬ 
other  nation  for  world-historical  significance.  After 
this  period,  the  declining  nation  has  lost  the  interest 
of  the  absolute;  it  may  indeed  absorb  the  higher 
principle  positively  and  begin  building  its  life  on  it, 
but  the  principle  is  only  like  an  adopted  child,  not 
like  a  relative  to  whom  its  ties  are  immanently  vital 
and  vigorous.  Perhaps  it  loses  its  autonomy,  or  it 
may  still  exist,  or  drag  out  its  existence,  as  a  par¬ 
ticular  state  or  a  group  of  states  and  involve  itself 
without  rhyme  or  reason  in  manifold  enterprises  at 
home  and  battles  abroad. 

348.  All  actions,  including  world-historical  ac¬ 
tions,  culminate  with  individuals  as  subjects 
giving  actuality  to  the  substantial  (see  Remark 
to  Paragraph  279).  They  are  the  living  instru¬ 
ments  of  what  is  in  substance  the  deed  of  the 
world  mind  and  they  are  therefore  directly  at 
one  with  that  deed  though  it  is  concealed  from 
them  and  is  not  their  aim  and  object  (see  Para¬ 
graph  344).  For  the  deeds  of  the  world  mind, 
therefore,  they  receive  no  honour  or  thanks 
either  from  their  contemporaries  (see  Paragraph 
344)  or  from  public  opinion  in  later  ages.  All 
that  is  vouchsafed  to  them  by  such  opinion  is 
undying  fame  in  respect  of  the  subjective  form 
of  their  acts. 

349.  A  nation  does  not  begin  by  being  a  state. 
The  transition  from  a  family,  a  horde,  a  clan,  a 
multitude,  &c.,  to  political  conditions  is  the  real¬ 
ization  of  the  Idea  in  the  form  of  that  nation. 
Without  this  form,  a  nation,  as  an  ethical  sub¬ 
stance — which  is  what  it  is  implicitly,  lacks  the 
objectivity  of  possessing  in  its  own  eyes  and  in 
the  eyes  of  others,  a  universal  and  universally 
valid  embodiment  in  laws,  i.e.  in  determinate 
thoughts,  and  as  a  result  it  fails  to  secure  recog¬ 
nition  from  others.  So  long  as  it  lacks  objective 

1  All  editions  read  “346.” — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


law  and  an  explicitly  established  rational  con¬ 
stitution,  its  autonomy  is  formal  only  and  is  not 
sovereignty. 

It  would  be  contrary  even  to  commonplace  ideas 
to  call  patriarchal  conditions  a  “constitution”  or  a 
people  under  patriarchal  government  a  “state”  or  its 
independence  “sovereignty.”  Hence,  before  history 
actually  begins,  we  have  on  the  one  hand  dull  inno¬ 
cence,  devoid  of  interest,  and,  on  the  other,  the  cour¬ 
age  of  revenge  and  of  the  struggle  for  formal  recog¬ 
nition  (see  Paragraph  331  and  Remark  to  Paragraph 
57). 

350.  It  is  the  absolute  right  of  the  Idea  to  step 
into  existence  in  clear-cut  laws  and  objective 
institutions,  beginning  with  marriage  and  agri¬ 
culture  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  203), whether 
this  right  be  actualized  in  the  form  of  divine 
legislation  and  favour,  or  in  the  form  of  force 
and  wrong.  This  right  is  the  right  of  heroes  to 
found  states. 

351.  The  same  consideration  justifies  civilized 
nations  in  regarding  and  treating  as  barbarians 
those  who  lag  behind  them  in  institutions  which 
are  the  essential  moments  of  the  state.  Thus  a 
pastoral  people  may  treat  hunters  as  barbarians, 
and  both  of  these  are  barbarians  from  the  point 
of  view  of  agriculturists,  &c.  The  civilized  na¬ 
tion  is  conscious  that  the  rights  of  barbarians 
are  unequal  to  its  own  and  treats  their  autonomy 
as  only  a  formality. 

When  wars  and  disputes  arise  in  such  circumstances, 
the  trait  which  gives  them  a  significance  for  world 
history  is  the  fact  that  they  are  struggles  for  recog¬ 
nition  in  connexion  with  something  of  specific  in¬ 
trinsic  worth. 

352.  The  concrete  Ideas,  the  minds  of  the  na¬ 
tions,  have  their  truth  and  their  destiny  in  the 
concrete  Idea  which  is  absolute  universality, 
i.e.  in  the  world  mind.  Around  its  throne  they 
stand  as  the  executors  of  its  actualization  and 
as  signs  and  ornaments  of  its  grandeur.  As  mind, 
it  is  nothing  but  its  active  movement  towards 
absolute  knowledge  of  itself  and  therefore  to¬ 
wards  freeing  its  consciousness  from  the  form 
of  natural  immediacy  and  so  coming  to  itself. 
Therefore  the  principles  of  the  formations  of 
this  self-consciousness  in  the  course  of  its  lib¬ 
eration — the  world-historical  realms — are  four 
in  number. 

353.  In  its  first  and  immediate  revelation,  mind 
has  as  its  principle  the  shape  of  the  substantial 
mind,  i.e.  the  shape  of  the  identity  in  which  in¬ 
dividuality  is  absorbed  in  its  essence  and  its 
claims  are  not  explicitly  recognized. 

The  second  principle  is  this  substantial  mind 


endowed  with  knowledge  so  that  mind  is  both 
the  positive  content  and  filling  of  mind  and  also 
the  individual  self-awareness  which  is  the  liv¬ 
ing  form  of  mind.  This  principle  is  ethical  indi¬ 
viduality  as  beauty. 

The  third  principle  is  the  inward  deepening 
of  this  individual  self-awareness  and  knowledge 
until  it  reaches  abstract  universality  and  there¬ 
fore  infinite  opposition  to  the  objective  world 
which  in  the  same  process  has  become  mind- 
forsaken. 

The  principle  of  the  fourth  formation  is  the 
conversion  of  this  opposition  so  that  mind  re¬ 
ceives  in  its  inner  life  its  truth  and  concrete  es¬ 
sence,  while  in  objectivity  it  is  at  home  and 
reconciled  with  itself.  The  mind  which  has  thus 
reverted  to  the  substantiality  with  which  it  be¬ 
gan  is  the  mind  which  has  returned  out  of  the 
infinite  opposition,  and  which  consequently  en¬ 
genders  and  knows  this  its  truth  as  thought  and 
as  a  world  of  actual  laws. 

354.  In  accordance  with  these  four  principles, 
the  world-historical  realms  are  the  following: 
(1)  the  Oriental,  (2)  the  Greek,  (3)  the  Roman, 
(4)  the  Germanic. 

355.  (1)  The  Oriental  realm. 

The  world-view  of  this  first  realm  is  substan¬ 
tial,  without  inward  division,  and  it  arises  in 
natural  communities  patriarchically  governed. 
According  to  this  view,  the  mundane  form  of 
government  is  theocratic,  the  ruler  is  also  a  high 
priest  or  God  himself ;  constitution  and  legisla¬ 
tion  are  at  the  same  time  religion,  while  religious 
and  moral  commands,  or  usages  rather,  are  at 
the  same  time  natural  and  positive  law.  In  the 
magnificence  of  this  regime  as  a  whole,  individ¬ 
ual  personality  loses  its  rights  and  perishes ;  the 
external  world  of  nature  is  either  directly  divine 
or  else  God’s  ornament,  and  the  history  of  the 
actual  is  poetry.  Distinctions  are  developed  in 
customs,  government,  and  state  on  their  many 
sides,  and  in  default  of  laws  and  amidst  the  sim¬ 
plicity  of  manners,  they  become  unwieldy,  dif¬ 
fuse,  and  superstitious  ceremonies,  the  accidents 
of  personal  power  and  arbitrary  rule,  and  class 
differences  become  crystallized  into  hereditary 
castes.  Hence  in  the  Oriental  state  nothing  is 
fixed,  and  what  is  stable  is  fossilized;  it  lives 
therefore  only  in  an  outward  movement  which 
becomes  in  the  end  an  elemental  fury  and  deso¬ 
lation.  Its  inner  calm  is  merely  the  calm  of  non¬ 
political  life  and  immersion  in  feebleness  and 
exhaustion. 

A  still  substantial,  natural,  mentality  is  a  moment 
in  the  development  of  the  state,  and  the  point  at 


ETHICAL  LIFE 


which  any  state  takes  this  form  is  the  absolute  be¬ 
ginning  of  its  history.  This  has  been  emphasized  and 
demonstrated  with  learning  and  profound  insight 
in  connexion  with  the  history  of  particular  states  by 
Dr.  Stuhr  in  his  book  Der  Untergang  der  Natur- 
staaten — a  work  in  which  he  leads  the  way  to  a  ra¬ 
tional  treatment  of  constitutional  history  and  of  his¬ 
tory  generally.  The  principle  of  subjectivity  and  self- 
conscious  freedom  is  there  too  shown  to  be  the 
principle  of  the  Germanic  people,  but  the  book 
goes  no  further  than  the  decline  of  natural  states, 
and  consequently  the  principle  is  only  brought  to 
the  point  where  it  appears  either  as  a  restless  mo¬ 
bility,  as  human  caprice  and  corruption,  or  in 
its  particular  form  as  emotion,  and  where  it  has 
not  yet  developed  to  the  objectivity  of  the  self- 
conscious  substantiality  or  to  an  organized  legal 
system. 

356.  (2)  The  Greek  realm. 

This  realm  possesses  this  substantial  unity  of 
finite  and  infinite, but  only  as  a  mysterious  back¬ 
ground,  suppressed  in  dim  recesses  of  the  mem¬ 
ory,  in  caves  and  traditional  imagery.  This  back¬ 
ground,  reborn  out  of  the  mind  which  differenti¬ 
ates  itself  to  individual  mentality,  emerges  into 
the  daylight  of  knowing  and  is  tempered  and 
transfigured  into  beauty  and  a  free  and  unruffled 
ethical  life.  Hence  it  is  in  a  world  of  this  char¬ 
acter  that  the  principle  of  personal  individuality 
arises,  though  it  is  still  not  self-enclosed  but 
kept  in  its  ideal  unity.  The  result  is  that  the 
whole  is  divided  into  a  group  of  particular  na¬ 
tional  minds;  ultimate  decision  is  ascribed  not 
to  the  subjectivity  of  explicitly  independent  self- 
consciousness  but  to  a  power  standing  above 
and  outside  it  (see  Remark  to  Paragraph  279) ; 
on  the  other  hand,  the  due  satisfaction  of  par¬ 
ticular  needs  is  not  yet  comprised  in  the  sphere 
of  freedom  but  is  relegated  exclusively  to  a  class 
of  slaves. 

357-  (3)  The  Roman  realm. 

In  this  realm,  differentiation  is  carried  to  its 
conclusion,  and  ethical  life  is  sundered  with¬ 
out  end  into  the  extremes  of  the  private  self- 
consciousness  of  persons  on  the  one  hand,  and  ab¬ 
stract  universality  on  the  other.  This  opposition 
begins  in  the  clash  between  the  substantial  intu¬ 
ition  of  an  aristocracy  and  the  principle  of  free 
personality  in  democratic  form.  As  the  opposi¬ 
tion  grows,  the  first  of  these  opponents  develops 
into  superstition  and  the  maintenance  of  heart¬ 
less  self-seeking  power,  while  the  second  be¬ 
comes  more  and  more  corrupt  until  it  sinks  into 
a  rabble.  Finally,  the  whole  is  dissolved  and  the 
result  is  universal  misfortune  and  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  ethical  life.  National  heroes  die  away 


into  the  unity  of  a  Pantheon,  all  individuals  are 
degraded  to  the  level  of  private  persons  equal 
with  one  another,  possessed  of  formal  rights, 
and  the  only  bond  left  to  hold  them  together  is 
abstract  insatiable  self-will. 

358.  (4)  The  Germanic  realm. 

Mind  and  its  world  are  thus  both  alike  lost  and 
plunged  in  the  infinite  grief  of  that  fate  for 
which  a  people,  the  Jewish  people,  was  held  in 
readiness.  Mind  is  here  pressed  back  upon  itself 
in  the  extreme  of  its  absolute  negativity.  This  is 
the  absolute  turning  point;  mind  rises  out  of 
this  situation  and  grasps  the  infinite  positivity 
of  this  its  inward  character,  i.e.  it  grasps  the 
principle  of  the  unity  of  the  divine  nature  and 
the  human,  the  reconciliation  of  objective  truth 
and  freedom  as  the  truth  and  freedom  appearing 
within  self-consciousness  and  subjectivity,  a 
reconciliation  with  the  fulfilment  of  which  the 
principle  of  the  north,  the  principle  of  the  Ger¬ 
manic  peoples,  has  been  entrusted. 

359.  This  principle  is  first  of  all  inward  and  ab¬ 
stract;  it  exists  in  feeling  as  faith,  love,  and 
hope,  the  reconciliation  and  resolution  of  all 
contradiction.  It  then  discloses  its  content,  rais¬ 
ing  it  to  become  actuality  and  self-conscious 
rationality,  to  become  a  mundane  realm  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  the  heart,  fidelity,  and  comrade¬ 
ship  of  free  men,  a  realm  which  in  this  its  sub¬ 
jectivity  is  equally  a  realm  of  crude  individual 
caprice  and  barbarous  manners.  This  realm  it 
sets  over  against  a  world  of  beyond,  an  intel¬ 
lectual  realm,  whose  content  is  indeed  the  truth 
of  its  (the  principle’s)  mind,  but  a  truth  not  yet 
thought  and  so  still  veiled  in  barbarous  imagery. 
This  world  of  beyond,  as  the  power  of  mind 
over  the  mundane  heart,  acts  against  the  latter 
as  a  compulsive  and  frightful  force. 

360.  These  two  realms  stand  distinguished  from 
one  another  though  at  the  same  time  they  are 
rooted  in  a  single  unity  and  Idea.  Here  their 
distinction  is  intensified  to  absolute  opposition 
and  a  stern  struggle  ensues  in  the  course  of 
which  the  realm  of  mind  lowers  the  place  of  its 
heaven  to  an  earthly  here  and  now,  to  a  com¬ 
mon  worldliness  of  fact  and  idea.  The  mundane 
realm,  on  the  other  hand,  builds  up  its  abstract 
independence  into  thought  and  the  principle  of 
rational  being  and  knowing,  i.e.  into  the  ration¬ 
ality  of  right  and  law.  In  this  way  their  opposi¬ 
tion  implicitly  loses  its  marrow  and  disappears. 
The  realm  of  fact  has  discarded  its  barbarity 
and  unrighteous  caprice,  while  the  realm  of 
truth  has  abandoned  the  world  of  beyond  and 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


its  arbitrary  force,  so  that  the  true  reconcilia¬ 
tion  which  discloses  the  state  as  the  image  and 
actuality  of  reason  has  become  objective.  In  the 
state,  self-consciousness  finds  in  an  organic  de¬ 
velopment  the  actuality  of  its  substantive  know¬ 
ing  and  willing;  in  religion,  it  finds  the  feeling 


and  the  representation  of  this  its  own  truth  as 
an  ideal  essentiality;  while  in  philosophic  sci¬ 
ence,  it  finds  the  free  comprehension  and  knowl¬ 
edge  of  this  truth  as  one  and  the  same  in  its 
mutually  complementary  manifestations,  i.e.  in 
the  state,  in  nature,  and  in  the  ideal  world. 


ADDITIONS 


i.  Preface ,  p.  i 

Laws  are  of  two  kinds — laws  of  nature  and  laws 
of  the  land.  The  laws  of  nature  simply  are  what 
they  are  and  are  valid  as  they  are ;  they  are  not  li¬ 
able  to  encroachment,  though  in  certain  cases  man 
may  transgress  them.  To  know  the  law  of  nature, 
we  must  learn  to  know  nature,  since  its  laws  are 
rigid  and  it  is  only  our  ideas  about  them  that  can  be 
false.  The  measure  of  these  laws  is  outside  us ;  know¬ 
ing  them  adds  nothing  to  them  and  does  not  assist 
their  operation ;  our  knowledge  of  them  can  expand, 
that  is  all.  Knowledge  of  the  laws  of  the  land  is  in 
one  way  similar,  but  in  another  way  not.  These  laws 
too  we  learn  to  know  just  as  they  exist;  the  citi¬ 
zen’s  knowledge  of  them  is  more  or  less  of  this  sort, 
and  the  student  of  positive  law  equally  stops  at  what 
is  given.  But  the  difference  in  the  case  of  laws  of  the 
land  is  that  they  arouse  the  spirit  of  reflection,  and 
their  diversity  at  once  draws  attention  to  the  fact 
that  they  are  not  absolute.  Positive  laws  are  some¬ 
thing  posited,  something  originated  by  men.  Between 
what  is  so  originated  and  man’s  inner  voice  there 
may  be  an  inevitable  clash  or  there  may  be  agree¬ 
ment.  Man  does  not  stop  short  at  the  existent,  but 
claims  to  have  in  himself  the  measure  of  what  is 
right.  He  may  be  subjected  to  the  compulsion  and 
dominion  of  an  external  authority,  though  never  as 
he  is  to  the  compulsion  of  nature,  because  his  inner 
self  always  tells  him  how  things  ought  to  be  and  he 
finds  within  himself  the  confirmation  or  denial  of 
what  passes  as  valid.  In  nature,  the  highest  truth  is 
that  there  is  a  law ;  in  the  law  of  the  land,  the  thing 
is  not  valid  simply  because  it  exists ;  on  the  contrary, 
everyone  demands  that  it  shall  comply  with  his  pri¬ 
vate  criterion.  Here  then  an  antagonism  is  possible 
between  what  ought  to  be  and  what  is,  between  the 
absolutely  right  which  stands  unaltered  and  the  ar¬ 
bitrary  determination  of  what  is  to  be  recognized  as 
right.  A  schism  and  a  conflict  of  this  sort  is  to  be 
found  only  in  the  territory  of  mind,  and  because 
mind’s  privilege  seems  therefore  to  lead  to  discon¬ 
tent  and  unhappiness,  men  are  often  thrown  back 
from  the  arbitrariness  of  life  to  the  contemplation 
of  nature  and  set  themselves  to  take  nature  as  an  ex¬ 
ample.  But  it  is  precisely  in  these  clashes  between 
what  is  absolutely  right  and  what  arbitrariness 
makes  pass  as  right  that  there  lies  the  need  for  study¬ 
ing  the  fundamentals  of  right.  In  the  right,  man  must 
meet  with  his  own  reason;  consequently,  he  must 
consider  the  rationality  of  the  right,  and  this  is  the 
task  of  our  science  in  contrast  with  the  positive 
study  of  law  which  often  has  to  do  only  with  con¬ 


tradictions.1  The  world  of  to-day  has  in  addition  a 
more  urgent  need  to  make  this  study  because  while 
amongst  the  ancients  the  existing  laws  were  still  re¬ 
spected  and  reverenced,  nowadays  the  civilization 
of  the  age  has  taken  a  new  turning  and  thought  has 
placed  itself  at  the  head  of  everything  which  is  to 
have  validity.  Theories  are  set  over  against  the  ex¬ 
istent  and  are  intended  to  appear  as  absolutely  cor¬ 
rect  and  necessary.  At  present  there  is  a  rather  spe¬ 
cial  need  for  becoming  acquainted  with,  and  under¬ 
standing,  the  thoughts  of  the  right.  Since  thought 
has  risen  to  be  the  essential  form  of  things,  we  must 
try  to  grasp  the  right  too  as  thought.  It  seems  to  be 
opening  wide  the  door  to  casual  opinions  to  hold 
that  thought  is  to  be  pre-eminent  over  the  right,  yet 
true  thought  is  not  an  opinion  about  the  thing  but 
the  concept  of  the  thing  itself.  The  concept  of  the 
thing  does  not  come  our  way  by  nature.  Anyone  has 
fingers  and  may  take  a  brush  and  colours,  but  that 
does  not  make  him  a  painter.  The  same  is  true  about 
thinking.  The  thought  of  the  right  is  surely  not  the 
thought  that  everybody  possesses  at  first  hand ;  on 
the  contrary,  exact  thinking  is  cognizing  and  appre¬ 
hending  the  thing,  and  our  apprehension  should 
therefore  be  scientific. 

2.  Paragraph  i. 

The  concept  and  its  objective  existence  are  two 
sides  of  the  same  thing,  distinct  and  united,  like  soul 
and  body.  The  body  is  the  same  life  as  the  soul  and 
yet  both  may  be  spoken  of  as  lying  outside  one  an¬ 
other.  A  soul  without  a  body  would  not  be  a  living 
thing,  nor  would  a  body  without  a  soul.  Hence  the 
determinate  existence  of  the  concept  is  its  body, 
while  its  body  obeys  the  soul  which  brought  it  into 
being.  The  seeds  have  the  tree  implicit  within  them 
and  contain  the  tree’s  whole  strength,  although  they 
are  not  yet  the  tree  itself.  The  tree  corresponds  in 
detail  with  the  simple  construction  of  the  seed.  If 
the  body  does  not  match  the  soul,  it  is  a  poor  sort  of 
thing.  The  unity  of  determinate  existence  and  the 
concept,  of  body  and  soul,  is  the  Idea.  The  unity  is 
not  a  mere  harmony,  but  rather  a  complete  inter¬ 
penetration.  Nothing  is  alive  which  is  not  in  some 
way  or  other  Idea.  The  Idea  of  right  is  freedom,  and 
if  it  is  to  be  truly  understood,  it  must  be  known  both 
in  its  concept  and  in  the  determinate  existence  of 
that  concept. 

1  [i.e.  with  the  inconsistencies  in  any  system  of  posi¬ 
tive  law  (see,  e.g.,  Hegel's  comments  on  fictions  in 
Roman  law  in  the  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  3  and  180) 
as  well  as  with  contradictory  judgements,  see,  e.g.,  Re¬ 
mark  to  Paragraph  211.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


116 

3.  Paragraph  2. 

Philosophy  forms  a  circle.  It  has  a  beginning,  an 

immediate  factor  (for  it  must  somehow  make  a 
start) ,  something  unproved  which  is  not  a  result.  But 
the  terminus  a  quo  of  philosophy  is  simply  relative, 
since  it  must  appear  in  another  terminus  as  a  termi¬ 
nus  ad  quern.  Philosophy  is  a  sequence  which  does 
not  hang  in  the  air;  it  is  not  something  which  begins 
from  nothing  at  all ;  on  the  contrary,  it  circles  back 
into  itself.1 

4.  Paragraph  4. 

The  freedom  of  the  will  is  best  explained  by  a  ref¬ 
erence  to  the  physical  world.  Freedom,  I  mean,  is  just 
as  fundamental  a  character  of  the  will  as  weight  is 
of  bodies.  If  we  say:  matter  is  “heavy,”  we  might 
mean  that  this  predicate  is  only  contingent ;  but  it  is 
nothing  of  the  kind,  for  nothing  in  matter  is  with¬ 
out  weight.  Matter  is  rather  weight  itself.  Heaviness 
constitutes  the  body  and  is  the  body.  The  same  is 
the  case  with  freedom  and  the  will,  since  the  free  en¬ 
tity  is  the  will.  Will  without  freedom  is  an  empty 
word,  while  freedom  is  actual  only  as  will,  as  subject. 

The  following  points  should  be  noted  about  the 
connexion  between  the  will  and  thought.  Mind  is  in 
principle  thinking,  and  man  is  distinguished  from 
beast  in  virtue  of  thinking.  But  it  must  not  be  im¬ 
agined  that  man  is  half  thought  and  half  will,  and 
that  he  keeps  thought  in  one  pocket  and  will  in  an¬ 
other,  for  this  would  be  a  foolish  idea.  The  distinc¬ 
tion  between  thought  and  will  is  only  that  between 
the  theoretical  attitude  and  the  practical.  These,  how¬ 
ever,  are  surely  not  two  faculties ;  the  will  is  rather 
a  special  way  of  thinking,  thinking  translating  itself 
into  existence,  thinking  as  the  urge  to  give  itself  ex¬ 
istence. 

This  distinction  between  thought  and  will  may  be 
described  as  follows.  In  thinking  an  object,  I  make  it 
into  thought  and  deprive  it  of  its  sensuous  aspect;  I 
make  it  into  something  which  is  directly  and  essen¬ 
tially  mine.  Since  it  is  in  thought  that  I  am  first  by 
myself,  I  do  not  penetrate  an  object  until  I  under¬ 
stand  it ;  it  then  ceases  to  stand  over  against  me 
and  I  have  taken  from  it  the  character  of  its  own 
which  it  had  in  opposition  to  me.  Just  as  Adam 
said  to  Eve:  “Thou  art  flesh  of  my  flesh  and  bone  of 
my  bone,”  2  so  mind  says:  “This  is  mind  of  my  mind 
and  its  foreign  character  has  disappeared.”  An  idea 
is  always  a  generalization,  and  generalization  is  a 
property  of  thinking.  To  generalize  means  to  think. 
The  ego  is  thought  and  so  the  universal.  When  I  say 
“I,”  I  eo  ipso  abandon  all  my  particular  characteris¬ 
tics,  my  disposition,  natural  endowment,  knowledge, 
and  age.  The  ego  is  quite  empty,  a  mere  point,  simple, 
yet  active  in  this  simplicity.  The  variegated  canvas 
of  the  world  is  before  me ;  I  stand  over  against  it ;  by 
my  theoretical  attitude  to  it  I  overcome  its  opposi¬ 
tion  to  me  and  make  its  content  my  own.  I  am  at 
home  in  the  world  when  I  know  it,  still  more  so  when 
I  have  understood  it.  So  much  for  the  theoretical 
attitude. 

1  [See  Science  of  Logic ,  i.  79-90.] 

2  [Genesis,  2.23] 


The  practical  attitude,  on  the  other  hand,  begins  in 
thinking,  in  the  ego  itself,  and  it  appears  first  as 
though  opposed  to  thinking  because,  I  mean,  it  sets 
up  a  sort  of  diremption.  In  so  far  as  I  am  practical 
or  active,  i.e.  in  so  far  as  I  do  something,  I  deter¬ 
mine  myself,  and  to  determine  myself  simply  means  to 
posit  a  difference.  But  these  differences  which  I  posit 
are  still  mine  all  the  same  ;  the  determinate  volitions 
are  mine  and  the  aims  which  I  struggle  to  realize  be¬ 
long  to  me.  If  I  now  let  these  determinations  and 
differences  go,  i.e.  if  I  posit  them  in  the  so-called  ex¬ 
ternal  world,  they  none  the  less  still  remain  mine. 
They  are  what  I  have  done,  what  I  have  made  ;  they 
bear  the  trace  of  my  mind. 

Such  is  the  distinction  between  the  theoretical  atti¬ 
tude  and  the  practical,  but  now  the  tie  between  them 
must  be  described.  The  theoretical  is  essentially  con¬ 
tained  in  the  practical ;  we  must  decide  against  the 
idea  that  the  two  are  separate,  because  we  cannot 
have  a  will  without  intelligence.  On  the  contrary,  the 
will  contains  the  theoretical  in  itself.  The  will  deter¬ 
mines  itself  and  this  determination  is  in  the  first 
place  something  inward,  because  what  I  will  I  hold 
before  my  mind  as  an  idea ;  it  is  the  object  of  my 
thought.  An  animal  acts  on  instinct,  is  driven  by  an 
inner  impulse  and  so  it  too  is  practical,  but  it  has  no 
will,  since  it  does  not  bring  before  its  mind  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  its  desire.  A  man,  however,  can  just  as  little 
be  theoretical  or  think  without  a  will,  because  in 
thinking  he  is  of  necessity  being  active.  The  content 
of  something  thought  has  the  form  of  being;  but 
this  being  is  something  mediated,  something  estab¬ 
lished  through  our  activity.  Thus  these  distinct  atti¬ 
tudes  cannot  be  divorced;  they  are  one  and  the  same; 
and  in  any  activity,  whether  of  thinking  or  willing, 
both  moments  are  present. 

5.  Paragraph  5. 

In  this  element  of  the  will  is  rooted  my  ability  to 
free  myself  from  everything,  abandon  every  aim,  ab¬ 
stract  from  everything.  Man  alone  can  sacrifice  ev¬ 
erything,  his  life  included;  he  can  commit  suicide. 
An  animal  cannot ;  it  always  remains  merely  neg¬ 
ative,  in  an  alien  destiny  to  which  it  merely  accus¬ 
toms  itself.  Man  is  the  pure  thought  of  himself,  and 
only  in  thinking  has  he  this  power  to  give  himself 
universality,  i.e.  to  extinguish  all  particularity,  all 
determinacy.  This  negative  freedom,  or  freedom  as 
the  Understanding  conceives  it,  is  one-sided;  but  a 
one-sided  view  always  contains  one  essential  factor 
and  therefore  is  not  to  be  discarded.  But  the  Under¬ 
standing  is  defective  in  exalting  a  single  one-sided 
factor  to  be  the  sole  and  the  supreme  one. 

In  history  this  form  of  freedom  is  a  frequent  phe¬ 
nomenon.  Amongst  the  Hindus,  for  instance,  the 
highest  life  is  held  to  be  persistence  in  the  bare 
knowledge  of  one’s  simple  identity  with  oneself,  fix¬ 
ation  in  this  empty  space  of  one’s  inner  life,  as  light 
remains  colourless  in  pure  vision,  and  the  sacrifice 
of  every  activity  in  life,  every  aim,  and  every  proj¬ 
ect.  In  this  way  man  becomes  Brahma ;  there  is  no 
longer  any  distinciton  between  the  finite  man  and 


ADDITIONS  ii 


Brahma.  In  fact  in  this  universality  every  difference 
has  disappeared. 

This  form  of  freedom  appears  more  concretely  in 
the  active  fanaticism  of  both  political  and  religious 
life.  For  instance,  during  the  Terror  in  the  French 
Revolution  all  differences  of  talent  and  authority 
were  supposed  to  have  been  superseded.  This  period 
was  an  upheaval,  an  agitation,  an  irreconcilable  ha¬ 
tred  of  everything  particular.  Since  fanaticism  wills 
an  abstraction  only,  nothing  articulated,  it  follows 
that,  when  distinctions  appear,  it  finds  them  antag¬ 
onistic  to  its  own  indeterminacy  and  annuls  them. 
For  this  reason,  the  French  Revolutionaries  destroyed 
once  more  the  institutions  which  they  had  made 
themselves,  since  any  institution  whatever  is  an¬ 
tagonistic  to  the  abstract  self-consciousness  of  equal¬ 
ity. 

6.  Paragraph  6. 

This  second  moment  appears  as  the  moment  op¬ 
posed  to  the  first ;  it  is  to  be  grasped  in  its  general 
character;  it  is  intrinsic  to  freedom,  although  it  does 
not  constitute  the  whole  of  freedom.  Here  the  ego 
leaves  undifferentiated  indeterminacy  and  proceeds 
to  differentiate  itself,  to  posit  a  content  or  object  and 
so  to  give  itself  determinacy.  My  willing  is  not  pure 
willing  but  the  willing  of  something.  A  will  which, 
like  that  expounded  in  Paragraph  5,  wills  only  the 
abstract  universal,  wills  nothing  and  is  therefore  no 
will  at  all.  The  particular  volition  is  a  restriction, 
since  the  will,  in  order  to  be  a  will,  must  restrict  it¬ 
self  in  someway  or  other.  The  fact  that  the  will  wills 
something  is  restriction,  negation.  Thus  particulari¬ 
zation  is  what  as  a  rule  is  called  finitude.  Reflective 
thinking  usually  takes  the  first  moment,  i.e.  inde¬ 
terminacy,  as  the  higher  and  absolute  moment,  while 
it  regards  restriction  as  a  mere  negation  of  this  in¬ 
determinacy.1  But  this  indeterminacy  is  itself  only 
a  negation  in  contrast  with  the  determinate,  with 
finitude ;  the  ego  is  this  solitude  and  absolute  nega¬ 
tion.2  The  indeterminate  will  is  to  this  extent  just  as 
one-sided  as  the  will  rooted  in  sheer  determinacy. 

7.  Paragraph  7. 

What  is  properly  called  the  will  includes  in  itself 
both  the  preceding  moments.  The  ego  as  such  is  in 
the  first  place  pure  activity,  the  universal  which  is 
by  itself.  But  this  universal  determines  itself  and  to 
that  extent  is  no  longer  by  itself  but  posits  itself  as 
an  other  and  ceases  to  be  the  universal.  Now  the 
third  moment  is  that,  in  its  restriction,  in  this  other, 
the  will  is  by  itself;  in  determining  itself  it  still  re¬ 
mains  by  itself  and  does  not  cease  to  keep  hold  of  the 
universal.  This  moment,  then,  is  the  concrete  con¬ 
cept  of  freedom,  while  the  two  previous  moments 
have  been  found  to  be  through  and  through  abstract 
and  one-sided. 

Freedom  in  this  sense,  however,  we  already  possess 

1  [Hegel  is  thinking  e.g.  of  Spinoza’s  view  that  all 
determination  is  negation  and  that  only  the  indetermi¬ 
nate,  or  the  infinite,  is  real.] 

2  [i.e.  the  pure  ego  of  Paragraph  5.  It  is  “alone”  and 
negative  because  it  is  the  renunciation  of  everything 
determinate  and  is  simply  turned  in  upon  itself.] 


in  the  form  of  feeling — in  friendship  and  love,  for 
instance.  Here  we  are  not  inherently  one-sided ;  we 
restrict  ourselves  gladly  in  relating  ourselves  to  an¬ 
other,  but  in  this  restriction  know  ourselves  as  our¬ 
selves.  In  this  determinacy  a  man  should  not  feel 
himself  determined ;  on  the  contrary,  since  he  treats 
the  other  as  other,  it  is  there  that  he  first  arrives  at 
the  feeling  of  his  own  selfhood.  Thus  freedom  lies 
neither  in  indeterminacy  nor  in  determinacy ;  it  is 
both  of  these  at  once.  The  will  which  restricts  it¬ 
self  simply  to  a  this  is  the  will  of  the  capricious  man 
who  supposes  that  he  is  not  free  unless  he  has  this 
will.  But  the  will  is  not  tied  to  something  restricted ; 
it  must  go  beyond  the  restriction,  since  the  nature  of 
the  will  is  other  than  this  one-sidedness  and  con¬ 
straint.  Freedom  is  to  will  something  determinate, 
yet  in  this  determinacy  to  be  by  oneself  and  to  re¬ 
vert  once  more  to  the  universal. 

8.  Paragraph  8. 

The  consideration  of  the  will’s  determinacy  prop¬ 
erly  belongs  to  the  Understanding  and  is  in  the  first 
instance  not  speculative.  The  will  is  determined  in 
two  senses,  i.e.  in  both  content  and  form.  Its  deter¬ 
minacy  in  form  is  its  purpose  and  the  fulfilment  of 
its  purpose.  My  purpose  is  at  first  only  something 
inward,  something  subjective,  but  it  should  also  be¬ 
come  objective  and  cast  aside  the  defect  of  mere  sub¬ 
jectivity.  At  this  point  you  may  ask  the  why  of  this 
defect.  If  what  has  a  defect  does  not  at  the  same  time 
stand  above  its  defect,  it  cannot  recognize  the  defect 
as  a  defect.  An  animal  is  a  defective  thing  from  our 
point  of  view,  not  from  its  own.  My  purpose,  so  far 
as  it  is  still  only  mine,  is  felt  by  me  as  a  defect  since 
freedom  and  will  are  for  me  the  unity  of  the  sub¬ 
jective  and  objective.  Hence  the  purpose  must  be 
established  objectively  and  thereby  it  attains  not  a 
new  one-sided  character  but  only  its  realization. 

9.  Paragraph  10. 

The  will  which  is  a  will  only  in  accordance  with 
its  concept  is  implicitly  free  but  at  the  same  time  it 
is  also  unfree,  for  it  would  first  become  truly  free 
as  truly  determinate  content.  At  that  point  it  is  free 
in  its  own  eyes,  has  freedom  as  its  object,  and  is  free¬ 
dom.  What  is  still  only  in  accordance  with  its  con¬ 
cept,  what  is  merely  implicit,  is  only  immediate,  on¬ 
ly  natural.  In  our  ordinary  ways  of  thinking  we  are 
familiar  with  this.  The  child  is  man  implicit.  At  first 
it  possesses  reason  only  implicitly ;  it  begins  by  being 
the  potentiality  of  reason  and  freedom,  and  so  is  free 
only  in  accordance  with  its  concept.  Now  what  ex¬ 
ists  purely  implicitly  in  this  way  does  not  yet  exist 
in  its  actuality.  Man  is  implicitly  rational,  but  he 
must  also  become  explicitly  so  by  struggling  to  create 
himself,  not  only  by  going  forth  from  himself  but  al¬ 
so  by  building  himself  up  within. 

10.  Paragraph  11. 

An  animal  too  has  impulses,  desires,  inclinations, 
but  it  has  no  will  and  must  obey  its  impulse  if  noth¬ 
ing  external  deters  it.  Man,  however,  the  wholly  un¬ 
determined,  stands  above  hisimpulses  and  may  make 
them  his  own,  put  them  in  himself  as  his  own.  An 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


118 

impulse  is  something  natural,  but  to  put  it  into  my 
ego  depends  on  my  will  which  thus  cannot  fall  back 
on  the  plea  that  the  impulse  has  its  basis  in  nature. 

11.  Paragraph  13. 

A  will  which  resolves  on  nothing  is  no  actual  will ; 
a  characterless  man  never  reaches  a  decision.  The  rea¬ 
son  for  indecision  may  also  lie  in  a  faint-heartedness 
which  knows  that,  in  willing  something  determi¬ 
nate,  it  is  engaging  with  finitude,  imposing  a  barrier 
on  itself  and  sacrificing  the  infinite;  yet  it  will  not 
renounce  the  totality  after  which  it  hankers.  How¬ 
ever  “beautiful”1  such  a  disposition  may  be,  it  is  nev¬ 
ertheless  dead.  As  Goethe  says:  “Whoever  wills  great 
achievement  must  be  able  to  restrict  himself.”2  Only 
by  resolving  can  a  man  step  into  actuality,  however 
bitter  to  him  his  resolve  may  be.  Inertia  lacks  the 
will  to  abandon  the  inward  brooding  which3  allows 
it  to  retain  everything  as  a  possibility.  But  possibil¬ 
ity  is  still  less  than  actuality.  The  will  which  is  sure 
of  itself  does  not  eo  ipso  lose  itself  in  its  determinate 
volition. 

12.  Paragraph  15. 

Since  it  is  possible  for  me  to  determine  myself  in 
this  way  or  that,  or  in  other  words  since  I  can  choose, 
I  possess  the  arbitrary  will,  and  to  possess  thisiswhat 
is  usually  called  freedom.  The  choice  which  I  have  is 
grounded  in  the  universality  of  the  will,  in  the  fact 
that  I  can  make  this  or  that  mine.  This  thing  that  is 
mine  is  particular  in  content  and  therefore  not  ade¬ 
quate  to  me  and  so  is  separate  from  me ;  it  is  only  po¬ 
tentially  mine,  while  I  am  the  potentiality  of  linking 
myself  to  it.  Choice,  therefore,  is  grounded  in  the  in¬ 
determinacy  of  the  ego  and  the  determinacy  of  a 
content.  Thus  the  will,  on  account  of  this  content,  is 
not  free,  although  it  has  an  infinite  aspect  in  virtue 
of  its  form.  No  single  content  is  adequate  to  it  and 
in  no  single  content  is  it  really  at  grips  with  itself. 
Arbitrariness  implies  that  the  content  is  made  mine 
not  by  the  nature  of  my  will  but  by  chance.  Thus  I 
am  dependent  on  this  content,  and  this  is  the  contra¬ 
diction  lying  in  arbitrariness.  The  man  in  the  street 
thinks  he  is  free  if  it  isopen  to  him  to  act  as  he  pleases 
but  his  very  arbitrariness  implies  that  he  is  not  free. 
When  I  will  what  is  rational,  then  I  am  acting  not 
as  a  particular  individual  but  in  accordance  with 
the  concepts  of  ethics  in  general.  In  an  ethical  action, 
what  I  vindicate  is  not  myself  but  the  thing.  But  in 
doing  a  perverse  action,  it  is  my  singularity  that  I 
bring  on  to  the  centre  of  the  stage.  The  rational  is 
the  high  road  where  everyone  travels,  where  no  one 
is  conspicuous.  When  great  artists  complete  a  master¬ 
piece,  we  may  speak  of  its  inevitability,  which  means 
that  the  artist’s  idiosyncrasy  has  completely  disap¬ 
peared  and  no  mannerism  is  detectable  in  it.  Pheidias 

1  [An  allusion  to  the  “beautiful  soul”  of  the  Moravi¬ 
ans,  for  which  see  Remark  (/)  to  Paragraph  140.] 

2  [From  the  sonnet  Natur  und  Kunst  (Lasson).  Hegel 
quotes  inaccurately.  Goethe’s  actual  words  may  be  trans¬ 
lated:  “Whoever  wills  great  achievement  must  first  col¬ 
lect  his  energies;  it  is  in  restriction  that  a  man  first 
shows  his  mastery.”] 

3  [Taking  der  as  a  misprint  for  demj\ 


has  no  mannerisms ;  his  figures  themselves  live  and 
declare  themselves.  But  the  worse  the  artist  is,  the 
more  we  see  in  his  work  the  artist,  his  singularity, 
his  arbitrariness.  If  you  stop  at  the  consideration 
that,  having  an  arbitrary  will,  a  man  can  will  this 
or  that,  then  of  course  his  freedom  consists  in  that 
ability.  But  if  you  keep  firmly  in  view  that  the  con¬ 
tent  of  his  willing  is  a  given  one,  then  he  is  deter¬ 
mined  thereby  and  in  that  respect  at  all  events  is 
free  no  longer. 

13.  Paragraph  17. 

Impulses  and  inclinations  are  in  the  first  instance  a 
content  of  the  will,  and  reflection  alone  stands  above 
them.  But  these  impulses  begin  to  impel  themselves, 
they  drive  one  another,  stir  each  other,  and  all  of 
them  demand  satisfaction.  Now  if  I  neglect  all  the 
others  and  put  myself  in  one  of  them  by  itself,  I 
find  myself  under  a  restriction  which  destroys  me, 
since  just  by  so  doing  I  have  surrendered  my  univer¬ 
sality,  which  is  a  system  of  all  impulses.  But  it  is 
just  as  little  help  to  make  a  mere  hierarchy  of  im¬ 
pulses — a  device  to  which  the  Understanding  usual¬ 
ly  resorts — since  no  criterion  for  so  ordering  them  is 
available  here,  and  therefore  the  demand  for  such  a 
hierarchy  runs  out  in  the  tedium  of  generalities. 

14.  Paragraph  18. 

The  Christian  doctrine  that  man  is  by  nature  evil 
is  loftier  than  the  other  which  takes  him  to  be  by  na¬ 
ture  good.  This  doctrine  is  to  be  understood  as  fol¬ 
lows  in  accordance  with  the  philosophical  exegesis 
of  it: 4  As  mind,  man  is  a  free  substance  which  is  in 
the  position  of  not  allowing  itself  to  be  determined 
by  natural  impulse.  When  man’s  condition  is  imme¬ 
diate  and  mentally  undeveloped,  he  is  in  a  situation 
in  which  he  ought  not  to  be  and  from  which  he  must 
free  himself.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  doctrine  of 
original  sin  without  which  Christianity  would  not 
be  the  religion  of  freedom. 

15.  Paragraph  20. 

In  happiness  thought  has  already  a  mastery  over 
the  natural  force  of  impulses,  since  the  thinker  is  not 
content  with  the  momentary  but  requires  happiness 
in  a  whole.  This  requirement  is  connected  with  edu¬ 
cation  in  that  it  is  education  which  vindicates  a  uni¬ 
versal.  In  the  ideal  of  happiness,  however,  there  are 
two  moments:  (i)  a  universal  which  is  above  all  par¬ 
ticularity;  but  (ii)  since  the  content  of  this  univer¬ 
sal  is  still  only  universal  pleasure,  there  appears  here 
once  again  the  singular,  the  particular,  i.e.  something 
finite,  and  a  return  must  therefore  be  made  to  im¬ 
pulse.  Since  the  content  of  happiness  lies  in  everyone’s 
subjectivity  and  feeling,  this  universal  end  is  for  its 
part  particular,  and  consequently  there  is  still  not 
present  in  it  any  genuine  unity  of  form  and  content. 

16.  Paragraph  21. 

Truth  in  philosophy  means  that  concept  and  ex¬ 
ternal  reality  correspond.  For  example,  the  body  is 
the  external  reality,  while  the  soul  is  the  concept;  but 

4  [For  Hegel’s  exegesis  of  this  doctrine,  see  Addition  90, 
Paragraph  139  below  and  the  Addition  to  Enc.  §  24.] 


ADDITIONS 


soul  and  body  ought  to  be  adequate  to  one  another. 
Therefore  a  corpse  is  still  an  existent,  but  its  exist¬ 
ence  is  no  true  existence ;  the  concept  has  left  it ;  and 
for  this  reason  a  dead  body  putrefies.  So  a  will  is 
truly  a  will  only  when  what  it  wills,  its  content,  is 
identical  with  itself,  when,  that  is  to  say,  freedom 
wills  freedom. 

17.  Paragraph  22. 

Infinity  has  rightly  been  represented  figuratively 
as  a  circle,  because  a  straight  line  goes  on  and  on  for¬ 
ever  and  denotes  the  purely  negative  and  false  in¬ 
finite  which,  unlike  the  true  infinite,  has  no  return 
into  itself.  The  free  will  is  truly  infinite,  since  it  is 
not  just  a  potentiality  and  a  capacity.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  its  external  existence  is  its  own  inwardness,  is 
itself. 

18.  Paragraph  26. 

It  is  usually  supposed  that  subjective  and  objective 
stand  rigidly  in  opposition  to  one  another.  But  this 
is  not  the  case ;  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that  they 
pass  over  into  each  other,  since  they  are  not  abstract 
categories  like  positive  and  negative  but  already  have 
a  more  concrete  significance. 

Consider  first  the  word  “subjective.”  We  may  call 
“subjective”  an  end  which  is  only  the  end  of  one  spe¬ 
cific  individual  subject.  In  this  sense  a  very  bad 
work  of  art,  one  which  is  not  quite  the  thing,  is  pure¬ 
ly  “subjective.”  The  word  may  also  be  applied,  how¬ 
ever,  to  the  content  of  the  will,  and  it  is  then  almost 
synonymous  with  “arbitrary” ;  a  “subjective”  con¬ 
tent  is  that  which  belongs  to  the  subject  alone.  Hence 
bad  actions,  for  example,  are  purely  “subjective.” 
But,  further,  it  is  just  that  pure  empty  ego  which 
may  be  called  “subjective,”  the  ego  which  has  itself 
alone  for  its  object  and  possesses  the  power  to  ab¬ 
stract  from  any  other  content.  Thus  subjectivity 
sometimes  means  something  wholly  idiosyncratic, 
and  at  other  times  something  with  the  highest  of 
claims,  since  everything  which  I  am  to  recognize  has 
also  the  task  of  becoming  mine  and  attaining  its  va¬ 
lidity  in  me.  Subjectivity  is  insatiably  greedy  to  con¬ 
centrate  and  drown  everything  in  this  single  spring 
of  the  pure  ego. 

No  less  varied  are  the  ways  in  which  we  may  take 
“objective.”  We  may  understand  by  it  everything 
which  we  make  an  object  to  ourselves,  whether  ob¬ 
jective  actualities  or  pure  thoughts  which  we  bring 
before  our  minds.  We  also  include  under  this  cate¬ 
gory  the  immediacy  of  existence  in  which  the  end  is 
to  be  realized ;  even  if  the  end  is  itself  wholly  singu¬ 
lar  andsubjective,we  none  the  less  call  it  “objective” 
on  its  appearance.  But  the  “objective”  will  is  also 
that  in  which  truth  lies,  and  thus  God’s  will,  the 
ethical  will,  is  an  “objective”  one.  Finally,  we  may 
also  call  “objective”  the  will  which  is  entirely  ab¬ 
sorbed  in  its  object,  as  for  example  the  will  of  the 
child,  which  is  rooted  in  trust  and  lacks  subjective 
freedom,  and  the  will  of  the  slave,  which  does  not 
yet  know  itself  as  free  and  on  that  account  is  a  will¬ 
less  will.  In  this  sense  any  will  is  “objective”  which 
acts  under  the  guidance  of  an  alien  authority  and 


has  not  yet  completed  its  endless  return  into  itself. 

19.  Paragraph  32. 

The  Idea  must  further  determine  itself  within  it¬ 
self  continually,  since  in  the  beginning  it  is  no  more 
than  an  abstract  concept.  But  this  original  abstract 
concept  is  never  abandoned.  It  merely  becomes  con¬ 
tinually  richer  in  itself  and  the  final  determination  is 
therefore  the  richest.  In  this  process  its  earlier,  mere¬ 
ly  implicit,  determinations  attain  their  free  self¬ 
subsistence  but  in  such  a  way  that  the  concept  re¬ 
mains  the  soul  which  holds  everything  together  and 
attains  its  own  proper  differentiation  only  through 
an  immanent  process.lt  therefore  cannot  be  said  that 
the  concept  reaches  anything  new ;  on  the  contrary, 
its  final  determination  coincides  with  its  first.  Even  if 
the  concept  seems  in  its  existence  to  have  become  de¬ 
composed,  this  is  nothing  but  a  semblance  revealing 
itself  in  due  course  as  a  semblance,  because  every 
single  detail  reverts  at  last  to  the  concept  of  the  uni¬ 
versal.  The  empirical  sciences  are  usually  analyses 
of  the  content  of  our  ideas,  and  when  the  single  in¬ 
stance  has  been  brought  back  to  the  common  char¬ 
acter,  the  latter  is  then  called  the  concept.  This  is 
not  our  procedure ;  we  only  wish  to  look  on  at  the 
way  in  which  the  concept  determines  itself  and  to 
restrain  ourselves  from  adding  thereto  anything  of 
our  thoughts  and  opinions.  What  we  acquire  in  this 
way,  however,  is  a  series  of  thoughts  and  another 
series  of  existent  shapes  of  experience;  to  which  I 
may  add  that  the  time  order  in  which  the  latter  ac¬ 
tually  appear  is  other  than  the  logical  order.  Thus, 
for  example,  we  cannot  say  that  property  existed 
before  the  family,  yet,  in  spite  of  that,  property 
must  be  dealt  with  first. 

Consequently  you  might  raise  here  the  question 
why  we  do  not  begin  at  the  highest  point,  i.e.  with 
the  concretely  true.  The  answer  is  that  it  is  precisely 
the  truth  in  the  form  of  a  result  that  we  are  look¬ 
ing  for,  and  for  this  purpose  it  is  essential  to  start  by 
grasping  the  abstract  concept  itself.  What  is  actual, 
the  shape  in  which  the  concept  is  embodied,  is  for 
us  therefore  the  secondary  thing  and  the  sequel, 
even  if  it  were  itself  first  in  the  actual  world.  The 
development  we  are  studying  is  that  whereby  the  ab¬ 
stract  forms  reveal  themselves  not  as  self-subsistent 
but  as  false. 

20.  Paragraph  33. 

In  speaking  of  Right  [Recht,  i.e.  jus ]  in  this  book, 
we  mean  not  merely  what  is  generally  understood 
by  the  word,  namely  civil  law,  but  also  morality, 
ethical  life,  and  world-history ;  these  belong  just  as 
much  to  our  topic,  because  the  concept  brings 
thoughts  together  into  a  true  system.  If  the  free  will 
is  not  to  remain  abstract,  it  must  in  the  first  place 
give  itself  an  embodiment,  and  the  material  prima¬ 
rily  available  to  sensation  for  such  an  embodiment  is 
things,  i.e.  objects  outside  us.  This  primary  mode  of 
freedom  is  the  one  which  we  are  to  become  acquainted 
with  as  property,  the  sphere  of  formal  and  abstract 
right.  To  this  sphere  there  also  belong  property  in 
its  mediated  form  as  contract,  and  right  in  its  in- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


fringement  as  crime  and  punishment.  The  freedom 
which  we  have  here  is  what  is  called  a  person,  i.e. 
the  subject  who  is  free,  free  indeed  in  his  own  eyes, 
and  who  gives  himself  an  embodiment  in  things. 

The  sheer  immediacy  of  external  fact,  however,  is 
not  an  adequate  embodiment  of  freedom,  and  the 
negation  of  this  immediacy  is  the  sphere  of  morality. 
I  am  now  free,  not  merely  in  this  immediate  thing, 
but  also  after  the  immediacy  has  been  superseded, 
i.e.  I  am  free  in  myself,  in  my  subjectivity.  In  this 
sphere  the  main  thing  is  my  insight,  my  intention, 
my  purpose,  because  externality  has  now  been  estab¬ 
lished  as  of  no  importance.  Good,  however,  which 
here  is  the  universal  end,  should  not  simply  remain 
in  my  inner  life ;  it  should  be  realized.  That  is  to  say, 
the  subjective  will  demands  that  what  is  internal  to 
it,  i.e.  its  end,  shall  acquire  an  external  existence, 
that  the  good  shall  in  this  way  be  consummated  in 
the  external  world. 

Morality  and  formal  right  are  two  abstract  mo¬ 
ments  whose  truth  is  ethical  life  alone.  Hence  ethi¬ 
cal  life  is  the  unity  of  the  will  in  its  concept  with  the 
will  of  the  individual,  i.e.  of  the  subject.  Its  first 
embodiment  is  again  something  natural,  whose  form 
is  love  and  feeling — the  family.  Here  the  individual 
has  transcended  his  shyness  of  personality  and  finds 
himself  and  his  consciousness  of  himself  in  a  whole. 
At  the  next  stage,  however,  we  see  substantial  unity 
disappearing  along  with  ethical  life  proper;  the 
family  falls  asunder  and  its  members  relate  them¬ 
selves  to  each  other  as  self-subsistent,  since  their 
only  bond  of  connexion  is  reciprocal  need.  This 
stage — civil  society — has  often  been  looked  upon  as 
the  state,  but  the  state  is  first  present  at  the  third 
stage,  the  stage  of  ethical  life  and  the  stage  of  mind 
in  which  the  prodigious  unification  of  self-subsistent 
individuality  with  universal  substantiality  has  been 
achieved.  The  right  of  the  state  therefore  stands 
above  the  preceding  stages;  it  is  freedom  in  its 
most  concrete  shape  and  as  such  is  subordinate  to 
one  thing  alone — the  supreme  absolute  truth  of  the 
world-mind. 

21.  Paragraph  34. 

When  I  say  that  “the  absolutely  free  will  at  the 
stage  when  its  concept  is  abstract  has  the  determi¬ 
nate  character  of  immediacy,”  what  I  mean  is  this: 
when  the  concept  had  fully  realized  itself  and  when 
the  embodiment  of  the  concept  had  become  nothing 
but  the  unfolding  of  its  own  self,  then  that  state  of 
affairs  would  be  the  fully  developed  Idea  of  the  will. 
But  at  the  start  the  concept  is  abstract,  which  means 
that  all  its  determinations  are  contained  within  it, 
but  still  only  contained  within  it ;  they  are  only  im¬ 
plicit  and  not  yet  developed  to  be  a  totality  in  them¬ 
selves.  If  I  say  “I  am  free,”  the  ego  is  still  this  in¬ 
wardness,  not  confronted  by  an  opposite.  In  moral¬ 
ity,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  opposition  from  the 
start,  since  I  stand  in  the  moral  sphere  as  a  single 
will  while  the  good  is  the  universal  even  though  it  is 
within  myself.  Thus  at  that  level,  the  will  has  in  it¬ 
self  the  different  factors  of  singularity  and  univer¬ 


sality,  and  this  gives  it  its  specific  character.  But,  to 
begin  with,  no  such  difference  is  present,  since  at  the 
first  stage,  that  of  abstract  unity,  there  is  no  ad¬ 
vance  and  no  mediation  and  so  the  will  has  the  form 
of  immediacy,  of  mere  being.  The  essential  point  of 
view  to  be  taken  here  then  is  that  this  original  in¬ 
determinacy  is  itself  a  determinacy.  The  indetermi¬ 
nacy  lies  in  the  fact  that  there  is  as  yet  no  difference 
between  the  will  and  its  content ;  but  indeterminacy, 
opposed  to  the  determinate,  acquires  the  character 
of  being  something  determinate.  It  is  abstract  iden¬ 
tity  which  here  constitutes  determinacy;  the  will 
therefore  becomes  a  single  will,  a  person. 

22.  Paragraph  33. 

The  abstract  will,  consciously  self-contained,  is 
personality.  Man’s  chief  glory  is  to  be  a  person,  and 
yet  in  spite  of  that  the  bare  abstraction,  “person,”  is 
somewhat  contemptuous  in  its  very  expression.  “Per¬ 
son”  is  essentially  different  from  “subject,”  since 
“subject”  is  only  the  possibility  of  personality; 
every  living  thing  of  any  sort  is  a  subject.  A  person, 
then,  is  a  subject  aware  of  this  subjectivity,  since  in 
personality  it  is  of  myself  alone  that  I  am  aware.  A 
person  is  a  unit  of  freedom  aware  of  its  sheer  in¬ 
dependence.  As  this  person,  I  know  myself  to  be  free 
in  myself.  I  can  abstract  from  everything,  since  noth¬ 
ing  confronts  me  save  pure  personality,  and  yet  as 
this  person  I  am  something  wholly  determinate,  e.g. 
I  am  of  a  certain  age,  a  certain  stature,  I  occupy  this 
space,  and  so  on  through  whatever  other  details  you 
like.  Thus  personality  is  at  once  the  sublime  and  the 
trivial.  It  implies  this  unity  of  the  infinite  with  the 
purely  finite,  of  the  wholly  limitless  with  determinate 
limitation.  It  is  the  sublimity  of  personality  that  is 
able  to  sustain  this  contradiction,  a  contradiction 
which  nothing  merely  natural  contains  or  could  en¬ 
dure. 

23.  Paragraph  37. 

Since,  in  personality,  particularity  is  not  present 
as  freedom,  everything  which  depends  on  particu¬ 
larity  is  here  a  matter  of  indifference.  To  have  no 
interest  except  in  one’s  formal  right  may  be  pure  ob¬ 
stinacy,  often  a  fitting  accompaniment  of  a  cold 
heart  and  restrictedsympathies.lt  is  uncultured  peo¬ 
ple  who  insist  most  on  their  rights,  while  noble  minds 
look  on  other  aspects  of  the  thing.  Thus  abstract 
right  is  nothing  but  a  bare  possibility  and,  at  least 
in  contrast  with  the  whole  range  of  the  situation, 
something  formal.  On  that  account,  to  have  a  right 
gives  one  a  warrant,  but  it  is  not  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary  that  one  should  insist  on  one’s  rights,  because 
that  is  only  one  aspect  of  the  whole  situation.  That 
is  to  say,  possibility  is  being  which  has  the  signifi¬ 
cance  of  also  not  being. 

24.  Paragraph  41. 

The  rationale  of  property  is  to  be  found  not  in  the 
satisfaction  of  needs  but  in  the  supersession  of  the 
pure  subjectivity  of  personality.  In  his  property  a 
person  exists  for  the  first  time  as  reason.  Even  if  my 
freedom  is  here  realized  first  of  all  in  an  external 


ADDITIONS 


thing,  and  so  falsely  realized,  nevertheless  abstract 
personality  in  its  immediacy  can  have  no  other  em¬ 
bodiment  save  one  characterized  by  immediacy. 

25.  Paragraph  42. 

Since  a  thing  lacks  subjectivity,  it  is  external  not 
merely  to  the  subject  but  to  itself.  Space  and  time 
are  external  in  this  way.  As  sentient,  I  am  myself 
external,  spatial,  and  temporal.  As  receptive  of  sen¬ 
suous  intuitions,  I  receive  them  from  something 
which  is  external  to  itself.  An  animal  can  intuit,  but 
the  soul  of  an  animal  has  for  its  object  not  its  soul, 
itself,  but  something  external. 

26.  Paragraph  44. 

All  things  may  become  man’s  property,  because 
man  is  free  will  and  consequently  is  absolute,  while 
what  stands  over  against  him  lacks  this  quality.  Thus 
everyone  has  the  right  to  make  his  will  the  thing  or 
to  make  the  thing  his  will,  or  in  other  words  to  de¬ 
stroy  the  thing  and  transform  it  into  his  own ;  for 
the  thing,  as  externality,  has  no  end  in  itself ;  it  is 
not  infinite  self-relation  but  something  external  to 
itself.  A  living  thing  too  (an  animal)  is  external  to 
itself  in  this  way  and  is  so  far  itself  a  thing.  Only 
the  will  is  the  infinite,  absolute  in  contrast  with 
everything  other  than  itself,  while  that  other  is  on 
its  side  only  relative.  Thus  “to  appropriate”  means 
at  bottom  only  to  manifest  the  pre-eminence  of  my 
will  over  the  thing  and  to  prove  that  it  is  not  abso¬ 
lute,  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  This  is  made  manifest 
when  I  endow  the  thing  with  some  purpose  not  di¬ 
rectly  its  own.  When  the  living  thing  becomes  my 
property,  I  give  to  it  a  soul  other  than  the  one  it  had 
before,  I  give  to  it  my  soul.  The  free  will,  therefore, 
is  the  idealism  which  does  not  take  things  as  they 
are  to  be  absolute,  while  realism  pronounces  them  to 
be  absolute,  even  if  they  only  exist  in  the  form  of 
finitude.  Even  an  animal  has  gone  beyond  this  real¬ 
ist  philosophy  since  it  devours  things  and  so  proves 
that  they  are  not  absolutely  self-subsistent. 

27.  Paragraph  46. 

In  property  my  will  is  the  will  of  a  person ;  but  a 
person  is  a  unit  and  so  property  becomes  the  per¬ 
sonality  of  this  unitary  will.  Since  property  is  the 
means  whereby  I  give  my  will  an  embodiment,  prop¬ 
erty  must  also  have  the  character  of  being  “this” 
or  “mine.”  This  is  the  important  doctrine  of  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  private  property.  While  the  state  may 
cancel  private  ownership  in  exceptional  cases,  it  is 
nevertheless  only  the  state  that  can  do  this ;  but  fre¬ 
quently,  especially  in  our  day,  private  property  has 
been  re-introduced  by  the  state.  For  example,  many 
states  have  dissolved  the  monasteries,  and  rightly, 
for  in  the  last  resort  no  community  has  so  good  a 
right  to  property  as  a  person  has. 

28.  Paragraph  47. 

Animals  are  in  possession  of  themselves;  their  soul 
is  in  possession  of  their  body.  But  they  have  no  right 
to  their  life,  because  they  do  not  will  it. 


121 

29.  Paragraph  49. 

The  equality  which  might  be  set  up,  e.g.  in  con¬ 
nexion  with  the  distribution  of  goods,  would  all  the 
same  soon  be  destroyed  again,  because  wealth  de¬ 
pends  on  diligence.  But  if  a  project  cannot  be  exe¬ 
cuted,  it  ought  not  to  be  executed.  Of  course  men 
are  equal,  but  only  qua  persons,  that  is,  with  respect 
only  to  the  source  from  which  possession  springs; 
the  inference  from  this  is  that  everyone  must  have 
property.  Hence,  if  you  wish  to  talk  of  equality,  it  is 
this  equality  which  you  must  have  in  view.  But  this 
equality  is  something  apart  from  the  fixing  of  par¬ 
ticular  amounts,  from  the  question  of  how  much  I 
own.  From  this  point  of  view  it  is  false  to  maintain 
that  justice  requires  everyone’s  property  to  be  equal, 
since  it  requires  only  that  everyone  shall  own  prop¬ 
erty.  The  truth  is  that  particularity  is  just  the  sphere 
where  there  is  room  for  inequality  and  where  equal¬ 
ity  would  be  wrong.  True  enough,  men  often  lust 
after  the  goods  of  others,  but  that  is  just  doing 
wrong,  since  right  is  that  which  remains  indifferent 
to  particularity. 

30.  Paragraph  50. 

The  points  made  so  far  have  been  mainly  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  proposition  that  personality  must 
be  embodied  in  property.  Now  the  fact  that  the  first 
person  to  take  possession  of  a  thing  should  also  be 
its  owner  is  an  inference  from  what  has  been  said. 
The  first  is  the  rightful  owner,  however,  not  because 
he  is  the  first  but  because  he  is  a  free  will,  for  it  is 
only  by  another’s  succeeding  him  that  he  becomes 
the  first. 

31.  Paragraph  51. 

A  person  puts  his  will  into  a  thing — that  is  just 
the  concept  of  property,  and  the  next  step  is  the  re¬ 
alization  of  this  concept.  The  inner  act  of  will  which 
consists  in  saying  that  something  is  mine  must  also 
become  recognizable  by  others.  If  I  make  a  thing 
mine,  I  give  to  it  a  predicate,  “mine,”  which  must 
appear  in  it  in  an  external  form  and  must  not  simply 
remain  in  my  inner  will.  It  often  happens  that  chil¬ 
dren  lay  stress  on  their  prior  willing  in  preference  to 
the  seizure  of  a  thing  by  others.  But  for  adults  this 
willing  is  not  sufficient,  since  the  form  of  subjectivity 
must  be  removed  and  must  work  its  way  beyond  the 
subjective  to  objectivity. 

32.  Paragraph  52. 

Fichte  1  has  raised  the  question  whether  the  mat¬ 
ter  too  belongs  to  me  if  I  impose  a  form  on  it.  On 
his  argument,  after  I  had  made  a  golden  cup,  it 
would  have  to  be  open  to  someone  else  to  take  the 
gold  provided  that  in  so  doing  he  did  no  damage  to 
my  work.  However  separable  the  matter  may  be  in 
thought,  still  in  reality  this  distinction  is  an  empty 

1  [ Science  0}  Rights ,  §  19  a,  pp.  298  ff.  (so  Lasson 
and  Reyburn).  Fichte  is  there  maintaining  that  the 
farmer  has  no  right  to  his  land  as  such  but  only  to  its 
products,  to  its  “accidents,”  not  to  its  “substance”;  he 
may  not  prevent  others  from  grazing  cattle  on  it  after 
harvest,  unless,  in  addition  to  cultivation  rights,  he  has 
grazing  rights  for  cattle  of  his  own.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


122 

subtlety,  because,  if  I  take  possession  of  a  field  and 
plough  it,  it  is  not  only  the  furrow  that  is  my  prop¬ 
erty,  but  the  rest  as  well,  the  furrowed  earth.  That 
is  to  say,  I  will  to  take  this  matter,  the  whole  thing, 
into  my  possession;  the  matter  therefore  does  not 
remain  a  res  nullias  nor  does  it  remain  its  own  prop¬ 
erty.  Further,  even  if  the  matter  remains  external 
to  the  form  which  I  have  given  to  the  object,  the 
form  is  precisely  a  sign  that  I  claim  the  thing  as 
mine.  The  thing  therefore  does  not  remain  external 
to  my  will  or  outside  what  I  have  willed.  Hence 
there  is  nothing  left  to  be  taken  into  possession  by 
someone  else. 

33.  Paragraph  54 . 

These  modes  of  taking  possession  involve  the  ad¬ 
vance  from  the  category  of  singularity  to  that  of  uni¬ 
versality.  It  is  only  of  a  single  thing  that  we  can 
take  possession  physically,  while  marking  a  thing  as 
mine  is  taking  possession  of  it  in  idea.  In  the  latter 
case  I  have  an  idea  of  the  thing  and  mean  that  the 
thing  as  a  whole  is  mine,  not  simply  the  part  which 
I  can  take  into  my  possession  physically. 

34.  Paragraph  55. 

Taking  possession  is  always  piece-meal  in  type; 
I  take  into  possession  no  more  than  what  I  touch 
with  my  body.  But  here  comes  the  second  point:  ex¬ 
ternal  objects  extend  further  than  I  can  grasp.  There¬ 
fore,  whatever  I  have  in  my  grasp  is  linked  with 
something  else.  It  is  with  my  hand  that  I  manage  to 
take  possession  of  a  thing,  but  its  reach  can  be  ex¬ 
tended.  What  I  hold  in  my  hand — that  magnificent 
tool  which  no  animal  possesses — can  itself  be  a  means 
to  gripping  something  else.  If  I  am  in  possession  of 
something,  the  intellect  immediately  draws  the  in¬ 
ference  that  it  is  not  only  the  immediate  object  in 
my  grasp  which  is  mine  but  also  what  is  connected 
with  it.  At  this  point  positive  law  must  enact  its 
statutes  since  nothing  further  on  this  topic  can  be 
deduced  from  the  concept. 

35.  Paragraph  56. 

This  forming  of  an  object  may  in  practice  assume 
the  most  various  guises.  In  farming  land  I  impose  a 
form  on  it.  Where  inorganic  objects  are  concerned, 
the  imposition  of  a  form  is  not  always  direct.  For 
example,  if  I  build  a  windmill,  I  have  not  imposed 
a  form  on  the  air,  but  I  have  formed  something  for 
utilizing  the  air,  though  I  am  not  on  that  account  at 
liberty  to  call  the  air  mine,  since  I  have  not  formed 
the  air  itself.  Further,  the  preserving  of  game  may 
be  regarded  as  a  way  of  forming  game,  for  we  pre¬ 
serve  it  with  a  view  to  maintaining  the  species.  [The 
same  is  true  of]  the  taming  of  animals,  only  of 
course  that  is  a  more  direct  way  of  forming  them 
and  it  depends  on  me  to  a  greater  extent. 

36.  Paragraph  57. 

To  adhere  to  man’s  absolute  freedom — one  aspect 
of  the  matter — is  eo  ipso  to  condemn  slavery.  Yet  if 
a  man  is  a  slave,  his  own  will  is  responsible  for  his 
slavery,  just  as  it  is  its  will  which  is  responsible  if  a 
people  is  subjugated.  Hence  the  wrong  of  slavery 


lies  at  the  door  not  simply  of  enslavers  or  conquerors 
but  of  the  slaves  and  the  conquered  themselves. 
Slavery  occurs  in  man’s  transition  from  the  state  of 
nature  to  genuinely  ethical  conditions;  it  occurs  in 
a  world  where  a  wrong  is  still  right.  At  that  stage 
wrong  has  validity  and  so  is  necessarily  in  place. 

37.  Paragraph  58. 

To  take  possession  by  marking  a  thing  is  of  all 
sorts  of  taking  possession  the  most  complete,  since 
the  mark  is  implicitly  at  work  to  some  extent  in  the 
other  sorts  too.  When  I  grasp  a  thing  or  form  it,  this 
also  means  in  the  last  resort  that  I  mark  it, and  mark 
it  for  others,  in  order  to  exclude  them  and  show  that 
I  have  put  my  will  into  the  thing.  The  notion  of  the 
mark,  that  is  to  say,  is  that  the  thing  does  not  count 
as  the  thing  which  it  is  but  as  what  it  is  supposed  to 
signify.  A  cockade,  for  instance,  signifies  citizenship 
of  a  state,  though  the  colour  has  no  connexion  with 
the  nation  and  represents  not  itself  but  the  nation. 
By  being  able  to  give  a  mark  to  things  and  thereby 
to  acquire  them,  man  just  shows  his  mastery  over 
things. 

38.  Paragraph  59. 

While  in  marking  a  thing  I  am  taking  possession 
in  a  universal  way  of  the  thing  as  such,  the  use  of  it 
implies  a  still  more  universal  relation  to  the  thing, 
because,  when  it  is  used,  the  thing  in  its  particularity 
is  not  recognized  but  is  negated  by  the  user.1  The 
thing  is  reduced  to  a  means  to  the  satisfaction  of  my 
need.  When  I  and  the  thing  meet,  an  identity  is  es¬ 
tablished  and  therefore  one  or  other  must  lose  its 
qualitative  character.  But  I  am  alive,  a  being  who 
wills  and  is  truly  affirmative ;  the  thing  on  the  other 
hand  is  something  physical.  Therefore  the  thing  must 
be  destroyed  while  I  preserve  myself.  This,  in  gener¬ 
al  terms,  is  the  prerogative  and  the  principle  of  the 
organic. 

39.  Paragraph  61. 

The  relation  of  use  to  property  is  the  same  as  that 
of  substance  to  accident,  inner  to  outer,  force  to  its 
manifestation.  Just  as  force  exists  only  in  manifest¬ 
ing  itself,  so  arable  land  is  arable  land  only  in  bear¬ 
ing  crops.  Thus  he  who  has  the  use  2  of  arable  land 
is  the  owner  of  the  whole,  and  it  is  an  empty  abstrac¬ 
tion  to  recognize  still  another  property  in  the  ob¬ 
ject  itself. 

40.  Paragraph  63. 

The  qualitative  disappears  here  in  the  form  of  the 
quantitative ;  that  is  to  say,  when  I  speak  of  “need,” 
I  use  a  term  under  which  the  most  various  things 
may  be  brought;  they  share  it  in  common  and  so 
become  commensurable.  The  advance  of  thought 

1  [When  I  mark  a  thing  as  mine,  I  attribute  to  it  the 
universal  predicate  “mine”  and  “recognize”  its  particu¬ 
lar  characteristics  in  the  sense  that  I  do  not  interfere 
with  them.  But  when  I  use  it  I  “negate”  its  particular 
characteristics  in  the  sense  that  I  change  them  to  suit 
my  purpose.  To  mark  land  as  mine  by  fencing  it  does 
not  change  its  character,  but  to  use  it,  e.g.  by  planting 
it,  does.] 

2  [i.e.  the  entire  and  permanent  use  of  it — see  Para¬ 
graph  62.] 


ADDITIONS 


here  therefore  is  from  a  thing’s  specific  quality  to  a 
character  which  is  indifferent  to  quality,  i.e.  quan¬ 
tity.  A  similar  thing  occurs  in  mathematics.  The  defi¬ 
nition  of  a  circle,  an  ellipse,  and  a  parabola  reveals 
their  specific  difference.  But,  in  spite  of  this,  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  these  different  curves  is  determined 
purely  quantitatively,  i.e.  in  such  a  way  that  the  on¬ 
ly  important  thing  is  a  purely  quantitative  differ¬ 
ence  which  rests  on  their  coefficients  alone,  on  purely 
empirical  magnitudes.  In  property,  the  quantitative 
character  which  emerges  from  the  qualitative  is  val¬ 
ue.  Here  the  qualitative  provides  the  quantity  with 
its  quantum  and  in  consequence  is  as  much  preserved 
in  the  quantity  as  superseded  by  it.  If  we  consider 
i  he  concept  of  value,  we  must  look  on  the  thing  it¬ 
self  only  as  a  symbol ;  it  counts  not  as  itself  but  as 
what  it  is  worth.  A  bill  of  exchange,  for  instance, 
does  not  represent  what  it  really  is — paper ;  it  is  on¬ 
ly  a  symbol  of  another  universal — value.  The  value 
of  a  thing  may  be  very  heterogeneous ;  it  depends  on 
need.  But  if  you  want  to  express  the  value  of  a  thing 
not  in  a  specific  case  but  in  the  abstract,  then  it  is 
money  which  expresses  this.  Money  represents  any 
and  every  thing,  though  since  it  does  not  portray  the 
need  itself  but  is  only  a  symbol  of  it,  it  is  itself  con¬ 
trolled  by  the  specific  value  [of  the  commodity]. 
Money,  as  an  abstraction,  merely  expresses  this  val¬ 
ue.1  It  is  possible  in  principle  to  be  the  owner  of  a 
thing  without  at  the  same  time  being  the  owner  of 
its  value.  If  a  family  can  neither  sell  nor  pawn  its 
goods,  it  is  not  the  owner  of  their  value.  But  since 
this  form  of  property  is  not  in  accordance  with  the 
concept  of  property,  such  restrictions  on  ownership 
(feudal  tenure,  testamentary  trusts)  are  mostly  in 
course  of  disappearing. 

41.  Paragraph  64. 

Prescription  rests  on  the  presumption  that  I  have 
ceased  to  regard  the  thing  as  mine.  If  a  thing  is  to 
remain  mine,  my  will  must  continue  in  it,  and  using 
it  or  keeping  it  safe  shows  this  continuance.  That 
public  memorials  may  lose  their  value  was  frequent¬ 
ly  shown  during  the  Reformation  in  the  case  of 
foundations,  endowments,  &c.,  for  the  Mass.  The 
spirit  of  the  old  faith,  i.e.  of  these  foundations,  had 
fled,  and  consequently  they  could  be  seized  as  private 
property. 

42.  Paragraph  65. 

While  prescription  is  an  alienation  with  no  direct 
expression  of  the  will  to  alienate,  alienation  proper 
is  an  expression  of  my  will,  of  my  will  no  longer  to 
regard  the  thing  as  mine.  The  whole  matter  may  al¬ 
so  be  so  viewed  that  alienation  is  seen  to  be  a  true 
mode  of  taking  possession.  To  take  possession  of  the 
thing  directly  is  the  first  moment  in  property.  Use 
is  likewise  a  way  of  acquiring  property.  The  third 

1  [“Prices  are  regulated  by  an  average  price;  this  in 
the  last  resort  means  that  they  are  regulated  by  the 
value  of  the  commodities.  I  say  ‘in  the  last  resort’  be¬ 
cause  average  prices  do  not  (as  Adam  Smith,  Ricardo, 
and  others  believed)  directly  coincide  with  the  value  of 
commodities.”  Karl  Marx:  Capital,  tr.  by  E.  and  C. 
Paul,  London,  1929,  P-  1 53-1 


123 

moment  then  is  the  unity  of  these  two,  taking  pos¬ 
session  of  the  thing  by  alienating  it.2 

43.  Paragraph  66. 

It  is  in  the  nature  of  the  case  that  a  slave  has  an 
absolute  right  to  free  himself  and  that  if  anyone  has 
prostituted  his  ethical  life  by  hiring  himself  to 
thieve  and  murder,  this  is  an  absolute  nullity  and 
everyone  has  a  warrant  to  repudiate  this  contract. 
The  same  is  the  case  if  I  hire  my  religious  feeling  to 
a  priest  who  is  my  confessor,  for  such  an  inward 
matter  a  man  has  to  settle  with  himself  alone.  A 
religious  feeling  which  is  partly  in  control  of  some¬ 
one  else  is  no  proper  religious  feeling  at  all.  The 
spirit  is  always  one  and  single  and  should  dwell  in 
me.  I  am  entitled  to  the  union  of  my  potential  and 
my  actual  being. 

44.  Paragraph  67. 

The  distinction  here  explained  is  that  between  a 
slave  and  a  modern  domestic  servant  or  day  labour¬ 
er.  The  Athenian  slave  perhaps  had  an  easier  occu¬ 
pation  and  more  intellectual  work  than  is  usually 
the  case  with  our  servants,  but  he  was  still  a  slave, 
because  he  had  alienated  to  his  master  the  whole 
range  of  his  activity. 

45.  Paragraph  70. 

A  single  person,  I  need  hardly  say,  is  something 
subordinate,  and  as  such  he  must  dedicate  himself 
to  the  ethical  whole.  Hence  if  the  state  claims  life, 
the  individual  must  surrender  it.  But  may  a  man 
take  his  own  life?  Suicide  may  at  a  first  glance  be 
regarded  as  an  act  of  courage,  but  only  the  false 
courage  of  tailors  and  servant  girls.  Or  again  it  may 
be  looked  upon  as  a  misfortune,  since  it  is  inward 
distraction  which  leads  to  it.  But  the  fundamental 
question  is:  Have  I  a  right  to  take  my  life?  The  an¬ 
swer  will  be  that  I,  as  this  individual,  am  not  mas¬ 
ter  of  my  life,  because  life,  as  the  comprehensive 
sum  of  my  activity,  is  nothing  external  to  personal¬ 
ity,  which  itself  is  this  immediate  personality.  Thus 
when  a  person  is  said  to  have  a  right  over  his  life, 
the  words  are  a  contradiction,  because  they  mean 
that  a  person  has  a  right  over  himself.  But  he  has  no 
such  right,  since  he  does  not  stand  over  himself  and 
he  cannot  pass  judgement  on  himself.  When  Hercu¬ 
les  destroyed  himself  by  fire  and  when  Brutus  fell 
on  his  sword,  this  was  the  conduct  of  a  hero  against 
his  personality.  But  as  for  an  unqualified  right  to 
suicide,  we  must  simply  say  that  there  is  no  such 
thing,  even  for  heroes. 

46.  Paragraph  71. 

In  a  contract  I  hold  property  on  the  strength  of  a 
common  will ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  the  interest  of  rea¬ 
son  that  the  subjective  will  should  become  universal 
and  raise  itself  to  this  degree  of  actualization.  Thus 

2  [Taking  possession  is  positive  acquisition.  Use  is 
the  negation  of  a  thing’s  particular  characteristics  (see 
Paragraph  59).  Alienation  is  the  synthesis  of  positive 
and  negative;  it  is  negative  in  that  it  involves  spurning 
the  thing  altogether;  it  is  positive  because  it  is  only  a 
thing  completely  mine  which  I  can  so  spurn.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


in  contract  my  will  still  has  the  character  “this,” 
though  it  has  it  in  community  with  another  will. 
The  universal  will,  however,  still  appears  here  only 
in  the  form  and  guise  of  community. 

47.  Paragraph  75. 

It  has  recently  become  very  fashionable  to  regard 
the  state  as  a  contract  of  all  with  all.  Everyone 
makes  a  contract  with  the  monarch,  so  the  argu¬ 
ment  runs,  and  he  again  with  his  subjects. This  point 
of  view  arises  from  thinking  superficially  of  a  mere 
unity  of  different  wills.  In  contract,  however,  there 
are  two  identical  wills  who  are  both  persons  and 
wish  to  remain  property  owners.  Thus  contract 
springs  from  a  person’s  arbitrary  will,  an  origin 
which  marriage  too  has  in  common  with  contract. 
But  the  case  is  quite  different  with  the  state ;  it  does 
not  lie  with  an  individual’s  arbitrary  will  to  sepa¬ 
rate  himself  from  the  state,  because  we  are  already 
citizens  of  the  state  by  birth.  The  rational  end  of 
man  is  life  in  the  state,  and  if  there  is  no  state  there, 
reason  at  once  demands  that  one  be  founded.  Per¬ 
mission  to  enter  a  state  or  leave  it  must  be  given  by 
the  state;  this  then  is  not  a  matter  which  depends 
on  an  individual’s  arbitrary  will  and  therefore  the 
state  does  not  rest  on  contract,  for  contract  presup¬ 
poses  arbitrariness.  It  is  false  to  maintain  that  the 
foundation  of  the  state  is  something  at  the  option  of 
all  its  members.  It  is  nearer  the  truth  to  say  that  it 
is  absolutely  necessary  for  every  individual  to  be  a 
citizen.  The  great  advance  of  the  state  in  modern 
times  is  that  nowadays  all  the  citizens  have  one  and 
the  same  end,  an  absolute  and  permanent  end;  it  is 
no  longer  open  to  individuals,  as  it  was  in  the  Mid¬ 
dle  Ages,  to  make  private  stipulations  in  connexion 
with  it. 

48.  Paragraph  76. 

Contract  implies  two  consenting  parties  and  two 
things.  That  is  to  say,  in  a  contract  my  purpose  is 
both  to  acquire  property  and  to  surrender  it.  Con¬ 
tract  is  real  when  the  action  of  both  parties  is  com¬ 
plete,  i.e.  when  both  surrender  and  both  acquire 
property,  and  when  both  remain  property  owners 
even  in  the  act  of  surrender.  Contract  is  formal 
where  only  one  of  the  parties  acquires  property  or 
surrenders  it. 

49.  Paragraph  78. 

Just  as  in  the  theory  of  property  we  had  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  ownership  and  possession,  between 
the  substance  of  the  matter  and  its  purely  external 
side,  so  here  in  contract  we  have  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  a  common  will — covenant — and  a  particular 
will — performance.  It  lies  in  the  nature  of  contract 
that  it  should  be  an  expression  of  both  the  common 
and  the  particular  will  of  the  parties,  because  in  it 
will  is  related  to  will.  The  covenant,  made  manifest 
in  a  symbol,  and  its  performance  are  quite  distinct 
from  each  other  amongst  civilized  peoples,  though 
amongst  savages  they  may  coincide.  In  the  forests  of 
Ceylon  there  is  a  tribe  of  traders  who  put  down  their 
property  and  wait  quietly  until  others  come  to  put 


theirs  down  opposite.  Here  there  is  no  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  dumb  declaration  of  will  and  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  what  is  willed. 

50.  Paragraph  80. 

In  contract  we  drew  the  distinction  between  the 
covenant  or  stipulation  (which  made  the  property 
mine  though  it  did  not  give  me  possession)  and  per¬ 
formance  (which  first  gave  me  possession).  Now  if 
I  am  already  the  out-and-out  owner  of  the  prop¬ 
erty,  the  object  of  the  pledge  is  to  put  me  simultane¬ 
ously  in  possession  of  the  value  of  the  property  and 
thereby  to  guarantee  the  covenant’s  performance  at 
the  very  time  the  covenant  is  made.  Surety  is  a  par¬ 
ticular  kind  of  pledge  whereby  someone  gives  his 
promise  or  pledges  his  credit  as  a  guarantee  for  an¬ 
other’s  performance.  Here  a  person  fulfils  the  func¬ 
tion  which  is  fulfilled  by  a  mere  thing  in  the  case  of 
a  pledge  proper. 

51.  Paragraph  81. 

In  contract  we  had  the  relation  of  two  wills  as  a 
common  will.  But  this  identical  will  is  only  relative¬ 
ly  universal,  posited  as  universal,  and  so  is  still  op¬ 
posed  to  the  particular  will.  In  contract,  to  be  sure, 
making  a  covenant  entails  the  right  to  require  its 
performance.  But  this  performance  is  dependent 
again  on  the  particular  will  which  qua  particular 
may  act  in  contravention  of  the  principle  of  right¬ 
ness.  At  this  point  then  the  negation,  which  was  im¬ 
plicitly  present  in  the  principle  of  the  will  at  the 
start,  comes  into  view,  and  this  negation  is  just  what 
wrong  is.  In  general  terms,  the  course  of  events  is 
that  the  will  is  freed  from  its  immediacy  and  thus 
there  is  evoked  out  of  the  common  will  the  particu¬ 
larity  which  then  comes  on  the  scene  as  opposed  to 
the  common  will.  In  contract  the  parties  still  retain 
their  particular  wills;  contract  therefore  is  not  yet 
beyond  the  stage  of  arbitrariness,  with  the  result 
that  it  remains  at  the  mercy  of  wrong. 

52.  Paragraph  82. 

The  principle  of  rightness,  the  universal  will,  re¬ 
ceives  its  essential  determinate  character  through 
the  particular  will,  and  so  is  in  relation  with  some¬ 
thing  which  is  inessential.  This  is  the  relation  of  es¬ 
sence  to  its  appearance.  Even  if  the  appearance  cor¬ 
responds  with  the  essence,  still,  looked  at  from  an¬ 
other  point  of  view,  it  fails  to  correspond  with  it, 
since  appearance  is  the  stage  of  contingency,  essence 
related  to  the  inessential.  In  wrong,  however,  ap¬ 
pearance  proceeds  to  become  a  show.  A  show  is  a 
determinate  existence  inadequate  to  the  essence,  the 
empty  disjunction  and  positing  of  the  essence,  so 
that  in  both  essence  and  show  the  distinction  of  the 
one  from  the  other  is  present  as  sheer  difference.  The 
show,  therefore,  is  the  falsity  which  disappears  in 
claiming  independent  existence ;  and  in  the  course  of 
the  show’s  disappearance  the  essence  reveals  itself  as 
essence,  i.e.  as  the  authority  of  the  show.  The  essence 
has  negated  that  which  negated  it  and  so  is  corrobo¬ 
rated.  Wrong  is  a  show  of  this  kind,  and,  when  it 
disappears,  right  acquires  the  character  of  something 


ADDITIONS 


fixed  and  valid.  What  is  here  called  the  essence  is 
just  the  principle  of  rightness,  and  in  contrast  with 
it  the  particular  will  annuls  itself  as  a  falsity.  Hither¬ 
to  the  being  of  the  right  has  been  immediate  only, 
but  now  it  is  actual  because  it  returns  out  of  its 
negation.  The  actual  is  the  effectual ;  in  its  otherness 
it  still  holds  fast  to  itself,  while  anything  immediate 
remains  susceptible  of  negation. 

|  53.  Paragraph  83. 

Wrong  is  thus  the  show  of  the  essence,  putting  it¬ 
self  as  self-subsistent.  If  the  show  is  only  implicit 
and  not  explicit  also,  i.e.  if  the  wrong  passes  in  my 
eyes  as  right,  the  wrong  is  nonmalicious.  The  show 
here  is  a  show  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  right 
but  not  from  my  point  of  view. 

The  second  type  of  wrong  is  fraud.  Here  the  wrong 
is  not  a  show  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  principle 
of  rightness.  The  position  is  that  I  am  making  a 
show  to  deceive  the  other  party.  In  fraud  the  right 
is  in  my  eyes  only  a  show.  In  the  first  case,  the  wrong 
was  a  show  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  right.  In 
the  second  case,  from  my  own  point  of  view,  from 
the  point  of  view  of  wrong,  right  is  only  a  show. 

Finally,  the  third  type  of  wrong  is  crime.  This  is 
wrong  both  in  itself  and  from  my  point  of  view.  But 
here  I  will  the  wrong  and  make  no  use  of  even 
a  show  of  right.  I  do  not  intend  the  other  against 
whom  the  crime  is  committed  to  regard  the  abso¬ 
lutely  wrong  as  right.  The  distinction  between  crime 
and  fraud  is  that  in  the  latter  the  form  of  acting  still 
implies  a  recognition  of  the  right,  and  this  is  just 
what  is  lacking  in  crime. 

54.  Paragraph  86. 

There  is  a  specific  ground  for  what  is  inherently 
right,  and  the  wrong  which  I  hold  to  be  right  I  also 
defend  on  some  ground  or  other.  The  nature  of  the 
finite  and  particular  is  to  allow  room  for  accidents. 
Thus  here  collisions  must  occur,  because  here  we  are 
on  the  level  of  the  finite.  This  first  type  of  wrong¬ 
doing  negates  the  particular  will  only,  while  univer¬ 
sal  rightness  is  respected.  Consequently  this  is  the 
most  venial  of  the  types  of  wrong-doing.  If  I  say  “a 
rose  is  not  red,”  I  still  recognize  that  it  has  a  colour. 
Hence  I  do  not  deny  the  genus ;  all  that  I  negate  is 
the  particular  colour,  red.  Similarly,  right  is  recog¬ 
nized  here.  Each  of  the  parties  wills  the  right  and 
what  is  supposed  to  result  to  each  is  the  right  alone. 
The  wrong  of  each  consists  simply  in  his  holding 
that  what  he  wants  is  right. 

55.  Paragraph  87. 

At  this  second  level  of  wrong-doing,  the  particu¬ 
lar  will  is  respected,  but  universal  rightness  is  not. 
In  fraud,  the  particular  will  is  not  infringed,  because 
the  party  defrauded  is  saddled  with  what  he  is  asked 
to  believe  is  right.  Thus  the  right  which  he  demands 
is  posited  as  something  subjective,  as  a  mere  show, 
and  it  is  this  which  constitutes  fraud. 

56.  Paragraph  8g. 

In  the  case  of  nonmalicious  wrong  and  civil  suits 
at  law,  no  punishment  is  imposed,  because  in  such 
cases  the  wrongdoer  has  willed  nothing  in  opposi¬ 


tion  to  the  right.  In  the  case  of  fraud,  on  the  other 
hand,  punishments  come  in,  because  here  it  is  an  in¬ 
fringement  of  right  which  is  in  question. 

57.  Paragraph  go. 

Wrong  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word  is  crime,  where 
there  is  no  respect  either  for  the  principle  of  right¬ 
ness  or  for  what  seems  right  to  me,  where,  then, 
both  sides,  the  objective  and  the  subjective,  are  in¬ 
fringed. 

58.  Paragraph  g3. 

Once  the  state  has  been  founded,  there  can  no 
longer  be  any  heroes.  They  come  on  the  scene  only 
in  uncivilized  conditions.  Their  aim  is  right,  neces¬ 
sary,  and  political,  and  this  they  pursue  as  their  own 
affair.  The  heroes  who  founded  states,  introduced 
marriage  and  agriculture,  did  not  do  this  as  their 
recognized  right,  and  their  conduct  still  has  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  being  their  particular  will.  But  as  the 
higher  right  of  the  Idea  against  nature,  this  heroic 
coercion  is  a  rightful  coercion.  Mere  goodness  can 
achieve  little  against  the  power  of  nature. 

59.  Paragraph  g4. 

Special  attention  must  be  paid  at  this  point  to  the 
difference  between  the  right  and  the  moral.  In  mo¬ 
rality,  i.e.  when  I  am  reflected  into  myself,  there  is 
also  a  duality,  because  the  good  is  my  aim  and  I 
ought  to  determine  myself  by  reference  to  that  Idea. 
The  good  is  embodied  in  my  decision  and  I  actualize 
the  good  in  myself.  But  this  embodiment  is  purely 
inward  and  therefore  cannot  be  coerced.  The  law  of 
the  land  therefore  cannot  possibly  wish  to  reach  as 
far  as  a  man’s  disposition,  because,  so  far  as  his  mor¬ 
al  convictions  are  concerned,  he  exists  for  himself 
alone,  and  force  in  that  context  is  meaningless. 

60.  Paragraph  g6. 

How  any  given  crime  is  to  be  punished  cannot  be 
settled  by  mere  thinking;  positive  laws  are  neces¬ 
sary.  But  with  the  advance  of  education,  opinions 
about  crime  become  less  harsh,  and  to-day  a  crim¬ 
inal  is  not  so  severely  punished  as  he  was  a  hundred 
years  ago.  It  is  not  exactly  crimes  or  punishments 
which  change  but  the  relation  between  them. 

61.  Paragraph  g7. 

A  crime  alters  something  in  some  way,  and  the 
thing  has  its  existence  in  this  alteration.  Yet  this 
existence  is  a  self-contradiction  and  to  that  extent 
is  inherently  a  nullity.  The  nullity  is  that  the  crime 
has  set  aside  right  as  such.  That  is  to  say,  right  as 
something  absolute  cannot  be  set  aside,  and  so  com¬ 
mitting  a  crime  is  in  principle  a  nullity:  and  this 
nullity  is  the  essence  of  what  a  crime  effects.  A  nul¬ 
lity,  however,  must  reveal  itself  to  be  such,  i.e.  mani¬ 
fest  itself  as  vulnerable.  A  crime,  as  an  act,  is  not 
something  positive,  not  a  first  thing,  on  which  pun¬ 
ishment  would  supervene  as  a  negation.  It  is  some¬ 
thing  negative,  so  that  its  punishment  is  only  a  nega¬ 
tion  of  the  negation.  Right  in  its  actuality,  then,  an¬ 
nuls  what  infringes  it  and  therein  displays  its  valid- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


126 

ity  and  proves  itself  to  be  a  necessary,  mediated, 
reality. 

62.  Paragraph  99. 

Feuerbach  1  bases  his  theory  of  punishment  on 
threat  and  thinks  that  if  anyone  commits  a  crime 
despite  the  threat,  punishment  must  follow  because 
the  criminal  was  aware  of  it  beforehand.  But  what 
about  the  justification  of  the  threat?  A  threat  pre¬ 
supposes  that  a  man  is  not  free,  and  its  aim  is  to  co¬ 
erce  him  by  the  idea  of  an  evil.  But  right  and  justice 
must  have  their  seat  in  freedom  and  the  will,  not  in 
the  lack  of  freedom  on  which  a  threat  turns.  To  base 
a  justification  of  punishment  on  threat  is  to  liken  it 
to  the  act  of  a  man  who  lifts  his  stick  to  a  dog.  It  is 
to  treat  a  man  like  a  dog  instead  of  with  the  free¬ 
dom  and  respect  due  to  him  as  a  man.  But  a  threat, 
which  after  all  may  rouse  a  man  to  demonstrate  his 
freedom  in  spite  of  it,  discards  justice  altogether. — 
Coercion  by  psychological  factors  can  concern  only 
differences  of  quantity  and  quality  in  crime,  not  the 
nature  of  crime  itself,  and  therefore  any  legal  codes 
that  may  be  products  of  the  doctrine  that  crime  is 
due  to  such  coercion  lack  their  proper  foundation. 

63.  Paragraph  100. 

Beccaria’s  requirement  that  men  should  give  their 
consent  to  being  punished  is  right  enough,  but  the 
criminal  gives  his  consent  already  by  his  very  act. 
The  nature  of  the  crime,  no  less  than  the  private  will 
of  the  criminal,  requires  that  the  injury  initiated  by 
the  criminal  should  be  annulled.  However  that  may 
be,  Beccaria’s  endeavour  to  have  capital  punishment 
abolished  has  had  beneficial  effects.  Even  if  neither 
Joseph  II  nor  the  French  ever  succeeded  in  entirely 
abolishing  it,  still  we  have  begun  to  see  which  crimes 
deserve  the  death  penalty  and  which  do  not.  Capital 
punishment  has  in  consequence  become  rarer,  as  in 
fact  should  be  the  case  with  this  most  extreme  pun¬ 
ishment. 

64.  Paragraph  101. 

Retribution  is  the  inner  connexion  and  the  iden¬ 
tity  of  two  conceptions  which  are  different  in  ap¬ 
pearance  and  which  also  exist  in  the  world  as  two 
distinct  and  opposed  events.  Retribution  is  inflicted 
on  the  criminal  and  so  it  has  the  look  of  an  alien 
destiny,  not  intrinsically  his  own.  Nevertheless  pun¬ 
ishment,  as  we  have  seen,  is  only  crime  made  mani¬ 
fest,  i.e.  is  the  second  half  which  necessarily  presup¬ 
poses  the  first.  Prima  facie,  the  objection  to  retribu¬ 
tion  is  that  it  looks  like  something  immoral,  i.e.  like 
revenge,  and  that  thus  it  may  pass  for  something 
personal.  Yet  it  is  not  something  personal,  but  the 
concept  itself,  which  carries  out  retribution. “Venge¬ 
ance  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord,”  as  the  Bible  says.2  And 
if  something  in  the  word  “repay”  calls  up  the  idea 
of  a  particular  caprice  of  the  subjective  will,  it  must 
be  pointed  out  that  what  is  meant  is  only  that  the 
form  which  crime  takes  is  turned  round  against  it¬ 
self.  The  Eumenides  sleep,  but  crime  awakens  them, 

1  [P.  J.  A.  Feuerbach  (1775-1833).  See  his  Lehrbuch 
des  gemeinen  peinlichen  Rechts  (1801).  (Messineo).] 

2  [Romans,  12.19] 


and  hence  it  is  the  very  act  of  crime  itself  which 
vindicates  itself. — Now  although  requital  cannot 
simply  be  made  specifically  equal  to  the  crime,  the 
case  is  otherwise  with  murder,  which  is  of  necessity 
liable  to  the  death  penalty ;  the  reason  is  that  since 
life  is  the  full  compass  of  a  man’s  existence,  the  pun¬ 
ishment  here  cannot  simply  consist  in  a  “value,”  for 
none  is  great  enough,  but  can  consist  only  in  taking 
away  a  second  life. 

65.  Paragraph  102. 

In  that  condition  of  society  when  there  are  nei¬ 
ther  magistrates  nor  laws,  punishment  always  takes 
the  form  of  revenge ;  revenge  remains  defective 
inasmuch  as  it  is  the  act  of  a  subjective  will  and 
therefore  does  not  correspond  with  its  content.  Those 
who  administer  justice  are  persons,  but  their  will  is 
the  universal  will  of  the  law  and  they  intend  to  im¬ 
port  into  the  punishment  nothing  except  what  is  im¬ 
plied  in  the  nature  of  the  thing.  The  person  wronged, 
however,  views  the  wrong  not  as  something  qualita¬ 
tively  and  quantitatively  limited  but  only  as  wrong 
pure  and  simple,  and  in  requiting  the  injury  he  may 
go  too  far,  and  this  would  lead  to  a  new  wrong.  A- 
mongst  uncivilized  peoples,  revenge  is  deathless; 
amongst  the  Arabs,  for  instance,  it  can  be  checked 
only  by  superior  force  or  by  the  impossibility  of  its 
satisfaction.  A  residue  of  revenge  still  lingers  in  com¬ 
paratively  modern  legislation  in  those  cases  where 
it  is  left  to  the  option  of  individuals  whether  to  pros¬ 
ecute  or  not. 

66.  Paragraph  104. 

Truth  entails  that  the  concept  shall  be,  and  that 
this  existence  shall  correspond  with  the  concept.  In 
the  sphere  of  right,  the  will  is  existent  in  something 
external,  but  the  next  requirement  is  that  the  will 
should  be  existent  in  something  inward,  in  itself.  It 
must  in  its  own  eyes  be  subjectivity,  and  have  itself 
as  its  own  object.  This  relation  to  itself  is  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  affirmation,  but  it  can  attain  it  only  by  su¬ 
perseding  its  immediacy.  The  immediacy  superseded 
in  crime  leads,  then,  through  punishment,  i.e.  through 
the  nullity  of  this  nullity,  to  affirmation,  i.e.  to  mo¬ 
rality. 

67.  Paragraph  106 . 

So  far  as  right  in  the  strict  sense  was  concerned,  it 
was  of  no  importance  what  my  intention  or  my 
principle  was.  This  question  about  the  self-determi¬ 
nation  and  motive  of  the  will,  like  the  question  about 
its  purpose,  now  enters  at  this  point  in  connexion 
with  morality.  Since  man  wishes  to  be  judged  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  his  own  self-determined  choices,  he  is 
free  in  this  relation  to  himself  whatever  the  external 
situation  may  impose  upon  him.  No  one  can  break 
in  upon  this  inner  conviction  of  mankind,  no  vio¬ 
lence  can  be  done  to  it,  and  the  moral  will,  therefore, 
is  inaccessible.  Man’s  worth  is  estimated  by  refer¬ 
ence  to  his  inward  action  and  hence  the  standpoint 
of  morality  is  that  of  freedom  aware  of  itself. 

68.  Paragraph  107. 

This  entire  category  of  the  subjectivity  of  the  will 
is  once  again  a  whole  which,  as  subjectivity,  must 


ADDITIONS 


also  have  objectivity.  It  is  in  a  subject  that  freedom 
can  first  be  realized,  since  the  subjective  is  the  true 
material  for  this  realization.  But  this  embodiment  of 
the  will  which  we  have  called  subjectivity  is  differ¬ 
ent  from  the  will  which  has  developed  all  its  potenti¬ 
alities  to  actuality.  That  is  to  say,  the  will  must  free 
itself  from  this  second  one-sidedness  of  pure  subjec¬ 
tivity  in  order  to  become  the  fully  actualized  will. 
In  morality,  it  is  man’s  private  interest  that  comes 
into  question,  and  the  high  worth  of  this  interest 
consists  precisely  in  the  fact  that  man  knows  him¬ 
self  as  absolute  and  is  self-determined.  The  unedu¬ 
cated  man  allows  himself  to  be  constrained  in  every¬ 
thing  by  brute  force  and  natural  factors;  children 
have  no  moral  will  but  leave  their  parents  to  decide 
things  for  them.  The  educated  man,  however,  devel¬ 
ops  an  inner  life  and  wills  that  he  himself  shall  be  in 
everything  he  does. 

69.  Paragraph  108. 

In  morality,  self-determination  is  to  be  thought 
of  as  the  pure  restlessness  and  activity  which  can 
never  arrive  at  anything  that  is.  It  is  in  the  sphere 
of  ethical  life  that  the  will  is  for  the  first  time  identi¬ 
cal  with  the  concept  of  the  will  and  has  this  concept 
alone  as  its  content.  In  the  moral  sphere  the  will  still 
relates  itself  to  its  implicit  principle  and  consequently 
its  position  is  that  of  difference.  The  process  through 
which  this  position  develops  is  that  whereby  the  sub¬ 
jective  will  becomes  identified  with  its  concept.  There¬ 
fore  the  “ought-to-be”  which  is  never  absent  from 
the  moral  sphere  becomes  an  “is”  only  in  ethical  life. 
Further,  this  “other”  in  relation  to  which  the  subjec¬ 
tive  will  stands  is  two-sided:  first,  it  is  what  is  sub¬ 
stantive,  the  concept;  secondly,  it  is  external  fact. 
Even  if  the  good  were  posited  in  the  subjective  will, 
that  still  would  not  give  it  complete  realization. 

70.  Paragraph  no. 

The  content  of  the  subjective  or  moral  will  has  a 
specific  character  of  its  own,  i.e.  even  if  it  has  ac¬ 
quired  the  form  of  objectivity,  it  must  still  continue 
to  enshrine  my  subjectivity,  and  my  act  is  to  count 
as  mine  only  if  on  its  inward  side  it  has  been  deter¬ 
mined  by  me,  if  it  was  my  purpose,  my  intention. 
Beyond  what  lay  in  my  subjective  will  I  recognize 
nothing  in  its  expression  as  mine.  What  I  wish  to  see 
in  my  deed  is  my  subjective  consciousness  over 
again. 

71.  Paragraph  112. 

In  dealing  with  formal  right,  I  said  [see  Para¬ 
graph  38]  that  it  contained  prohibitions  only,  that 
hence  a  right  action,  strictly  so  called,  was  purely 
negative  in  character  in  respect  of  the  will  of  others. 
In  morality,  on  the  other  hand,  my  will  has  a  posi¬ 
tive  character  in  relation  to  the  will  of  others,  i.e. 
the  universal  will  is  implicitly  present  within  what 
the  subjective  will  effects.  To  effect  something  is  to 
produce  something  or  to  alter  what  already  exists, 
and  such  changes  have  a  bearing  on  the  will  of  oth¬ 
ers.  The  concept  of  morality  is  the  inner  relation  of 
the  will  to  itself.  But  here  it  is  not  only  one  will ;  on 


the  contrary  its  objectification  implies  at  the  same 
time  the  cancellation  of  the  single  will,  and  there¬ 
fore,  in  addition,  just  because  the  character  of  one¬ 
sidedness  vanishes,  the  positing  of  two  wills  and  a 
positive  bearing  of  each  on  the  other.  So  far  as  rights 
are  concerned,  it  makes  no  difference  whether  some¬ 
one  else’s  will  may  do  something  in  relation  to  mine 
when  I  give  my  will  an  embodiment  in  property.  In 
morality,  however,  the  welfare  of  others  too  is  in 
question,  and  this  positive  bearing  cannot  come  on 
the  scene  before  this  point. 

72.  Paragraph  114. 

If  an  action  is  to  be  moral,  it  must  in  the  first 
place  correspond  with  my  purpose,  since  the  moral 
will  has  the  right  to  refuse  to  recognize  in  the  result¬ 
ing  state  of  affairs  what  was  not  present  inwardly 
as  purpose.  Purpose  concerns  only  the  formal  prin¬ 
ciple  that  the  external  will  shall  be  within  me  as 
something  inward.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  second 
moment  of  the  moral  sphere,  questions  may  be 
asked  about  the  intention  behind  the  action,  i.e. 
about  the  relative  worth  of  the  action  in  relation  to 
me.  The  third  and  last  moment  is  not  the  relative 
worth  of  the  action  but  its  universal  worth,  the  good. 

In  a  moral  action,  then,  there  may  be  a  breach 
first  between  what  is  purposed  and  what  is  really 
effected  and  achieved;  secondly,  between  what  is 
there  externally  as  a  universal  will  and  the  particu¬ 
lar  inner  determination  which  I  give  to  it.  The  third 
and  last  point  is  that  the  intention  should  be  in  ad¬ 
dition  the  universal  content  of  the  action.  The  good 
is  the  intention  raised  to  be  the  concept  of  the  will. 

73.  Paragraph  115. 

I  am  chargeable  with  what  lay  in  my  purpose  and 
this  is  the  most  important  point  in  connexion  with 
crime.  But  responsibility  contains  only  the  quite  ex¬ 
ternal  judgement  whether  I  have  or  have  not  done 
some  thing.  It  does  not  follow  that,  because  I  am 
responsible,  the  thing  done  may  be  imputed  to  me. 

74.  Paragraph  117. 

The  will  has  confronting  it  a  state  of  affairs  upon 
which  it  acts.  But  in  order  to  know  what  this  state 
of  affairs  is  I  must  have  an  idea  of  it,  and  the  re¬ 
sponsibility  is  truly  mine  only  in  so  far  as  I  had 
knowledge  of  the  situation  confronting  me.  Such  a 
situation  is  a  presupposition  of  my  volition  and  my 
will  is  therefore  finite,  or  rather,  since  my  will  is 
finite,  it  has  a  presupposition  of  this  kind.  As  soon  as 
my  thinking  and  willing  is  rational,  I  am  no  longer 
at  this  level  of  finitude,  since  the  object  on  wThich  I 
act  is  no  longer  an  “other”  to  me.  Finitude,  how¬ 
ever,  implies  fixed  limits  and  restrictions.  I  have 
confronting  me  an  “other”  which  is  only  contingent, 
something  necessary  in  a  purely  external  way;  its 
path  and  mine  may  meet  or  diverge.  Nevertheless,  I 
am  nothing  except  in  relation  to  my  freedom,  and 
my  will  is  responsible  for  the  deed  only  in  so  far  as 
I  know  what  I  am  doing.  Oedipus,  who  killed  his 
father  without  knowing  it,  cannot  be  accused  of 
parricide.  The  ancient  penal  codes,  however,  at- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


tached  less  weight  to  the  subjective  side  of  action,  to 
imputability,  than  we  do  nowadays.  That  is  why 
sanctuaries  were  instituted  in  ancient  times  for  har¬ 
bouring  and  protecting  the  fugitive  from  vengeance. 

75.  Paragraph  118. 

The  transition  to  intention  depends  on  the  fact 
that  I  accept  responsibility  only  for  what  my  idea  of 
the  situation  was.  That  is  to  say,  there  can  be  im¬ 
puted  to  me  only  what  I  knew  of  the  circumstances. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  inevitable  consequences 
linked  with  every  action,  even  if  I  am  only  bringing 
about  some  single,  immediate,  state  of  affairs.  The 
consequences  in  such  a  case  represent  the  universal 
implicit  within  that  state  of  affairs.  Of  course  I  can¬ 
not  foresee  the  consequences — they  might  be  pre¬ 
ventable — but  I  must  be  aware  of  the  universal  char¬ 
acter  of  my  isolated  act.  The  important  point  here  is 
not  the  isolated  thing  but  the  whole,  and  that  de¬ 
pends  not  on  the  differentia  of  the  particular  action, 
but  on  its  universal  nature.  Now  the  transition  from 
purpose  to  intention  lies  in  the  fact  that  I  ought  to 
be  aware  not  simply  of  my  single  action  but  also  of 
the  universal  which  is  conjoined  with  it.  The  uni¬ 
versal  which  comes  on  the  scene  here  in  this  way  is 
what  I  have  willed,  my  intention. 

76.  Paragraph  iiq. 

It  happens  of  course  that  circumstances  may  make 
an  action  miscarry  to  a  greater  or  lesser  degree.  In  a 
case  of  arson,  for  instance,  the  fire  may  not  catch  or 
alternatively  it  may  take  hold  further  than  the  in¬ 
cendiary  intended.  In  spite  of  this,  however,  we 
must  not  make  this  a  distinction  between  good  and 
bad  luck,  since  in  acting  a  man  must  lay  his  account 
with  externality.  The  old  proverb  is  correct:  “A 
flung  stone  is  the  devil’s.”  To  act  is  to  expose  oneself 
to  bad  luck.  Thus  bad  luck  has  a  right  over  me  and 
is  an  embodiment  of  my  own  willing. 

77.  Paragraph  121. 

In  my  own  eyes,  reflected  into  myself,  I  am  a  par¬ 
ticular  in  correlation  with  the  externality  of  my  ac¬ 
tion.  My  end  constitutes  the  content  of  the  action, 
the  content  determinant  of  the  action.  Murder  and 
arson,  for  example,  are  universal  and  so  are  not  the 
positive  content  of  my  action  qua  the  action  of  a 
subject.  If  one  of  these  crimes  has  been  committed, 
its  perpetrator  may  be  asked  why  he  committed  it. 
The  murder  was  not  done  for  the  sake  of  murder¬ 
ing  ;  the  murderer  had  in  view  some  particular  posi¬ 
tive  end.  But  if  we  were  to  say  that  he  murdered  for 
the  mere  pleasure  of  murdering,  then  the  purely  posi¬ 
tive  content  of  the  subject  would  surely  be  pleasure, 
and  if  that  is  the  case  then  the  deed  is  the  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  the  subject’s  will.  Thus  the  motive  of  an  act 
is,  more  particularly,  what  is  called  the  “moral”  fac¬ 
tor,  and  this  has  in  that  case  the  double  meaning  of 
the  universal  implicit  in  the  purpose  and  the  partic¬ 
ular  aspect  of  the  intention.  It  is  a  striking  modern 
innovation  to  inquire  continually  about  the  motives 
of  men’s  actions.  Formerly,  the  question  was  sim¬ 
ply:  “Is  he  an  honest  man?  Does  he  do  his  duty?” 


Nowadays  we  insist  on  looking  into  men’s  hearts 
and  so  we  presuppose  a  gulf  between  the  objectivity 
of  actions  and  their  inner  side,  the  subjective  mo¬ 
tives.  To  be  sure,  the  subject’s  volition  must  be  con¬ 
sidered  ;  he  wills  something  and  the  reason  for  what 
he  wills  lies  within  himself ;  he  wills  the  satisfaction 
of  his  desire,  the  gratification  of  his  passion.  None 
the  less,  the  good  and  the  right  are  also  a  content  of 
action,  a  content  not  purely  natural  but  put  there 
by  my  rationality.  To  make  my  freedom  the  content 
of  what  I  will  is  a  plain  goal  of  my  freedom  itself. 
Therefore  it  is  to  take  higher  moral  ground  to  find 
satisfaction  in  the  action  and  to  advance  beyond  the 
gulf  between  the  self-consciousness  of  a  man  and  the 
objectivity  of  his  deed,  even  though  to  treat  action 
as  if  it  involved  such  a  gulf  is  a  way  of  looking  at 
the  matter  characteristic  of  certain  epochs  in  world 
history  and  in  individual  biography. 

78.  Paragraph  123. 

Since  the  specifications  of  happiness  are  given, 
they  are  not  true  specifications  of  freedom,  because 
freedom  is  not  genuinely  free  in  its  own  eyes  except 
in  the  good,  i.e.  except  when  it  is  its  own  end.  Con¬ 
sequently  we  may  raise  the  question  whether  a  man 
has  the  right  to  set  before  himself  ends  not  freely 
chosen  but  resting  solely  on  the  fact  that  the  sub¬ 
ject  is  a  living  being.  The  fact  that  man  is  a  living 
being,  however,  is  not  fortuitous,  but  in  conformity 
with  reason,  and  to  that  extent  he  has  a  right  to 
make  his  needs  his  end.  There  is  nothing  degrading 
in  being  alive,  and  there  is  no  mode  of  intelligent  be¬ 
ing  higher  than  life  in  which  existence  would  be 
possible.  It  is  only  the  raising  of  the  given  to  some¬ 
thing  self-created  which  yields  the  higher  orbit  of 
the  good,  although  this  distinction  implies  no  incom¬ 
patibility  between  the  two  levels. 

79.  Paragraph  124. 

In  magnis  .  . .  voluisse  sat  est 1  is  right  in  the  sense 
that  we  ought  to  will  something  great.  But  we  must 
also  be  able  to  achieve  it,  otherwise  the  willing  is 
nugatory.  The  laurels  of  mere  willing  are  dry  leaves 
that  never  were  green. 

80.  Paragraph  126. 

The  famous  answer: 2  Je  n’en  vois  pas  la  necessity, 
given  to  the  lampooner  who  excused  himself  with 
the  words:  II  jaut  done  que  je  vive,  is  apposite  at 
this  point.  Life  ceases  to  be  necessary  in  face  of  the 
higher  realm  of  freedom.  When  St.  Crispin  stole 
leather  to  make  shoes  for  the  poor,  his  action  was 
moral  but  wrong  and  so  inadmissible. 

81.  Paragraph  127. 

Life  as  the  sum  of  ends  has  a  right  against  ab¬ 
stract  right.  If  for  example  it  is  only  by  stealing 
bread  that  the  wolf  can  be  kept  from  the  door,  the 
action  is  of  course  an  encroachment  on  someone’s 
property,  but  it  would  be  wrong  to  treat  this  action 
as  an  ordinary  theft.  To  refuse  to  allow  a  man  in 

1  [“In  great  things  to  have  willed  is  enough”  (Pro¬ 
pertius,  11.  x.  6).] 

2  [By  Richelieu  (Bolland).] 


ADDITIONS 


jeopardy  of  his  life  to  take  such  steps  for  self-preser¬ 
vation  would  be  to  stigmatize  him  as  without  rights, 
and  since  he  would  be  deprived  of  his  life,  his  free¬ 
dom  would  be  annulled  altogether.  Many  diverse 
details  have  a  bearing  on  the  preservation  of  life, 
and  when  we  have  our  eyes  on  the  future  we  have  to 
engage  ourselves  in  these  details.  But  the  only  thing 
that  is  necessary  is  to  live  now,  the  future  is  not  ab¬ 
solute  but  ever  exposed  to  accident.  Hence  it  is  only 
the  necessity  of  the  immediate  present  which  can 
justify  a  wrong  action,  because  not  to  do  the  action 
would  in  turn  be  to  commit  an  offence,  indeed  the 
most  wrong  of  all  offences,  namely  the  complete  de¬ 
struction  of  the  embodiment  of  freedom.  Beneficium 
competentiae  is  relevant  here,  because  kinship  and 
other  close  relationships  imply  the  right  to  demand 
that  no  one  shall  be  sacrificed  altogether  on  the  altar 
of  right. 

8  2.  Paragraph  129. 

Every  stage  is  really  the  Idea,  but  the  earlier 
stages  contain  it  only  in  rather  an  abstract  form. 
Thus  for  example,  even  the  ego,  as  personality,  is 
already  the  Idea,  though  in  its  most  abstract  shape. 
The  good,  therefore,  is  the  Idea  further  determined, 
the  unity  of  the  concept  of  the  will  with  the  particu¬ 
lar  will.  It  is  not  something  abstractly  right,  but 
something  concrete  whose  contents  are  made  up  of 
both  right  and  welfare  alike. 

83.  Paragraph  131. 

The  good  is  the  truth  of  the  particular  will,  but 
the  will  is  only  that  into  which  it  puts  itself ;  it  is 
not  good  by  nature  but  can  become  what  it  is  only 
by  its  own  labour.  On  the  other  hand,  the  good  it¬ 
self,  apart  from  the  subjective  will,  is  only  an  ab¬ 
straction  without  that  real  existence  which  it  is  to 
acquire  for  the  first  time  through  the  efforts  of  that 
will.  Accordingly,  the  development  of  the  good  has 
three  stages:  (i)  The  good  should  present  itself  to 
my  volition  as  a  particular  will  and  I  should  know 
it.  (ii)  I  should  myself  say  what  is  good  and  should 
develop  its  particular  specifications,  (iii)  Finally, 
the  specification  of  the  good  on  its  own  account,  the 
particularization  of  the  good  as  infinite  subjectivity 
aware  of  itself.  This  inward  specifying  of  what  good 
is,  is  conscience. 

84.  Paragraph  133. 

From  my  point  of  view  the  essence  of  the  will  is 
duty.  Now  if  my  knowledge  stops  at  the  fact  that 
the  good  is  my  duty,  I  am  still  going  no  further  than 
the  abstract  character  of  duty.  I  should  do  my  duty 
for  duty’s  sake,  and  when  I  do  my  duty  it  is  in  a 
true  sense  my  own  objectivity  which  I  am  bringing 
to  realization.  In  doing  my  duty,  I  am  by  myself 
and  free.  To  have  emphasized  this  meaning  of  duty 
has  constituted  the  merit  of  Kant’s  moral  philosophy 
and  its  loftiness  of  outlook. 

85.  Paragraph  134. 

This  is  the  same  question  as  was  put  to  Jesus  when 
someone  wished  to  learn  from  him  what  he  should 


do  to  inherit  eternal  life.1  Good  as  a  universal  is  ab¬ 
stract  and  cannot  be  accomplished  so  long  as  it  re¬ 
mains  abstract.  To  be  accomplished  it  must  acquire 
in  addition  the  character  of  particularity. 

86.  Paragraph  133. 

While  we  laid  emphasis  above  on  the  fact  that  the 
outlook  of  Kant’s  philosophy  is  a  high  one  in  that  it 
propounds  a  correspondence  between  duty  and  ra¬ 
tionality,  still  we  must  notice  here  that  this  point  of 
view  is  defective  in  lacking  all  articulation.  The 
proposition:  “Act  as  if  the  maxim  of  thine  action 
could  be  laid  down  as  a  universal  principle,”  would 
be  admirable  if  we  already  had  determinate  princi¬ 
ples  of  conduct.  That  is  to  say,  to  demand  of  a  prin¬ 
ciple  that  it  shall  be  able  to  serve  in  addition  as  a 
determinant  of  universal  legislation  is  to  presuppose 
that  it  already  possesses  a  content.  Given  the  con¬ 
tent,  then  of  course  the  application  of  the  principle 
would  be  a  simple  matter.  In  Kant’s  case,  however, 
the  principle  itself  is  still  not  available  and  his  cri¬ 
terion  of  non-contradiction  is  productive  of  nothing, 
since  where  there  is  nothing,  there  can  be  no  contra¬ 
diction  either. 

87.  Paragraph  136 . 

We  may  speak  in  a  very  lofty  strain  about  duty, 
and  talk  of  the  kind  is  uplifting  and  broadens  hu¬ 
man  sympathies,  but  if  it  never  comes  to  anything 
specific  it  ends  in  being  wearisome.  Mind  demands 
particularity  and  is  entitled  to  it.  But  conscience  is 
this  deepest  inward  solitude  with  oneself  where  ev¬ 
erything  external  and  every  restriction  has  disap¬ 
peared — this  complete  withdrawal  into  oneself.  As 
conscience,  man  is  no  longer  shackled  by  the  aims  of 
particularity,  and  consequently  in  attaining  that 
position  he  has  risen  to  higher  ground,  the  ground  of 
the  modern  world,  which  for  the  first  time  has  reached 
this  consciousness,  reached  this  sinking  into  oneself. 
The  more  sensuous  consciousness2  of  earlier  epochs 
had  something  external  and  given  confronting  it, 
either  religion  or  law.  But  conscience  knows  itself  as 
thinking  and  knows  that  what  alone  has  obligatory 
force  for  me  is  this  that  I  think. 

88.  Paragraph  137. 

When  we  speak  of  conscience,  it  may  easily  be 
thought  that,  in  virtue  of  its  form,  which  is  abstract 
inwardness,  conscience  is  at  this  point  without  more 
ado  true  conscience.  But  true  conscience  determines 
itself  to  will  what  is  absolutely  good  and  obligatory 
and  is  this  self-determination.  So  far,  however,  it  is 
only  with  good  in  the  abstract  that  we  have  to  do 
and  conscience  is  still  without  this  objective  content 
and  is  but  the  infinite  certainty  of  oneself. 

89.  Paragraph  138. 

If  we  look  more  closely  at  this  process  of  evapora¬ 
tion  and  see  how  all  specific  determinations  disap¬ 
pear  into  this  simple  concept  and  then  have  to  be 

1  [Luke,  10.25] 

2  [For  the  distinction  between  sense-consciousness 
and  more  highly  developed  types  of  consciousness,  see 
Remarks  to  Paragraphs  21  and  35.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


130 

condensed  out  of  it  again,  what  we  find  is  that  it  is 
primarily  due  to  the  fact  that  everything  recognized 
as  right  and  duty  may  be  proved  by  discursive  think¬ 
ing  to  be  nugatory,  restricted,  and  in  all  respects 
not  absolute.  On  the  other  hand,  just  as  subjectivity 
evaporates  every  content  into  itself,  so  it  may  de¬ 
velop  it  out  of  itself  once  more.  Everything  which 
arises  in  the  ethical  sphere  is  produced  by  this  activ¬ 
ity  of  mind.  The  moral  point  of  view,  however,  is  de¬ 
fective  because  it  is  purely  abstract.  When  I  am  aware 
of  my  freedom  as  the  substance  of  my  being,  I  am 
inactive  and  do  nothing.  But  if  I  proceed  to  act  and 
look  for  principles  on  which  to  act,  I  grope  for  some¬ 
thing  determinate  and  then  demand  its  deduction 
from  the  concept  of  the  free  will.  While,  therefore,  it 
is  right  enough  to  evaporate  right  and  duty  into 
subjectivity,  it  is  wrong  if  this  abstract  groundwork 
is  not  then  condensed  out  again.  It  is  only  in  times 
when  the  world  of  actuality  is  hollow,  spiritless,  and 
unstable,  that  an  individual  may  be  allowed  to  take 
refuge  from  actuality  in  his  inner  life.  Socrates  lived 
at  the  time  of  the  ruin  of  the  Athenian  democracy. 
His  thought  vaporized  the  world  around  him  and  he 
withdrew  into  himself  to  search  there  for  the  right 
and  the  good.  Even  in  our  day  there  are  cases  when 
reverence  for  the  established  order  is  more  or  less 
lacking ;  man  insists  on  having  the  authoritative  as 
his  will,  as  that  to  which  he  has  granted  recognition. 

90.  Paragraph  ijp. 

The  abstract  self-certainty  which  knows  itself  as 
the  basis  of  everything  has  in  it  the  potentiality  ei¬ 
ther  of  willing  the  universality  of  the  concept  or  al¬ 
ternatively  of  taking  a  particular  content  as  a  princi¬ 
ple  and  realizing  that.  The  second  alternative  is  evil, 
which  therefore  always  includes  the  abstraction  of 
self-certainty.  It  is  only  man  who  is  good,  and  he  is 
good  only  because  he  can  also  be  evil.  Good  and  evil 
are  inseparable,  and  their  inseparability  is  rooted  in 
the  fact  that  the  concept  becomes  an  object  to  itself, 
and  as  object  it  eo  ipso  acquires  the  character  of  dif¬ 
ference.  The  evil  will  wills  something  opposed  to  the 
universality  of  the  will,  while  the  good  will  acts  in 
accordance  with  its  true  concept. 

The  difficulty  of  the  question  as  to  how  the  will 
can  be  evil  as  well  as  good  usually  arises  because  we 
think  of  the  will  as  related  to  itself  purely  positively 
and  because  we  represent  its  volition  as  something 
determinate  1  confronting  it,  as  the  good.  But  the 
problem  of  the  origin  of  evil  may  be  more  precisely 
put  in  the  form:  “How  does  the  negative  come  into 
the  positive?”  If  we  begin  by  presupposing  that  in 
the  creation  of  the  world  God  is  the  absolutely  posi¬ 
tive,  then,  turn  where  we  will,  we  shall  never  discov¬ 
er  the  negative  within  that  positive,  since  to  talk  of 
God’s  “permitting”  evil  is  to  ascribe  to  him  a  passive 
relation  to  evil  which  is  unsatisfactory  and  meaning¬ 
less.  In  the  representative  thinking  of  religious  my¬ 
thology  there  is  no  comprehension  of  the  origin  of 
evil ;  i.e.  the  positive  and  the  negative  are  not  dis- 

1  [Reading  und  sein  Wollen  als  ein  Bestimmtes,  with 
Lasson.] 


covered  in  one  another,  there  is  only  a  representa¬ 
tion  of  their  succession  and  juxtaposition,  so  that 
it  is  from  outside  that  the  negative  comes  to  the 
positive.  But  this  cannot  satisfy  thought,  which  de¬ 
mands  a  reason  and  a  necessity  and  insists  on  appre¬ 
hending  the  negative  as  itself  rooted  in  the  positive. 
Now  the  solution  of  the  problem,  the  way  the  con¬ 
cept  treats  the  matter,  is  already  contained  in  the 
concept,  since  the  concept,  or  to  speak  more  con¬ 
cretely,  the  Idea,  has  it  in  its  essence  to  differentiate 
itself  and  to  posit  itself  negatively.  If  we  adhere  to 
the  purely  positive,  i.e.  if  we  rest  in  the  unmixed 
good  which  is  supposed  to  be  good  at  its  source,  then 
we  are  accepting  an  empty  category  of  the  Under¬ 
standing  which  clings  to  abstractions  and  one-sided 
categories  of  this  kind  and  by  the  very  asking  of  this 
question  makes  it  a  difficult  one.  If  we  begin  with 
the  standpoint  of  the  concept,  however,  we  appre¬ 
hend  the  positive  as  activity  and  as  self-distinction. 
Evil  and  good  alike  have  their  origin  in  the  will  and 
the  will  in  its  concept  is  both  good  and  evil. 

The  natural  will  is  implicitly  the  contradiction  of 
self-distinction,  of  being  both  inwardness  and  also 
self-awareness.2  To  maintain  then  that  evil  implies 
the  further  point  that  man  is  evil  in  so  far  as  his  will 
is  natural  would  be  to  contradict  the  usual  idea  that 
it  is  just  the  natural  will  which  is  guiltless  and  good. 
But  the  natural  will  stands  in  opposition  to  the  con¬ 
tent  of  freedom,  and  the  child  and  the  uneducated 
man,  whose  wills  are  only  natural,  are  for  that  very 
reason  liable  to  be  called  to  account  for  their  actions 
only  in  a  less  degree.  Now  when  we  speak  of  man, 
we  mean  not  the  child  but  the  self-conscious  adult, 
and  when  we  speak  of  good,  we  mean  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  it.  It  is  doubtless  true  that  the  natural  is  in¬ 
herently  innocent,  neither  good  nor  bad,  but  when 
it  is  drawn  into  the  orbit  of  the  will  which  is  free 
and  knows  that  it  is  free,  it  acquires  the  character  of 
not  being  free  and  is  therefore  evil.  When  man  wills 
the  natural,  it  is  no  longer  merely  natural,  but  the 
negative  opposed  to  the  good,  i.e.  to  the  concept  of 
the  will. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  now  objected  that  since 
evil  is  rooted  in  the  concept  and  inevitable,  man 
would  be  guiltless  if  he  committed  it,  our  reply  must 
be  that  a  man’s  decision  is  his  own  act,  and  his  own 
act  is  freely  chosen  and  his  own  responsibility.  In 
the  religious  legend  it  is  said  that  man  is  as  God 
when  he  knows  good  and  evil;3  and  it  is  true  that 
this  likeness  to  God  is  present  in  such  knowledge  in 
that  the  inevitability  here  is  no  natural  inevitability 
since  on  the  contrary  the  decision  is  really  the  tran¬ 
scendence  of  this  duality  of  good  and  evil.  When 
both  good  and  evil  are  placed  before  me,  I  have  a 
choice  between  the  two ;  I  can  decide  between  them 
and  endow  my  subjective  character  with  either. 
Thus  the  nature  of  evil  is  that  man  may  will  it  but 
need  not. 

2  [i.e.  both  universal  inner  principle  and  also  aware¬ 
ness  of  self  as  particular,  as  opposed  to  the  universal.] 

3  [Genesis,  3.5,  i.e.  after  doing  what  had  been  for¬ 
bidden.] 


ADDITIONS 


91.  Paragraph  140. 

Representative  thinking  may  go  further  and  per¬ 
vert  the  evil  will  into  a  show  of  goodness.  Although 
it  cannot  alter  the  nature  of  evil,  it  can  invest  it 
with  a  show  of  goodness.  Since  every  action  has  a 
positive  aspect,  and  since  the  category  of  good  as 
opposed  to  evil  is  likewise  reduced  to  positivity,  I 
may  claim  that  my  action  in  its  bearing  on  my  in- 

Itention  is  good.  Thus  evil  has  good  linked  with  it 
not  only  in  my  consciousness  but  also  if  welookatmy 
action  on  its  positive  side.  When  self-consciousness 
gives  out,  to  others  only,  that  its  action  is  good, 
this  form  of  subjectivism  is  hypocrisy.  But  if  it  goes 
so  far  as  to  claim  that  the  deed  is  good  in  its  own 
eyes  also,  then  we  have  a  still  higher  peak  cf  the 
subjectivism  which  knows  itself  as  absolute.  For 
this  type  of  mind  absolute  good  and  absolute  evil 
have  both  vanished,  and  the  subject  is  therefore  at 
liberty  to  pass  himself  off  at  discretion  as  anything 
he  likes.  This  is  the  position  of  the  absolute  sophistry 
which  usurps  the  office  of  lawgiver  and  rests  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  good  and  evil  on  its  own  caprice. 
The  chief  hypocrites  are  the  pious  ones  (the  Tar- 
tuffes)  who  are  punctilious  in  every  ritual  observ¬ 
ance  and  may  even  be  religious  to  all  appearance, 
while  yet  they  do  just  as  they  please.  There  is  little 
mention  of  hypocrites  nowadays,  partly  because 
the  accusation  of  hypocrisy  seems  to  be  too  harsh ; 
partly,  however,  because  hypocrisy  in  its  naive  form 
has  more  or  less  disappeared.  This  downright  false¬ 
hood,  this  veneer  of  goodness,  has  now  become  too 
transparent  not  to  be  seen  through,  and  the  divorce 
between  doing  good  with  one  hand  and  evil  with  the 
other  no  longer  occurs,  since  advancing  culture  has 
weakened  the  opposition  between  these  categories. 

Instead,  hypocrisy  has  now  assumed  the  subtler 
form  of  Probabilism,  which  involves  the  agent’s  at¬ 
tempt  to  represent  a  transgression  as  something  good 
from  the  point  of  view  of  his  private  conscience. 
This  doctrine  can  only  arise  when  the  moral  and  the 
good  are  determined  by  authority,  with  the  result 
that  there  are  as  many  reasons  as  there  are  author¬ 
ities  for  supposing  that  evil  is  good.  Casuist  theo¬ 
logians,  Jesuits  especially,  have  worked  up  these 
cases  of  conscience  and  multiplied  them  ad  infinitum . 

These  cases  have  now  been  elaborated  to  such  a 
high  degree  of  subtlety  that  numerous  clashes  have 
arisen  between  them,  and  the  opposition  between 
good  and  evil  has  become  so  weak  that  in  single  in¬ 
stances  they  appear  to  turn  into  one  another.  The 
only  desideratum  now  is  probability,  i.e.  something 
approximately  good,  something  which  may  be  sup¬ 
ported  by  any  single  reason  or  authority.  Thus  the 
special  characteristic  of  this  attitude  is  that  its  con¬ 
tent  is  purely  abstract ;  it  sets  up  the  concrete  con¬ 
tent  as  something  inessential  or  rather  abandons  it 
to  bare  opinion.  On  this  principle,  anyone  may  have 
committed  a  crime  and  yet  have  willed  the  good. 
For  example,  if  a  bad  character  is  murdered,  the 
positive  side  of  the  action  may  be  given  out  to  be 
the  withstanding  of  evil  and  the  will  to  diminish  it. 
Now  the  next  step  beyond  Probabilism  is  that  it 


131 

is  no  longer  a  question  of  someone  else’s  statement 
or  authority;  it  is  a  question  only  of  the  subject 
himself,  i.e.  of  his  own  conviction — a  conviction 
which  alone  is  able  to  make  a  thing  good.  The  defect 
here  is  that  everything  is  supposed  to  fall  within  the 
orbit  of  conviction  alone  and  that  the  absolutely 
right,  for  which  this  conviction  should  be  only  the 
form,  no  longer  exists.  It  is  certainly  not  a  matter  of 
indifference  whether  I  do  something  by  habit  and 
custom  or  because  I  am  actuated  throughout  by  the 
truth  which  underlies  these.  But  objective  truth  is 
still  different  from  my  conviction,  because  convic¬ 
tion  lacks  the  distinction  between  good  and  evil. 
Conviction  always  remains  conviction,  and  the  bad 
could  only  be  that  of  which  I  am  not  convinced. 

Now  while  this  obliteration  of  good  and  evil  im¬ 
plies  a  very  lofty  attitude,  there  is  involved  in  this 
attitude  the  admission  that  it  is  subject  to  error,  and 
to  that  extent  it  is  brought  down  from  its  pedestal 
into  mere  fortuitousness  and  seems  undeserving  of 
respect.  Now  this  form  of  subjectivism  is  irony,  the 
consciousness  that  this  principle  of  conviction  is  not 
worth  much  and  that,  lofty  criterion  though  it  be,  it 
is  only  caprice  that  governs  it.  This  attitude  is  really 
a  product  of  Fichte’s  philosophy,  which  proclaims 
that  the  Ego  is  absolute,  i.e.  is  absolute  certainty, 
the  “universal  self-hood”  which  advances  through 
a  course  of  further  development  to  objectivity.1  Of 
Fichte  himself  it  cannot  properly  be  said  that  he 
made  subjective  caprice  a  guiding  principle  in  ethics, 
but,  later  on,  this  principle  of  the  mere  particular, 
in  the  sense  of  “particular  self-hood,”  was  deified  by 
Friedrich  von  Schlegel  with  reference  to  the  good 
and  the  beautiful.  As  a  result,  he  made  objective 
goodness  only  an  image  of  my  conviction,  receiving 
support  from  my  efforts  alone,  and  dependent  for 
its  appearance  and  disappearance  on  me  as  its  lord 
and  master.  If  I  relate  myself  to  something  objec¬ 
tive,  it  vanishes  at  the  same  moment  before  my 
eyes,  and  so  I  hover  over  a  pit  of  nothingness,  sum¬ 
moning  shapes  from  the  depths  and  annihilating 
them.  This  supreme  type  of  subjectivism  can  emerge 
only  in  a  period  of  advanced  culture  when  faith  has 
lost  its  seriousness,  and  its  essence  is  simply  “all  is 
vanity.” 

92  .Paragraph  141. 

Each  of  the  two  principles  hitherto  discussed, 
namely  good  in  the  abstract  and  conscience,  is  de¬ 
fective  in  lacking  its  opposite.  Good  in  the  abstract 
evaporates  into  something  completely  powerless,  in¬ 
to  which  I  may  introduce  any  and  every  content, 
while  the  subjectivity  of  mind  becomes  just  as 
worthless  because  it  lacks  any  objective  significance. 
Thus  a  longing  may  arise  for  an  objective  order  in 
which  man  gladly  degrades  himself  to  servitude  and 
total  subjection,  if  only  to  escape  the  torment  of 
vacuity  and  negation.  Many  Protestants  have  re¬ 
cently  gone  over  to  the  Roman  Catholic  Church, 
and  they  have  done  so  because  they  found  their 
inner  life  worthless  and  grasped  at  something  fixed, 

1  [For  further  comments  on  Fichte’s  views,  with  ref¬ 
erences,  see  e.g.  History  0}  Philosophy,  iii.  481  ff.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


at  a  support,  an  authority,  even  if  it  was  not  exactly 
the  stability  of  thought  which  they  caught. 

The  unity  of  the  subjective  with  the  objective  and 
absolute  good  is  ethical  life,  and  in  it  we  find  the 
reconciliation  which  accords  with  the  concept.  Mo¬ 
rality  is  the  form  of  the  will  in  general  on  its  sub¬ 
jective  side.  Ethical  life  is  more  than  the  subjective 
form  and  the  self-determination  of  the  will ;  in  ad¬ 
dition  it  has  as  its  content  the  concept  of  the  will, 
namely  freedom.  The  right  and  the  moral  cannot  exist 
independently;  they  must  have  the  ethical  as  their 
support  and  foundation,  for  the  right  lacks  the  mo¬ 
ment  of  subjectivity,  while  morality  in  turn  pos¬ 
sesses  that  moment  alone,  and  consequently  both  the 
right  and  the  moral  lack  actuality  by  themselves. 
Only  the  infinite,  the  Idea,  is  actual.  Right  exists 
only  as  a  branch  of  a  whole  or  like  the  ivy  which 
twines  itself  round  a  tree  firmly  rooted  on  its  own 
account. 

93.  Paragraph  144. 

Throughout  ethical  life  the  objective  and  sub¬ 
jective  moments  are  alike  present,  but  both  of  them 
are  only  its  forms.  Its  substance  is  the  good,  i.e.  the 
objective  is  filled  with  subjectivity.  If  we  consider 
ethical  life  from  the  objective  standpoint,  we  may 
say  that  in  it  we  are  ethical  unselfconsciously.  In 
this  sense,  Antigone  proclaims  that  “no  one  knows 
whence  the  laws  come;  they  are  everlasting,”1  i.e. 
their  determinate  character  is  absolute  and  has  its 
source  in  the  nature  of  the  thing.  None  the  less, 
however,  the  substance  of  ethical  life  has  a  conscious¬ 
ness  also,  though  the  status  of  this  consciousness  is 
never  higher  than  that  of  being  one  moment. 

94.  Paragraph  145. 

Since  the  laws  and  institutions  of  the  ethical  or¬ 
der  make  up  the  concept  of  freedom,  they  are  the 
substance  or  universal  essence  of  individuals,  who 
are  thus  related  to  them  as  accidents  only.  Whether 
the  individual  exists  or  not  is  all  one  to  the  objec¬ 
tive  ethical  order.  It  alone  is  permanent  and  is  the 
power  regulating  the  life  of  individuals.  Thus  the 
ethical  order  has  been  represented  by  mankind  as 
eternal  justice,  as  gods  absolutely  existent,  in  con¬ 
trast  with  which  the  empty  business  of  individuals 
is  only  a  game  of  see-saw. 

95.  Paragraph  149. 

Duty  is  a  restriction  only  on  the  self-will  of  sub¬ 
jectivity.  It  stands  in  the  way  only  of  that  abstract 
good  to  which  subjectivity  adheres.  When  we  say: 
“We  want  to  be  free,”  the  primary  meaning  of  the 
words  is  simply:  “We  want  abstract  freedom,”  and 
every  institution  and  every  organ  of  the  state  passes 
as  a  restriction  on  freedom  of  that  kind.  Thus  duty 
is  not  a  restriction  on  freedom,  but  only  on  freedom 
in  the  abstract,  i.e.  on  unfreedom.  Duty  is  the  at¬ 
tainment  of  our  essence,  the  winning  of  positive 
freedom. 

1  [This  misquotation  of  Sophocles:  Antigone,  11.  450- 
7,  may  be  due  to  the  transcriber  of  Hegel’s  lecture,  be¬ 
cause  the  lines  are  quoted  correctly  in  the  Remark  to 
Paragraph  166.] 


96  .Paragraph  150. 

To  conform  to  the  ethical  order  on  this  or  that 
particular  occasion  is  hardly  enough  to  make  a  man 
virtuous ;  he  is  virtuous  only  when  this  mode  of  be¬ 
haviour  is  a  fixed  element  in  his  character.  Virtue 
is  rather  like  ethical  virtuosity,2  and  the  reason  why 
we  speak  of  virtue  less  nowadays  than  formerly  is 
that  ethical  living  is  less  like  the  form  of  a  particu¬ 
lar  individual’s  character.  The  French  are  par  excel¬ 
lence  the  people  who  speak  most  of  virtue,  and  the 
reason  is  that  amongst  them  ethical  life  in  the  indi¬ 
vidual3  is  more  a  matter  of  his  own  idiosyncrasies 
or  a  natural  mode  of  conduct.  The  Germans,  on  the 
other  hand,  are  more  thoughtful,  and  amongst  them 
the  same  content  acquires  the  form  of  universality. 

97.  Paragraph  151. 

Just  as  nature  has  its  laws,  and  as  animals,  trees, 
and  the  sun  fulfil  their  law,  so  custom  ( Sitte )  is  the 
law  appropriate  to  free  mind.  Right  and  morality 
are  not  yet  what  ethics  (Sitte)  is,  namely  mind.  In 
right,  particularity  is  still  not  the  particularity  of  the 
concept,  but  only  that  of  the  natural  will.  So,  too, 
at  the  standpoint  of  morality,  self-consciousness 
is  not  yet  mind's  consciousness  of  itself.  At  that 
level  it  is  only  the  worth  of  the  subject  in  himself 
that  is  in  question,  i.e.  the  subject  who  determines 
himself  by  reference  to  good  in  contrast  with  evil, 
who  still  has  self-will  as  the  form  of  his  willing. 
Here,  however,  at  the  standpoint  of  ethics,  the  will 
is  mind’s  will  and  it  has  a  content  which  is  substan¬ 
tive  and  in  conformity  with  itself. 

Education  is  the  art  of  making  men  ethical.  It  be¬ 
gins  with  pupils  whose  life  is  at  the  instinctive  level 
and  shows  them  the  way  to  a  second  birth,  the  way 
to  change  their  instinctive  nature  into  a  second,  in¬ 
tellectual,  nature,  and  makes  this  intellectual  level 
habitual  to  them.  At  this  point  the  clash  between  the 
natural  and  the  subjective  will  disappears,  the  sub¬ 
ject’s  internal  struggle  dies  away.  To  this  extent, 
habit  is  part  of  ethical  life  as  it  is  of  philosophic 
thought  also,  since  such  thought  demands  that  mind 
be  trained  against  capricious  fancies,  and  that  these 
be  destroyed  and  overcome  to  leave  the  way  clear 
for  rational  thinking.  It  is  true  that  a  man  is  killed 
by  habit,  i.e.  if  he  has  once  come  to  feel  completely 
at  home  in  life,  if  he  has  become  mentally  and  physi¬ 
cally  dull,  and  if  the  clash  between  subjective  con¬ 
sciousness  and  mental  activity  has  disappeared ;  for 
man  is  active  only  in  so  far  as  he  has  not  attained 
his  end  and  wills  to  develop  his  potentialities  and 
vindicate  himself  in  struggling  to  attain  it.  When 
this  has  been  fully  achieved,  activity  and  vitality  are 
at  an  end,  and  the  result — loss  of  interest  in  life — 

2  [Heroes  (“ethical  virtuosi”)  lived  in  uncivilized 
conditions  (see  Addition  to  Paragraph  93)  and  there 
was  no  ethical  life  in  society  as  they  found  it;  but  since 
they  introduced  ethical  institutions  for  the  first  time 
(see  Remarks  to  Paragraphs  167  and  203),  they  dis¬ 
played  virtue  as  a  kind  of  virtuosity.  Nowadays,  ethical 
life  is  common  to  everyone  and  consists  in  conformity  to 
the  existing  order,  not  in  divergence  from  it.] 

3  [Reading  das  Sittliche  am  Individuum,  with  Las- 
son.] 


ADDITIONS 


is  mental  or  physical  death. 

98.  Paragraph  153. 

The  educational  experiments,  advocated  by  Rous¬ 
seau  in  Emile ,  of  withdrawing  children  from  the 
common  life  of  every  day  and  bringing  them  up  in 
the  country,  have  turned  out  to  be  futile,  since  no 
success  can  attend  an  attempt  to  estrange  people 
from  the  laws  of  the  world.  Even  if  the  young  have 
to  be  educated  in  solitude,  it  is  still  useless  to  hope 
that  the  fragrance  of  the  intellectual  world  will  not 
ultimately  permeate  this  solitude  or  that  the  power 
of  the  world  mind  is  too  feeble  to  gain  the  mastery 
of  those  outlying  regions.  It  is  by  becoming  a  citizen 
of  a  good  state  that  the  individual  first  comes  into 
his  right. 

99.  Paragraph  153. 

A  slave  can  have  no  duties;  only  a  free  man  has 
them.  If  all  rights  were  put  on  one  side  and  all  duties 
on  the  other,  the  whole  would  be  dissolved,  since 
their  identity  alone  is  the  fundamental  thing,  and  it 
is  to  this  that  we  have  here  to  hold  fast. 

100.  Paragraph  156. 

Ethical  life  is  not  abstract  like  the  good,  but  is 
intensely  actual.  Mind  has  actuality,  and  individuals 
are  accidents  of  this  actuality.  Thus  in  dealing  with 
ethical  life,  only  two  views  are  possible:  either  we 
start  from  the  substantiality  of  the  ethical  order,  or 
else  we  proceed  atomistically  and  build  on  the  basis 
of  single  individuals.  This  second  point  of  view  ex¬ 
cludes  mind  because  it  leads  only  to  a  juxtaposition. 
Mind,  however,  is  not  something  single,  but  is  the 
unity  of  the  single  and  the  universal. 

10 1.  Paragraph  158. 

Love  means  in  general  terms  the  consciousness  of 
my  unity  with  another,  so  that  I  am  not  in  selfish 
isolation  but  win  my  self-consciousness  only  as  the 
renunciation  of  my  independence  and  through  know¬ 
ing  myself  as  the  unity  of  myself  with  another  and 
of  the  other  with  me.  Love,  however,  is  feeling,  i.e. 
ethical  life  in  the  form  of  something  natural.  In  the 
state,  feeling  disappears;  there  we  are  conscious  of 
unity  as  law ;  there  the  content  must  be  rational  and 
known  to  us.  The  first  moment  in  love  is  that  I  do 
not  wish  to  be  a  self-subsistentand  independent  per¬ 
son  and  that,  if  I  were,  then  I  would  feel  defective 
and  incomplete.  The  second  moment  is  that  I  find 
myself  in  another  person,  that  I  count  for  something 
in  the  other,  while  the  other  in  turn  comes  to  count 
for  something  in  me.  Love,  therefore,  is  the  most 
tremendous  contradiction ;  the  Understanding  can¬ 
not  resolve  it  since  there  is  nothing  more  stubborn 
than  this  point  ( Punktualitat )  of  self-consciousness 
which  is  negated  and  which  nevertheless  I  ought  to 
possess  as  affirmative.  Love  is  at  once  the  propound¬ 
ing  and  the  resolving  of  this  contradiction.  As  the 
resolving  of  it,  love  is  unity  of  an  ethical  type. 

102.  Paragraph  15Q. 

The  right  of  the  family  properly  consists  in  the 
fact  that  its  substantiality  should  have  determinate 


existence.  Thus  it  is  a  right  against  externality  and 
against  secessions  from  the  family  unity.  On  the  oth¬ 
er  hand,  to  repeat,  love  is  a  feeling,  something  sub¬ 
jective,  against  which  unity  cannot  make  itself  ef¬ 
fective.  The  demand  for  unity  can  be  sustained,  then, 
only  in  relation  to  such  things  as  are  by  nature  ex¬ 
ternal  and  not  conditioned  by  feeling. 

103.  Paragraph  161. 

Marriage  is  in  essence  an  ethical  tie.  Formerly,  es¬ 
pecially  in  most  systems  of  natural  law,  attention 
was  paid  only  to  the  physical  side  of  marriage  or  to 
its  natural  character.  Consequently,  it  was  treated 
only  as  a  sex  relationship,  and  this  completely  barred 
the  way  to  its  other  characteristics.  This  is  crude 
enough,  but  it  is  no  less  so  to  think  of  it  as  only  a 
civil  contract,  and  even  Kant  does  this.  On  this  view, 
the  parties  are  bound  by  a  contract  of  mutual  ca¬ 
price,  and  marriage  is  thus  degraded  to  the  level  of 
a  contract  for  reciprocal  use.  A  third  view  of  mar¬ 
riage  is  that  which  bases  it  on  love  alone,  but  this 
must  be  rejected  like  the  other  two,  since  love  is  only 
a  feeling  and  so  is  exposed  in  every  respect  to  con¬ 
tingency,  a  guise  which  ethical  life  may  not  assume. 
Marriage,  therefore,  is  to  be  more  precisely  char¬ 
acterized  as  ethico-legal  ( rechtlich  sittliche)  love, 
and  this  eliminates  from  marriage  the  transient, 
fickle,  and  purely  subjective  aspects  of  love. 

104.  Paragraph  162. 

Amongst  peoples  who  hold  the  female  sex  in  scant 
respect,  marriages  are  arranged  by  the  parents  at 
will  without  consulting  the  young  people.  The  latter 
raise  no  objection,  since  at  that  level  of  culture  the 
particularity  of  feeling  makes  no  claims  for  itself. 
For  the  woman  it  is  only  a  matter  of  getting  a  hus¬ 
band,  for  the  man,  of  getting  a  wife.  In  other  social 
conditions,  considerations  of  wealth,  connexions,  po¬ 
litical  ends,  may  be  the  determining  factor.  In  such 
circumstances,  great  hardships  may  arise  through 
making  marriage  a  means  to  other  ends.  Nowadays, 
however,  the  subjective  origin  of  marriage,  the  state 
of  being  in  love,  is  regarded  as  the  only  important 
originating  factor.  Here  the  position  is  represented 
to  be  that  a  man  must  wait  until  his  hour  has  struck 
and  that  he  can  bestow  his  love  only  on  one  specific 
individual. 

105.  Paragraph  163. 

The  distinction  between  marriage  and  concubinage 
is  that  the  latter  is  chiefly  a  matter  of  satisfying  nat¬ 
ural  desire,  while  this  satisfaction  is  made  secondary 
in  the  former.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  physical  ex¬ 
periences  may  be  mentioned  in  married  life  without 
a  blush,  although  outside  the  marriage  tie  their  men¬ 
tion  would  produce  a  sense  of  shame.  But  it  is  on 
this  account,  too,  that  marriage  must  be  regarded  as 
in  principle  indissoluble,  for  the  end  of  marriage  is 
the  ethical  end,  an  end  so  lofty  that  everything  else 
is  manifestly  powerless  against  it  and  made  subject 
to  it.  Marriage  is  not  to  be  dissolved  because  of  pas¬ 
sion,  since  passion  is  subordinate  to  it.  But  it  is  not 
indissoluble  except  in  principle,  since  as  Christ  says, 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


134 

only  “for  the  hardness  of  your  heart”1  is  divorce  es¬ 
tablished.  Since  marriage  has  feeling  for  one  of  its 
moments,  it  is  not  absolute  but  weak  and  potential¬ 
ly  dissoluble.  Legislators,  however,  must  make  its 
dissolution  as  difficult  as  possible  and  uphold  the 
right  of  the  ethical  order  against  caprice. 

106.  Paragraph  164. 

Friedrich  von  Schlegel  in  his  Lucinde ,2  and  a  fol¬ 
lower  of  his  in  the  Brief e  eines  Ungenannten ,8  have 
put  forward  the  view  that  the  wedding  ceremony  is 
superfluous  and  a  formality  which  might  be  discard¬ 
ed.  Their  reason  is  that  love  is,  so  they  say,  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  marriage  and  that  the  celebration  therefore 
detracts  from  its  worth.  Surrender  to  sensual  im¬ 
pulse  is  here  represented  as  necessary  to  prove  the 
freedom  and  inwardness  of  love — an  argument  not 
unknown  to  seducers. 

It  must  be  noticed  in  connexion  with  sex-relations 
that  a  girl  in  surrendering  her  body  loses  her  honour. 
With  a  man,  however,  the  case  is  otherwise,  because 
he  has  a  field  for  ethical  activity  outside  the  family. 
A  girl  is  destined  in  essence  for  the  marriage  tie  and 
for  that  only;  it  is  therefore  demanded  of  her  that 
her  love  shall  take  the  form  of  marriage  and  that  the 
different  moments  in  love  shall  attain  their  true  ra¬ 
tional  relation  to  each  other. 

107.  Paragraph  166. 

Women  are  capable  of  education,  but  they  are  not 
made  for  activities  which  demand  a  universal  faculty 
such  as  the  more  advanced  sciences,  philosophy,  and 
certain  forms  of  artistic  production.  Women  may 
have  happy  ideas,  taste,  and  elegance,  but  they  can- 
net  attain  to  the  ideal.4  The  difference  between  men 
and  women  is  like  that  between  animals  and  plants. 
Men  correspond  to  animals,  while  women  correspond 
to  plants  because  their  development  is  more  placid 
and  the  principle  that  underlies  it  is  the  rather  vague 
unity  of  feeling.  When  women  hold  the  helm  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  the  state  is  at  once  in  jeopardy,  because 
women  regulate  their  actions  not  by  the  demands  of 
universality  but  by  arbitrary  inclinations  and  opin¬ 
ions.  Women  are  educated — who  knows  how? — as 
it  were  by  breathing  in  ideas,  by  living  rather  than 
by  acquiring  knowledge.  The  status  of  manhood,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  attained  only  by  the  stress  of 
thought  and  much  technical  exertion. 

108.  Paragraph  168. 

A  sense  of  shame — to  go  no  farther — is  a  bar  to 
consanguineous  marriage.  But  this  repugnance  finds 
justification  in  the  concept  of  the  thing.  What  is  al¬ 
ready  united,  I  mean,  cannot  be  united  for  the  first 
time  by  marriage.  It  is  a  commonplace  of  stock- 
breeding  that  the  offspring  is  comparatively  weak 
when  animals  of  the  same  stock  are  mated,  since  if 

1  [Matthew,  19.8;  Mark,  10.5] 

2  [Berlin,  1799.] 

3  Liibeck  and  Leipzig,  1800.  [“ Anonymous  Letters,” 
i.e.  Schleiermacher’s  anonymously  published  defence  of 
Lucinde  against  the  charge  of  immorality.] 

4  [ Ideate .  By  this  word  Hegel  means  “the  Beautiful 
and  whatever  tends  thither”  ( Science  of  Logic,  i.  163, 
footnote).] 


there  is  to  be  unification  there  must  first  be  division. 
The  force  of  generation, as  of  mind,  is  all  the  greater, 
the  greater  the  oppositions  out  of  which  it  is  repro¬ 
duced.  Familiarity,  close  acquaintance,  the  habit  of 
common  pursuits, should  not  precede  marriage;  they 
should  come  about  for  the  first  time  within  it.  And 
their  development  has  all  the  more  value,  the  richer 
it  is  and  the  more  facets  it  has. 

109.  Paragraph  172. 

In  many  legal  codes  the  wider  circle  of  the  clan  is 
adhered  to,  and  this  is  regarded  as  the  essential  bond, 
while  the  other  bond,  that  of  each  particular  family, 
appears  less  important  in  comparison.  Thus  in  the 
older  Roman  law,  the  wife  in  the  easily  dissolved 
type  of  marriage  stood  in  a  closer  relation  to  her 
kinsfolk  than  to  her  husband  and  children.  Under 
feudal  law,  again,  the  maintenance  of  the  splendor 
familiae  made  it  necessary  for  only  the  males  of 
the  family  to  be  reckoned  members  and  for  the 
clan  as  a  whole  to  count  as  the  important  thing, 
while  the  newly  founded  family  disappeared  in 
comparison.  Nevertheless,  each  new  family  is  the 
essential  thing  in  contrast  with  the  more  remote 
connexions  of  clan-kinship,  and  parents  and  chil¬ 
dren  form  the  nucleus  proper  as  opposed  to  the 
clan,  which  is  also  in  certain  sense  called  a  “fam¬ 
ily.”  Hence  an  individual’s  relation  to  his  wealth 
must  have  a  more  essential  connexion  with  his  mar¬ 
riage  than  with  the  wider  circle  of  his  kin. 

no.  Paragraph  173. 

The  relation  of  love  between  husband  and  wife  is 
in  itself  not  objective,  because  even  if  their  feeling  is 
their  substantial  unity,  still  this  unity  has  no  objec¬ 
tivity.  Such  an  objectivity  parents  first  acquire  in 
their  children,  in  whom  they  can  see  objectified  the 
entirety  of  their  union.  In  the  child,  a  mother  loves 
its  father  and  he  its  mother.  Both  have  their  love 
objectified  for  them  in  the  child.  While  in  theirgoods 
their  unity  is  embodied  only  in  an  external  thing,  in 
their  children  it  is  embodied  in  a  spiritual  one  in 
which  the  parents  are  loved  and  which  they  love. 

hi.  Paragraph  174. 

Man  has  to  acquire  for  himself  the  position  which 
he  ought  to  attain ;  he  is  not  already  in  possession  of 
it  by  instinct.  It  is  on  this  fact  that  the  child’s  right 
to  education  is  based.  Peoples  under  patriarchal  gov¬ 
ernment  are  in  the  same  position  as  children ;  they 
are  fed  from  central  stores  and  not  regarded  as  self- 
subsistent  and  adults.  The  services  which  may  be  de¬ 
manded  from  children  should  therefore  have  educa¬ 
tion  as  their  sole  end  and  be  relevant  thereto ;  they 
must  not  be  ends  in  themselves,  since  a  child  in  slav¬ 
ery  is  in  the  most  unethical  of  all  situations  what¬ 
ever.  One  of  the  chief  factors  in  education  is  disci¬ 
pline,  the  purport  of  which  is  to  break  down  the 
child’s  self-will  and  thereby  eradicate  his  purely  nat¬ 
ural  and  sensuous  self.  We  must  not  expect  to  achieve 
this  by  mere  goodness,  since  it  is  just  the  immediate 
will  which  acts  on  immediate  fancies  and  caprices, 
not  on  reasons  and  representative  thinking.  If  we 


ADDITIONS 


advance  reasons  to  children,  we  leave  it  open  to  them 
to  decide  whether  the  reasons  are  weighty  or  not, 
and  thus  we  make  everything  depend  on  their  whim. 
So  far  as  children  are  concerned,  universality  and 
the  substance  of  things  reside  in  their  parents,  and 
this  implies  that  children  must  be  obedient.  If  the 
feeling  of  subordination,  producing  the  longing  to 
grow  up,  is  not  fostered  in  children,  they  become 
forward  and  impertinent. 

1 12.  Paragraph  175. 

As  a  child,  man  must  have  lived  with  his  parents 
encircled  by  their  love  and  trust,  and  rationality 
must  appear  in  him  as  his  very  own  subjectivity.  In 
the  early  years  it  is  education  by  the  mother  espe¬ 
cially  which  is  important,  since  ethical  principles 
must  be  implanted  in  the  child  in  the  form  of  feel¬ 
ing.  It  is  noteworthy  that  on  the  whole  children  love 
their  parents  less  than  their  parents  love  them.  The 
reason  for  this  is  that  they  are  gradually  increasing 
in  strength,  and  are  learning  to  stand  on  their  own 
feet,  and  so  are  leaving  their  parents  behind  them. 
The  parents,  on  the  other  hand,  possess  in  their  chil¬ 
dren  the  objective  embodiment  of  their  union. 

1 13.  Paragraph  176. 

It  is  because  marriage  depends  entirely  on  feeling, 
something  subjective  and  contingent,  that  it  may  be 
dissolved.  The  state,  on  the  other  hand,  is  not  sub¬ 
ject  to  partition,  because  it  rests  on  law.  To  be  sure, 
marriage  ought  to  be  indissoluble,  but  here  again  we 
have  to  stop  at  this  “ought” ;  yet,  since  marriage  is 
an  ethical  institution,  it  cannot  be  dissolved  at  will 
but  only  by  an  ethical  authority,  whether  the  church 
or  the  law  court.  If  the  parties  are  completely  es¬ 
tranged,  e.g.  owing  to  adultery,  then  even  the  ec¬ 
clesiastical  authority  must  permit  divorce. 

1 14.  Paragraph  180. 

In  earlier  times,  a  Roman  father  had  the  right  to 
disinherit  his  children  and  even  kill  them.  Later  he 
lost  both  these  rights.  Attempts  were  made  to  forge 
into  a  legal  system  this  incoherence  between  un¬ 
ethical  institutions  and  devices  to  rob  them  of  that 
character,  and  it  is  the  retention  of  this  incoher¬ 
ence  which  constitutes  the  deficiency  and  difficulty 
of  the  German  law  of  inheritance.  To  be  sure,  the 
right  to  make  a  will  must  be  conceded ;  but  in  con¬ 
ceding  it  our  point  of  view  must  be  that  this  right 
of  free  choice  arises  or  is  magnified  with  the  disper¬ 
sion  and  estrangement  of  the  members  of  the  family. 
Further,  the  so-called  “family  of  friends”  which 
testamentary  disposition  brings  with  it  may  be  ad¬ 
mitted  only  in  defect  of  members  of  the  family  prop¬ 
er,  i.e.  of  spouse  and  children.  To  make  a  will  at  all 
entails  something  obnoxious  and  disagreeable,  be¬ 
cause  in  making  it  I  reveal  the  names  of  my  favour¬ 
ites.  Favour,  however,  is  arbitrary ;  it  may  be  gained 
surreptitiously  by  a  variety  of  expedients,  it  may  de¬ 
pend  on  all  sorts  of  foolish  reasons,  and  as  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  having  his  name  included  in  a  will,  a  bene¬ 
ficiary  may  be  required  to  subject  himself  to  the 
most  abject  servilities.  In  England,  the  home  of  all 


135 

sorts  of  eccentricity,  there  is  no  end  to  the  folly  end 
whimsicality  of  bequests. 

1 15.  Paragraph  181. 

The  starting-point  for  the  universal  here  is  the 
self-subsistence  of  the  particular,  and  the  ethical  or¬ 
der  seems  therefore  to  be  lost  at  this  point,  since  it 
is  precisely  the  identity  of  the  family  which  con¬ 
sciousness  takes  to  be  the  primary  thing,  the  divine, 
and  the  source  of  obligation.  Now,  however,  a  sit¬ 
uation  arises  in  which  the  particular  is  to  be  my  pri¬ 
mary  determining  principle,  and  thus  my  determinacy 
by  ethical  factors  has  been  annulled.  But  this  is  noth¬ 
ing  but  a  pure  mistake,  since,  while  I  suppose  that  I 
am  adhering  to  the  particular,  the  universal  and  the 
necessity  of  the  link  between  particulars  remains  the 
primary  and  essential  thing.  I  am  thus  altogether  on 
the  level  of  show,  and  while  my  particularity  remains 
my  determining  principle,  i.e.  my  end,  I  am  for  that 
very  reason  the  servant  of  the  universal  which  prop¬ 
erly  retains  power  over  me  in  the  last  resort. 

1 16.  Paragraph  182. 

Civil  society  is  the  [stage  of]  difference  which  in¬ 
tervenes  between  the  family  and  the  state,  even  if  its 
formation  follows  later  in  time  than  that  of  the  state, 
because,  as  [the  stage  of]  difference,  it  presupposes  the 
state ;  to  subsist  itself,  it  must  have  the  state  before 
its  eyes  as  something  self-subsistent.  Moreover,  the 
creation  of  civil  society  is  the  achievement  of  the 
modern  world  which  has  for  the  first  time  given  all 
determinations  of  the  Idea  their  due.  If  the  state 
is  represented  as  a  unity  of  different  persons,  as  a 
unity  which  is  only  a  partnership,  then  what  is 
really  meant  is  only  civil  society.  Many  modern 
constitutional  lawyers  have  been  able  to  bring  with¬ 
in  their  purview  no  theory  of  the  state  but  this.  In 
civil  society  each  member  is  his  own  end,  everything 
else  is  nothing  to  him.  But  except  in  contact  with 
others  he  cannot  attain  the  whole  compass  of  his 
ends,  and  therefore  these  others  are  means  to  the 
end  of  the  particular  member.  A  particular  end,  how¬ 
ever,  assumes  the  form  of  universality  through  this 
relation  to  other  people,  and  it  is  attained  in  the  si¬ 
multaneous  attainment  of  the  welfare  of  others.  Since 
particularity  is  inevitably  conditioned  by  universal¬ 
ity,  the  whole  sphere  of  civil  society  is  the  territory 
of  mediation  where  there  is  free  play  for  every  idio¬ 
syncrasy,  every  talent,  every  accident  of  birth  and 
fortune,  and  where  waves  of  every  passion  gush  forth, 
regulated  only  by  reason  glinting  through  them.  Par¬ 
ticularity,  restricted  by  universality,  is  the  only 
standard  whereby  each  particular  member  promotes 
his  welfare. 

1 17.  Paragraph  184. 

Here  ethical  life  is  split  into  its  extremes  and  lost ; 
the  immediate  unity  of  the  family  has  fallen  apart 
into  a  plurality.  Reality  here  is  externality,  the  de¬ 
composing  of  the  concept,  the  self-subsistence  of  its 
moments  which  have  now  won  their  freedom  and 
their  determinate  existence.  Though  in  civil  society 
universal  and  particular  have  fallen  apart,  yet  both 


t36  PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


are  still  reciprocally  bound  together  and  conditioned. 
While  each  of  them  seems  to  do  just  the  opposite  to 
the  other  and  supposes  that  it  can  exist  only  by  keep¬ 
ing  the  other  at  arm’s  length,  none  the  less  each  still 
conditions  the  other.  Thus,  for  example,  most  peo¬ 
ple  regard  the  paying  of  taxes  as  injurious  to  their 
particular  interest,  as  something  inimical  and  ob¬ 
structive  of  their  own  ends.  Yet,  however  true  this 
seems ,  particular  ends  cannot  be  attained  without 
the  help  of  the  universal,  and  a  country  where  no 
taxeswere  paid  could  not  be  singled  out  asinvigorat- 
ing  its  citizens.  Similarly,  it  might  seem  that  univer¬ 
sal  ends  would  be  more  readily  attainable  if  the  uni¬ 
versal  absorbed  the  strength  of  the  particulars  in  the 
way  described,  for  instance,  in  Plato’s  Republic.  But 
this,  too,  is  only  an  illusion,  since  both  universal  and 
particular  turn  into  one  another  and  exist  only  for 
and  by  means  of  one  another.  If  I  further  my  ends, 
I  further  the  ends  of  the  universal,  and  this  in  turn 
furthers  my  end. 

ii 8>.  Paragraph  185. 

Particularity  by  itself  is  measureless  excess,  and  the 
forms  of  this  excess  are  themselves  measureless.  By 
means  of  his  ideas  and  reflections  man  expands  his 
desires,  which  are  not  a  closed  circle  like  animal  in¬ 
stinct,  and  carries  them  on  to  the  false  infinite.  At 
the  other  end  of  the  scale,  however,  want  and  desti¬ 
tution  are  measureless  too,  and  the  discord  of  this 
situation  can  be  brought  into  a  harmony  only  by  the 
state  which  has  powers  over  it.  Plato  wished  to  ex¬ 
clude  particularity  from  his  state,  but  this  is  no  help, 
since  help  on  these  lines  would  contravene  the  infi¬ 
nite  right  of  the  Idea  to  allow  freedom  to  the  partic¬ 
ular.  It  was  in  the  Christian  religion  in  the  first  place 
that  the  right  of  subjectivity  arose,  together  with  the 
infinity  of  self-awareness,  and  while  granting  this 
right,  the  whole  order  must  at  the  same  time  retain 
strength  enough  to  put  particularity  in  harmony 
with  the  unity  of  ethical  life. 

1 19.  Paragraph  187. 

By  educated  men,  we  may  prima  facie  understand 
those  who  without  the  obtrusion  of  personal  idio¬ 
syncrasy  can  do  what  others  do.  It  is  precisely  this 
idiosyncrasy,  however,  which  uneducated  men  dis¬ 
play,  since  their  behaviour  is  not  governed  by  the 
universal  characteristics  of  the  situation.  Similarly, 
an  uneducated  man  is  apt  to  hurt  the  feelings  of  his 
neighbours.  He  simply  lets  himself  go  and  does  not 
reflect  on  the  susceptibilities  of  others.  It  is  not  that 
he  intends  to  hurt  them,  but  his  conduct  is  not  con¬ 
sonant  with  his  intention.  Thus  education  rubs  the 
edges  off  particular  characteristics  until  a  man  con¬ 
ducts  himself  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  the 
thing.  Genuine  originality,  which  produces  the  real 
thing,  demands  genuine  education,  while  bastard 
originality  adopts  eccentricities  which  only  enter  the 
heads  of  the  uneducated. 

120.  Paragraph  189. 

There  are  certain  universal  needs  such  as  food, 
drink,  clothing,  &c.,  and  it  depends  entirely  on  ac¬ 


cidental  circumstances  how  these  are  satisfied.  The 
fertility  of  the  soil  varies  from  place  to  place,  har¬ 
vests  vary  from  year  to  year,  one  man  is  industrious, 
another  indolent.  But  this  medley  of  arbitrariness 
generates  universal  characteristics  by  its  own  work¬ 
ing;  and  this  apparently  scattered  and  thoughtless 
sphere  is  upheld  by  a  necessity  which  automatically 
enters  it.  To  discover  this  necessary  element  here  is 
the  object  of  political  economy,  a  science  which  is 
a  credit  to  thought  because  it  finds  laws  for  a  mass 
of  accidents.  It  is  an  interesting  spectacle  here  to  see 
all  chains  of  activity  leading  back  to  the  same  point  ; 
particular  spheres  of  action  fall  into  groups,  influ¬ 
ence  others,  and  are  helped  or  hindered  by  others. 
The  most  remarkable  thing  here  is  this  mutual  in¬ 
terlocking  of  particulars,  which  is  what  one  would 
least  expect  because  at  first  sight  everything  seems 
to  be  given  over  to  the  arbitrariness  of  the  individual, 
and  it  has  a  parallel  in  the  solar  system  which  dis¬ 
plays  to  the  eye  only  irregular  movements,  though  its 
laws  may  none  the  less  be  ascertained. 

12 1.  Paragraph  190. 

An  animal  is  restricted  to  particularity.  It  has  its 
instincts  and  means  of  satisfying  them,  means  which 
are  limited  and  which  it  cannot  overstep.  Some  in¬ 
sects  are  parasitic  on  a  certain  kind  of  plant;  some 
animals  have  a  wider  range  and  can  live  in  different 
climates,  but  there  is  always  a  restriction  preventing 
them  from  having  the  range  open  to  man.  The  need 
of  shelter  and  clothing,  the  necessity  of  cooking  his 
food  to  make  it  fit  to  eat  and  to  overcome  its  nat¬ 
ural  rawness,  both  mean  that  man  has  less  comfort 
than  an  animal,  and  indeed,  as  mind,  he  ought  to 
have  less.  Intelligence,  with  its  grasp  of  distinctions, 
multiplies  these  human  needs,  and  since  taste  and 
utility  become  criteria  of  judgement,  even  the  needs 
themselves  are  affected  thereby.  Finally,  it  is  no 
longer  need  but  opinion  which  has  to  be  satisfied, 
and  it  is  just  the  educated  man  who  analyses  the 
concrete  into  its  particulars.  The  very  multiplication 
of  needs  involves  a  check  on  desire,  because  when 
many  things  are  in  use,  the  urge  to  obtain  any  one 
thing  which  might  be  needed  is  less  strong,  and  this 
is  a  sign  that  want  altogether  is  not  so  imperious. 

122.  Paragraph  191 . 

What  the  English  call  “comfort”  is  something  in¬ 
exhaustible  and  illimitable.  [Others  can  discover  to 
you  that  what  you  take  to  be]  comfort  at  any  stage 
is  discomfort,  and  these  discoveries  never  come  to  an 
end.  Hence  the  need  for  greater  comfort  does  not  ex¬ 
actly  arise  within  you  directly ;  it  is  suggested  to  you 
by  those  who  hope  to  make  a  profit  from  its  creation. 

123.  Paragraph  192. 

The  fact  that  I  must  direct  my  conduct  by  refer¬ 
ence  to  others  introduces  here  the  form  of  universal¬ 
ity.  It  is  from  others  that  I  acquire  the  means  of  sat¬ 
isfaction  and  I  must  accordingly  accept  their  views. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  I  am  compelled  to  pro¬ 
duce  means  for  the  satisfaction  of  others.  We  play  in¬ 
to  each  other’s  hands  and  so  hang  together.  To  this 


ADDITIONS 


extent  everything  private  becomes  something  social. 
In  dress  fashions  and  hours  of  meals,  there  are  cer¬ 
tain  conventions  which  we  have  to  accept  because  in 
these  things  it  is  not  worth  the  trouble  to  insist  on 
displaying  one’s  own  discernment.  The  wisest  thing 
here  is  to  do  as  others  do. 

124  .Paragraph  195. 

The  entire  Cynical  mode  of  life  adopted  by  Di¬ 
ogenes  was  nothing  more  or  less  than  a  product  of 
Athenian  social  life,  and  what  determined  it  was  the 
way  of  thinking  against  which  his  whole  manner 
protested.  Hence  it  was  not  independent  of  social 
conditions  but  simply  their  result;  it  was  itself  a 
rude  product  of  luxury.  When  luxury  is  at  its  height, 
distress  and  depravity  are  equally  extreme,  and  in 
such  circumstances  Cynicism  is  the  outcome  of  op¬ 
position  to  refinement. 

125.  Paragraph  196. 

There  is  hardly  any  raw  material  which  does  not 
need  to  be  worked  on  before  use.  Even  air  has  to  be 
worked  for  because  we  have  to  warm  it.  Water  is  per¬ 
haps  the  only  exception,  because  we  can  drink  it  as 
we  find  it.  It  is  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow  and  the  toil 
of  his  hands  that  man  obtains  the  means  to  satisfy 
his  needs. 

126.  Paragraph  197. 

The  savage  is  lazy  and  is  distinguished  from  the 
educated  man  by  his  brooding  stupidity,  because 
practical  education  is  just  education  in  the  need  and 
habit  of  being  busy.  A  clumsy  man  always  produces 
a  result  he  does  not  intend ;  he  is  not  master  of  his 
own  job. The  skilled  worker,  on  the  other  hand,  may 
be  said  to  be  the  man  who  produces  the  thing  as  it 
ought  to  be  and  who  hits  the  nail  on  the  head  with¬ 
out  shrinking  ( keine  Sprodigkeit  in  seinem  subjek- 
tiven  Tun  gegen  den  Zweck  findet). 

127.  Paragraph  201. 

The  ways  and  means  of  sharing  in  the  capital  of 
society  are  left  to  each  man’s  particular  choice,  but 
the  subdivision  of  civil  society  into  different  general 
branches  is  a  necessity.  The  family  is  the  first  pre¬ 
condition  of  the  state,  but  class  divisions  are  the  sec¬ 
ond.  The  importance  of  the  latter  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  although  private  persons  are  self-seeking,  they 
are  compelled  to  direct  their  attention  to  others. 
Here  then  is  the  root  which  connects  self-seeking  to 
the  universal,  i.e.  to  the  state,  whose  care  it  must  be 
that  this  tie  is  a  hard  and  fast  one. 

128.  Paragraph  203. 

In  our  day  agriculture  is  conducted  on  methods 
devised  by  reflective  thinking,  i.e.  like  a  factory.1 
This  has  given  it  a  character  like  that  of  industry 
and  contrary  to  its  natural  one.  Still,  the  agricul¬ 
tural  class  will  always  retain  a  mode  of  life  which  is 
patriarchal  and  the  substantial  frame  of  mind  prop- 

1  [On  the  authority  of  Arthur  Young’s  Lincolnshire 
(1799),  Halevy  remarks  that,  if  you  were  in  the  offices 
of  a  certain  farm  there,  “you  could  not  tell  whether  you 
were  on  a  farm  or  in  the  heart  of  a  large  factory”  ( His¬ 
tory  of  the  English  People  in  1815,  Bk.  ii,  Chap,  i).] 


137 

er  to  such  a  life.  The  member  of  this  class  accepts 
unreflectively  what  is  given  him  and  takes  what  he 
gets,  thanking  God  for  it  and  living  in  faith  and  con¬ 
fidence  that  this  goodness  will  continue.  What  comes 
to  him  suffices  him  ;  once  it  is  consumed,  more  comes 
again.  This  is  the  simple  attitude  of  mind  not  con¬ 
centrated  on  the  struggle  for  riches.  It  may  be  de¬ 
scribed  as  the  attitude  of  the  old  nobility  which  just 
ate  what  there  was.  So  far  as  this  class  is  concerned, 
nature  does  the  major  part,  while  individual  effort  is 
secondary.  In  the  business  class,  however,  it  is  intel¬ 
ligence  which  is  the  essential  thing,  and  natural  prod¬ 
ucts  can  be  treated  only  as  raw  materials. 

129.  Paragraph  204. 

In  the  business  class,  the  individual  is  thrown  back 
on  himself,  and  this  feeling  of  self-hood  is  most  in¬ 
timately  connected  with  the  demand  for  law  and 
order.  The  sense  of  freedom  and  order  has  therefore 
arisen  above  all  in  towns.  The  agricultural  class,  on 
the  other  hand,  has  little  occasion  to  think  of  itself ; 
what  it  obtains  is  the  gift  of  a  stranger,  of  nature. 
Its  feeling  of  dependence  is  fundamental  to  it,  and 
with  this  feeling  there  is  readily  associated  a  willing¬ 
ness  to  submit  to  whatever  may  befall  it  at  other 
men’s  hands.  The  agricultural  class  is  thus  more  in¬ 
clined  to  subservience,  the  business  class  to  freedom. 

130.  Paragraph  207. 

When  we  say  that  a  man  must  be  a  “somebody,” 
we  mean  that  he  should  belong  to  some  specific 
social  class,  since  to  be  a  somebody  means  to  have 
substantive  being.  A  man  with  no  class  is  a  mere 
private  person  and  his  universality  is  not  actualized. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  individual  in  his  particularity 
may  take  himself  as  the  universal  and  presume  that 
by  entering  a  class  he  is  surrendering  himself  to  an 
indignity.  This  is  the  false  idea  that  in  attaining  a 
determinacy  necessary  to  it,  a  thing  is  restricting 
and  surrendering  itself. 

13 1  .Paragraph  209. 

From  one  point  of  view,  it  is  through  the  working 
of  the  system  of  particularity  that  right  becomes  an 
external  compulsion  as  a  protection  of  particular  in¬ 
terests.  Even  though  this  result  is  due  to  the  con¬ 
cept,  right  none  the  less  only  becomes  something 
existent  because  this  is  useful  for  men’s  needs.  To 
become  conscious  in  thought  of  his  right,  man  must 
be  trained  to  think  and  give  up  dallying  with  mere 
sensation.  We  must  invest  the  objects  of  our  thought 
with  the  form  of  universality  and  similarly  we  must 
direct  our  willing  by  a  universal  principle.  It  is  only 
after  man  has  devised  numerous  needs  and  after 
their  acquisition  has  become  intertwined  with  his 
satisfaction,  that  he  can  frame  laws  for  himself. 

132.  Paragraph  211. 

The  sun  and  the  planets  have  their  laws  too,  but 
they  do  not  know  them.  Savages  are  governed  by 
impulses,  customs,  and  feelings,  but  they  are  uncon 
scious  of  this.  When  nght  is  posited  as  law  and  is 
known,  every  accident  of  feeling  vanishes  together 
with  the  form  of  revenge,  sympathy,  and  selfishness, 


i38  PHILOSOPHY 

and  in  this  way  the  right  attains  for  the  first  time  its 
true  determinacyand  is  given  its  due  honour.  It  is  as 
a  result  of  the  discipline  of  comprehending  the  right 
that  the  right  first  becomes  capable  of  universality. 

In  the  course  of  applying  the  laws,  clashes  occur, 
and  in  dealing  with  these  the  judge’s  intelligence  has 
its  proper  scope;  this  is  quite  inevitable,  because 
otherwise  carrying  out  the  law  would  be  something 
mechanical  from  start  to  finish.  But  to  go  so  far  as 
to  get  rid  of  clashes  altogether  by  leaving  much  to 
the  judge’s  discretion  is  a  far  worse  solution,  because 
even  the  clash  is  intrinsic  to  thought,  to  conscious 
thinking  and  its  dialectic,  while  the  mere  fiat  of  a 
judge  would  be  arbitrary. 

It  is  generally  alleged  in  favour  of  customary  law 
that  it  is  “living,”  but  this  vitality,  i.e.  the  identity 
between  the  subject  and  what  the  law  provides,  is 
not  the  whole  essence  of  the  matter.  Law  ( Recht ) 
must  be  known  by  thought,  it  must  be  a  system  in 
itself,  and  only  as  such  can  it  be  recognized  in  a 
civilized  country.  The  recent  denial  that  nations 
“have  a  vocation  to  codify  their  laws”  is  not  only 
an  insult;  it  also  implies  the  absurdity  of  supposing 
that  not  a  single  individual  has  been  endowed  with 
skill  enough  to  bring  into  a  coherent  system  the  end¬ 
less  mass  of  existing  laws.  The  truth  is  that  it  is  just 
systematization,  i.e.  elevation  to  the  universal,  which 
our  time  is  pressing  for  without  any  limit.  A  similar 
view  is  that  collections  of  judgements,  like  those 
available  in  a  Corpus  Juris ,  are  far  superior  to  a 
code  worked  out  in  the  most  general  way.  The  rea¬ 
son  alleged  is  that  such  judgements  always  retain  a 
certain  particularity  and  a  certain  reminiscence  of 
history  which  men  are  unwilling  to  sacrifice.  But  the 
mischievousness  of  such  collections  is  made  clear 
enough  by  the  practice  of  English  law. 

133.  Paragraph  213. 

In  the  higher  relationships  of  marriage,  love,  reli¬ 
gion,  and  the  state,  the  only  aspects  which  can  be¬ 
come  the  subject  of  legislation  are  those  of  such  a 
nature  as  to  permit  of  their  being  in  principle  ex¬ 
ternal.  Still,  in  this  respect  there  is  a  wide  difference 
between  the  laws  of  different  peoples.  The  Chinese, 
for  instance,  have  a  law  requiring  a  husband  to  love 
his  first  wife  more  than  his  other  wives.  If  he  is  con¬ 
victed  of  doing  the  opposite,  corporal  punishment 
follows.  Similarly,  the  legislation  of  the  ancients  in 
earlier  times  was  full  of  precepts  about  uprightness 
and  integrity  which  are  unsuited  by  nature  to  legal 
enactment  because  they  fall  wholly  within  the  field 
of  the  inner  life.  It  is  only  in  the  case  of  the  oath, 
whereby  things  are  brought  home  to  conscience,  that 
uprightness  and  integrity  must  be  taken  into  account 
as  the  substance  of  the  matter. 

134.  Paragraph  214. 

There  is  one  essential  element  in  law  and  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  justice  which  contains  a  measure  of 
contingency  and  which  arises  from  the  fact  that  the 
law  is  a  universal  prescription  which  has  to  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  single  case.  If  you  wished  to  declare 
yourself  against  this  contingency,  you  would  be 


OF  RIGHT 

talking  in  abstractions.  The  measure  of  a  man’s 
punishment,  for  example,  cannot  be  made  equiva¬ 
lent  to  any  determination  of  the  concept  of  punish¬ 
ment,  and  the  decision  made,  whatever  it  be,  is  from 
this  point  of  view  arbitrary  always.  But  this  con¬ 
tingency  is  itself  necessary,  and  if  you  argue  against 
having  a  code  at  all  on  the  ground  that  any  code  is 
incomplete,  you  are  overlooking  just  that  element  of 
law  in  which  completion  is  not  to  be  achieved  and 
which  therefore  must  just  be  accepted  as  it  stands. 

135.  Paragraph  215. 

The  legal  profession,  possessed  of  a  special  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  law,  often  claims  this  knowledge  as  its 
monopoly  and  refuses  to  allow  any  layman  to  dis¬ 
cuss  the  subject.  Physicists  similarly  have  taken 
amiss  Goethe’s  theory  about  colours  1  because  he 
did  not  belong  to  their  craft  and  was  a  poet  into  the 
bargain.  But  we  do  not  need  to  be  shoemakers  to 
know  if  our  shoes  fit,  and  just  as  little  have  we  any 
need  to  be  professionals  to  acquire  knowledge  of 
matters  of  universal  interest.  Law  is  concerned  with 
freedom,  the  worthiest  and  holiest  thing  in  man,  the 
thing  man  must  know  if  it  is  to  have  obligatory 
force  for  him. 

136.  Paragraph  216. 

Completeness  means  the  exhaustive  collection  of 
every  single  thing  pertaining  to  a  given  field,  and  no 
science  or  branch  of  knowledge  can  be  complete  in 
this  sense.  Now  if  we  say  that  philosophy  or  any  one 
of  the  sciences  is  incomplete,  we  are  not  far  from 
holding  that  we  must  wait  until  the  deficiency  is 
made  up,  since  the  best  part  may  still  be  wanting. 
But  take  up  this  attitude  and  advance  is  impossible, 
either  in  geometry,  which  seems  to  be  a  closed 
science  although  new  propositions  do  arise,  or  in 
philosophy,  which  is  always  capable  of  freshness  in 
detail  even  though  its  subject  is  the  universal  Idea. 
In  the  past,  the  universal  law  always  consisted  of 
the  ten  commandments;  now  we  can  see  at  once 
that  not  to  lay  down  the  law  “Thou  shalt  not  kill,” 
on  the  ground  that  a  legal  code  cannot  be  complete, 
is  an  obvious  absurdity.  Any  code  could  be  still 
better — no  effort  of  reflection  is  required  to  justify 
this  affirmation ;  we  can  think  of  the  best,  finest,  and 
noblest  as  still  better,  finer,  and  nobler.  But  a  big 
old  tree  puts  forth  more  and  more  branches  without 
thereby  becoming  a  new  tree ;  though  it  would  be 
silly  to  refuse  to  plant  a  tree  at  all  simply  because  it 
might  produce  new  branches. 

137.  Paragraph  217. 

Law  and  the  right  are  identical  in  the  sense  that 
what  is  implicitly  right  is  posited  in  the  law.  I  pos¬ 
sess  something,  own  a  property,  which  I  occupied 
when  it  was  ownerless.  This  possession  must  now 
further  be  recognized  and  posited  as  mine.  Hence  in 
civil  society  formalities  arise  in  connexion  with  prop¬ 
erty.  Boundary  stones  are  erected  as  a  symbol  for 

1  [Hegel’s  acceptance  of  this  anti-Newtonian  theory, 
e.g.  in  Enc.y  §  320,  gave  great  pleasure  to  Goethe.  For 
a  summary  and  criticism  of  the  theory,  see  e.g.  G.  H. 
Lewes:  Life  of  Goethe ,  Book  V,  chap,  ix.] 


ADDITIONS 


others  to  recognize.  Entries  are  made  in  mortgage 
and  property  registers.  Most  property  in  civil  so¬ 
ciety  is  held  on  contract,  and  contractual  forms  are 
fixed  and  determinate.  Now  we  may  have  an  antip¬ 
athy  to  formalities  of  this  kind  and  we  may  sup¬ 
pose  that  they  only  exist  to  bring  in  money  to  the 
authorities ;  we  may  even  regard  them  as  something 
offensive  and  a  sign  of  mistrust  because  they  impair 
the  validity  of  the  saying:  “ A  man  is  as  good  as  his 
word.”  But  the  formality  is  essential  because  what  is 
inherently  right  must  also  be  posited  as  right.  My 
will  is  a  rational  will ;  it  has  validity,  and  its  validity 
should  be  recognized  by  others.  At  this  point,  then, 
my  subjectivity  and  that  of  others  must  be  set  aside 
and  the  will  must  achieve  the  security,  stability,  and 
objectivity  which  can  be  attained  only  through  such 
formalities. 

138.  Paragraph  218. 

It  seems  to  be  a  contradiction  that  a  crime  com¬ 
mitted  in  society  appears  more  heinous  and  yet  is 
punished  more  leniently.  But  while  it  would  be  im¬ 
possible  for  society  to  leave  a  crime  unpunished, 
since  that  would  be  to  posit  it  as  right,  still  since  so¬ 
ciety  is  sure  of  itself,  a  crime  must  always  be  some¬ 
thing  idiosyncratic  in  comparison,  something  un¬ 
stable  and  exceptional.  The  very  stability  of  society 
gives  a  crime  the  status  of  something  purely  subjec¬ 
tive  which  seems  to  be  the  product  rather  of  natural 
impulse  than  of  a  prudent  will.  In  this  light,  crime 
acquires  a  milder  status,  and  for  this  reason  its  pun¬ 
ishment  too  becomes  milder.  If  society  is  still  inter¬ 
nally  weak,  then  an  example  must  be  made  by  in¬ 
flicting  punishments,  since  punishment  is  itself  an 
example  over  against  the  example  of  crime.  But  in  a 
society  which  is  internally  strong,  the  commission  of 
crime  is  something  so  feeble  that  its  annulment  must 
be  commensurable  with  its  feebleness.  Harsh  pun¬ 
ishments,  therefore,  are  not  unjust  in  and  by  them¬ 
selves  ;  they  are  related  to  contemporary  conditions. 
A  criminal  code  cannot  hold  good  for  all  time,  and 
crimes  are  only  shows  of  reality  which  may  draw 
on  themselves  a  greater  or  lesser  degree  of  disavowal. 

139.  Paragraph  221. 

Since  any  individual  has  the  right  in  judicio  stare , 
he  must  also  know  what  the  law  is  or  otherwise  this 
privilege  would  be  useless  to  him.  But  it  is  also  his 
duty  to  stand  his  trial.  Under  the  feudal  system,  the 
nobles  often  refused  to  stand  their  trial.  They  defied 
the  court  and  alleged  that  the  court  was  wrong  to 
demand  their  appearance.  Feudal  conditions,  how¬ 
ever,  contravened  the  very  idea  of  a  court.  Nowa¬ 
days  monarchs  have  to  recognize  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  court  in  their  private  affairs,  and  in  free  states 
they  commonly  lose  their  case. 

140.  Paragraph  222 . 

A  man  may  be  indignant  if  a  right  which  he  knows 
he  has  is  refused  him  because  he  cannot  prove  it. 
But  if  I  have  a  right,  it  must  at  the  same  time  be  a 
right  posited  in  law.  I  must  be  able  to  explain  and 
prove  it,  and  its  validity  can  only  be  recognized  in 


139 

society  if  its  rightness  in  principle  is  also  made  a 
posited  rightness  in  law. 

141.  Paragraph  224. 

It  is  straightforward  common  sense  to  hold  that 
the  publicity  of  legal  proceedings  is  right  and  just. 
A  strong  reason  against  such  publicity  has  always 
been  the  rank  1  of  justices ;  they  are  unwilling  to  sit 
in  public  and  they  regard  themselves  as  a  sanctuary 
of  law  which  laymen  are  not  to  enter.  But  an  inte¬ 
gral  part  of  justice  is  the  confidence  which  citizens 
have  in  it,  and  it  is  this  which  requires  that  proceed¬ 
ings  shall  be  public.  The  right  of  publicity  depends 
on  the  fact  that  (i)  the  aim  of  the  court  is  justice, 
which  as  universal  falls  under  the  cognizance  of 
everyone,  and  (ii)  it  is  through  publicity  that  the 
citizens  become  convinced  that  the  judgement  was 
actually  just. 

142.  Paragraph  227. 

No  grounds  can  be  adduced  for  supposing  that 
the  judge,  i.e.  the  legal  expert,  should  be  the  only 
person  to  establish  how  the  facts  lie,  for  ability  to  do 
so  depends  on  general,  not  on  purely  legal,  educa¬ 
tion.  Determination  of  the  facts  of  the  case  depends 
on  empirical  details,  on  depositions  about  what  hap¬ 
pened,  and  on  similar  perceptual  data,  or  again  on 
facts  from  which  inferences  can  be  drawn  about  the 
deed  in  question  and  which  make  it  probable  or  im¬ 
probable.  Here  then,  it  is  an  assurance  which  should 
be  required,  not  truth  in  the  higher  sense  in  which 
it  is  always  something  eternal.  Here  such  assurance 
is  subjective  conviction,  or  conscience,  and  the  prob¬ 
lem  is:  What  form  should  this  assurance  take  in  a 
court  of  law?  The  demand,  commonly  made  in  Ger¬ 
man  law,  that  a  criminal  should  confess  his  guilt, 
has  this  to  be  said  for  it,  that  the  right  of  self-con¬ 
sciousness  thereby  attains  a  measure  of  satisfaction  ; 
consciousness  must  chime  in  with  the  judge’s  sen¬ 
tence,  and  it  is  only  when  the  criminal  has  confessed 
that  the  judgement  loses  its  alien  character  so  far  as 
he  is  concerned.  But  a  difficulty  arises  here,  because 
the  criminal  may  lie,  and  the  interest  of  justice  may 
be  jeopardized.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  subjective 
conviction  of  the  judge  is  to  hold  good,  some  hard¬ 
ship  is  once  more  involved,  because  the  accused  is 
no  longer  being  treated  as  a  free  man.  Now  the  mid¬ 
dle  term  between  these  extremes  is  trial  by  jury, 
which  meets  the  demand  that  the  declaration  of 
guilt  or  innocence  shall  spring  from  the  soul  of  the 
accused.2 

143.  Paragraph  229. 

In  civil  society,  universality  is  necessity  only.  When 
we  are  dealing  with  human  needs,  it  is  only  right  as 
such  which  is  steadfast.  But  this  right — only  a  re¬ 
stricted  sphere — has  a  bearing  simply  on  the  protec- 

1  [In  the  eighteenth  century,  judicial  authority  was 
often  still  vested  in  Lords  of  the  Manor.] 

2  [The  verdict  of  his  peers  is  the  verdict  of  the  crimi¬ 
nal’s  own  soul  or  reason  because  reason  is  universal  and 
so  common  to  them  and  to  him  alike.  His  crime  is  his 
subjective  defiance  of  his  reason  or  his  inner  universality 
— see  Part  i,  subsection  3  (c).] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


tion  of  property ;  welfare  is  something  external  to 
right  as  such.  This  welfare,  however,  is  an  essential 
end  in  the  system  of  needs.  Hence  the  universal, 
which  in  the  first  instance  is  the  right  only,  has  to 
be  extended  over  the  whole  field  of  particularity. 
Justice  is  a  big  thing  in  civil  society.  Given  good 
laws,  a  state  can  flourish,  and  freedom  of  property  is 
a  fundamental  condition  of  its  prosperity.  Still, since 
I  am  inextricably  involved  in  particularity,  I  have 
a  right  to  claim  that  in  this  association  with  other 
particulars,  my  particular  welfare  too  shall  be  pro¬ 
moted.  Regard  should  be  paid  to  my  welfare,  to  my 
particular  interest,  and  this  is  done  through  the  po¬ 
lice  and  the  Corporation. 

144.  Paragraph  234. 

Here  nothing  hard  and  fast  can  be  laid  down  and 
no  absolute  lines  can  be  drawn.  Everything  here  is 
personal ;  subjective  opinion  enters  in,  and  the  spirit 
of  the  constitution  and  the  crisis  of  the  day  have  to 
provide  precision  of  detail.  In  time  of  war,  for  in¬ 
stance,  many  a  thing,  harmless  at  other  times,  has  to 
be  regarded  as  harmful.  As  a  result  of  this  presence 
of  accident,  of  personal  arbitrariness,  the  public  au¬ 
thority  acquires  a  measure  of  odium.  When  reflec¬ 
tive  thinking  is  very  highly  developed,  the  public 
authority  may  tend  to  draw  into  its  orbit  everything 
it  possibly  can,  for  in  everything  some  factor  may  be 
found  which  might  make  it  dangerous  in  one  of  its 
bearings.  In  such  circumstances,  the  public  authority 
may  set  to  work  very  pedantically  and  embarrass 
the  day-to-day  life  of  people.  But  however  great 
this  annoyance,  no  objective  line  can  be  drawn  here 
either. 

145.  Paragraph  236. 

The  oversight  and  care  exercised  by  the  public  au¬ 
thority  aims  at  being  a  middle  term  between  an  in¬ 
dividual  and  the  universal  possibility,  afforded  by 
society,  of  attaining  individual  ends.  It  has  to  un¬ 
dertake  street-lighting,  bridge-building,  the  pricing 
of  daily  necessaries,  and  the  care  of  public  health.  In 
this  connexion,  two  main  views  predominate  at  the 
present  time.  One  asserts  that  the  superintendence 
of  everything  properly  belongs  to  the  public  author¬ 
ity,  the  other  that  the  public  authority  has  nothing 
at  all  to  settle  here  because  everyone  will  direct  his 
conduct  according  to  the  needs  of  others.  The  indi¬ 
vidual  must  have  a  right  to  work  for  his  bread  as 
he  pleases,  but  the  public  also  has  a  right  to  insist 
that  essential  tasks  shall  be  properly  done.  Both 
points  of  view  must  be  satisfied,  and  freedom  of 
trade  should  not  be  such  as  to  jeopardize  the  general 
good. 

146.  Paragraph  238. 

To  be  sure,  the  family  has  to  provide  bread  for  its 
members,  but  in  civil  society  the  family  is  something 
subordinate  and  only  lays  the  foundations ;  its  ef¬ 
fective  range  is  no  longer  so  comprehensive.  Civil  so¬ 
ciety  is  rather  the  tremendous  power  which  draws 
men  into  itself  and  claims  from  them  that  they  work 
for  it,  owe  everything  to  it,  and  do  everything  by  its 


means.  If  man  is  to  be  a  member  of  civil  society  in 
this  sense,  he  has  rights  and  claims  against  it  just  as 
he  had  rights  and  claims  in  the  family.  Civil  society 
must  protect  its  members  and  defend  their  rights, 
while  its  rights  impose  duties  on  every  one  of  its 
members. 

147.  Paragraph  239. 

The  line  which  demarcates  the  rights  of  parents 
from  those  of  civil  society  is  very  hard  to  draw  here. 
Parents  usually  suppose  that  in  the  matter  of  educa¬ 
tion  they  have  complete  freedom  and  may  arrange 
everything  as  they  like.  The  chief  opposition  to  any 
form  of  public  education  usually  comes  from  par¬ 
ents  and  it  is  they  who  talk  and  make  an  outcry 
about  teachers  and  schools  because  they  have  a  fad¬ 
dish  dislike  of  them.  None  the  less,  society  has  a 
right  to  act  on  principles  tested  by  its  experience  and 
to  compel  parents  to  send  their  children  to  school,  to 
have  them  vaccinated,  and  so  forth.  The  disputes 
that  have  arisen  in  France  1  between  the  advocates 
of  state  supervision  and  those  who  demand  that  ed¬ 
ucation  shall  be  free,  i.e.  at  the  option  of  the  par¬ 
ents,  are  relevant  here. 

148.  Paragraph  240. 

There  was  an  Athenian  law  compelling  every  citi¬ 
zen  to  give  an  account  of  his  source  of  livelihood.2 
Nowadays  we  take  the  view  that  this  is  nobody’s 
business  but  his  own.  Of  course  every  individual  is 
from  one  point  of  view  independent,  but  he  also 
plays  his  part  in  the  system  of  civil  society,  and 
while  every  man  has  the  right  to  demand  subsistence 
from  it,  it  must  at  the  same  time  protect  him  from 
himself.  It  is  not  simply  starvation  which  is  at  issue ; 
the  further  end  in  view  is  to  prevent  the  formation 
of  a  pauperized  rabble.  Since  civil  society  is  respon¬ 
sible  for  feeding  its  members,  it  also  has  the  right 
to  press  them  to  provide  for  their  own  livelihood. 

149.  Paragraph  244. 

The  lowest  subsistence  level,  that  of  a  rabble  of 
paupers,  is  fixed  automatically,  but  the  minimum 
varies  considerably  in  different  countries.  In  Eng¬ 
land,  even  the  very  poorest  believe  that  they  have 
rights;  this  is  different  from  what  satisfies  the  poor 
in  other  countries.  Poverty  in  itself  does  not  make 
men  into  a  rabble;  a  rabble  is  created  only  when 
there  is  joined  to  poverty  a  disposition  of  mind,  an 
inner  indignation  against  the  rich,  against  society, 
against  the  government,  &c.  A  further  consequence 
of  this  attitude  is  that  through  their  dependence  on 
chance  men  become  frivolous  and  idle,  like  the  Ne¬ 
apolitan  lazzaroni  for  example.  In  this  way  there  is 
born  in  the  rabble  the  evil  of  lacking  self-respect 
enough  to  secure  subsistence  by  its  own  labour  and 

1  [Rousseau’s  Emile,  published  in  1762,  is  the  classic 
demand  for  freedom  in  education.  State  supervision  was 
advocated  by  La  Chalotais  in  his  Essai  d’  Education  na- 
tionale,  published  a  year  later.  The  Jesuits,  the  chief 
educators  in  France,  were  expelled  in  1764.  The  revival 
of  family  life  also  helped  to  stimulate  French  interest  in 
education  in  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth  century.] 

3  [Herodotus,  History,  ii.  177.  Plutarch:  Life  of 
Solon.] 


ADDITIONS  141 

yet  at  the  same  time  of  claiming  to  receive  subsist-  a  sphere  in  which  it  gains  strength  and  respect. 


ence  as  its  right.  Against  nature  man  can  claim  no 
right,  but  once  society  is  established,  poverty  im¬ 
mediately  takes  the  form  of  a  wrong  done  to  one 
class  by  another.  The  important  question  of  how 
poverty  is  to  be  abolished  is  one  of  the  most  disturb¬ 
ing  problems  which  agitate  modern  society. 

150.  Paragraph  248. 

Civil  society  is  thus  driven  to  found  colonies.  In¬ 
crease  of  population  alone  has  this  effect,  but  it  is 
due  in  particular  to  the  appearance  of  a  number  of 
people  who  cannot  secure  the  satisfaction  of  their 
needs  by  their  own  labour  once  production  rises 
above  the  requirements  of  consumers.  Sporadic  colo¬ 
nization  is  particularly  characteristic  of  Germany. 
The  emigrants  withdraw  to  America  or  Russia  and 
remain  there  with  no  home  ties,  and  so  prove  useless 
to  their  native  land.  The  second  and  entirely  differ¬ 
ent  type  of  colonization  is  the  systematic ;  the  state 
undertakes  it,  is  aware  of  the  proper  method  of  car¬ 
rying  it  out  and  regulates  it  accordingly.  This  type 
was  common  amongst  the  ancients,  particularly  the 
Greeks.  Hard  work  was  not  the  business  of  the  citi¬ 
zens  in  Greece,  since  their  energy  was  directed  rather 
to  public  affairs.  So  if  the  population  increased  to 
such  an  extent  that  there  might  be  difficulty  in  feed¬ 
ing  it,  the  young  people  would  be  sent  away  to  a 
new  district,  sometimes  specifically  chosen,  some¬ 
times  left  to  chance  discovery.  In  modern  times, 
colonists  have  not  been  allowed  the  same  rights  as 
those  left  at  home,  and  the  result  of  this  situation 
has  been  wars  and  finally  independence,  as  may  be 
seen  in  the  history  of  the  English  and  Spanish  colo¬ 
nies.  Colonial  independence  proves  to  be  of  the  great¬ 
est  advantage  to  the  mother  country,  just  as  the 
emancipation  of  slaves  turns  out  to  the  greatest  ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  owners. 

15 1.  Paragraph  255. 

The  consideration  behind  the  abolition  of  Corpo¬ 
rations  in  recent  times  is  that  the  individual  should 
fend  for  himself.  But  we  may  grant  this  and  still 
hold  that  corporation  membership  does  not  alter  a 
man’s  obligation  to  earn  his  living.  Under  modern 
political  conditions,  the  citizens  have  only  a  restrict¬ 
ed  share  in  the  public  business  of  the  state,  yet  it  is 
essential  to  provide  men — ethical  entities — with  work 
of  a  public  character  over  and  above  their  private 
business.  This  work  of  a  public  character,  which  the 
modern  state  does  not  always  provide,  is  found  in 
the  Corporation.  We  saw  earlier  [Addition  to  Para¬ 
graph  184]  that  in  fending  for  himself  a  member  of 
civil  society  is  also  working  for  others.  But  this  un¬ 
conscious  compulsion  is  not  enough ;  it  is  in  the 
Corporation  that  it  first  changes  into  a  known  and 
thoughtful  ethical  mode  of  life.  Of  course  Corpora¬ 
tions  must  fall  under  the  higher  surveillance  of  the 
state,  because  otherwise  they  would  ossify,  build 
themselves  in,  and  decline  into  a  miserable  system 
of  castes.  In  and  by  itself,  however,  a  Corporation  is 
not  a  closed  caste ;  its  purpose  is  rather  to  bring  an 
isolated  trade  into  the  social  order  and  elevate  it  to 


152.  Paragraph  258. 

The  state  in  and  by  itself  is  the  ethical  whole,  the 
actualization  of  freedom ;  and  it  is  an  absolute  end 
of  reason  that  freedom  should  be  actual.  The  state  is 
mind  on  earth  and  consciously  realizing  itself  there. 
In  nature,  on  the  other  hand,  mind  actualizes  itself 
only  as  its  own  other,  as  mind  asleep.  Only  when  it 
is  present  in  consciousness,  when  it  knows  itself  as  a 
really  existent  object,  is  it  the  state.  In  considering 
freedom,  the  starting-point  must  be  not  individual¬ 
ity,  the  single  self-consciousness,  but  only  the  es¬ 
sence  of  self-consciousness;  for  whether  man  knows 
it  or  not,  this  essence  is  externally  realized  as  a  self- 
subsistent  power  in  which  single  individuals  are  only 
moments.  The  march  of  God  in  the  world,  that  is 
what  the  state  is.  The  basis  of  the  state  is  the  power 
of  reason  actualizing  itself  as  will.  In  considering 
the  Idea  of  the  state,  we  must  not  have  our  eyes  on 
particular  states  or  on  particular  institutions.  In¬ 
stead  we  must  consider  the  Idea,  this  actual  God,  by 
itself.  On  some  principle  or  other,  any  state  may  be 
shown  to  be  bad,  this  or  that  defect  may  be  found 
in  it ;  and  yet,  at  any  rate  if  one  of  the  mature  states 
of  our  epoch  is  in  question,  it  has  in  it  the  moments 
essential  to  the  existence  of  the  state.  But  since  it  is 
easier  to  find  defects  than  to  understand  the  affirma¬ 
tive,  we  may  readily  fall  into  the  mistake  of  looking 
at  isolated  aspects  of  the  state  and  so  forgetting  its 
inward  organic  life.  The  state  is  no  ideal  work  of 
art ;  it  stands  on  earth  and  so  in  the  sphere  of  caprice, 
chance,  and  error,  and  bad  behaviour  may  disfigure 
it  in  many  respects.  But  the  ugliest  of  men,  or  a 
criminal,  or  an  invalid,  or  a  cripple,  is  still  always  a 
living  man.  The  affirmative,  life,  subsists  despite  his 
defects,  and  it  is  this  affirmative  factor  which  is  our 
theme  here. 

153.  Paragraph  259. 

The  state  in  its  actuality  is  essentially  an  individ¬ 
ual  state,  and  beyond  that  a  particular  state.  Indi¬ 
viduality  is  to  be  distinguished  from  particularity. 
The  former  is  a  moment  in  the  very  Idea  of  the 
state,  while  the  latter  belongs  to  history.  States  as 
such  are  independent  of  one  another,  and  therefore 
their  relation  to  one  another  can  only  be  an  external 
one,  so  that  there  must  be  a  third  thing  standing 
above  them  to  bind  them  together.  Now  this  third 
thing  is  the  mind  which  gives  itself  actuality  in 
world-history  and  is  the  absolute  judge  of  states. 
Several  states  may  form  an  alliance  to  be  a  sort  of 
court  with  jurisdiction  over  others,  there  may  be 
confederations  of  states,  like  the  Holy  Alliance  for 
example,  but  these  are  always  relative  only  and  re¬ 
stricted,  like  “perpetual  peace.”  1  The  one  and  only 
absolute  judge,  which  makes  itself  authoritative 
against  the  particular  and  at  all  times,  is  the  absolute 
mind  which  manifests  itself  in  the  history  of  the 
world  as  the  universal  and  as  the  genus  there  opera¬ 
tive. 

1  [See  Paragraphs  324,  333,  and  the  Addition  there¬ 
to.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


154.  Paragraph  260. 

The  Idea  of  the  state  in  modern  times  has  a  special 
character  in  that  the  state  is  the  actualization  of 
freedom  not  in  accordance  with  subjective  whim 
but  in  accordance  with  the  concept  of  the  will,  i.e. 
in  accordance  with  its  universality  and  divinity.  Im¬ 
mature  states  are  those  in  which  the  Idea  of  the  state 
is  still  veiled  and  where  its  particular  determinations 
have  not  yet  attained  free  self-subsistence.  In  the 
states  of  classical  antiquity,  universality  was  present, 
but  particularity  had  not  then  been  released,  given 
free  scope,  and  brought  back  to  universality,  i.e.  to 
the  universal  end  of  the  whole.  The  essence  of  the 
modern  state  is  that  the  universal  be  bound  up  with 
the  complete  freedom  of  its  particular  members  and 
with  private  well-being,  that  thus  the  interests  of 
family  and  civil  society  must  concentrate  themselves 
on  the  state,  although  the  universal  end  cannot  be 
advanced  without  the  personal  knowledge  and  will 
of  its  particular  members,  whose  own  rights  must  be 
maintained.  Thus  the  universal  must  be  furthered, 
but  subjectivity  on  the  other  hand  must  attain  its 
full  and  living  development.  It  is  only  when  both 
these  moments  subsist  in  their  strength  that  the  state 
can  be  regarded  as  articulated  and  genuinely  organ¬ 
ized. 

155.  Paragraph  261. 

In  the  state  everything  depends  on  the  unity  of 
universal  and  particular.  In  the  states  of  antiquity, 
the  subjective  end  simply  coincided  with  the  state’s 
will.  In  modern  times,  however,  we  make  claims  for 
private  judgement,  private  willing,  and  private  con¬ 
science.  The  ancients  had  none  of  these  in  the  mod¬ 
ern  sense ;  the  ultimate  thing  with  them  was  the  will 
of  the  state.  Whereas  under  the  despots  of  Asia  the 
individual  had  no  inner  life  and  no  justification  in 
himself,  in  the  modern  world  man  insists  on  respect 
being  paid  to  his  inner  life.  The  conjunction  of  duty 
and  right  has  a  twofold  aspect:  what  the  state 
demands  from  us  as  a  duty  is  eo  ipso  our  right 
as  individuals,  since  the  state  1  is  nothing  but  the 
articulation  of  the  concept  of  freedom.  The  de¬ 
terminations  of  the  individual  will  are  given  an 
objective  embodiment  through  the  state  and  there¬ 
by  they  attain  their  truth  and  their  actualization 
for  the  first  time.  The  state  is  the  one  and  only  pre¬ 
requisite  of  the  attainment  of  particular  ends  and 
welfare. 

156.  Paragraph  262. 

In  Plato’s  state,  subjective  freedom  does  not  count, 
because  people  have  their  occupations  assigned  to 
them  by  the  Guardians.  In  many  oriental  states,  this 
assignment  is  determined  by  birth.  But  subjective 
freedom,  which  must  be  respected,  demands  that  in¬ 
dividuals  should  have  free  choice  in  this  matter. 

157.  Paragraph  263. 

The  state,  as  mind,  sunders  itself  into  the  particu¬ 
lar  determinations  of  its  concept,  of  its  mode  of  be¬ 
ing.  We  might  use  here  an  illustration  drawn  from 
nature.  The  nervous  system  is  the  sensitive  system 

1  [Reading  er,  with  Lasson.] 


proper;  it  is  the  abstract  moment,  the  moment  of 
being  by  oneself  and  so  of  having  identity  with  one¬ 
self.  But  analysis  of  sensation  reveals  that  it  has  two 
aspects  and  these  are  distinct  in  such  away  that  each 
of  them  seems  to  be  a  whole  system  by  itself.  The 
first  is  feeling  in  the  abstract,  keeping  oneself  self- 
enclosed,  the  dull  movement  which  goes  on  inter¬ 
nally,  reproduction,  internal  self-nutrition,  growth, 
and  digestion.  The  second  moment  is  that  this  self- 
related  existence  has  over  against  it  the  moment  of 
difference,  a  movement  outwards.  This  is  irritability, 
sensation  moving  outwards.  This  constitutes  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  its  own,  and  there  are  some  of  the  lower  types 
of  animals  which  have  developed  this  system  alone, 
while  they  lack  the  soul-charged  unity  of  inner  sen¬ 
sation.  If  we  compare  these  natural  features  with 
those  of  mind,  then  the  family  must  be  paralleled 
with  sensibility  and  civil  society  with  irratibility. 
Now'  the  third  is  the  state,  the  nervous  system  as  a 
whole,  something  inwardly  organized ;  but  this  lives 
only  in  so  far  as  both  moments  (in  this  case  family 
and  civil  society)  are  developed  within  it.  The  laws 
regulating  family  and  civil  society  are  the  institu¬ 
tions  of  the  rational  order  which  glimmers  in  them. 
But  the  ground  and  final  truth  of  these  institutions 
is  mind,  their  universal  end  and  known  objective. 
The  family  too  is  ethical,  only  its  end  is  not  known 
as  such,  while  it  is  the  separation  between  one  man 
and  another  which  makes  civil  society  what  it  is. 

158.  Paragraph  265. 

As  was  remarked  earlier  on,2  the  sanctity  of  mar¬ 
riage  and  the  institutions  in  which  civil  society  is  an 
appearance  of  ethical  life  constitute  the  stability  of 
the  whole,  i.e.  stability  is  secured  when  universal  af¬ 
fairs  are  the  affairs  of  each  member  in  his  particular 
capacity.  What  is  of  the  utmost  importance  is  that 
the  law  of  reason  should  beshot  through  and  through 
by  the  law  of  particular  freedom,  and  that  my  par¬ 
ticular  end  should  become  identified  with  the  uni¬ 
versal  end,  or  otherwise  the  state  is  left  in  the  air. 
The  state  is  actual  only  when  its  members  have  a 
feeling  of  their  own  self-hood  and  it  is  stable  only 
when  public  and  private  ends  are  identical.  It  has 
often  been  said  that  the  end  of  the  state  is  the  hap¬ 
piness  of  the  citizens.  That  is  perfectly  true.  If  all  is 
not  well  with  them,  if  their  subjective  aims  are  not 
satisfied,  if  they  do  not  find  that  the  state  as  such  is 
the  means  to  their  satisfaction,  then  the  footing  of 
the  state  itself  is  insecure. 

159.  Paragraph  267. 

The  unity  of  the  freedom  which  knows  and  wills 
itself  is  present  first  of  all  as  necessity.  Here  sub¬ 
stance  is  present  as  the  subjective  existence  of  indi¬ 
viduals.  Necessity’s  other  mode  of  being,  however, 
is  the  organism,  i.e.  mind  is  a  process  internal  to  it¬ 
self,  it  articulates  itself  within,  posits  differences  in 
itself,  and  thereby  completes  the  cycle  of  its  life. 

160.  Paragraph  268. 

Immature  minds  delight  in  argumentation  and 

2  [The  reference  is  probably  to  Paragraph  255.] 


ADDITIONS 


fault-finding,  because  it  is  easy  enough  to  find  fault, 
though  hard  to  see  the  good  and  its  inner  necessity. 
The  learner  always  begins  by  finding  fault,  but  the 
scholar  sees  the  positive  merit  in  everything.  In  reli¬ 
gion,  this  or  that  is  quickly  dismissed  as  supersti¬ 
tious,  but  it  is  infinitely  harder  to  apprehend  the 
truth  underlying  the  superstition.  Hence  men’s  ap¬ 
parent  sentiment  towards  the  state  is  to  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  what  they  really  will ;  inwardly  they 
really  will  the  thing,  but  they  cling  to  details  and 
take  delight  in  the  vanity  of  pretending  to  know 
better.  We  are  confident  that  the  state  must  subsist 
and  that  in  it  alone  can  particular  interests  be  se¬ 
cured.  But  habit  blinds  us  to  that  on  which  our 
whole  existence  depends.  When  we  walk  the  streets 
at  night  in  safety,  it  does  not  strike  us  that  this 
might  be  otherwise.  This  habit  of  feeling  safe  has 
become  second  nature,  and  we  do  not  reflect  on  just 
how  this  is  due  solely  to  the  working  of  special  in¬ 
stitutions.  Commonplace  thinking  often  has  the  im¬ 
pression  that  force  holds  the  state  together,  but  in 
fact  its  only  bond  is  the  fundamental  sense  of  order 
which  everybody  possesses. 

161.  Paragraph  269. 

The  state  is  an  organism,  i.e.  the  development  of 
the  Idea  to  the  articulation  of  its  differences.  Thus 
these  different  sides  of  the  state  are  its  various  pow¬ 
ers  with  their  functions  and  spheres  of  action,  by 
means  of  which  the  universal  continually  engenders 
itself  in  a  necessary  way;  in  this  process  it  main¬ 
tains  its  identity  since  it  is  presupposed  even  in  its 
own  production.  This  organism  is  the  constitution 
of  the  state ;  it  is  produced  perpetually  by  the  state, 
while  it  is  through  it  that  the  state  maintains  itself. 
If  the  state  and  its  constitution  fall  apart,  if  the  vari¬ 
ous  members  of  the  organism  free  themselves,  then 
the  unity  produced  by  the  constitution  is  no  longer 
an  accomplished  fact.  This  tallies  with  the  fable  1 
about  the  belly  and  the  other  members.  The  nature 
of  an  organism  is  such  that  unless  each  of  its  parts 
is  brought  into  identity  with  the  others,  unless  each 
of  them  is  prevented  from  achieving  autonomy,  the 
whole  must  perish.  By  listing  attributes,  axioms,  &c., 
no  progress  can  be  made  in  assessing  the  nature  of 
the  state ;  it  must  be  apprehended  as  an  organism. 
One  might  as  well  try  to  understand  the  nature  of 
God  by  listing  his  attributes,  while  the  truth  is  that 
we  must  intuit  God’s  life  in  that  life  itself. 

162.  Paragraph  270. 

The  state  is  actual,  and  its  actuality  consists  in 
this,  that  the  interest  of  the  whole  is  realized  in  and 
through  particular  ends.  Actuality  is  always  the 
unity  of  universal  and  particular,  the  universal  dis¬ 
membered  in  the  particulars  which  seem  to  be  self- 
subsistent,  although  they  really  are  upheld  and  con¬ 
tained  only  in  the  whole.  Where  this  unity  is  not 
present,  a  thing  is  not  actual  even  though  it  may 
have  acquired  existence.  A  bad  state  is  one  which 

1  [The  fable  recounted  by  Menenius  Agrippa  to  dis¬ 
suade  the  Roman  plebs  from  secession.  Livy,  ii.  32. 
Shakespeare,  Coriolanus ,  Act  I,  Sc.  i.] 


merely  exists;  a  sick  body  exists  too,  but  it  has  no 
genuine  reality.  A  hand  which  is  cut  off  still  looks 
like  a  hand,  and  it  exists,  but  without  being  actual.2 
Genuine  actuality  is  necessity;  what  is  actual  is  in¬ 
herently  necessary.  Necessity  consists  in  this,  that 
the  whole  is  sundered  into  the  differences  of  the  con¬ 
cept  and  that  this  divided  whole  yields  a  fixed  and 
permanent  determinacy,  though  one  which  is  not 
fossilized  but  perpetually  recreates  itself  in  its  dis¬ 
solution. 

To  a  mature  state  thought  and  consciousness  es¬ 
sentially  belong.  Therefore  the  state  knows  what  it 
wills  and  knows  it  as  something  thought.  Now  since 
knowing  has  its  seat  in  the  state,  the  seat  of  science 
must  be  there  too  and  not  in  the  church.  Despite 
this,  it  is  often  said  nowadays  that  the  state  must 
grow  out  of  religion.  The  state  is  mind  fully  mature 
and  it  exhibits  its  moments  in  the  daylight  of  con¬ 
sciousness.  Now  the  fact  that  what  is  hidden  in  the 
Idea  steps  forth  into  objective  existence  gives  the 
state  the  appearance  of  something  finite,  and  so  the 
state  reveals  itself  as  a  domain  of  worldliness,  while 
religion  displays  itself  as  a  domain  of  the  infinite.  If 
this  be  so,  the  state  seems  to  be  the  subordinate,  and 
since  what  is  finite  cannot  stand  on  its  own  feet,  the 
state  is  therefore  said  to  need  the  church  as  its  basis. 
As  finite,  it  lacks  justification,  and  it  is  only  through 
religion  that  it  can  become  sacrosanct  and  pertain 
to  the  infinite.  This  handling  of  the  matter,  how¬ 
ever,  is  supremely  one-sided.  Of  course  the  state  is 
essentially  worldly  and  finite ;  it  has  particular  ends 
and  particular  powers;  but  its  worldly  character  is 
only  one  of  its  aspects,  and  it  is  only  to  an  unintelli¬ 
gent  superficial  glance  that  it  is  finite  and  nothing 
more.  For  the  state  has  a  life-giving  soul,  and  the 
soul  which  animates  it  is  subjectivity,  which  creates 
differences  and  yet  at  the  same  time  holds  them  to¬ 
gether  in  unity.  In  the  realm  of  religion  too  there  are 
distinctions  and  limitations.  God,  it  is  said,  is  triune ; 
thus  there  are  three  persons  whose  unity  alone  is 
Spirit  ( Geist ).  Therefore  to  apprehend  the  nature 
of  God  concretely  is  to  apprehend  it  through  dis¬ 
tinctions  alone.  Hence  in  the  kingdom  of  God  there 
are  limitations,  just  as  there  are  in  the  world,  and  to 
hold  that  mind  (Geist)  on  earth,  i.e.  the  state,  is  on¬ 
ly  a  finite  mind,  is  a  one-sided  view,  since  there  is 
nothing  irrational  about  actuality.  Of  course  a  bad 
state  is  worldly  and  finite  and  nothing  else,  but  the 
rational  state  is  inherently  infinite. 

Secondly,  it  is  averred  that  the  state  must  derive 
its  justification  from  religion.  In  religion,  the  Idea  is 
mind  in  the  inwardness  of  the  heart,  but  it  is  this 
same  Idea  which  gives  itself  a  worldly  form  as  the 
state  and  fashions  for  itself  an  embodiment  and  an 
actuality  in  knowing  and  willing.  Now  if  you  say 
that  the  state  must  be  grounded  on  religion,  you 
may  mean  that  it  should  rest  on  rationality  and 
arise  out  of  it ;  but  your  statement  may  also  be  mis¬ 
understood  to  mean  that  men  are  most  adroitly 
schooled  to  obedience  if  their  minds  are  shackled 

2  [The  illustration  is  from  Aristotle’s  Politics  1253“ 

19  ff.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


by  a  slavish  religion.  (The  Christian  religion,  how¬ 
ever,  is  the  religion  of  freedom,  though  it  must  be  ad¬ 
mitted  that  this  religion  may  become  changed  in 
character  and  perverted  from  freedom  to  bondage 
when  it  is  infected  with  superstition.)  Now  if  you 
mean  that  men  must  have  religion  so  that  their 
minds,  already  shackled,  may  the  more  easily  be 
oppressed  by  the  state,  then  the  purport  of  your 
statement  is  bad.  But  if  you  mean  that  men  ought  to 
respect  the  state,  this  whole  whose  limbs  they  are, 
then  of  course  the  best  means  of  effecting  this  is  to 
give  them  philosophical  insight  into  the  essence  of 
the  state,  though,  in  default  of  that,  a  religious  frame 
of  mind  may  lead  to  the  same  result.  For  this  rea¬ 
son,  the  state  may  have  need  of  religion  and  faith. 
But  the  state  remains  essentially  distinct  from  reli¬ 
gion,  since  whatever  it  claims,  it  claims  in  the  form 
of  a  legal  duty,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to 
it  in  what  spirit  that  duty  is  performed.  The  field  of 
religion,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  inner  life,  and  just 
as  the  state  would  jeopardize  the  right  of  that  life  if, 
like  religion,  it  made  claims  on  it,  so  also  when  the 
church  acts  like  a  state  and  imposes  penalties,  it  de¬ 
generates  into  a  religion  of  tyranny. 

A  third  difference  which  is  connected  with  the 
foregoing  is  that  the  content  of  religion  is  and  re¬ 
mains  veiled,  and  consequently  religion’s  place  is  in 
the  field  of  the  heart,  feeling,  and  representative 
thinking.  In  this  field  everything  has  the  form  of 
subjectivity.  The  state,  on  the  other  hand,  actualizes 
itself  and  gives  its  specific  institutions  a  stable,  ob¬ 
jective,  existence.  Now  if  religious  feeling  wished  to 
assert  itself  in  the  state  in  the  same  way  as  it  is 
wont  to  do  in  its  own  field,  it  would  overturn  the 
organization  of  the  state,  because  the  different  or¬ 
gans  of  the  state  have  latitude  to  pursue  their  sev¬ 
eral  distinct  paths,  while  in  religion  everything  is 
always  referred  back  to  the  whole.  If  this  whole, 
then,  wished  to  engulf  all  the  concerns  of  the  state, 
this  would  be  tantamount  to  fanaticism ;  the  wish 
to  have  the  whole  in  every  particular  could  be  ful¬ 
filled  only  by  the  destruction  of  the  particular,  and 
fanaticism  is  just  the  refusal  to  give  scope  to  partic¬ 
ular  differences.  Hence  to  say:  “To  the  pious  man  no 
law  is  given”  is  nothing  but  an  expression  of  this 
same  fanaticism.  Once  piety  usurps  the  place  of  the 
state,  it  cannot  tolerate  the  determinate  but  simply 
shatters  it.  It  is  quite  consistent  with  this  if  piety 
leaves  decisions  to  conscience,  to  the  inner  life,  and 
is  not  governed  by  reasons.  This  inner  life  does  not 
develop  into  reasoned  argument  or  give  an  account 
of  itself.  Hence  if  piety  is  to  pass  for  the  actuality  of 
the  state,  all  laws  are  cast  to  the  winds  and  subjec¬ 
tive  feeling  is  the  legislator.  This  feeling  may  be  pure 
caprice,  and  whether  it  is  or  not  can  only  be  learnt 
from  its  actions.  But  by  becoming  actions  and  pre¬ 
cepts,  its  actions  assume  the  guise  of  laws,  and  this 
is  just  the  very  opposite  of  the  subjective  feeling 
with  which  we  started.  This  feeling  has  God  for  its 
object,  and  we  might  make  him  the  determinant  of 
everything.  But  God  is  the  universal  Idea  and  this 
feeling  can  regard  him  only  as  the  indeterminate, 


which  is  too  immature  to  determine  what  is  existent 
in  the  state  in  a  developed  form.  It  is  precisely  the 
fact  that  everything  in  the  state  is  fixed  and  secure 
which  is  the  bulwark  against  caprice  and  dogmatic 
opinion.  Religion  as  such,  then,  ought  not  to  be  the 
governor. 

163.  Paragraph  271. 

Just  as  irritability  in  the  living  organism  is  itself 
from  one  point  of  view  something  inward,  some¬ 
thing  pertaining  to  the  organism  as  such,  so  here 
again  the  outward  reference  is  an  inward  tendency. 
The  inner  side  of  the  state  as  such  is  the  civil  power, 
while  its  outward  tendency  is  the  military  power, 
although  this  has  a  fixed  place  inside  the  state  itself. 
Now  to  have  both  these  powers  in  equilibrium  con¬ 
stitutes  an  important  factor  in  the  spirit  of  the  state. 
Sometimes  the  civil  power  is  wholly  effaced  and 
rests  entirely  on  the  military  power,  as  was  the  case, 
for  instance,  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  Emperors 
and  the  Praetorians.1  At  other  times,  nowadays  for 
example,  the  military  power  is  a  mere  by-product 
of  the  civil  power  once  all  the  citizens  are  conscript- 
able. 

1 64.  Paragraph  272. 

We  should  desire  to  have  in  the  state  nothing  ex¬ 
cept  what  is  an  expression  of  rationality.  The  state 
is  the  world  which  mind  has  made  for  itself;  its 
march,  therefore,  is  on  lines  that  are  fixed  and  ab¬ 
solute.  How  often  we  talk  of  the  wisdom  of  God  in 
nature!  But  we  are  not  to  assume  for  that  reason 
that  the  physical  world  of  nature  is  a  loftier  thing 
than  the  world  of  mind.  As  high  as  mind  stands 
above  nature,  so  high  does  the  state  stand  above 
physical  life.  Man  must  therefore  venerate  the  state 
as  a  secular  deity,2  and  observe  that  if  it  is  difficult 
to  comprehend  nature,  it  is  infinitely  harder  to  un¬ 
derstand  the  state.  It  is  a  fact  of  the  highest  impor¬ 
tance  that  nowadays  we  have  gained  a  clear-cut  in¬ 
tuition  into  the  state  in  general  and  have  been  so 
much  engaged  in  discussing  and  making  constitu¬ 
tions.  But  by  getting  so  far  we  have  not  yet  settled 
everything.  In  addition,  it  is  necessary  to  bring  to 
bear  on  a  rational  topic  the  reason  underlying  intu¬ 
ition,  to  know  what  the  essence  of  the  matter  is  and 
to  realize  that  the  obvious  is  not  always  the  essential. 

The  powers  of  the  state,  then,  must  certainly  be 
distinguished,  but  each  of  them  must  build  itself  in¬ 
wardly  into  a  whole  and  contain  in  itself  the  other 
moments.  When  we  speak  of  the  distinct  activities 
of  these  powers,  we  must  not  slip  into  the  monstrous 
error  of  so  interpreting  their  distinction  as  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  each  power  should  subsist  independently 
in  abstraction  from  the  others.  The  truth  is  that  the 

1  [Under  the  reforms  instituted  by  Diocletian  and 
Constantine,  the  Praetorian  Prefects,  who  were  origi¬ 
nally  exclusively  military  officials,  had  supreme  author¬ 
ity,  under  the  Emperor,  in  both  civil  and  military  af¬ 
fairs.  See  e.g.  Gibbon,  chap,  xvii — perhaps  Hegel’s 
source.] 

2  [ Irdisch-Gottliches .  Hegel  here  follows  Kant  who, 
e.g.  at  the  end  of  his  essay  on  Theory  and  Practice, 
refers  to  nation  states  as  Erden-G otter.] 


ADDITIONS 


powers  are  to  be  distinguished  only  as  moments  of 
the  concept.  If  instead  they  subsist  independently 
in  abstraction  from  one  another,  then  it  is  as  clear 
as  day  that  two  independent  units  cannot  constitute 
a  unity  but  must  of  course  give  rise  to  strife,  where¬ 
by  either  the  whole  is  destroyed  or  else  unity  is  re¬ 
stored  by  force.  Thus  in  the  French  Revolution,  the 
legislative  power  sometimes  engulfed  the  so-called 
“executive,”  the  executive  sometimes  engulfed  the 
legislative,  and  in  such  a  case  it  must  be  stupid  to 
formulate  e.g.  the  moral  demand  for  harmony. 

Leave  the  thing  to  the  heart  if  you  like  and  be 
saved  all  trouble ;  but  even  if  ethical  feeling  is  in¬ 
dispensable,  it  has  no  right  to  determine  the  powers 
of  the  state  by  reference  to  itself  alone.  The  vital 
point,  then,  is  that  since  the  fixed  characters  of  the 
powers  are  implicitly  the  whole,  so  also  all  the  pow¬ 
ers  as  existents  constitute  the  concept  as  a  whole. 
Mention  is  usually  made  of  three  powers,  the  legis¬ 
lative,  the  executive,  and  the  judiciary ;  of  these  the 
first  corresponds  to  universality  and  the  second  to 
particularity,  but  the  judiciary  is  not  the  third  mo¬ 
ment  of  the  concept,  since  the  individuality  intrinsic 
to  the  concept  lies  outside  these  spheres. 

165.  Paragraph  273. 

The  principle  of  the  modern  world  is  freedom  of 
subjectivity,  the  principle  that  all  the  essential  fac¬ 
tors  present  in  the  intellectual  whole  are  now  com¬ 
ing  into  their  right  in  the  course  of  their  develop¬ 
ment.  Starting  from  this  point  of  view,  we  can  hard¬ 
ly  raise  the  idle  question:  Which  is  the  better  form 
of  government,  monarchy  or  democracy?  We  may 
only  say  that  all  constitutional  forms  are  one-sided 
unless  they  can  sustain  in  themselves  the  principle 
of  free  subjectivity  and  know  how  to  correspond 
with  a  matured  rationality. 

166.  Paragraph  274. 

The  state  in  its  constitution  must  permeate  all  re¬ 
lationships  within  the  state.  Napoleon,  for  instance, 
wished  to  give  the  Spaniards  a  constitution  a  priori ,x 
but  the  project  turned  out  badly  enough.  A  consti¬ 
tution  is  not  just  something  manufactured;  it  is  the 
work  of  centuries,  it  is  the  Idea,  the  consciousness  of 
rationality  so  far  as  that  consciousness  is  developed 
in  a  particular  nation.  No  constitution,  therefore,  is 
just  the  creation  of  its  subjects.  What  Napoleon 
gave  to  the  Spaniards  was  more  rational  than  what 
they  had  before,  and  yet  they  recoiled  from  it  as 
from  something  alien,  because  they  were  not  yet 
educated  up  to  its  level.  A  nation’s  constitution  must 
embody  its  feeling  for  its  rights  and  its  position, 
otherwise  there  may  be  a  constitution  there  in  an 
external  way,  but  it  is  meaningless  and  valueless. 
Isolated  individuals  may  often  feel  the  need  and  the 

1  [When  he  expelled  the  Bourbons  from  Spain  and  put 
Joseph  Bonaparte  on  the  throne  under  the  Constitution 
of  Bayonne  in  1808.  With  the  breakdown  of  the  Na¬ 
poleonic  regime  in  1812-13,  the  Bourbons  were  restored 
together  with  the  old  constitution.  A  liberal  document, 
the  Constitution  of  Cadiz,  was  drawn  up  in  1812,  but 
it  remained  a  dead  letter.  Note  that  Hegel  regards  a 
more  liberal  constitution  as  a  more  rational  one.] 


145 

longing  for  a  better  constitution,  but  it  is  quite  an¬ 
other  thing,  and  one  that  does  not  arise  till  later,  for 
the  mass  of  the  people  to  be  animated  by  such  an 
idea.  The  principle  of  morality,  of  the  inner  life  of 
Socrates,  was  a  necessary  product  of  his  age,  but 
time  was  required  before  it  could  become  part  and 
parcel  of  the  self-consciousness  of  everyone. 

167.  Paragraph  275. 

We  begin  with  the  power  of  the  crown,  i.e.  with 
the  moment  of  individuality,  since  this  includes  the 
state’s  three  moments  as  a  totality  in  itself.  The  ego, 
that  is  to  say,  is  at  once  the  most  individual  thing 
and  the  most  universal.  Prima  facie,  individuality 
occurs  in  nature  too,  but  reality,  the  opposite  of 
ideality,  and  reciprocal  externality  are  not  the  same 
as  self-enclosed  existence.  On  the  contrary,  in  nature 
the  various  individual  things  subsist  alongside  one 
another.  In  mind,  on  the  other  hand,  variety  exists 
only  as  something  ideal  and  as  a  unity.  The  state, 
then,  as  something  mental,  is  the  exhibition  of  all 
its  moments,  but  individuality  is  at  the  same  time 
the  bearer  of  its  soul  and  its  life-giving  principle,  i.e. 
the  sovereignty  which  contains  all  differences  in  it¬ 
self. 

168.  Paragraph  276. 

Much  the  same  thing  as  this  ideality  of  the  mo¬ 
ments  in  the  state  occurs  with  life  in  the  physical 
organism.  Life  is  present  in  every  cell.  There  is  only 
one  life  in  all  the  cells  and  nothing  withstands  it. 
Separated  from  that  life,  every  cell  dies.  This  is  the 
same  as  the  ideality  of  every  single  class,  power,  and 
Corporation  as  soon  as  they  have  the  impulse  to  sub¬ 
sist  and  be  independent.  It  is  with  them  as  it  is  with 
the  belly  in  the  organism.  It,  too,  asserts  its  inde¬ 
pendence,  but  at  the  same  time  its  independence  is 
set  aside  and  it  is  sacrificed  and  absorbed  into  the 
whole. 

169.  Paragraph  277. 

The  business  of  the  state  is  in  the  hands  of  indi¬ 
viduals.  But  their  authority  to  conduct  its  affairs  is 
based  not  on  their  birth  but  on  their  objective  quali¬ 
ties.  Ability,  skill,  character,  all  belong  to  a  man  in 
his  particular  capacity.  He  must  be  educated  and  be 
trained  to  a  particular  task.  Hence  an  office  may  not 
be  saleable  or  hereditary.  In  France,  seats  in  parlia¬ 
ment  were  formerly  saleable,  and  in  the  English 
army  commissions  up  to  a  certain  rank  are  saleable 
to  this  day.2  This  saleability  of  office,  however,  was 
or  is  still  connected  with  the  medieval  constitution 
of  certain  states,  and  such  constitutions  are  nowa¬ 
days  gradually  disappearing. 

170.  Paragraph  279. 

In  the  organization  of  the  state — which  here  means 
in  constitutional  monarchy — we  must  have  nothing 
before  our  minds  except  the  inherent  necessity  of 
the  Idea.  All  other  points  of  view  must  vanish.  The 
state  must  be  treated  as  a  great  architectonic  struc- 

2  [In  Hegel’s  day,  all  officers’  commissions  from  an 
ensign’s  to  a  lieutenant-colonel’s  were  on  sale,  but  there 
were  restrictions  on  both  purchaser  and  price.] 


146  PHILOSOPHY 

ture,  as  a  hieroglyph  of  the  reason  which  reveals  it¬ 
self  in  actuality.  Everything  to  do  with  mere  utility, 
externality,  and  so  forth,  must  be  eliminated  from 
the  philosophical  treatment  of  the  subject.  Now  our 
ordinary  ideas  can  quite  well  grasp  the  conception 
of  the  state  as  a  self-determining  and  completely 
sovereign  will,  as  final  decision.  What  is  more  dif¬ 
ficult  is  to  apprehend  this  “I  will”  as  a  person.  To 
do  so  is  not  to  say  that  the  monarch  may  act  capri¬ 
ciously.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  is  bound  by  the  con¬ 
crete  decisions  of  his  counsellors,  and  if  the  consti¬ 
tution  is  stable,  he  has  often  no  more  to  do  than  sign 
his  name.  But  this  name  is  important.  It  is  the  last 
word  beyond  which  it  is  impossible  to  go.  It  might 
be  said  that  an  organic,  articulated,  constitution 
was  present  even  in  the  beautiful  democracy  of 
Athens,  and  yet  we  cannot  help  noticing  that  the 
Greeks  derived  their  final  decisions  from  the  observa¬ 
tion  of  quite  external  phenomena  such  as  oracles, 
the  entrails  of  sacrificial  animals,  and  the  flight  of 
birds.  They  treated  nature  as  a  power  which  in  those 
ways  revealed  and  expressed  what  was  good  for  men. 

At  that  time,self-consciousnesshadnotyet  advanced 
to  the  abstraction  of  subjectivity,  not  even  so  far  as 
to  understand  that,  when  a  decision  is  to  be  made, 
an  “I  will”  must  be  pronounced  by  man  himself. 
This  “I  will”  constitutes  the  great  difference  between 
the  ancient  world  and  the  modern,  and  in  the  great 
edifice  of  the  state  it  must  therefore  have  its  appro¬ 
priate  objective  existence.  Unfortunately,  however, 
this  requirement  is  regarded  as  only  external  and 
optional. 

1 71.  Paragraph  280. 

It  is  often  alleged  against  monarchy  that  it  makes 
the  welfare  of  the  state  dependent  on  chance,  for,  it 
is  urged,  the  monarch  may  be  ill-educated,  he  may 
perhaps  be  unworthy  of  the  highest  position  in  the 
state,  and  it  is  senseless  that  such  a  state  of  affairs 
should  exist  because  it  is  supposed  to  be  rational. 
But  all  this  rests  on  a  presupposition  which  is  nuga¬ 
tory,  namely  that  everything  depends  on  the  mon¬ 
arch’s  particular  character.  In  a  completely  organ¬ 
ized  state,  it  is  only  a  question  of  the  culminating 
point  of  formal  decision  (and  a  natural  bulwark 
against  passion.  It  is  wrong  therefore  to  demand  ob¬ 
jective  qualities  in  a  monarch)  ; 1  he  has  only  to  say 
“yes”  and  dot  the  “i,”  because  the  throne  should  be 
such  that  the  significant  thing  in  its  holder  is  not  his 
particular  make-up.  (Monarchy  in  this  sense  is  ra¬ 
tional  because  it  corresponds  with  the  concept,  but 
since  this  is  hard  to  grasp,  we  often  fail  to  notice 
the  rationality  of  monarchy.  Monarchy  must  be  in¬ 
herently  stable  and)  whatever  else  the  monarch  may 
have  in  addition  to  this  power  of  final  decision  is 
part  and  parcel  of  his  private  character  and  should 
be  of  no  consequence.  Of  course  there  may  be  cir¬ 
cumstances  in  which  it  is  this  private  character  alone 
which  has  prominence,  but  in  that  event  the  state  is 
either  not  fully  developed,  or  else  is  badly  con- 

1  [The  passages  in  parentheses  are  translated  from 
Gans’s  third  edition;  they  did  not  appear  in  the  first.] 


OF  RIGHT 

structed.  In  a  well-organized  monarchy,  the  objec¬ 
tive  aspect  belongs  to  law  alone,  and  the  monarch’s 
part  is  merely  to  set  to  the  law  the  subjective  “I 
will.” 

172.  Paragraph  281. 

If  we  are  to  grasp  the  Idea  of  the  monarch,  we 
cannot  be  content  with  saying  that  God  has  ap¬ 
pointed  kings  to  rule  over  us,  since  God  has  made 
everything,  even  the  worst  of  things.  The  point  of 
view  of  utility  does  not  get  us  very  far  either,  and  it 
is  always  possible  to  point  out  counterbalancing  dis¬ 
advantages.  Still  less  does  it  help  to  regard  mon 
archy  as  a  positive  right.  That  I  should  hold  prop¬ 
erty  is  necessary,  but  my  holding  of  this  particular 
property  is  contingent;  and  in  the  same  way,  the 
right  that  there  must  be  one  man  at  the  head  of  af¬ 
fairs  seems  contingent  too  if  it  is  treated  as  abstract 
and  as  posited.  This  right,  however,  is  inevitably 
present  both  as  a  felt  want  and  as  a  requirement  of 
the  situation.  Monarchs  are  not  exactly  distinguished 
for  bodily  prowess  or  intellectual  gifts,  and  yet  mil¬ 
lions  submit  to  their  rule.  Now  to  say  that  men  al¬ 
low  themselves  to  be  ruled  counter  to  their  own  in¬ 
terests,  ends,  and  intentions  is  preposterous.  Men 
are  not  so  stupid.  It  is  their  need,  it  is  the  inner 
might  of  the  Idea,  which,  even  against  what  they 
appear  to  think,  constrains  them  to  obedience  and 
keeps  them  in  that  relation. 

If  then  the  monarch  comes  on  the  scene  as  the 
head  and  a  part  of  the  constitution,  we  are  compelled 
to  hold  that  there  is  no  constitutional  identity  be¬ 
tween  a  conquered  people  and  its  prince.  A  rebellion 
in  a  province  conquered  in  war  is  a  different  thing 
from  a  rising  in  a  well-organized  state.  It  is  not 
against  their  prince  that  the  conquered  are  in  rebel¬ 
lion,  and  they  are  committing  no  crime  against  the 
state,  because  their  connexion  with  their  master  is 
not  a  connexion  within  the  Idea  or  one  within  the 
inner  necessity  of  the  constitution.  In  such  a  case, 
there  is  only  a  contract,  no  political  tie.  Je  ne  suis 
pas  votre  prince ,  je  suis  voire  maitre ,  Napoleon  re¬ 
torted  to  the  envoys  at  Erfurt.2 

173.  Paragraph  282 . 

Pardon  is  the  remission  of  punishment,  but  it  does 
not  annul  the  law  ( Recht ).  On  the  contrary,  the 
law  stands  and  the  pardoned  man  remains  a  crimi¬ 
nal  as  before.  Pardon  does  not  mean  that  he  has  not 
committed  a  crime.  This  annulment  of  punishment 
may  take  place  through  religion,  since  something 
done  may  by  spirit  ( Geist )  be  made  undone  inspirit. 
But  the  power  to  accomplish  this  on  earth  resides  in 
the  king’s  majesty  alone  and  must  belong  solely  to 
his  self-determined  decision. 

174.  Paragraph  290. 

The  point  of  special  importance  in  the  executive  is 
the  division  of  functions.  The  executive  is  concerned 
with  the  transition  from  the  universal  to  the  partic- 

2  [When  Napoleon  met  Tsar  Alexander  at  Erfurt  in 
1808,  he  was  visited  by  representatives  of  many  Ger¬ 
man  states.  This  is  one  of  the  many  stories  of  his  rude¬ 
ness  on  that  occasion.] 


ADDITIONS 


ular  and  the  individual,  and  its  functions  must  be 
divided  in  accordance  with  the  differences  between 
its  branches.  The  difficulty,  however,  is  that  these 
different  branches  meet  again  at  both  the  top  and 
the  bottom.  The  police  and  the  judiciary,  for  in¬ 
stance,  move  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  but  in 
each  particular  case  they  coincide  again.  The  usual 
expedient  adopted  to  meet  this  difficulty  is  to  ap¬ 
point  a  Chancellor,  a  Prime  Minister,  or  a  President 
du  Conseil  des  Ministres  to  unify  control  at  the  top. 
But  the  result  of  this  is  that  once  more  everything 
may  have  its  source  in  the  Minister’s  power,  and  the 
business  of  the  state  is,  as  we  say,  centralized.  This 
entails  the  maximum  of  simplification,  speed,  and 
efficiency  in  meeting  state  requirements.  A  system 
of  this  kind  was  introduced  by  the  French  revolu¬ 
tionaries,  elaborated  by  Napoleon,  and  still  exists 
in  France  to-day.  On  the  other  hand,  France  lacks 
Corporations  and  local  government,  i.e.  associations 
wherein  particular  and  universal  interests  meet.  It 
is  true  that  these  associations  won  too  great  a  meas¬ 
ure  of  self-subsistence  in  the  Middle  Ages,  when  they 
were  states  within  states  and  obstinately  persisted  in 
behaving  like  independent  corporate  bodies.  But 
while  that  should  not  be  allowed  to  happen,  we  may 
none  the  less  affirm  that  the  proper  strength  of  the 
state  lies  in  these  associations.  In  them  the  executive 
meets  with  legitimate  interests  which  it  must  re¬ 
spect,  and  since  the  administration  cannot  be  other 
than  helpful  to  such  interests,  though  it  must  also 
supervise  them,  the  individual  finds  protection  in 
the  exercise  of  his  rights  and  so  links  his  private 
interest  with  the  maintenance  of  the  whole.  For 
some  time  past  organizations  have  been  framed  with 
a  view  to  controlling  these  particular  spheres  from 
above,1  and  effort  has  chiefly  been  expended  on  or¬ 
ganizations  of  that  type,  while  the  lower  classes,  the 
mass  of  the  population,  have  been  left  more  or  less 
unorganized.  And  yet  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
that  the  masses  should  be  organized,  because  only 
so  do  they  become  mighty  and  powerful.  Otherwise 
they  are  nothing  but  a  heap,  an  aggregate  of  atomic 
units.  Only  when  the  particular  associations  are  or¬ 
ganized  members  of  the  state  are  they  possessed  of 
legitimate  power. 

175.  Paragraph  297. 

The  middle  class,  to  which  civil  servants  belong, 
is  politically  conscious  and  the  one  in  which  educa¬ 
tion  is  most  prominent.  For  this  reason  it  is  also  the 
pillar  of  the  state  so  far  as  honesty  and  intelligence 
are  concerned.  A  state  without  a  middle  class  must 
therefore  remain  on  a  low  level.  Russia,  for  instance, 
has  a  mass  of  serfs  on  the  one  hand  and  a  mass  of 
rulers  on  the  other.  It  is  a  prime  concern  of  the  state 
that  a  middle  class  should  be  developed,  but  this 
can  be  done  only  if  the  state  is  an  organic  unity  like 
the  one  described  here,  i.e.  it  can  be  done  only  by 
giving  authority  to  spheres  of  particular  interests, 
which  are  relatively  independent,  and  by  appointing 

1  [Hegel  is  thinking  of  his  own  experience  in  Bavaria 
in  1807.  See  Brieje  von  und  an  Hegel,  vol.  i,  p.  130. 
(Lasson).] 


an  army  of  officials  whose  personal  arbitrariness  is 
broken  against  such  authorized  bodies.  Action  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  everyone’s  rights,  and  the  habit  of 
such  action,  is  a  consequence  of  the  counterpoise  to 
officialdom  which  independent  and  self-subsistent 
bodies  create. 

176.  Paragraph  298. 

The  constitution  must  in  and  by  itself  be  the  fixed 
and  recognized  ground  on  which  the  legislature 
stands,  and  for  this  reason  it  must  not  first  be  con¬ 
structed.  Thus  the  constitution  is,  but  just  as  essen¬ 
tially  it  becomes,  i.e.  it  advances  and  matures.  This 
advance  is  an  alteration  which  is  imperceptible  and 
which  lacks  the  form  of  alteration.  For  example,  the 
wealth  of  the  German  princes  and  their  families  be¬ 
gan  by  being  private  property  but  then  without  any 
struggle  or  opposition  it  was  converted  into  crown 
lands,  i.e.  into  public  property.  This  came  about  be¬ 
cause  the  princes  felt  the  need  of  integrating  their 
possessions  and  demanded  property  guarantees  from 
their  country  and  Estates ;  and  these  guarantees  were 
intertwined  with  such  a  mode  of  stabilizing  property 
that  it  ceased  to  be  at  the  sole  disposal  of  the  princes. 
An  analogous  case  is  that  [in  the  Holy  Roman  Em¬ 
pire]  the  Emperor  was  formerly  a  judge  and  travelled 
the  Empire  on  circuit,  and  then,  owing  to  the  purely 
superficial  results  of  cultural  progress,  external  rea¬ 
sons  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  delegate  more  and 
more  of  his  judicial  functions  to  others,  with  the  re¬ 
sult  that  the  judicial  power  was  transferred  from  the 
person  of  the  monarch  to  groups  of  judges.  Hence  the 
advance  from  one  state  of  affairs  to  another  is  tran¬ 
quil  in  appearance  and  unnoticed.  In  this  way  a  con¬ 
stitution  changes  over  a  long  period  of  time  into 
something  quite  different  from  what  it  was  original¬ 
ly. 

177.  Paragraph  299. 

The  two  sides  of  the  constitution  bear  respectively 
on  the  rights  and  the  services  of  individuals.  Services 
are  now  almost  entirely  reduced  to  money  payments, 
and  military  service  is  now  almost  the  only  personal 
one  exacted.  In  the  past,  far  more  claims  were  made 
directly  on  a  man’s  own  person,  and  he  used  to  be 
called  upon  for  work  according  to  his  ability.  In  our 
day,  the  state  purchases  what  it  requires.  This  may 
at  first  sight  seem  an  abstract,  heartless,  and  dead 
state  of  affairs,  and  for  the  state  to  be  satisfied  with 
indirect  services  may  also  look  like  decadence  in  the 
state.  But  the  principle  of  the  modern  state  requires 
that  the  whole  of  an  individual’s  activity  shall  be 
mediated  through  his  will.  By  means  of  money,  how¬ 
ever,  the  justice  of  equality  can  be  achieved  much 
more  efficiently.  Otherwise,  if  assessment  depended 
on  concrete  ability,  a  talented  man  would  be  more 
heavily  taxed  than  anuntalented  one.  But  nowadays 
respect  for  subjective  freedom  is  publicly  recognized 
precisely  in  the  fact  that  the  state  lays  hold  of  a  man 
only  by  that  which  is  capable  of  being  held.2 

178.  Paragraph  300. 

The  proposal  to  exclude  members  of  the  executive 

2  [i.e.  external  goods.  See  Paragraph  299.] 


148  PHILOSOPHY 

from  legislative  bodies,  as  for  instance  the  Constit¬ 
uent  Assembly1  did,  is  a  consequence  of  false  views 
of  the  state.  In  England,  ministers  must  be  members 
of  parliament,  and  this  is  right,  because  executive 
officers  should  be  linked  with  and  not  opposed  to  the 
legislature.  The  idea2  of  the  so-called  “independence 
of  powers”  contains  the  fundamental  error  of  sup¬ 
posing  that  the  powers,  though  independent,  are  to 
check  one  another.  This  independence,  however,  de¬ 
stroys  the  unity  of  the  state,  and  unity  is  the  chief 
of  all  desiderata. 

179.  Paragraph  301. 

The  attitude  of  the  executive  to  the  Estates  should 
not  be  essentially  hostile,  and  a  belief  in  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  such  hostility  is  a  sad  mistake.  The  executive 
is  not  a  party  standing  over  against  another  party 
in  such  a  way  that  each  has  continually  to  steal  a 
march  on  the  other  and  wrest  something  from  the 
other.  If  such  a  situation  arises  in  the  state,  that  is  a 
misfortune,  but  it  cannot  be  called  health.  The  taxes 
voted  by  the  Estates,  moreover,  are  not  to  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  a  present  given  to  the  state.  On  the  contrary, 
they  are  voted  in  the  best  interests  of  the  voters  them¬ 
selves.  The  real  significance  of  the  Estates  lies  in  the 
fact  that  it  is  through  them  that  the  state  enters  the 
subjective  consciousness  of  the  people  and  that  the 
people  begins  to  participate  in  the  state. 

180.  Paragraph  302. 

The  constitution  is  essentially  a  system  of  media¬ 
tion.  In  despotisms  where  there  are  only  rulers  and 
people,  the  people  is  effective,  if  at  all,  only  as  a 
mass  destructive  of  the  organization  of  the  state. 
When  the  multitude  enters  the  state  as  one  of  its 
organs,  it  achieves  its  interests  by  legal  and  orderly 
means.  But  if  these  means  are  lacking,  the  voice  of 
the  masses  is  always  for  violence.  Hence,  in  despotic 
states,  the  despot  always  indulges  the  mob  and  keeps 
his  wrath  for  his  entourage.  For  the  same  reason  too 
the  mob  in  such  states  pays  only  a  few  taxes.  Taxes 
rise  in  a  constitutionally  governed  state  simply  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  people’s  own  consciousness.  In  no  country 
are  so  many  taxes  paid  as  in  England. 

1 81.  Paragraph  306. 

This  class  has  a  volition  of  a  more  independent 
character.  On  the  whole,  the  class  of  landed  property 
owners  is  divided  into  an  educated  section  and  a  sec¬ 
tion  of  farmers.  But  over  against  both  of  these  sorts 
of  people  there  stands  the  business  class,  which  is  de¬ 
pendent  on  needs  and  concentrated  on  their  satisfac¬ 
tion,  and  the  civil  servant  class,  which  is  essentially 
dependent  on  the  state.  The  security  and  stability  of 
the  agricultural  class  may  be  still  further  increased 
by  the  institution  of  primogeniture,  though  this  in¬ 
stitution  is  desirable  only  from  the  point  of  view  of 
politics, since  it  entails  a  sacrifice  for  the  political  end 
of  giving  the  eldest  son  a  life  of  independence.  Pri¬ 
mogeniture  is  grounded  on  the  fact  that  the  state 
should  be  able  to  reckon  not  on  the  bare  possibility 

1  [In  France.] 

a  [Montesquieu’s.  See  The  Spirit  of  Laws,  xi.  6.] 


OF  RIGHT 

of  political  inclinations,  but  on  something  necessary. 
Now  an  inclination  for  politics  is  of  course  not  bound 
up  with  wealth,  but  there  is  a  relatively  necessary 
connexion  between  the  two,  because  a  man  with  in¬ 
dependent  means  is  not  hemmed  in  by  external  cir¬ 
cumstances  and  so  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  him 
from  entering  politics  and  working  for  the  state. 
Where  political  institutions  are  lacking,  however, 
the  foundation  and  encouragement  of  primogeniture 
is  nothing  but  a  chain  on  the  freedom  of  private 
rights,  and  either  political  meaning  must  be  given  to 
it,  or  else  it  will  in  due  course  disappear. 

182.  Paragraph  309. 

The  introduction  of  representation  implies  that 
consent  is  to  be  given  not  directly  by  all  but  only 
by  plenipotentiaries,  since  under  a  representative 
system  the  individual,  qua  infinite  person,  no  longer 
comes  into  the  picture.  Representation  is  grounded 
on  trust,  but  trusting  another  is  something  different 
from  giving  my  vote  myself  in  my  own  personal  ca¬ 
pacity.  Hence  majority  voting  runs  counter  to  the 
principle  that  I  should  be  personally  present  in  any¬ 
thing  which  is  to  be  obligatory  on  me.  We  have  con¬ 
fidence  in  a  man  when  we  take  him  to  be  a  man  of 
discretion  who  will  manage  ouraffairs  conscientious¬ 
ly  and  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  just  as  if  they 
were  his  own.  Thus  the  principle  of  the  individual 
subjective  will  disappears,  since  confidence  is  given 
to  a  thing,  to  a  man’s  principles,  or  his  demeanour 
or  his  conduct  or  his  concrete  mentality  generally. 
The  important  thing,  then,  is  that  a  member  of  the 
Estates  shall  have  a  character,  insight,  and  will  ade¬ 
quate  to  his  task  of  concentrating  on  public  busi¬ 
ness.  In  other  words  there  is  no  question  of  an  in¬ 
dividual’s  talking  as  an  abstract  single  person.  The 
point  is  rather  that  his  interests  are  made  good  in  an 
assembly  whose  business  is  with  the  general  interest. 
The  electors  require  a  guarantee  that  their  deputy 
will  further  and  secure  this  general  interest. 

183.  Paragraph  315. 

Estates  Assemblies,  open  to  the  public,  are  a  great 
spectacle  and  an  excellent  education  for  the  citizens, 
and  it  is  from  them  that  the  people  learns  best  how 
to  recognize  the  true  character  of  its  interests.  The 
idea  usually  dominant  is  that  everyone  knows  from 
the  start  what  is  best  for  the  state  and  that  the  As¬ 
sembly  debate  is  a  mere  discussion  of  this  knowl¬ 
edge.  In  fact,  however,  the  precise  contrary  is  the 
truth.  It  is  here  that  there  first  begin  to  develop  the 
virtues,  abilities,  dexterities,  which  have  to  serve  as 
examples  to  the  public.  Of  course  such  debates  are 
irksome  to  ministers,  who  have  to  equip  themselves 
with  wit  and  eloquence  to  meet  the  criticisms  there 
directed  against  them.  None  the  less,  publicity  here 
is  the  chief  means  of  educating  the  public  in  nation¬ 
al  affairs.  A  nation  which  has  such  public  sittings  is 
far  more  vitally  related  to  the  state  than  one  which 
has  no  Estates  Assembly  or  one  which  meets  in  pri¬ 
vate.  It  is  only  because  their  every  step  is  made 
known  publicly  in  this  way  that  the  two  Houses  keep 
pace  with  the  advance  of  public  opinion,  and  it  then 


ADDITIONS  149 


becomes  clear  that  a  man’s  castle  building  at  his  fire¬ 
side  with  his  wife  and  his  friends  is  one  thing,  while 
what  happens  in  a  great  Assembly,  where  one  shrewd 
idea  devours  another,  is  something  quite  different. 

184.  Paragraph  316. 

Public  opinion  is  the  unorganized  way  in  which  a 
people’s  opinions  and  wishes  are  made  known.  What 
is  actually  made  authoritative  in  the  state  must  op¬ 
erate  in  an  organized  manner  as  the  parts  of  the  con¬ 
stitution  do.  But  at  all  times  public  opinion  has  been 
a  great  power  and  it  is  particularly  so  in  our  day 
when  the  principle  of  subjective  freedom  has  such 
importance  and  significance.  What  is  to  be  authori¬ 
tative  nowadays  derives  its  authority,  not  at  all 
from  force,  only  to  a  small  extent  from  habit  and 
custom,  really  from  insight  and  argument. 

185.  Paragraph  317. 

The  principle  of  the  modern  world  requires  that 
what  anyone  is  to  recognize  shall  reveal  itself  to  him 
as  something  entitled  to  recognition.  Apart  from  that, 
however,  everyone  wishes  to  have  some  share  in  dis¬ 
cussion  and  deliberation.  Once  he  has  had  his  say  and 
so  his  share  of  responsibility,  his  subjectivity  has 
been  satisfied  and  he  puts  up  with  a  lot.  In  France 
freedom  of  speech  has  turned  out  far  less  dangerous 
than  enforced  silence,  because  with  the  latter  the 
fear  is  that  men  bottle  up  their  objections  to  a  thing, 
whereas  argument  gives  them  an  outlet  and  a  meas¬ 
ure  of  satisfaction,  and  this  is  in  addition  a  means 
whereby  the  thing  can  be  pushed  ahead  more  easily. 

186.  Paragraph  318. 

Public  opinion  contains  all  kinds  of  falsity  and 
truth,  but  it  takes  a  great  man  to  find  the  truth  in  it. 
The  great  man  of  the  age  is  the  one  who  can  put  in¬ 
to  words  the  will  of  his  age,  tell  his  age  what  its  will 
is,  and  accomplish  it.1  What  he  does  is  the  heart  and 
the  essence  of  his  age,  he  actualizes  his  age.  The 
man  who  lacks  sense  enough  to  despise  public  opin¬ 
ion  expressed  in  gossip  will  never  do  anything  great. 

187.  Paragraph  320. 

Subjectivity  has  been  treated  once  already  [Par¬ 
agraphs  279  ff.]  as  the  apex  of  the  state,  as  the  crown. 
Its  other  aspect  is  its  arbitrary  manifestation  in  pub¬ 
lic  opinion,  its  most  external  mode  of  appearance. 
The  subjectivity  of  the  monarch  is  inherently  ab¬ 
stract,  but  it  should  be  something  concrete  and  so 
be  the  ideality  which  diffuses  itself  over  the  whole 
state.  The  state  at  peace  is  that  in  which  all  branches 
of  civil  life  subsist,  but  they  possess  their  subsistence 
outside  and  alongside  one  another  as  something 
which  issues  from  the  Idea  of  the  whole.  The  fact 
that  it  so  issues  must  also  come  into  appearance  as 
the  ideality  of  the  whole. 

188.  Paragraph  324. 

In  peace  civil  life  continually  expands ;  all  its  de¬ 
partments  wall  themselves  in,  and  in  the  long  run 
men  stagnate.  Their  idiosyncrasies  become  continual- 

1  [Reading  Wer,  was  seine  Zeit  will,  ausspricht,  ihr 
sagt  und  vollbringt,  with  Ziegler  in  Kant-Studien,  1909.] 


ly  more  fixed  and  ossified.  But  for  health  the  unity 
of  the  body  is  required,  and  if  its  parts  harden  them¬ 
selves  into  exclusiveness,  that  is  death.  Perpetual 
peace  is  often  advocated  as  an  ideal  towards  which 
humanity  should  strive.  With  that  end  in  view,  Kant 
proposed  a  league  of  monarchs  to  adjust  differences 
between  states,  and  the  Holy  Alliance2  was  meant  to 
be  a  league  of  much  the  same  kind.  But  the  state  is 
an  individual,  and  individuality  essentially  implies 
negation.  Hence  even  if  a  number  of  states  make 
themselves  into  a  family,  this  group  as  an  individual 
must  engender  an  opposite  and  create  an  enemy.  As 
a  result  of  war,  nations  are  strengthened,  but  peo¬ 
ples  involved  in  civil  strife  also  acquire  peace  at  home 
through  making  wars  abroad.  To  be  sure,  war  pro¬ 
duces  insecurity  of  property,  but  this  insecurity  of 
things  is  nothing  but  their  transience — which  is  in¬ 
evitable.  We  hear  plenty  of  sermons  from  the  pulpit 
about  the  insecurity,  vanity,  and  instability  of  tem¬ 
poral  things,  but  everyone  thinks,  however  much  he 
is  moved  by  what  he  hears,  that  he  at  least  will  be 
able  to  retain  his  own.  But  if  this  insecurity  now 
comes  on  the  scene  in  the  form  of  hussars  with  shin¬ 
ing  sabres  and  they  actualize  in  real  earnest  what  the 
preachers  have  said,  then  the  moving  and  edifying 
discourses  which  foretold  all  these  events  turn  into 
curses  against  the  invader.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the 
fact  remains  that  wars  occur  when  the  necessity  of 
the  case  requires.  The  seeds  burgeon  once  more,  and 
harangues  are  silenced  by  the  solemn  cycles  of  his¬ 
tory. 

189.  Paragraph  327. 

The  military  class  is  that  universal  class  which  is 
charged  with  the  defence  of  the  state,  and  its  duty  is 
to  make  real  the  ideality  implicit  within  itself,  i.e.  to 
sacrifice  itself.  Courage  to  be  sure  is  multiform.  The 
mettle  of  an  animal  or  a  brigand,  courage  for  the 
sake  of  honour,  the  courage  of  a  knight,  these  are 
not  true  forms  of  courage.  The  true  courage  of  civ¬ 
ilized  nations  is  readiness  for  sacrifice  in  the  service 
of  the  state,  so  that  the  individual  counts  as  only  one 
amongst  many.  The  important  thing  here  is  not  per¬ 
sonal  mettle  but  aligning  oneself  with  the  universal. 
In  India  five  hundred  men  conquered  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  who  were  not  cowards,  but  who  only  lacked 
this  disposition  to  work  in  close  co-operation  with 
others.3 

190.  Paragraph  329. 

In  almost  all  European  countries  the  individual 
head  of  the  state  is  the  monarch,  and  foreign  affairs 
are  his  business.  Where  the  Estates  have  constitu¬ 
tional  powers,  the  question  may  arise  whether  they 

2  [1815,  between  Russia,  Austria,  and  Prussia; 
formed  on  the  initiative  of  Tsar  Alexander  in  the  pro¬ 
fessed  endeavour  “to  regulate  future  conduct  by  the 
principles  of  the  Gospel.”] 

3  [In  1751  Clive  “led  five  hundred  men  to  Arcot  .  .  . 
and  there  held  a  crumbling  fortress  against  ten  thousand 
Indians  with  a  stiffening  of  French  troops.”  At  Flassey 
“he  brought  3,000  men  into  action  of  whom  900  only 
were  Europeans,  against  a  force  of  40,000  infantry  and 
15,000  cavalry  and  .  .  .  routed  his  opponents”  (Fisher, 
History  of  Europe,  London,  1936,  p.  764)*] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  RIGHT 


should  not  decide  on  war  and  peace,  and  in  any 
case  they  have  their  influence  on  the  question,  par¬ 
ticularly  in  connexion  with  ways  and  means.  In 
England,  for  example,  no  unpopular  war  can  be 
waged.  If, however, it  is  supposed  that  monarchsand 
cabinetsaremoresubject  to  passion  than  parliaments 
are,  and  if  for  this  reason  an  attempt  is  made  to  jug¬ 
gle  the  decision  on  war  and  peace  into  the  hands  of 
the  latter,  then  we  must  point  out  that  whole  peo¬ 
ples  may  often  be  a  prey  to  excitement  or  be  car¬ 
ried  away  by  passion  to  a  greater  extent  than  their 
leaders.  In  England  the  whole  nation  has  frequently 
pressed  for  war  and  to  a  certain  extent  compelled 
ministers  to  wage  it.  The  popularity  of  Pitt  was  due 
to  his  knowing  how  to  fall  in  with  what  the  people 
wanted  at  the  time.1  It  was  only  later2  that  the  peo¬ 
ple  cooled  down  and  so  began  to  reflect  that  the  war 
was  useless  and  unnecessary  and  had  been  under¬ 
taken  without  counting  the  cost.  Moreover,  a  state 
stands  in  relation  not  with  one  other  state  only, 
but  with  many.  And  the  complexities  of  their  rela¬ 
tions  become  so  delicate  that  they  can  be  handled 
only  by  the  head  of  the  state. 

19 1.  Paragraph  330. 

States  are  not  private  persons  but  completely  au¬ 
tonomous  totalities  in  themselves,  and  so  the  rela¬ 
tion  between  them  differs  from  a  moral  relation  and 
a  relation  involving  private  rights.  Attempts  have 
often  been  made  to  regard  the  state  as  a  person  with 
the  rights  of  persons  and  as  a  moral  entity.  But  the 
position  with  private  persons  is  that  they  are  under 
the  jurisdiction  of  a  court  which  gives  effect  to  what 
is  right  in  principle.  Now  a  relation  between  states 
ought  also  to  be  right  in  principle,  but  in  mundane 
affairs  a  principle  ought  also  to  have  power.  Now 


since  there  is  no  power  in  existence  which  decides 
in  face  of  the  state  what  is  right  in  principle  and  ac¬ 
tualizes  this  decision,  it  follows  that  so  far  as  inter¬ 
national  relations  are  concerned  we  can  never  get 
beyond  an  “ought.”  The  relation  between  states  is 
a  relation  between  autonomous  entities  which  make 
mutual  stipulations  but  which  at  the  same  time  are 
superior  to  these  stipulations. 

192.  Paragraph  331. 

When  Napoleon  said  before  the  Peace  of  Campo- 
formio3  that  “the  French  Republic  needs  recogni¬ 
tion  as  little  as  the  sun  requires  it,”  what  his  words 
implied  was  simply  the  thing’s  strength  which  car¬ 
ries  wTith  it,  without  any  verbal  expression,  the  guar¬ 
antee  of  recognition. 

193.  Paragraph  338. 

Modern  wars  are  therefore  humanely  waged,  and 
person  is  not  set  over  against  person  in  hatred.  At 
most,  personal  enmities  appear  in  the  vanguard,  but 
in  the  main  body  of  the  army  hostility  is  something 
vague  and  gives  place  to  each  side’s  respect  for  the 
duty  of  the  other. 

194.  Paragraph  339. 

The  European  peoples  forma  family  in  accordance 
with  the  universal  principle  underlying  their  legal 
codes,  their  customs,  and  their  civilization.  This 
principle  has  modified  their  international  conduct 
accordingly  in  a  state  of  affairs  [i.e.  war]  otherwise 
dominated  by  the  mutual  infliction  of  evils.  The  re¬ 
lations  of  state  to  state  are  uncertain,  and  there  is 
no  Praetor  available  to  adjust  them.  The  only  high¬ 
er  judge  is  the  universal  absolute  mind,  the  world 
mind. 

3  [1797,  at  the  close  of  Napoleon’s  first  Italian  cam¬ 
paign.] 


CONTENTS:  PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


INTRODUCTION 

I.  Original  History  153 

II.  Reflective  History  154 

III.  Philosophical  History  156 

Geographical  Basis  of  History  190 

Classification  of  Historic  Data  203 

FIRST  PART,  The  Oriental  World 

Principle  of  the  Oriental  World  207 

I.  China  209 

II.  India  219 

II.  Continued,  India,  Buddhism  233 

III.  Persia  235 

1.  The  Zend  People  237 

2.  The  Assyrians,  Babylonians, 

Medes,  and  Persians  239 

3.  The  Persian  Empire  and  its  Con¬ 

stituent  Parts  242 

Persia  242 

Syria  and  Semitic  Western  Asia  243 

Judcea  245 

Egypt  247 

Transition  to  the  Greek  World  257 

SECOND  PART,  The  Greek  World 

The  Region  of  Spirit  2  59 

I.  The  Elements  of  the  Greek  Spirit  259 

II.  Phases  of  Individuality  HZsthetically 

Conditioned  267 

1.  The  Subjective  Work  of  Art  267 

2.  The  Objective  Work  of  Art  268 

3.  The  Political  Work  of  Art  271 

The  War  with  the  Persians  274 

Athens  275 

Sparta  276 


The  Peloponnesian  War  278 

The  Macedonian  Empire  281 

III.  Fall  of  the  Greek  Spirit  282 

THIRD  PART,  The  Roman  World 

Distinction  between  the  Roman ,  Persian, 

and  Greek  Principle  285 

I.  Rome  to  the  Time  of  the  Second 

Punic  War  287 

1.  The  Elements  of  the  Roman  Spirit  287 

2.  History  of  Rome  to  the  Second 

Punic  War  293 

II.  Rome  from  the  Second  Punic  War  to 

the  Emperors  298 

III.  1.  Rome  under  the  Emperors  301 

2.  Christianity  303 

3.  The  Byzantine  Empire  31 1 

FOURTH  PART,  The  German  World 

T he  Principle  0 f  Spiritual  Freedom  315 

I.  The  Elements  of  the  Christian  Ger¬ 
man  World  317 

1.  The  Barbarian  Migrations  317 

2.  Mohammedanism  321 

3.  The  Empire  of  Charlemagne  324 

II.  The  Middle  Ages  326 

1.  The  Feudality  and  the  Hierarchy  327 

2.  The  Crusades  337 

3.  The  Transition  from  Feudalism  to 

Monarchy  342 

III.  The  Modern  Time  348 

1.  The  Reformation  348 

2.  Influence  of  the  Reformation  on 

Political  Development  355 

3.  The  Eclaircissement  and  Revolu¬ 

tion  360 


INTRODUCTION 


The  subject  of  this  course  of  lectures  is  the  phil¬ 
osophical  history  of  the  world.  And  by  this  must 
be  understood,  not  a  collection  of  general  ob¬ 
servations  respecting  it,  suggested  by  the  study 
of  its  records,  and  proposed  to  be  illustrated  by 
its  facts,  but  universal  history  itself.1  To  gain  a 
clear  idea,  at  the  outset,  of  the  nature  of  our 
task,  it  seems  necessary  to  begin  with  an  exam¬ 
ination  of  the  other  methods  of  treating  history. 
The  various  methods  may  be  ranged  under  three 
heads : 

I.  Original  history. 

II.  Reflective  history. 

III.  Philosophical  history. 

I. 

Of  the  first  kind,  the  mention  of  one  or  two 
distinguished  names  will  furnish  a  definite  type. 
To  this  category  belong  Herodotus,  Thucydides, 
and  other  historians  of  the  same  order,  whose  de¬ 
scriptions  are  for  the  most  part  limited  to  deeds, 
events,  and  states  of  society,  which  they  had  be¬ 
fore  their  eyes,  and  whose  spirit  they  shared. 
They  simply  transferred  what  was  passing  in  the 
world  around  them,  to  the  realm  of  representa¬ 
tive  intellect.  An  external  phenomenon  is  thus 
translated  into  an  internal  conception.  In  the 
same  way,  the  poet  operates  upon  the  material 
supplied  him  by  his  emotions;  projecting  it  into 
an  image  for  the  conceptive  faculty.  These  orig¬ 
inal  historians  did,  it  is  true,  find  statements  and 
narratives  of  other  men  ready  to  hand.  One  per¬ 
son  cannot  be  an  eye  or  ear  witness  of  every¬ 
thing.  But  they  make  use  of  such  aids  only  as  the 
poet  does  of  that  heritage  of  an  already-formed 
language,  to  which  he  owes  so  much;  merely  as 
an  ingredient.  Historiographers  bind  together  the 
fleeting  elements  of  story,  and  treasure  them  up 
for  immortality  in  the  temple  of  Mnemosyne. 
Legends,  ballad-stories,  traditions,  must  be  ex¬ 
cluded  from  such  original  history.  These  are  but 

1 1  cannot  mention  any  work  that  will  serve  as  a  com¬ 
pendium  of  the  course,  but  I  may  remark  that  in  my 
Philosophy  of  Right,  §§341-360,  I  have  already  given 
a  definition  of  such  a  universal  history  as  it  is  pro¬ 
posed  to  develop,  and  a  syllabus  of  the  chief  elements 
or  periods  into  which  it  naturally  divides  itself. 


dim  and  hazy  forms  of  historical  apprehension, 
and  therefore  belong  to  nations  whose  intelli¬ 
gence  is  but  half  awakened.  Here,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  we  have  to  do  with  people  fully  conscious 
of  what  they  were  and  what  they  were  about. 
The  domain  of  reality — actually  seen,  or  capable 
of  being  so — affords  a  very  different  basis  in 
point  of  firmness  from  that  fugitive  and  shad¬ 
owy  element,  in  which  were  engendered  those 
legends  and  poetic  dreams  whose  historical  pres¬ 
tige  vanishes,  as  soon  as  nations  have  attained  a 
mature  individuality. 

Such  original  historians,  then,  change  the 
events,  the  deeds,  and  the  states  of  society  with 
which  they  are  conversant,  into  an  object  for  the 
conceptive  faculty.  The  narratives  they  leave  us 
cannot,  therefore,  be  very  comprehensive  in  their 
range.  Herodotus, Thucydides,  Guicciardini,  may 
be  taken  as  fair  samples  of  the  class  in  this  re¬ 
spect.  What  is  present  and  living  in  their  en¬ 
vironment  is  their  proper  material.  The  influ¬ 
ences  that  have  formed  the  writer  are  identical 
with  those  which  have  moulded  the  events  that 
constitute  the  matter  of  his  story.  The  author’s 
spirit,  and  that  of  the  actions  he  narrates,  is  one 
and  the  same.  He  describes  scenes  in  which  he 
himself  has  been  an  actor,  or  at  any  rate  an  in¬ 
terested  spectator.  It  is  short  periods  of  time, 
individual  shapes  of  persons  and  occurrences 
single,  unreflected  traits,  of  which  he  makes  his 
picture.  And  his  aim  is  nothing  more  than  the 
presentation  to  posterity  of  an  image  of  events 
as  clear  as  that  which  he  himself  possessed  in 
virtue  of  personal  observation,  or  life-like  de¬ 
scriptions.  Reflections  are  none  of  his  business, 
for  he  lives  in  the  spirit  of  his  subject;  he  has 
not  attained  an  elevation  above  it.  If,  as  in 
Caesar’s  case,  he  belongs  to  the  exalted  rank  of 
generals  or  statesmen,  it  is  the  prosecution  of 
his  own  aims  that  constitutes  the  history. 

Suchspeechesaswefindin  Thucydides  (forex- 
ample)  of  which  we  can  positively  assert  that 
they  are  not  bona  fide  reports,  would  seem  to 
make  against  our  statement  that  a  historian  of 
his  class  presents  us  no  reflected  picture;  that 
persons  and  people  appear  in  his  works  in  propria 
persona .  Speeches,  it  must  be  allowed,  are  veri- 


153 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


154 

table  transactions  in  the  human  commonwealth ; 
in  fact,  very  gravely  influential  transactions.  It 
is,  indeed,  often  said,  “Such  and  such  things  are 
only  talk”;  by  way  of  demonstrating  their  harm¬ 
lessness.  That  for  which  this  excuse  is  brought 
may  be  mere  “talk”;  and  talk  enjoys  the  im¬ 
portant  privilege  of  being  harmless.  But  address¬ 
es  of  peoples  to  peoples,  or  orations  directed  to 
nations  and  to  princes, are  integrant  constituents 
of  history.  Granted  that  such  orations  as  those 
of  Pericles — that  most  profoundly  accomplished, 
genuine,  noble  statesman — were  elaborated  by 
Thucydides,  it  must  yet  be  maintained  that 
they  were  not  foreign  to  the  character  of  the 
speaker.  In  the  orations  in  question,  these  men 
proclaim  the  maxims  adopted  by  their  country¬ 
men,  and  which  formed  their  own  character; 
they  record  their  views  of  their  political  rela¬ 
tions,  and  of  their  moral  and  spiritual  nature; 
and  the  principles  of  their  designs  and  conduct. 
What  the  historian  puts  into  their  mouths  is  no 
supposititious  system  of  ideas,  but  an  uncorrupt¬ 
ed  transcript  of  their  intellectual  and  moral  habi¬ 
tudes. 

Of  these  historians,  whom  we  must  make 
thoroughly  our  own,  with  whom  we  must  linger 
long,  if  we  would  live  with  their  respective  na¬ 
tions,  and  enter  deeply  into  their  spirit :  of  these 
historians,  to  whose  pages  ive  may  turn  not  for 
the  purposes  of  erudition  merely,  but  with  a  view 
to  deep  and  genuine  enjoyment,  there  are  fewer 
than  might  be  imagined.  Herodotus,  the  Father, 
i.e.,  the  Founder  of  History,  and  Thucydides 
have  been  already  mentioned.  Xenophon’s  ac¬ 
count  of  the  retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand  is  a 
work  equally  original.  Caesar’s  Commentaries  is 
the  simple  masterpiece  of  a  mighty  spirit. 
Among  the  ancients,  these  annalists  were  neces¬ 
sarily  great  captains  and  statesmen.  In  the  Mid¬ 
dle  Ages,  if  we  except  the  bishops,  who  were 
placed  in  the  very  centre  of  the  political  world, 
the  monks  monopolize  this  category  as  naive 
chroniclers  who  were  as  decidedly  isolated  from 
active  life  as  those  elder  annalists  had  been  con¬ 
nected  with  it.  In  modern  times  the  relations  are 
entirely  altered.  Our  culture  is  essentially  com¬ 
prehensive,  and  immediately  changes  all  events 
into  historical  representations.  Belonging  to  the 
class  in  question,  we  have  vivid,  simple,  clear 
narrations — especially  of  military  transactions 
— which  might  fairly  take  their  place  with  those 
of  Caesar.  In  richness  of  matter  and  fulness  of 
detail  as  regards  strategic  appliances,  and  attend¬ 
ant  circumstances,  they  are  even  more  instruc¬ 
tive.  The  French  Memoires,  also,  fall  under  this 
category.  In  many  cases  these  are  written  by  men 


of  mark,  though  relating  to  affairs  of  little  note. 
They  not  unfrequently  contain  a  large  propor¬ 
tion  of  anecdotal  matter,  so  that  the  ground  they 
occupy  is  narrow  and  trivial.  Yet  they  are  often 
veritable  masterpieces  in  history;  as  those  of 
Cardinal  de  Retz.  which  in  fact  trench  on  a  larg¬ 
er  historical  field.  In  Germany  such  masters  are 
rare.  Frederick  the  Great  ( Histoire  de  mon 
temps )  is  an  illustrious  exception.  Writers  of 
this  order  must  occupy  an  elevated  position. 
Only  from  such  a  position  is  it  possible  to  take 
an  extensive  view  of  affairs — to  see  everything. 
This  is  out  of  the  question  for  him,  who  from 
below  merely  gets  a  glimpse  of  the  great  world 
through  a  miserable  cranny. 

II. 

The  second  kind  of  history  we  may  call  the 
reflective.  It  is  history  whose  mode  of  represen¬ 
tation  is  not  really  confined  by  the  limits  of  the 
time  to  which  it  relates,  but  whose  spirit  tran¬ 
scends  thepresent.  In  this  second  order  a  strongly 
marked  variety  of  species  may  be  distinguished. 

i.  It  is  the  aim  of  the  investigator  to  gain  a  view 
of  the  entire  history  of  a  people  or  a  country,  or 
of  the  world,  in  short,  what  we  call  universal  his¬ 
tory.  In  this  case  the  working  up  of  the  historical 
material  is  the  main  point.  The  workman  ap¬ 
proaches  his  task  with  his  own  spirit;  a  spirit 
distinct  from  that  of  the  element  he  is  to  manip¬ 
ulate.  Here  a  very  important  consideration  will 
be  the  principles  to  which  the  author  refers  the 
bearing  and  motives  of  the  actions  and  events 
which  he  describes,  and  those  which  determine 
the  form  of  his  narrative.  Among  us  Germans 
this  reflective  treatment  and  the  display  of  in¬ 
genuity  which  it  occasions  assume  a  manifold 
variety  of  phases.  Every  writer  of  history  pro¬ 
poses  to  himself  an  original  method.  The  Eng¬ 
lish  and  French  confess  to  general  principles  of 
historical  composition.  Their  standpoint  is  more 
that  of  cosmopolitan  or  of  national  culture. 
Among  us  each  labors  to  invent  a  purely  individ¬ 
ual  point  of  view.  Instead  of  writing  history,  we 
are  always  beating  our  brains  to  discover  how 
history  ought  to  be  written.  This  first  kind  of  re¬ 
flective  history  is  most  nearly  akin  to  the  preced¬ 
ing,  when  it  has  no  farther  aim  than  to  present 
the  annals  of  a  country  complete.  Such  compila¬ 
tions  (among  which  may  be  reckoned  the  works 
of  Livy,  Diodorus  Siculus,  Johannes  von  Mul¬ 
ler’s  History  of  Switzerland)  are,  if  well  per¬ 
formed,  highly  meritorious.  Among  the  best  of 
the  kind  may  be  reckoned  such  annalists  as  ap¬ 
proach  those  of  the  first  class;  who  give  so  vivid 
a  transcript  of  events  that  the  reader  may  well 


INTRODUCTION  155 


fancy  himself  listening  to  contemporaries  and 
eye-witnesses.  But  it  often  happens  that  the  in¬ 
dividuality  of  tone  which  must  characterize  a 
writer  belonging  to  a  different  culture,  is  not 
modified  in  accordance  with  the  periods  such  a 
record  must  traverse.  The  spirit  of  the  writer  is 
quite  other  than  that  of  the  times  of  which  he 
treats.  Thus  Livy  puts  into  the  mouths  of  the 
old  Roman  kings,  consuls,  and  generals,  such  ora¬ 
tions  as  would  be  delivered  by  an  accomplished 
advocate  of  the  Livian  era,  and  which  strikingly 
contrast  with  the  genuine  traditions  of  Roman 
antiquity  ( e .  g.,  the  fable  of  Menenius  Agrip- 
pa).  In  the  same  way  he  gives  us  descriptions 
of  battles,  as  if  he  had  been  an  actual  specta¬ 
tor;  but  whose  features  would  serve  well  enough 
for  battles  in  any  period,  and  whose  distinct¬ 
ness  contrasts  on  the  other  hand  with  the  want 
of  connection  and  the  inconsistency  that  pre¬ 
vail  elsewhere,  even  in  his  treatment  of  chief 
points  of  interest.  The  difference  between  such  a 
compiler  and  an  original  historian  may  be  best 
seen  by  comparing  Polybius  himself  with  the 
style  in  which  Livy  uses,  expands,  and  abridges 
his  annals  in  those  periods  of  which  Polybius’ 
account  has  been  preserved.  Johannes  von  Mul¬ 
ler  has  given  a  stiff,  formal,  pedantic  aspect  to 
his  history,  in  the  endeavor  to  remain  faithful  in 
his  portraiture  to  the  times  he  describes.  We 
much  prefer  the  narratives  we  find  in  old  Tschudy. 
All  is  more  naive  and  natural  than  it  appears  in 
the  garb  of  a  fictitious  and  affected  archaism. 

A  history  which  aspires  to  traverse  long  periods 
of  time,  or  to  be  universal,  must  indeed  forego 
the  attempt  to  give  individual  representations  of 
the  past  as  it  actually  existed.  It  must  fore¬ 
shorten  its  pictures  by  abstractions ;  and  this  in¬ 
cludes  not  merely  the  omission  of  events  and 
deeds,  but  whatever  is  involved  in  the  fact  that 
thought  is,  after  all,  the  most  trenchant  epito- 
mist.  A  battle,  a  great  victory,  a  siege,  no  longer 
maintains  its  original  proportions,  but  is  put  off 
with  a  bare  mention.  When  Livy,  e.  g.y  tells  us 
of  the  wars  with  the  Volsci,  we  sometimes  have 
the  brief  announcement:  “This  year  war  was 
carried  on  with  the  Volsci.” 

2.  A  second  species  of  reflective  history  is 
what  we  may  call  the  pragmatical.  When  we  have 
to  deal  with  the  past,  and  occupy  ourselves  with 
a  remote  world,  a  present  rises  into  being  for  the 
mind,  produced  by  its  own  activity,  as  the  re¬ 
ward  of  its  labor.  The  occurrences  are,  indeed, 
various;  but  the  idea  which  pervades  them — 
their  deeper  import  and  connection — is  one.  This 
takes  the  occurrence  out  of  the  category  of  the 
past  and  makes  it  virtually  present.  Pragmatical 


(didactic)  reflections,  though  in  their  nature  de¬ 
cidedly  abstract,  are  truly  and  indefeasibly  of 
the  present,  and  quicken  the  annals  of  the  dead 
past  with  the  life  of  to-day.  Whether,  indeed, 
such  reflections  are  truly  interesting  and  enliven¬ 
ing,  depends  on  the  writer’s  own  spirit.  Moral 
reflections  must  here  be  specially  noticed — the 
moral  teaching  expected  from  history,  which  lat¬ 
ter  has  not  infrequently  been  treated  with  a  di¬ 
rect  view  to  the  former.  It  may  be  allowed  that 
examples  of  virtue  elevate  the  soul,  and  are  ap¬ 
plicable  in  the  moral  instruction  of  children  for 
impressing  excellence  upon  their  minds.  But  the 
destinies  of  peoples  and  states,  their  interests, 
relations,  and  the  complicated  tissue  of  their  af¬ 
fairs,  present  quite  another  field.  Rulers,  states¬ 
men,  nations,  are  wont  to  be  emphatically  com¬ 
mended  to  the  teaching  which  experience  offers 
in  history.  But  what  experience  and  history  teach 
is  this — that  peoples  and  governments  never  have 
learned  anything  from  history,  or  acted  on  prin¬ 
ciples  deduced  from  it.  Each  period  is  involved 
in  such  peculiar  circumstances,  exhibits  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  things  so  strictly  idiosyncratic,  that  its 
conduct  must  be  regulated  by  considerations  con¬ 
nected  with  itself,  and  itself  alone.  Amid  the 
pressure  of  great  events,  a  general  principle  gives 
no  help.  It  is  useless  to  revert  to  similar  circum¬ 
stances  in  the  past.  The  pallid  shades  of  mem¬ 
ory  struggle  in  vain  with  the  life  and  freedom 
of  the  present.  Looked  at  in  this  light,  nothing 
can  be  shallower  than  the  oft-repeated  appeal 
to  Greek  and  Roman  examples  during  the  French 
Revolution.  Nothing  is  more  diverse  than  the 
genius  of  those  nations  and  that  of  our  times. 
Johannes  von  Muller,  in  his  Universal  History, 
as  also  in  his  History  of  Switzerland ,  had  such 
moral  aims  in  view.  He  designed  to  prepare  a 
body  of  political  doctrines  for  the  instruction  of 
princes,  governments,  and  peoples  (he  formed 
a  special  collection  of  doctrines  and  reflec¬ 
tions — frequently  giving  us  in  his  correspond¬ 
ence  the  exact  number  of  apophthegms  which 
he  had  compiled  in  a  week) ;  but  he  cannot  reck¬ 
on  this  part  of  his  labor  as  among  the  best  that 
he  accomplished.  It  is  only  a  thorough,  liberal, 
comprehensive  view  of  historical  relations  (such, 
e.  g.,  as  we  find  in  Montesquieu’s  Esprit  des 
lois ),  that  can  give  truth  and  interest  to  reflec¬ 
tions  of  this  order.  One  reflective  history,  there¬ 
fore,  supersedes  another.  The  materials  are  pat¬ 
ent  to  every  writer:  each  is  likely  enough  to 
believe  himself  capable  of  arranging  and  manip¬ 
ulating  them ;  and  may  expect  that  each  wall 
insist  upon  his  own  spirit  as  that  of  the  age  in 
question.  Disgusted  by  such  reflective  histories. 


i56  philosophy 

readers  have  often  returned  with  pleasure  to  a 
narrative  adopting  no  particular  point  of  view. 
These  certainly  have  their  value;  but  for  the 
most  part  they  offer  only  material  for  history. 
We  Germans  are  content  with  such.  The  French, 
on  the  other  hand,  display  great  genius  in  reani¬ 
mating  bygone  times,  and  in  bringing  the  past  to 
bear  upon  the  present  condition  of  things. 

3.  The  third  form  of  reflective  history  is  the 
critical.  This  deserves  mention  as  pre-eminently 
the  mode  of  treating  history  now  current  in  Ger¬ 
many.  It  is  not  history  itself  that  is  here  pre¬ 
sented.  We  might  more  properly  designate  it  as 
a  history  of  history;  a  criticism  of  historical 
narratives  and  an  investigation  of  their  truth 
and  credibility.  Its  peculiarity,  in  point  of  fact 
and  of  intention,  consists  in  the  acuteness  with 
which  the  writer  extorts  something  from  the 
records  which  was  not  in  the  matters  recorded. 
The  French  have  given  us  much  that  is  profound 
and  judicious  in  this  class  of  composition,  but 
they  have  not  endeavored  to  pass  a  merely  criti¬ 
cal  procedure  for  substantial  history.  They  have 
duly  presented  their  judgments  in  the  form  of 
critical  treatises.  Among  us,  the  so-called  “high¬ 
er  criticism,”  which  reigns  supreme  in  the  do¬ 
main  of  philology,  has  also  taken  possession  of 
our  historical  literature.  This  “higher  criticism” 
has  been  the  pretext  for  introducing  all  the  anti- 
historical  monstrosities  that  a  vain  imagination 
could  suggest.  Here  we  have  the  other  method  of 
making  the  past  a  living  reality;  putting  subjec¬ 
tive  fancies  in  the  place  of  historical  data;  fan¬ 
cies  whose  merit  is  measured  by  their  boldness, 
that  is,  the  scantiness  of  the  particulars  on  which 
they  are  based,  and  the  peremptoriness  with  which 
they  contravene  the  best  established  facts  of 
history. 

4.  The  last  species  of  reflective  history  an¬ 
nounces  its  fragmentary  character  on  the  very 
face  of  it.  It  adopts  an  abstract  position;  yet, 
since  it  takes  general  points  of  view  ( e.g .,  as  the 
history  of  art,  of  law,  of  religion),  it  forms  a 
transition  to  the  Philosophical  History  of  the 
World.  In  our  time  this  form  of  the  history  of 
ideas  has  been  more  developed  and  brought  into 
notice.  Such  branches  of  national  life  stand  in 
close  relation  to  the  entire  complex  of  a  peo¬ 
ple’s  annals;  and  the  question  of  chief  impor¬ 
tance  in  relation  to  our  subject  is,  whether  the 
connection  of  the  whole  is  exhibited  in  its  truth 
and  reality,  or  referred  to  merely  external  rela¬ 
tions.  In  the  latter  case,  these  important  phe¬ 
nomena  (art,  law,  religion,  etc.)  appear  as  pure¬ 
ly  accidental  national  peculiarities.  It  must  be 
remarked  that,  when  reflective  history  has  ad- 


OF  HISTORY 

vanced  to  the  adoption  of  general  points  of  view, 
if  the  position  taken  is  a  true  one.theseare  found 
to  constitute — not  a  merely  external  thread,  a 
superficial  series — but  are  the  inward  guiding 
soul  of  the  occurrences  and  actions  that  occupy 
a  nation’s  annals.  For,  like  the  soul-conductor 
Mercury,  the  idea  is  in  truth,  the  leader  of  peo¬ 
ples  and  of  the  world;  and  spirit,  the  rational 
and  necessitated  will  of  that  conductor,  is  and 
has  been  the  director  of  the  events  of  the  world’s 
history.  To  become  acquainted  with  spirit  in  this 
its  office  of  guidance,  is  the  object  of  our  present 
undertaking.  This  brings  us  to 

III. 

The  third  kind  of  history — the  philosophical. 
No  explanation  was  needed  of  the  two  previous 
classes;  their  nature  was  self-evident.  It  is  other¬ 
wise  with  this  last,  which  certainly  seems  to  re¬ 
quire  an  exposition  or  justification.  The  most 
general  definition  that  can  be  given  is:  that  the 
philosophy  of  history  means  nothing  but  the 
thoughtful  consideration  of  it.  Thought  is,  in¬ 
deed,  essential  to  humanity.  It  is  this  that  distin¬ 
guishes  us  from  the  brutes.  In  sensation,  cogni¬ 
tion,  and  intellection;  in  our  instincts  and  voli¬ 
tions,  as  far  as  they  are  truly  human,  thought  is 
an  invariable  element.  To  insist  upon  thought  in 
this  connection  with  history  may,  however,  ap¬ 
pear  unsatisfactory.  In  this  science  it  would  seem 
as  if  thought  must  be  subordinate  to  what  is  giv¬ 
en,  to  the  realities  of  fact;  that  this  is  its  basis 
and  guide :  while  philosophy  dwells  in  the  region 
of  self-produced  ideas,  without  reference  to  ac¬ 
tuality.  Approaching  history  thus  prepossessed, 
speculation  might  be  expected  to  treat  it  as  a 
mere  passive  material;  and,  so  far  from  leaving 
it  in  its  native  truth,  to  force  it  into  conformity 
with  a  tyrannous  idea,  and  to  construe  it,  as  the 
phrase  is,  “a  priori.”  But  as  it  is  the  business  of 
history  simply  to  adopt  into  its  records  what  is 
and  has  been,  actual  occurrences  and  transac¬ 
tions;  and  since  it  remains  true  to  its  character 
in  proportion  as  it  strictly  adheres  to  its  data, 
we  seem  to  have  in  philosophy,  a  process  dia¬ 
metrically  opposed  to  that  of  the  historiographer. 
This  contradiction,  and  the  charge  consequently 
brought  against  speculation,  shall  be  explained 
and  confuted.  We  do  not,  however,  propose  to 
correct  the  innumerable  special  misrepresenta¬ 
tions,  trite  or  novel,  that  are  current  respecting 
the  aims,  the  interests,  and  the  modes  of  treating 
history,  and  its  relation  to  philosophy. 

The  only  thought  which  philosophy  brings  with 
it  to  the  contemplation  of  history,  is  the  simple 
conception  of  reason;  that  reason  is  the  sover- 


INTRODUCTION 


eign  of  the  world;  that  the  history  of  the  world, 
therefore,  presents  us  with  a  rational  process. 
This  conviction  and  intuition  is  a  hypothesis  in 
the  domain  of  history  as  such.  In  that  of  philoso¬ 
phy  it  is  no  hypothesis.  It  is  there  proved  by  spec¬ 
ulative  cognition,  that  reason — and  this  term 
may  here  suffice  us,  without  investigating  the  re¬ 
lation  sustained  by  the  universe  to  the  divine 
being — is  substance,  as  well  as  infinite  power ;  its 
own  infinite  material  underlying  all  the  natural 
and  spiritual  life  which  it  originates,  as  also  the 
infinite  form — that  which  sets  this  material  in 
motion.  On  the  one  hand,  reason  is  the  substance 
of  the  universe ;  viz.,  that  by  which  and  in  which 
all  reality  has  its  being  and  subsistence.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  the  infinite  energy  of  the  uni¬ 
verse  ;  since  reason  is  not  so  powerless  as  to  be 
incapable  of  producing  anything  but  a  mere  ideal, 
a  mere  intention, having  its  place  outside  reality, 
nobody  knows  where;  something  separate  and 
abstract,  in  the  heads  of  certain  human  beings. 
It  is  the  infinite  complex  of  things,  their  entire 
essence  and  truth.  It  is  its  own  material  which 
it  commits  to  its  own  active  energy  to  work  up; 
not  needing,  as  finite  action  does,  the  conditions 
of  an  external  material  of  given  means  from 
which  it  may  obtain  its  support,  and  the  objects 
of  its  activity.  It  supplies  its  own  nourishment, 
and  is  the  object  of  its  own  operations.  While  it 
is  exclusively  its  own  basis  of  existence,  and  ab¬ 
solute  final  aim,  it  is  also  the  energizing  power 
realizing  this  aim;  developing  it  not  only  in  the 
phenomena  of  the  natural,  but  also  of  the  spirit¬ 
ual  universe — the  history  of  the  world.  That  this 
“idea”  or  “reason”  is  the  true,  the  eternal,  the  ab¬ 
solutely  powerful  essence;  that  it  reveals  itself 
in  the  world,  and  that  in  that  world  nothing  else 
is  revealed  but  this  and  its  honour  and  glory — is 
the  thesis  which,  as  we  have  said,  has  been 
proved  in  philosophy,  and  is  here  regarded  as 
demonstrated. 

In  those  of  my  hearers  who  are  not  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  philosophy,  I  may  fairly  presume,  at 
least,  the  existence  of  a  belief  in  reason,  a  desire, 
a  thirst  for  acquaintance  with  it,  in  entering  up¬ 
on  this  course  of  lectures.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  wish 
for  rational  insight,  not  the  ambition  to  amass  a 
mere  heap  of  acquirements,  that  should  be  pre¬ 
supposed  in  every  case  as  possessing  the  mind 
of  the  learner  in  the  study  of  science.  If  the 
clear  idea  of  reason  is  not  already  developed  in 
our  minds,  in  beginning  the  study  of  universal 
history,  we  should  at  least  have  the  firm,  un¬ 
conquerable  faith  that  reason  does  exist  there; 
and  that  the  world  of  intelligence  and  conscious 
volition  is  not  abandoned  to  chance,  but  must 


show  itself  in  the  light  of  the  self-cognizant  idea. 
Yet  I  am  not  obliged  to  make  any  such  prelimi¬ 
nary  demand  upon  your  faith.  What  I  have  said 
thus  provisionally,  and  what  I  shall  have  fur¬ 
ther  to  say,  is,  even  in  reference  to  our  branch 
of  science,  not  to  be  regarded  as  hypothetical, 
but  as  a  summary  view  of  the  whole ;  the  result 
of  the  investigation  we  are  about  to  pursue;  a 
result  which  happens  to  be  known  to  me,  be¬ 
cause  I  have  traversed  the  entire  field.  It  is  only 
an  inference  from  the  history  of  the  world,  that 
its  development  has  been  a  rational  process; 
that  the  history  in  question  has  constituted  the 
rational  necessary  course  of  the  world-spirit — 
that  spirit  whose  nature  is  always  one  and  the 
same,  but  which  unfolds  this  its  one  nature  in 
the  phenomena  of  the  world’s  existence.  This 
must,  as  before  stated,  present  itself  as  the  ulti¬ 
mate  result  of  history.  But  we  have  to  take  the 
latter  as  it  is.  We  must  proceed  historically — 
empirically.  Among  other  precautions  we  must 
take  care  not  to  be  misled  by  professed  his¬ 
torians  who  (especially  among  the  Germans, 
and  enjoying  a  considerable  authority),  are 
chargeable  with  the  very  procedure  of  which 
they  accuse  the  philosopher — introducing  a  pri¬ 
ori  inventions  of  their  own  into  the  records  of 
the  past.  It  is,  for  example,  a  widely  current 
fiction,  that  there  was  an  original  primeval  peo¬ 
ple,  taught  immediately  by  God,  endowed  with 
perfect  insight  and  wisdom,  possessing  a  thor¬ 
ough  knowledge  of  all  natural  laws  and  spiritua! 
truth;  that  there  have  been  such  or  such  sacer¬ 
dotal  peoples;  or,  to  mention  a  more  specific 
averment,  that  there  was  a  Roman  epos,  from 
which  the  Roman  historians  derived  the  early 
annals  of  their  city,  etc.  Authorities  of  this  kind 
we  leave  to  those  talented  historians  by  profes¬ 
sion,  among  whom  (in  Germany  at  least)  their 
use  is  not  uncommon.  We  might  then  announce 
it  as  the  first  condition  to  be  observed,  that  we 
should  faithfully  adopt  all  that  is  historical. 
But  in  such  general  expressions  themselves,  as 
“faithfully”  and  “adopt,”  lies  the  ambiguity. 
Even  the  ordinary,  the  “impartial”  historio¬ 
grapher,  whobelieves  and  professes  that  he  main¬ 
tains  a  simply  receptive  attitude;  surrendering 
himself  only  to  the  data  supplied  him — is  by  no 
means  passive  as  regards  the  exercise  of  his 
thinking  powers.  He  brings  his  categories  with 
him,  and  sees  the  phenomena  presented  to  his 
mental  vision,  exclusively  through  these  media. 
And,  especially  in  all  that  pretends  to  the  name 
of  science,  it  is  indispensable  that  reason  should 
not  sleep — that  reflection  should  be  in  full  play. 
To  him  who  looks  upon  the  world  rationally,  the 


!58  philosophy 

world  in  its  turn  presents  a  rational  aspect.  The 
relation  is  mutual.  But  the  various  exercises  of 
reflection,  the  different  points  of  view,  the  modes 
of  deciding  the  simple  question  of  the  relative 
importance  of  events  (the  first  category  that  oc¬ 
cupies  the  attention  of  the  historian),  do  not 
belong  to  this  place. 

I  will  only  mention  two  phases  and  points  of 
view  that  concern  the  generally  diffused  convic¬ 
tion  that  reason  has  ruled,  and  is  still  ruling  in 
the  world,  and  consequently  in  the  world’s  his¬ 
tory;  because  they  give  us,  at  the  same  time,  an 
opportunity  for  more  closely  investigating  the 
question  that  presents  the  greatest  difficulty, 
and  for  indicating  a  branch  of  the  subject,  which 
will  have  to  be  enlarged  on  in  the  sequel. 

I.  One  of  these  points  is  that  passage  in  his¬ 
tory  which  informs  us  that  the  Greek  Anaxa¬ 
goras  was  the  first  to  enunciate  the  doctrine  that 
voik,  understanding  generally,  or  reason,  governs 
the  world.  It  is  not  intelligence  as  self-conscious 
reason — not  a  spirit  as  such  that  is  meant ;  and 
we  must  clearly  distinguish  these  from  each 
other.  The  movement  of  the  solar  system  takes 
place  according  to  unchangeable  laws.  These 
laws  are  reason,  implicit  in  the  phenomena  in 
question.  But  neither  the  sun  nor  the  planets, 
which  revolve  around  it  according  to  these  laws, 
can  be  said  to  have  any  consciousness  of  them. 

A  thought  of  this  kind — that  nature  is  an  em¬ 
bodiment  of  reason,  that  it  is  unchangeably  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  universal  laws — appears  nowise 
striking  or  strange  to  us.  We  are  accustomed  to 
such  conceptions,  and  find  nothing  extraordinary 
in  them.  And  I  have  mentioned  this  extraordi¬ 
nary  occurrence,  partly  to  show  how  history 
teaches,  that  ideas  of  this  kind,  which  may  seem 
trivial  to  us,  have  not  always  been  in  the  world; 
that,  on  the  contrary,  such  a  thought  makes  an 
epoch  in  the  annals  of  human  intelligence.  Aris¬ 
totle  says  of  Anaxagoras,  as  the  originator  of  the 
thought  in  question,  that  he  appeared  as  a  sober 
man  among  the  drunken.  Socrates  adopted  the 
doctrine  from  Anaxagoras,  and  it  forthwith  be¬ 
came  the  ruling  idea  in  philosophy — except  in 
the  school  of  Epicurus,  who  ascribed  all  events 
to  chance.  “I  was  delighted  with  the  sentiment” 
— Plato  makes  Socrates  say — “and  hoped  I  had 
found  a  teacher  who  would  show  me  nature  in 
harmony  with  reason,  who  would  demonstrate 
in  each  particular  phenomenon  its  specific  aim, 
and  in  the  whole,  the  grand  object  of  the  uni¬ 
verse.  I  would  not  have  surrendered  this  hope 
for  a  great  deal.  But  how  very  much  was  I  disap¬ 
pointed,  when,  having  zealously  applied  myself 
to  the  writings  of  Anaxagoras,  I  found  that  he 


OF  HISTORY 

adduces  only  external  causes,  such  as  atmos¬ 
phere,  ether,  water,  and  the  like.”  It  is  evident 
that  the  defect  which  Socrates  complains  of, 
respecting  Anaxagoras’  doctrine,  does  not  con¬ 
cern  the  principle  itself,  but  the  shortcoming  of 
the  propounder  in  applying  it  to  nature  in  the 
concrete.  Nature  is  not  deduced  from  that  prin¬ 
ciple:  the  latter  remains  in  fact  a  mere  abstrac¬ 
tion,  inasmuch  as  the  former  is  not  compre¬ 
hended  and  exhibited  as  a  development  of  it — 
an  organization  produced  by  and  from  reason.  I 
wish,  at  the  very  outset,  to  call  your  attention  to 
the  important  difference  between  a  conception, 
a  principle,  a  truth  limited  to  an  abstract  form 
and  its  determinate  application,  and  concrete 
development.  This  distinction  affects  the  whole 
fabric  of  philosophy;  and  among  other  bearings 
of  it  there  is  one  to  which  we  shall  have  to  revert 
at  the  close  of  our  view  of  universal  history,  in 
investigating  the  aspect  of  political  affairs  in 
the  most  recent  period. 

We  have  next  to  notice  the  rise  of  this  idea — 
that  reason  directs  the  world — in  connection 
with  a  further  application  of  it,  well  known  to 
us — in  the  form,  viz.,  of  the  religions  truth,  that 
the  world  is  not  abandoned  to  chance  and  ex¬ 
ternal  contingent  causes,  but  that  a  Providence 
controls  it.  I  stated  above,  that  I  would  not 
make  a  demand  on  your  faith,  in  regard  to  the 
principle  announced.  Yet  I  might  appeal  to  your 
belief  in  it,  in  this  religious  aspect ,  if,  as  a  gen¬ 
eral  rule,  the  nature  of  philosophical  science  al¬ 
lowed  it  to  attach  authority  to  presuppositions. 
To  put  it  in  another  shape — this  appeal  is  for¬ 
bidden,  because  the  science  of  which  we  have  to 
treat,  proposes  itself  to  furnish  the  proof  (not 
indeed  of  the  abstract  truth  of  the  doctrine,  but) 
of  its  correctness  as  compared  with  facts.  The 
truth,  then,  that  a  Providence  (that  of  God) 
presides  over  the  events  of  the  world — -consorts 
with  the  proposition  in  question;  for  Divine 
Providence  is  wisdom,  endowed  with  an  infinite 
power,  which  realizes  its  aim,  viz.,  the  absolute 
rational  design  of  the  world.  Reason  is  thought 
conditioning  itself  with  perfect  freedom.  But  a 
difference,  rather  a  contradiction,  will  manifest 
itself,  between  this  belief  and  our  principle,  just 
as  was  the  case  in  reference  to  the  demand  made 
by  Socrates  in  the  case  of  Anaxagoras’  dictum. 
For  that  belief  is  similarly  indefinite;  it  is  what 
is  called  a  belief  in  a  general  providence,  and  is 
not  followed  out  into  definite  application,  or  dis¬ 
played  in  its  bearing  on  the  grand  total — the  en¬ 
tire  course  of  human  history.  But  to  explain  his¬ 
tory  is  to  depict  the  passions  of  mankind,  the 
genius,  the  active  powers,  that  play  their  part  on 


INTRODUCTION 


the  great  stage;  and  the  providentially  deter¬ 
mined  process  which  these  exhibit,  constitutes 
what  is  generally  called  the  ‘‘plan”  of  provi¬ 
dence.  Yet  it  is  this  very  plan  which  is  supposed 
to  be  concealed  from  our  view:  which  it  is 
deemed  presumption,  even  to  wish  to  recognize. 
The  ignorance  of  Anaxagoras,  as  to  how  intelli¬ 
gence  reveals  itself  in  actual  existence,  was  in¬ 
genuous.  Neither  in  his  consciousness,  nor  in  that 
of  Greece  at  large,  had  that  thought  been  farther 
expanded.  He  had  not  attained  the  power  to 
apply  his  general  principle  to  the  concrete,  so  as 
to  deduce  the  latter  from  the  former.  It  was 
Socrates  who  took  the  first  step  in  comprehend¬ 
ing  the  union  of  the  concrete  with  the  universal. 
Anaxagoras,  then,  did  not  take  up  a  hostile  posi¬ 
tion  toward  such  an  application.  The  common 
belief  in  Providence  does;  at  least  it  opposes  the 
use  of  the  principle  on  the  large  scale,  and  de¬ 
nies  the  possibility  of  discerning  the  plan  of 
Providence.  In  isolated  cases  this  plan  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  manifest.  Pious  persons  are  encour¬ 
aged  to  recognize,  in  particular  circumstances, 
something  more  than  mere  chance ;  to  acknowl¬ 
edge  the  guiding  hand  of  God;  e.g.,  when  help 
has  unexpectedly  come  to  an  individual  in  great 
perplexity  and  need.  But  these  instances  of 
providential  design  are  of  a  limited  kind,  and 
concern  the  accomplishment  of  nothing  more 
than  the  desires  of  the  individual  in  question. 
But  in  the  history  of  the  world,  the  individuals 
we  have  to  do  with  are  peoples;  totalities  that 
are  states.  We  cannot,  therefore,  be  satisfied 
with  what  we  may  call  this  “peddling”  view  of 
providence,  to  which  the  belief  alluded  to  limits 
itself.  Equally  unsatisfactory  is  the  merely  ab¬ 
stract,  undefined  belief  in  a  providence,  when 
that  belief  is  not  brought  to  bear  upon  the  de¬ 
tails  of  the  process  which  it  conducts.  On  the 
contrary  our  earnest  endeavor  must  be  directed 
to  the  recognition  of  the  ways  of  Providence, 
the  means  it  uses,  and  the  historical  phenomena 
in  which  it  manifests  itself ;  and  we  must  show 
their  connection  with  the  general  principle  above 
mentioned.  But  in  noticing  the  recognition  of 
the  plan  of  Divine  Providence  generally,  I  have 
implicitly  touched  upon  a  prominent  question  of 
the  day ;  viz.,  that  of  the  possibility  of  knowing 
God :  or  rather,  since  public  opinion  has  ceased 
to  allow  it  to  be  a  matter  of  question,  the  doc¬ 
trine  that  it  is  impossible  to  know  God.  In  di¬ 
rect  contravention  of  what  is  commanded  in 
Holy  Scripture  as  the  highest  duty — that  we 
should  not  merely  love,  but  know  God — the 
prevalent  dogma  involves  the  denial  of  what  is 
there  said;  viz.,  that  it  is  the  spirit  ( der  Geist) 


that  leads  into  truth,  knows  all  things,  pene¬ 
trates  even  into  the  deep  things  of  the  Godhead. 
While  the  Divine  Being  is  thus  placed  beyond 
our  knowledge,  and  outside  the  limit  of  all  human 
things,  we  have  the  convenient  licence  of  wan¬ 
dering  as  far  as  we  list,  in  the  direction  of  our 
own  fancies.  We  are  freed  from  the  obligation  to 
refer  our  knowledge  to  the  divine  and  true.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  vanity  and  egotism  which 
characterize  it  find,  in  this  false  position,  ample 
justification;  and  the  pious  modesty  which  puts 
far  from  it  the  knowledge  of  God  can  well  esti¬ 
mate  how  much  furtherance  thereby  accrues  to 
its  own  wayward  and  vain  strivings.  I  have  been 
unwilling  to  leave  out  of  sight  the  connection 
between  our  thesis — that  reason  governs  and  has 
governed  the  world — and  the  question  of  the 
possibility  of  a  knowledge  of  God,  chiefly  that  I 
might  not  lose  the  opportunity  of  mentioning  the 
imputation  against  philosophy  of  being  shy  of 
noticing  religious  truths,  or  of  having  occasion 
to  be  so;  in  which  is  insinuated  the  suspicion 
that  it  has  anything  but  a  clear  conscience  in  the 
presence  of  these  truths.  So  far  from  this  being 
the  case,  the  fact  is  that  in  recent  times  philoso¬ 
phy  has  been  obliged  to  defend  the  domain  of  re¬ 
ligion  against  the  attacks  of  several  theological 
systems.  In  the  Christian  religion  God  has  re¬ 
vealed  Himself,  that  is,  He  has  given  us  to  under¬ 
stand  what  He  is;  so  that  He  is  no  longer  a  con¬ 
cealed  or  secret  existence.  And  this  possibility  of 
knowing  Him,  thus  afforded  us,  renders  such 
knowledge  a  duty.  God  wishes  no  narrow-hearted 
souls  or  empty  heads  for  His  children ;  but  those 
whose  spirit  is  of  itself  indeed,  poor,  but  rich  in 
the  knowledge  of  Him;  and  who  regard  this 
knowledge  of  God  as  the  only  valuable  posses¬ 
sion.  That  development  of  the  thinking  spirit, 
which  has  resulted  from  the  revelation  of  the  Di¬ 
vine  Being  as  its  original  basis,  must  ultimately 
advance  to  the  intellectual  comprehension  of 
what  was  presented  in  the  first  instance,  to  feel¬ 
ing  and  imagination.  The  time  must  eventually 
come  for  understanding  that  rich  product  of  ac¬ 
tive  reason,  which  the  history  of  the  world  offers 
to  us.  It  was  for  awhile  the  fashion  to  profess 
admiration  for  the  wisdom  of  God,  as  displayed 
in  animals,  plants,  and  isolated  occurrences.  But. 
if  it  be  allowed  that  providence  manifests  itself 
in  such  objects  and  forms  of  existence,  why  not 
also  in  universal  history?  This  is  deemed  too 
great  a  matter  to  be  thus  regarded.  But  divine 
wisdom,  i.e.,  reason,  is  one  and  the  same  in  the 
great  as  in  the  little;  and  we  must  not  imagine 
God  to  be  too  weak  to  exercise  His  wisdom  on 
the  grand  scale.  Our  intellectual  striving  aims 


160  PHILOSOPHY 

at  realizing  the  conviction  that  what  was  in¬ 
tended  by  eternal  wisdom,  is  actually  accom¬ 
plished  in  the  domain  of  existent,  active  spirit, 
as  well  as  in  that  of  mere  nature.  Our  mode  of 
treating  the  subject  is,  in  this  aspect,  a  theo- 
diccea — a  justification  of  the  ways  of  God — 
which  Leibnitz  attempted  metaphysically,  in  his 
method,  i.e.,  in  indefinite  abstract  categories — 
so  that  the  ill  that  is  found  in  the  world  may  be 
comprehended,  and  the  thinking  spirit  reconciled 
with  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  evil.  Indeed, 
nowhere  is  such  a  harmonizing  view  more  press- 
ingly  demanded  than  in  universal  history;  and 
it  can  be  attained  only  by  recognizing  the  posi¬ 
tive  existence,  in  which  that  negative  element  is 
a  subordinate  and  vanquished  nullity.  On  the 
one  hand,  the  ultimate  design  of  the  world  must 
be  perceived;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fact 
that  this  design  has  been  actually  realized  in  it, 
and  that  evil  has  not  been  able  permanently  to 
assert  a  competing  position, but  this  superintend¬ 
ing  iwj,  or  in  “providence.”  “Reason,”  whose 
sovereignty  over  the  world  has  been  maintained, 
is  as  indefinite  a  term  as  “providence,”  suppos¬ 
ing  the  term  to  be  used  by  those  who  are  unable 
to  characterize  it  distinctly — to  show  wherein 
it  consists,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  decide  whether 
a  thing  is  rational  or  irrational.  An  adequate 
definition  of  reason  is  the  first  desideratum ;  and 
whatever  boast  may  be  made  of  strict  adherence 
to  it  in  explaining  phenomena.  Without  such  a 
definition  we  get  no  farther  than  mere  words. 
With  these  observations  we  may  proceed  to  the 
second  point  of  view  that  has  to  be  considered 
in  this  introduction. 

II.  The  inquiry  into  the  essential  destiny  of 
reason,  as  far  as  it  is  considered  in  reference  to 
the  world,  is  identical  with  the  question,  what  is 
the  ultimate  design  of  the  world?  And  the  ex¬ 
pression  implies  that  that  design  is  destined  to 
be  realized.  Two  points  of  consideration  suggest 
themselves;  first,  the  import  of  this  design — its 
abstract  definition ;  and  secondly,  its  realization. 

It  must  be  observed  at  the  outset,  that  the 
phenomenon  we  investigate — universal  history 
— belongs  to  the  realm  of  spirit.  The  term 
<(world”  includes  both  physical  and  psychical 
nature.  Physical  nature  also  plays  its  part  in  the 
world’s  history,  and  attention  will  have  to  be 
paid  to  the  fundamental  natural  relations  thus 
involved.  But  spirit,  and  the  course  of  its  de¬ 
velopment,  is  our  substantial  object.  Our  task 
does  not  require  us  to  contemplate  nature  as  a 
rational  system  in  itself,  though  in  its  own  proper 
domain  it  proves  itself  such,  but  simply  in  its 
relation  to  spirit.  On  the  stage  on  which  we  are 


OF  HISTORY 

observing  it — universal  history — spirit  displays 
itself  in  its  most  concrete  reality.  Notwith¬ 
standing  this  (or  rather  for  the  very  purpose  of 
comprehending  the  general  principles  which  this, 
its  form  of  concrete  reality ,  embodies)  we  must 
premise  some  abstract  characteristics  of  the  na¬ 
ture  of  spirit.  Such  an  explanation,  however, 
cannot  be  given  here  under  any  other  form  than 
that  of  bare  assertion.  The  present  is  not  the  oc¬ 
casion  for  unfolding  the  idea  of  spirit  specula¬ 
tively;  for  whatever  has  a  place  in  an  introduc¬ 
tion,  must,  as  already  observed,  be  taken  as 
simply  historical ;  something  assumed  as  having 
been  explained  and  proved  elsewhere ;  or  whose 
demonstration  awaits  the  sequel  of  the  science 
of  history  itself. 

We  have  therefore  to  mention  here: 

(1)  The  abstract  characteristics  of  the  nature 
of  spirit. 

(2)  What  means  spirit  uses  in  order  to  realize 
its  idea. 

(3)  Lastly,  we  must  consider  the  shape  which 
the  perfect  embodiment  of  spirit  assumes 
— the  state. 

(1)  The  nature  of  spirit  may  be  understood 
by  a  glance  at  its  direct  opposite — matter.  As 
the  essence  of  matter  is  gravity,  so,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  may  affirm  that  the  substance,  the  es¬ 
sence  of  spirit  is  freedom.  All  will  readily  assent 
to  the  doctrine  that  spirit,  among  other  prop¬ 
erties,  is  also  endowed  with  freedom;  but  phi¬ 
losophy  teaches  that  all  the  qualities  of  spirit 
exist  only  through  freedom;  that  all  are  but 
means  for  attaining  freedom;  that  all  seek  and 
produce  this  and  this  alone.  It  is  a  result  of  spec¬ 
ulative  philosophy,  that  freedom  is  the  sole  truth 
of  spirit.  Matter  possesses  gravity  in  virtue  of 
its  tendency  toward  a  central  point.  It  is  essen¬ 
tially  composite;  consisting  of  parts  that  exclude 
each  other.  It  seeks  its  unity;  and  therefore 
exhibits  itself  as  self-destructive,  as  verging  to¬ 
ward  its  opposite.  If  it  could  attain  this,  it 
would  be  matter  no  longer,  it  would  have  per¬ 
ished.  It  strives  after  the  realization  of  its  idea; 
for  in  unity  it  exists  ideally.  Spirit,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  may  be  defined  as  that  which  has  its  centre 
in  itself.  It  has  not  a  unity  outside  itself,  but 
has  already  found  it;  it  exists  in  and  with  itself. 
Matter  has  its  essence  out  of  itself ;  spirit  is  self- 
contained  existence.  Now  this  is  freedom,  exact¬ 
ly.  For  if  I  am  dependent,  my  being  is  referred 
to  something  else  which  I  am  not;  I  cannot 
exist  independently  of  something  external.  I  am 
free,  on  the  contrary,  when  my  existence  depends 
upon  myself.  This  self-contained  existence  of 
spirit  is  none  other  than  self-consciousness,  con- 


INTRODUCTION  161 


sciousness  of  one’s  own  being.  Two  things  must 
be  distinguished  in  consciousness;  first,  the  fact 
that  I  know;  secondly,  what  I  know.  In  self  con¬ 
sciousness  these  are  merged  in  one;  for  spirit 
knows  itself.  It  involves  an  appreciation  of  its 
own  nature,  as  also  an  energy  enabling  it  to 
realize  itself ;  to  make  itself  actually  that  which 
it  is  potentially.  According  to  this  abstract  defini¬ 
tion  it  may  be  said  of  universal  history,  that  it 
is  the  exhibition  of  spirit  in  the  process  of  work¬ 
ing  out  the  knowledge  of  that  which  it  is  poten¬ 
tially.  And  as  the  germ  bears  in  itself  the  whole 
nature  of  the  tree,  and  the  taste  and  form  of  its 
fruits,  so  do  the  first  traces  of  spirit  virtually 
contain  the  whole  of  that  history.  The  Orientals 
have  not  attained  the  knowledge  that  spirit — 
man  as  such — is  free;  and  because  they  do  not 
know  this,  they  are  not  free.  They  only  know 
that  one  is  free.  But  on  this  very  account,  the 
freedom  of  that  one  is  only  caprice;  ferocity — 
brutal  recklessness  of  passion,  or  a  mildness  and 
tameness  of  the  desires,  which  is  itself  only 
an  accident  of  nature — mere  caprice  like  the 
former.  That  one  is  therefore  only  a  despot; 
not  a  free  man.  The  consciousness  of  freedom 
first  arose  among  the  Greeks,  and  therefore  they 
were  free;  but  they,  and  the  Romans  likewise, 
knew  only  that  some  are  free,  not  man  as  such. 
Even  Plato  and  Aristotle  did  not  know  this.  The 
Greeks,  therefore,  had  slaves;  and  their  whole 
life  and  the  maintenance  of  their  splendid  lib¬ 
erty,  was  implicated  with*  the  institution  of 
slavery :  a  fact  moreover,  which  made  that  lib¬ 
erty  on  the  one  hand  only  an  accidental,  tran¬ 
sient  and  limited  growth;  on  the  other  hand,  con¬ 
stituted  it  a  rigorous  thraldom  of  our  common 
nature,  of  the  human.  The  German  nations,  un¬ 
der  the  influence  of  Christianity,  were  the  first 
to  attain  the  consciousness  that  man,  as  man, 
is  free:  that  it  is  the  freedom  of  spirit  which  con¬ 
stitutes  its  essence.  This  consciousness  arose 
first  in  religion,  the  inmost  region  of  spirit;  but 
to  introduce  the  principle  into  the  various  rela¬ 
tions  of  the  actual  world,  involves  a  more  exten¬ 
sive  problem  than  its  simple  implantation;  a 
problem  whose  solution  and  application  require 
a  severe  and  lengthened  process  of  culture.  In 
proof  of  this,  we  may  note  that  slavery  did  not 
cease  immediately  on  the  reception  of  Christian¬ 
ity.  Still  less  did  liberty  predominate  in  states; 
or  governments  and  constitutions  adopt  a  ra¬ 
tional  organization,  or  recognize  freedom  as  their 
basis.  That  application  of  the  principle  to  politi¬ 
cal  relations,  the  thorough  moulding  and  inter¬ 
penetration  of  the  constitution  of  society  by  it, 
is  a  process  identical  with  history  itself.  I  have 


already  directed  attention  to  the  distinction  here 
involved,  between  a  principle  as  such,  and  its  ap¬ 
plication;  i.e.y  its  introduction  and  carrying  out 
in  the  actual  phenomena  of  spirit  and  life.  This 
is  a  point  of  fundamental  importance  in  our  sci¬ 
ence,  and  one  which  must  be  constantly  respected 
as  essential.  And  in  the  same  way  as  this  distinc¬ 
tion  has  attracted  attention  in  view  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  principle  of  self-consciousness — freedom; 
it  also  shows  itself  as  an  essential  one,  in  view  of 
the  principle  of  freedom  generally.  The  history 
of  the  world  is  none  other  than  the  progress  of 
the  consciousness  of  freedom;  a  progress  whose 
development  according  to  the  necessity  of  its  na¬ 
ture  it  is  our  business  to  investigate. 

The  general  statement  given  above,  of  the  va¬ 
rious  grades  in  the  consciousness  of  freedom — 
and  which  we  applied  in  the  first  instance  to  the 
fact  that  the  Eastern  nations  knew  only  that  one 
is  free;  the  Greek  and  Roman  world  only  that 
some  are  free ;  while  we  know  that  all  men  abso¬ 
lutely  (man  as  man)  are  free — supplies  us  with 
the  natural  division  of  universal  history,  and 
suggests  the  mode  of  its  discussion.  This  is  re¬ 
marked,  however,  only  incidentally  and  antic- 
ipatively;  some  other  ideas  must  be  first  ex¬ 
plained. 

The  destiny  of  the  spiritual  world,  and — since 
this  is  the  substantial  world,  while  the  physical 
remains  subordinate  to  it,  or,  in  the  language  of 
speculation,  has  no  truth  as  against  the  spiritual 
— the  final  cause  of  the  world  at  large,  we  allege 
to  be  the  consciousness  of  its  own  freedom  on 
the  part  of  spirit,  and  ipso  facto,  the  reality  of 
that  freedom.  But  that  this  term  “freedom,” 
without  further  qualification,  is  an  indefinite, 
and  incalculable  ambiguous  term;  and  that  while 
that  which  it  represents  is  the  ne  plus  idtra  of 
attainment,  it  is  liable  to  an  infinity  of  misun¬ 
derstandings,  confusions  and  errors,  and  to  be¬ 
come  the  occasion  for  all  imaginable  excesses — 
has  never  been  more  clearly  known  and  felt  than 
in  modern  times.  Yet,  for  the  present,  we  must 
content  ourselves  with  the  term  itself  without 
further  definition.  Attention  was  also  directed  to 
the  importance  of  the  infinite  difference  between 
a  principle  in  the  abstract,  and  its  realization  in 
the  concrete.  In  the  process  before  us,  the  essen¬ 
tial  nature  of  freedom — which  involves  in  it  ab¬ 
solute  necessity — is  to  be  displayed  as  coming 
to  a  consciousness  of  itself  (for  it  is  in  its  very 
nature,  self-consciousness)  andthereby  realizing 
its  existence.  Itself  is  its  own  object  of  attain¬ 
ment,  and  the  sole  aim  of  spirit.  This  result  it  is, 
at  which  the  process  of  the  world’s  history  has 
been  continually  aiming;  and  to  which  the  sacri- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


162 

frees  that  have  ever  and  anon  been  laid  on  the 
vast  altar  of  the  earth,  through  the  long  lapse 
of  ages,  have  been  offered.  This  is  the  only  aim 
that  sees  itself  realized  and  fulfilled;  the  only 
pole  of  repose  amid  the  ceaseless  change  of 
events  and  conditions,  and  the  sole  efficient  prin¬ 
ciple  that  pervades  them.  This  final  aim  is  God’s 
purpose  with  the  world;  but  God  is  the  absolute¬ 
ly  perfect  Being,  and  can,  therefore,  will  noth¬ 
ing  other  than  Himself — His  own  Will.  The  na¬ 
ture  of  His  Will — that  is,  His  Nature  itself — is 
what  we  here  call  the  idea  of  freedom;  translating 
the  language  of  religion  into  that  of  thought. 
The  question,  then,  which  we  may  next  put,  is: 
What  means  does  this  principle  of  freedom  use 
for  its  realization?  This  is  the  second  point  we 
have  to  consider. 

(2)  The  question  of  the  means  by  which  free¬ 
dom  develops  itself  to  a  world,  conducts  us  to 
the  phenomenon  of  history  itself.  Although  free¬ 
dom  is,  primarily,  an  undeveloped  idea,  the 
means  it  uses  are  external  and  phenomenal; 
presenting  themselves  in  history  to  our  sensuous 
vision.  The  first  glance  at  history  convinces  us 
that  the  actions  of  men  proceed  from  their 
needs,  their  passions,  their  characters  and  tal¬ 
ents;  and  impresses  us  with  the  belief  that  such 
needs,  passions  and  interests  are  the  sole  springs 
of  action — the  efficient  agents  in  this  scene  of 
activity.  Among  these  may,  perhaps,  be  found 
aims  of  a  liberal  or  universal  kind — benevolence 
it  may  be,  or  noble  patriotism;  but  such  virtues 
and  general  views  are  but  insignificant  as  com¬ 
pared  with  the  world  and  its  doings.  We  may  per¬ 
haps  see  the  ideal  of  reason  actualized  in  those 
who  adopt  such  aims,  and  within  the  sphere  of 
their  influence;  but  they  bear  only  a  trifling 
proportion  to  the  mass  of  the  human  race ;  and 
the  extent  of  that  influence  is  limited  according¬ 
ly.  Passions,  private  aims,  and  the  satisfaction 
of  selfish  desires,  are  on  the  other  hand,  most 
effective  springs  of  action.  Their  power  lies  in 
the  fact  that  they  respect  none  of  the  limitations 
which  justice  and  morality  would  impose  on 
them;  and  that  these  natural  impulses  have  a 
more  direct  influence  over  man  than  the  arti¬ 
ficial  and  tedious  discipline  that  tends  to  order 
and  self-restraint,  law  and  morality.  When  we 
look  at  this  display  of  passions,  and  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  their  violence;  the  unreason  which 
is  associated  not  only  with  them,  but  even 
(rather  we  might  say  especially )  with  good  de¬ 
signs  and  righteous  aims ;  when  we  see  the  evil, 
the  vice,  the  ruin  that  has  befallen  the  most 
flourishing  kingdoms  which  the  mind  of  man 
ever  created;  we  can  scarce  avoid  being  filled 


with  sorrow  at  this  universal  taint  of  corruption: 
and,  since  this  decay  is  not  the  work  of  mere 
nature,  but  of  the  human  will — a  moral  em- 
bitterment — a  revolt  of  the  good  spirit  (if  it 
have  a  place  within  us)  may  well  be  the  result 
of  our  reflections.  Without  rhetorical  exaggera¬ 
tion,  a  simply  truthful  combination  of  the  mis¬ 
eries  that  have  overwhelmed  the  noblest  of  na¬ 
tions  and  polities,  and  the  finest  exemplars  of 
private  virtue — forms  a  picture  of  most  fearful 
aspect,  and  excites  emotions  of  the  profoundest 
and  most  hopeless  sadness,  counterbalanced  by 
no  consolatory  result.  We  endure  in  beholding 
it  a  mental  torture,  allowing  no  defence  or  es¬ 
cape  but  the  consideration  that  what  has  hap¬ 
pened  could  not  be  otherwise ;  that  it  is  a  fatality 
which  no  intervention  could  alter.  And  at  last  we 
draw  back  from  the  intolerable  disgust  with 
which  these  sorrowful  reflections  threaten  us, 
into  the  more  agreeable  environment  of  our  in¬ 
dividual  life — the  present  formed  by  our  private 
aims  and  interests.  In  short,  we  retreat  into  the 
selfishness  that  stands  on  the  quiet  shore,  and 
thence  enjoys  in  safety  the  distant  spectacle  of 
“wrecks  confusedly  hurled.”  But  even  regarding 
history  as  the  slaughter-bench  at  which  the  hap¬ 
piness  of  peoples,  the  wisdom  of  states,  and  the 
virtue  of  individuals  have  been  victimized — the 
question  involuntarily  arises — to  what  princi¬ 
ple,  to  what  final  aim  these  enormous  sacrifices 
have  been  offered.  From  this  point  the  investiga¬ 
tion  usually  proceeds  to  that  which  we  have 
made  the  general  commencement  of  our  inquiry. 
Starting  from  this,  we  pointed  out  those  phe¬ 
nomena  which  made  up  a  picture  so  suggestive 
of  gloomy  emotions  and  thoughtful  reflections 
— as  the  very  field  that  we,  for  our  part,  regard 
as  exhibiting  only  the  means  for  realizing  what 
we  assert  to  be  the  essential  destiny — the  abso¬ 
lute  aim,  or,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the 
true  result  of  the  world’s  history.  We  have  all 
along  purposely  eschewed  “moral  reflections” 
as  a  method  of  rising  from  the  scene  of  historical 
specialties  to  the  general  principles  which  they 
embody.  Besides,  it  is  not  the  interest  of  such 
sentimentalities  really  to  rise  above  those  de¬ 
pressing  emotions;  and  to  solve  the  enigmas  of 
providence  which  the  considerations  that  occa¬ 
sioned  them  present.  It  is  essential  to  their  char¬ 
acter  to  find  a  gloomy  satisfaction  in  the  empty 
and  fruitless  sublimities  of  that  negative  result. 
We  return  them  to  the  point  of  view  which  we 
have  adopted;  observing  that  the  successive 
steps  ( Momente )  of  the  analysis  to  which  it  will 
lead  us,  will  also  evolve  the  conditions  requisite 
for  answering  the  inquiries  suggested  by  the 


INTRODUCTION  163 


panorama  of  sin  and  suffering  that  history  un¬ 
folds. 

The  first  remark  we  have  to  make,  and  which, 
though  already  presented  more  than  once,  can¬ 
not  be  too  often  repeated  when  the  occasion 
seems  to  call  for  it — is  that  what  we  call  princi¬ 
ple ,  aim,  destiny,  or  the  nature  and  idea  of  spirit, 
is  something  merely  general  and  abstract.  Prin¬ 
ciple — plan  of  existence — -law — is  a  hidden,  un¬ 
developed  essence,  which  as  such,  however  true 
in  itself,  is  not  completely  real.  Aims,  principles, 
etc.  have  a  place  in  our  thoughts,  in  our  subjec¬ 
tive  design  only;  but  not  yet  in  the  sphere  of 
reality.  That  which  exists  for  itself  only,  is  a 
possibility,  a  potentiality;  but  has  not  yet 
emerged  into  existence.  A  second  element  must 
be  introduced  in  order  to  produce  actuality — 
viz.,  actuation,  realization;  and  whose  motive 
power  is  the  will — the  activity  of  man  in  the 
widest  sense.  It  is  only  by  this  activity  that  that 
idea  as  well  as  abstract  characteristics  gener¬ 
ally  are  realized,  actualized;  for  of  themselves 
they  are  powerless.  The  motive  power  that  puts 
them  in  operation,  and  gives  them  determinate 
existence,  is  the  need,  instinct,  inclination,  and 
passion  of  man.  That  some  conception  of  mine 
should  be  developed  into  act  and  existence  is 
my  earnest  desire :  I  wish  to  assert  my  person¬ 
ality  in  connection  with  it:  I  wish  to  be  satis¬ 
fied  by  its  execution.  If  I  am  to  exert  myself 
for  any  object,  it  must  in  some  way  or  other  be 
my  object.  In  the  accomplishment  of  such  or 
such  designs  I  must  at  the  same  time  find  my 
satisfaction;  although  the  purpose  for  which 
I  exert  myself  includes  a  complication  of  re¬ 
sults,  many  of  which  have  no  interest  for  me. 
This  is  the  absolute  right  of  personal  existence 
— to  find  itself  satisfied  in  its  activity  and  labor. 
If  men  are  to  interest  themselves  for  anything, 
they  must  (so  to  speak)  have  part  of  their  exist¬ 
ence  involved  in  it;  find  their  individuality  grati¬ 
fied  by  its  attainment.  Here  a  mistake  must  be 
avoided.  We  intend  blame,  and  justly  impute 
it  as  a  fault,  when  we  say  of  an  individual,  that 
he  is  “interested”  (in  taking  part  in  such  or  such 
transactions),  that  is,  seeks  only  his  private  ad¬ 
vantage.  In  reprehending  this  we  find  fault  with 
him  for  furthering  his  personal  aims  without  any 
regard  to  a  more  comprehensive  design;  of  which 
he  takes  advantage  to  promote  his  own  interest, 
or  which  he  even  sacrifices  with  this  view.  But 
he  who  is  active  in  promoting  an  object ,  is  not 
simply  “interested,”  but  interested  in  that  ob¬ 
ject  itself.  Language  faithfully  expresses  this 
distinction.  Nothing  therefore  happens,  noth¬ 
ing  is  accomplished,  unless  the  individuals  con¬ 


cerned,  seek  their  own  satisfaction  in  the  issue. 
They  are  particular  units  of  society;  i.e .,  they 
have  special  needs,  instincts,  and  interests  gen¬ 
erally,  peculiar  to  themselves.  Among  these 
needs  are  not  only  such  as  we  usually  call  neces¬ 
sities,  the  stimuli  of  individual  desire  and  voli¬ 
tion,  but  also  those  connected  with  individual 
views  and  convictions ;  or,  to  use  a  term  express¬ 
ing  less  decision,  leanings  of  opinion;  suppos¬ 
ing  the  impulses  of  reflection,  understanding, 
and  reason,  to  have  been  awakened.  In  these 
cases  people  demand,  if  they  are  to  exert  them¬ 
selves  in  any  direction,  that  the  object  should 
commend  itself  to  them ;  that  in  point  of  opin¬ 
ion,  whether  as  to  its  goodness,  justice,  advan¬ 
tage,  profit,  they  should  be  able  to  “enter  into 
it.”  This  is  a  consideration  of  especial  importance 
in  our  age,  when  people  are  less  than  formerly 
influenced  by  reliance  on  others,  and  by  author¬ 
ity ;  when,  on  the  contrary,  they  devote  their  ac¬ 
tivities  to  a  cause  on  the  ground  of  their  own  un¬ 
derstanding,  their  independent  conviction  and 
opinion. 

We  assert  then  that  nothing  has  been  accom¬ 
plished  without  interest  on  the  part  of  the  ac¬ 
tors;  and — if  interest  be  called  passion,  inas¬ 
much  as  the  whole  individuality,  to  the  neglect 
of  all  other  actual  or  possible  interests  and 
claims,  is  devoted  to  an  object  with  every  fibre 
of  volition,  concentrating  all  its  desires  and  pow¬ 
ers  upon  it — we  may  affirm  absolutely  that  noth¬ 
ing  great  in  the  world  has  been  accomplished 
without  passion.  Two  elements,  therefore,  enter 
into  the  object  of  our  investigation;  the  first  the 
idea,  the  second  the  complex  of  human  passions; 
the  one  the  warp,  the  other  the  woof  of  the  vast 
arras-web  of  universal  history.  The  concrete 
mean  and  union  of  the  two  is  liberty,  under  the 
conditions  of  morality  in  a  state.  We  have 
spoken  of  the  idea  of  freedom  as  the  nature  of 
spirit,  and  the  absolute  goal  of  history.  Passion 
is  regarded  as  a  thing  of  sinister  aspect,  as  more 
or  less  immoral.  Man  is  required  to  have  no  pas¬ 
sions.  Passion,  it  is  true,  is  not  quite  the  suitable 
word  for  what  I  wish  to  express.  I  mean  here 
nothing  more  than  the  human  activity  as  result¬ 
ing  from  private  interests — special,  or  if  you 
will,  self-seeking  designs — with  this  qualifica¬ 
tion,  that  the  whole  energy  of  will  and  character 
is  devoted  to  their  attainment;  that  other  in¬ 
terests  (which  would  in  themselves  constitute 
attractive  aims)  or  rather  all  things  else,  are 
sacrificed  to  them.  The  object  in  question  is  so 
bound  up  with  the  man’s  will,  that  it  entirely 
and  alone  determines  the  “hue  of  resolution,” 
and  is  inseparable  from  it.  It  has  become  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


164 

very  essence  of  his  volition.  For  a  person  is  a 
specific  existence;  not  man  in  general  (a  term 
to  which  no  real  existence  corresponds)  but  a 
particular  human  being.  The  term  “character” 
likewise  expresses  this  idiosyncrasy  of  will  and 
intelligence.  But  character  comprehends  all  pe¬ 
culiarities  whatever ;  the  way  in  which  a  person 
conducts  himself  in  private  relations,  etc.,  and 
is  not  limited  to  his  idiosyncrasy  in  its  practical 
and  active  phase.  I  shall,  therefore,  use  the  term 
“passions”;  understanding  thereby  the  partic¬ 
ular  bent  of  character,  as  far  as  the  peculiarities 
of  volition  are  not  limited  to  private  interest, 
but  supply  the  impelling  and  actuating  force  for 
accomplishing  deeds  shared  in  by  the  commu¬ 
nity  at  large.  Passion  is  in  the  first  instance  the 
subjective ,  and  therefore  the  formal  side  of 
energy,  will,  and  activity — leaving  the  object  or 
aim  still  undetermined.  And  there  is  a  similar 
relation  of  formality  to  reality  in  merely  indi¬ 
vidual  conviction,  individual  views,  individual 
conscience.  It  is  always  a  question  of  essential 
importance,  what  is  the  purport  of  my  convic¬ 
tion,  what  the  object  of  my  passion,  in  deciding 
whether  the  one  or  theother  is  of  a  true  and  sub¬ 
stantial  nature.  Conversely,  if  it  is  so,  it  will  in¬ 
evitably  attain  actual  existence — be  realized. 

From  this  comment  on  the  second  essential 
element  in  the  historical  embodiment  of  an  aim, 
we  infer,  glancing  at  the  institution  of  the  state 
in  passing,  that  a  state  is  then  well  constituted 
and  internally  powerful,  when  the  private  in¬ 
terest  of  its  citizens  is  one  with  the  common  in¬ 
terest  of  the  state;  when  the  one  finds  its  grati¬ 
fication  and  realization  in  the  other — a  proposi¬ 
tion  in  itself  very  important.  But  in  a  state 
many  institutions  must  be  adopted,  much  polit¬ 
ical  machinery  invented,  accompanied  by  appro- 
priatepolitical  arrangements — necessitating  long 
struggles  of  the  understanding  before  what  is 
really  appropriate  can  be  discovered — involving, 
moreover,  contentions  with  private  interest  and 
passions,  and  a  tedious  discipline  of  these  latter, 
in  order  to  bring  about  the  desired  harmony. 
The  epoch  when  a  state  attains  this  harmonious 
condition  marks  the  period  of  its  bloom,  its  vir¬ 
tue,  its  vigour,  and  its  prosperity.  But  the  history 
of  mankind  does  not  begin  with  a  conscious  aim 
of  any  kind,  as  it  is  the  case  with  the  particular 
circles  into  which  men  form  themselves  of  set 
purpose.  The  mere  social  instinct  implies  a  con¬ 
scious  purpose  of  security  for  life  and  property; 
and  when  society  has  been  constituted,  this  pur¬ 
pose  becomes  more  comprehensive.  The  history 
of  the  world  begins  with  its  general  aim,  the  re¬ 
alization  of  the  idea  of  spirit,  only  in  an  implicit 


form,  that  is,  as  nature;  a  hidden, most  profound¬ 
ly  hidden,  unconscious  instinct ;  and  the  whole 
process  of  history  (as  already  observed)  is  di¬ 
rected  to  rendering  this  unconscious  impulse  a 
conscious  one.  Thus  appearing  in  the  form  of 
merely  natural  existence,  natural  will — that 
which  has  been  called  the  subjectiveside — physi¬ 
cal  craving,  instinct,  passion,  private  interest, 
as  also  opinion  and  subjective  conception — 
spontaneously  present  themselves  at  the  very 
commencement.  This  vast  congeries  of  volitions, 
interests  and  activities,  constitute  the  instru¬ 
ments  and  means  of  the  world-spirit  for  attain¬ 
ing  its  object;  bringing  it  to  consciousness,  and 
realizing  it.  And  this  aim  is  none  other  than  find¬ 
ing  itself,  coming  to  itself,  and  contemplating 
itself  in  concrete  actuality.  But  that  those  mani¬ 
festations  of  vitality  on  the  part  of  individuals 
and  peoples,  in  which  they  seek  and  satisfy  their 
own  purposes,  are,  at  the  same  time,  the  means 
and  instruments  of  a  higher  and  broader  purpose 
of  which  they  know  nothing — which  they  realize 
unconsciously — might  be  madeamatter  of  ques¬ 
tion  ;  rather  has  been  questioned,  and  in  every 
variety  of  form  negatived,  decried  and  con¬ 
temned  as  mere  dreaming  and  “philosophy.”  But 
on  this  point  I  announced  my  view  at  the  very 
outset,  and  asserted  our  hypothesis — which, 
however,  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  in  the  form 
of  a  legitimate  inference — and  our  belief  that 
reason  governs  the  world,  and  has  consequently 
governed  its  history.  In  relation  to  this  inde¬ 
pendently  universal  and  substantial  existence — 
all  else  is  subordinate,  subservient  to  it,  and  the 
means  for  its  development.  The  union  of  uni¬ 
versal  abstract  existence  generally  with  the  indi¬ 
vidual — the  subjective — that  this  alone  is  truth, 
belongs  to  the  department  of  speculation,  and  is 
treated  in  this  general  form  in  logic.  But  in  the 
process  of  the  world’s  history  itself,  as  still  in¬ 
complete,  the  abstract  final  aim  of  history  is  not 
yet  made  the  distinct  object  of  desire  and  inter¬ 
est.  While  these  limited  sentiments  are  still  un¬ 
conscious  of  the  purpose  they  are  fulfilling,  the 
universal  principle  is  implicit  in  them,  and  is 
realizing  itself  through  them.  The  question  also 
assumes  the  form  of  the  union  of  freedom  and 
necessity;  the  latent  abstract  process  of  spirit 
being  regarded  as  necessity ,  while  that  which  ex¬ 
hibits  itself  in  the  conscious  will  of  men,  as  their 
interest,  belongs  to  the  domain  of  freedom.  As 
the  metaphysical  connection  ( i.e the  connec¬ 
tion  in  the  idea)  of  these  forms  of  thought  be 
longs  to  logic,  it  vwnild  be  out  of  place  to  ana¬ 
lyse  it  here.  The  chief  and  cardinal  points  only 
shall  be  mentioned. 


INTRODUCTION  165 


Philosophy  shows  that  the  idea  advances  to 
an  infinite  antithesis ;  that,  viz.,  between  the  idea 
in  its  free,  universal  form,  in  which  it  exists  for 
itself,  and  the  contrasted  form  of  abstract,  in¬ 
troversion,  reflection  on  itself,  which  is  formal 
existence-for-self,  personality,  formal  freedom, 
such  as  belongs  to  spirit  only.  The  universal  idea 
exists  thus  as  the  substantial  totality  of  things  on 
the  one  side,  and  as  the  abstract  essence  of  free 
volition  on  the  other  side.  This  reflection  of  the 
mind  on  itself  is  individual  self-consciousness 
— the  polar  opposite  of  the  idea  in  its  general 
form,  and  therefore  existing  in  absolute  limita¬ 
tion.  This  polar  opposite  is  consequently  limita¬ 
tion,  particularization,  for  the  universal  absolute 
being;  it  is  the  side  of  its  definite  existence;  the 
sphere  of  its  formal  reality,  the  sphere  of  the 
reverence  paid  to  God.  To  comprehend  the  ab¬ 
solute  connection  of  this  antithesis  is  the  pro¬ 
found  task  of  metaphysics.  This  limitation  origi¬ 
nates  all  forms  of  particularity  of  whatever 
kind.  The  formal  volition  wills  itself ;  desires  to 
make  its  own  personality  valid  in  all  that  it  pur¬ 
poses  and  does:  even  the  pious  individual  wishes 
to  be  saved  and  happy.  This  pole  of  the  an¬ 
tithesis,  existing  for  itself,  is — in  contrast  with 
the  Absolute  Universal  Being — a  special  sepa¬ 
rate  existence,  taking  cognizance  of  specialty 
only,  and  willing  that  alone.  In  short  it  plays  its 
part  in  the  region  of  mere  phenomena.  This  is  the 
sphere  of  particular  purposes,  in  effecting  which 
individuals  exert  themselves  on  behalf  of  their 
individuality,  give  it  full  play  and  objective 
realization.  This  is  also  the  sphere  of  happiness 
and  its  opposite.  He  is  happy  who  finds  his  con¬ 
dition  suited  to  his  special  character,  will,  and 
fancy,  and  so  enjoys  himself  in  that  condition. 
The  history  of  the  world  is  not  the  theatre  of 
happiness.  Periods  of  happiness  are  blank  pages 
in  it,  for  they  are  periods  of  harmony,  periods 
when  the  antithesis  is  in  abeyance.  Reflection 
on  self — the  freedom  above  described — is  ab¬ 
stractly  defined  as  the  formal  element  of  the  ac¬ 
tivity  of  the  absolute  idea.  The  realizing  activity 
of  which  we  have  spoken  is  the  middle  term  of 
the  syllogism,  one  of  whose  extremes  is  the  uni¬ 
versal  essence,  the  idea,  which  reposes  in  the 
penetralia  of  spirit;  and  the  other,  the  complex 
of  external  things — objective  matter.  That  ac¬ 
tivity  is  the  medium  by  which  the  universal  la¬ 
tent  principle  is  translated  into  the  domain  of 
objectivity. 

I  will  endeavor  to  make  what  has  been  said 
more  vivid  and  clear  by  examples. 

The  building  of  a  house  is,  in  the  first  instance, 
a  subjective  aim  and  design.  On  the  other  hand, 


we  have,  as  means,  the  several  substances  re¬ 
quired  for  the  work — iron,  wood,  stones.  The 
elements  are  made  use  of  in  working  up  this 
material:  fire  to  melt  the  iron,  wind  to  blow  the 
fire,  water  to  set  wheels  in  motion,  in  order  to 
cut  the  wood,  etc.  The  result  is  that  the  wind, 
which  has  helped  to  build  the  house,  is  shut  out 
by  the  house;  so  also  are  the  violence  of  rains 
and  floods,  and  the  destructive  powers  of  fire, 
so  far  as  the  house  is  made  fireproof.  The  stones 
and  beams  obey  the  law  of  gravity,  press  down¬ 
ward,  and  so  high  walls  are  carried  up.  Thus  the 
elements  are  made  use  of  in  accordance  with 
their  nature,  and  yet  to  co-operate  for  a  product, 
by  which  their  operation  is  limited.  Thus  the 
passions  of  men  are  gratified;  they  develop 
themselves  and  their  aims  in  accordance  with 
their  natural  tendencies,  and  build  up  the  edifice 
of  human  society;  thus  fortifying  a  position  for 
right  and  order  against  themselves. 

The  connection  of  events  above  indicated  in¬ 
volves  also  the  fact  that  in  history  an  additional 
result  is  commonly  produced  by  human  actions 
beyond  that  which  they  aim  at  and  obtain,  that 
which  they  immediately  recognize  and  desire. 
They  gratify  their  own  interest ;  but  something 
further  is  thereby  accomplished,  latent  in  the 
actions  in  question,  though  not  present  to  their 
consciousness,  and  not  included  in  their  design. 
An  analogous  example  is  offered  in  the  case  of  a 
man  who,  from  a  feeling  of  revenge — perhaps 
not  an  unjust  one,  but  produced  by  injury  on 
the  other’s  part — burns  that  other  man’s  house. 
A  connection  is  immediately  established  between 
the  deed  itself  and  a  train  of  circumstances  not 
directly  included  in  it,  taken  abstractedly.  In  it¬ 
self  it  consisted  in  merely  presenting  a  small 
flame  to  a  small  portion  of  a  beam.  Events  not 
involved  in  that  simple  act  follow  of  themselves. 
The  part  of  the  beam  which  was  set  fire  to  is 
connected  with  its  remote  portions;  the  beam 
itself  is  united  with  the  woodwork  of  the  house 
generally,  and  this  with  other  houses;  so  that 
a  wide  conflagration  ensues,  which  destroys  the 
goods  and  chattels  of  many  other  persons  be¬ 
sides  his  against  whom  the  act  of  revenge  was 
first  directed;  perhaps  even  costs  not  a  few  men 
their  lives.  This  lay  neither  in  the  deed  ab¬ 
stractedly,  nor  in  the  design  of  the  man  who 
committed  it.  But  the  action  has  a  further  gen¬ 
eral  bearing.  In  the  design  of  the  doer  it  was  only 
revenge  executed  against  an  individual  in  the  de¬ 
struction  of  his  property,  but  it  is  moreover  a 
crime,  and  that  involves  punishment  also.  This 
may  not  have  been  present  to  the  mind  of  the 
perpetrator,  still  less  in  his  intention;  but  his 


1 66  PHILOSOPHY 

deed  itself,  the  general  principles  it  calls  into 
play,  its  substantial  content  entails  it.  By  this 
example  I  wish  only  to  impress  on  you  the  con¬ 
sideration  that,  in  a  simple  act,  something  fur¬ 
ther  may  be  implicated  than  lies  in  the  intention 
and  consciousness  of  the  agent.  The  example 
before  us  involves,  however,  this  additional  con¬ 
sideration,  that  the  substance  of  the  act,  conse¬ 
quently  we  may  say  the  act  itself,  recoils  upon 
the  perpetrator — reacts  upon  him  with  destruc¬ 
tive  tendency.  This  union  of  the  two  extremes — 
the  embodiment  of  a  general  idea  in  the  form  of 
direct  reality,  and  the  elevation  of  a  speciality 
into  connection  with  universal  truth — is  brought 
to  pass,  at  first  sight,  under  the  conditions  of  an 
utter  diversity  of  nature  between  the  two,  and 
an  indifference  of  the  one  extreme  towards  the 
other.  The  aims  which  the  agents  set  before 
them  are  limited  and  special;  but  it  must  be  re¬ 
marked  that  the  agents  themselves  are  intelli¬ 
gent  thinking  beings.  The  purport  of  their  de¬ 
sires  is  interwoven  with  ge?ieral,  essential  con¬ 
siderations  of  justice,  good,  duty,  etc.;  for  mere 
desire,  volition  in  its  rough  and  savage  forms, 
falls  not  within  the  scene  and  sphere  of  univer¬ 
sal  history.  Those  general  considerations,  which 
form  at  the  same  time  a  norm  for  directing  aims 
and  actions,  have  a  determinate  purport;  for 
such  an  abstraction  as  “good  for  its  own  sake” 
has  no  place  in  living  reality.  If  men  are  to  act, 
they  must  not  only  intend  the  good,  but  must 
have  decided  for  themselves  whether  this  or  that 
particular  thing  is  a  good.  What  special  course 
of  action, however, is  good  or  not,  is  determined, 
as  regards  the  ordinary  contingencies  of  private 
life,  by  the  laws  and  customs  of  a  state;  and 
here  no  great  difficulty  is  presented.  Each  indi¬ 
vidual  has  his  position ;  he  knows  on  the  whole 
what  a  just,  honorable  course  of  conduct  is.  As 
to  ordinary,  private  relations,  the  assertion  that 
it  is  difficult  to  choose  the  right  and  good — the 
regarding  it  as  the  mark  of  an  exalted  morality 
to  find  difficulties  and  raise  scruples  on  that 
score — may  be  set  down  to  an  evil  or  perverse 
will  which  seeks  to  evade  duties  not  in  them¬ 
selves  of  a  perplexing  nature;  or  at  any  rate,  to 
an  idly  reflective  habit  of  mind — where  a  feeble 
will  affords  no  sufficient  exercise  to  the  faculties 
— leaving  them  therefore  to  find  occupation 
within  themselves,  and  to  expend  themselves  on 
moral  self-adulation. 

It  is  quite  otherwise  with  the  comprehensive 
relations  that  history  has  to  do  with.  In  this 
sphere  are  presented  those  momentous  collisions 
between  existing,  acknowledged  duties,  laws, 
and  rights,  and  those  contingencies  which  are  ad¬ 


OF  HISTORY 

verse  to  this  fixed  system ;  which  assail  and  even 
destroy  its  foundations  and  existence;  whose 
tenor  may  nevertheless  seem  good — on  the  large 
scale  advantageous — yes,  even  indispensable 
and  necessary.  These  contingencies  realize  them¬ 
selves  in  history:  they  involve  a  general  princi¬ 
ple  of  a  different  order  from  that  on  which  de¬ 
pends  the  permane?ice  of  a  people  or  a  state. 
This  principle  is  an  essential  phase  in  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  the  creating  idea,  of  truth  striving 
and  urging  towards  itself.  Historical  men — 
world-historical  individuals — are  those  in  whose 
aims  such  a  general  principle  lies. 

Caesar,  in  danger  of  losing  a  position,  not  per¬ 
haps  at  that  time  of  superiority  yet  at  least  of 
equality  with  the  others  who  were  at  the  head  of 
the  state,  and  of  succumbing  to  those  who  were 
just  on  the  point  of  becoming  his  enemies,  be¬ 
longs  essentially  to  this  category.  These  enemies, 
who  were  at  the  same  time  pursuing  their  per¬ 
sonal  aims,  had  the  form  of  the  constitution, 
and  the  power  conferred  by  an  appearance  of 
justice,  on  their  side.  Caesar  was  contending  for 
the  maintenance  of  his  position,  honor,  and 
safety;  and,  since  the  power  of  his  opponents  in¬ 
cluded  the  sovereignty  over  the  provinces  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  his  victory  secured  for  him  the 
conquest  of  that  entire  empire ;  and  he  thus  be¬ 
came,  though  leaving  the  form  of  the  constitu¬ 
tion,  the  autocrat  of  the  state.  That  which  se¬ 
cured  for  him  the  execution  of  a  design,  which 
in  the  first  instance  was  of  negative  import,  the 
autocracy  of  Rome,  was,  however,  at  the  same 
time  an  independently  necessary  feature  in  the 
history  of  Rome  and  of  the  world.  It  was  not, 
then,  his  private  gain  merely,  but  an  unconscious 
impulse  that  occasioned  the  accomplishment  of 
that  for  which  the  time  was  ripe.  Such  are  all 
great  historical  men — whose  own  particular  aims 
involve  those  large  issues  which  are  the  will  of 
the  world-spirit.  They  may  be  called  heroes,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  they  have  derived  their  purposes  and 
their  vocation, not  from  the  calm, regular  course 
of  things,  sanctioned  by  the  existing  order;  but 
from  a  concealed  fount — one  which  has  not  at¬ 
tained  to  phenomenal,  present  existence — from 
that  inner  spirit,  still  hidden  beneath  the  sur¬ 
face,  which,  impinging  on  the  outer  world  as  on 
a  shell,  bursts  it  in  pieces,  because  it  is  another 
kernel  than  that  which  belonged  to  the  shell 
in  question.  They  are  men,  therefore,  who  ap¬ 
pear  to  draw  the  impulse  of  their  life  from  them¬ 
selves;  and  whose  deeds  have  produced  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  things  and  a  complex  of  historical  rela¬ 
tions  which  appear  to  be  only  their  interest,  and 
their  work. 


INTRODUCTION  167 


Such  individuals  had  no  consciousness  of  the 
general  idea  they  were  unfolding,  while  prose¬ 
cuting  those  aims  of  theirs ;  on  the  contrary,  they 
were  practical,  political  men.  But  at  the  same 
time  they  were  thinking  men,  who  had  an  in¬ 
sight  into  the  requirements  of  the  time — what 
was  ripe  for  development.  This  was  the  very 
truth  for  their  age,  for  their  world;  the  species 
next  in  order,  so  to  speak,  and  which  was  already 
formed  in  the  womb  of  time.  It  was  theirs  to 
know  this  nascent  principle;  the  necessary,  di¬ 
rectly  sequent  step  in  progress,  which  their 
world  was  to  take;  to  make  this  their  aim,  and 
to  expend  their  energy  in  promoting  it.  World- 
historical  men,  the  heroes  of  an  epoch,  must, 
therefore,  be  recognizedas  its  clear-sighted  ones ; 
their  deeds,  their  words  are  thebest  of  that  time. 
Great  men  have  formed  purposes  to  satisfy 
themselves,  not  others.  Whatever  prudent  de¬ 
signs  and  counsels  they  might  have  learned  from 
others  would  be  the  more  limited  and  incon¬ 
sistent  features  in  their  career;  for  it  was  they 
who  best  understood  affairs;  from  whom  others 
learned,  and  approved,  or  at  least  acquiesced  in 
their  policy.  For  that  spirit  which  had  taken  this 
fresh  step  in  history  is  the  inmost  soul  of  all  in¬ 
dividuals;  but  in  a  state  of  unconsciousness 
which  the  great  men  in  question  aroused.  Their 
fellows,  therefore,  follow  these  soul-leaders;  for 
they  feel  the  irresistible  power  of  their  own 
inner  spirit  thus  embodied.  If  we  go  on  to  cast 
a  look  at  the  fate  of  these  world-historical  per¬ 
sons,  whose  vocation  it  was  to  be  the  agents  of 
the  world-spirit,  we  shall  find  it  to  have  been  no 
happy  one.  They  attained  no  calm  enjoyment; 
their  whole  life  was  labor  and  trouble;  their 
whole  nature  was  nought  else  but  their  master- 
passion.  When  their  object  is  attained  they  fall 
off  like  empty  hulls  from  the  kernel.  They  die 
early,  like  Alexander;  they  are  murdered,  like 
Caesar ;  transported  to  St.  Helena,  like  Napoleon. 
This  fearful  consolation — that  historical  men 
have  not  enjoyed  what  is  calledhappiness,andof 
which  only  private  life  (and  this  may  be  passed 
under  very  various  external  circumstances)  is 
capable — this  consolation  those  may  draw  from 
history,  who  stand  in  need  of  it ;  and  it  is  craved 
by  envy — vexed  at  what  is  great  and  transcend¬ 
ent — striving,  therefore,  to  depreciate  it,  and  to 
find  some  flaw  in  it.  Thus  in  modern  times  it  has 
been  demonstrated  ad  nauseam  that  princes  are 
generally  unhappy  on  their  thrones;  in  consid¬ 
eration  of  which  the  possession  of  a  throne  is 
tolerated,  and  men  acquiesce  in  the  fact  that  not 
themselves  but  the  personages  in  question  are 
its  occupants.  The  free  man,  we  may  observe, 


is  not  envious,  but  gladly  recognizes  what  is 
great  and  exalted,  and  rejoices  that  it  exists. 

It  is  in  the  light  of  those  common  elements 
which  constitute  the  interest  and  therefore  the 
passions  of  individuals,  that  these  historical  men 
are  to  be  regarded.  They  are  great  men,  because 
they  willed  and  accomplished  something  great ; 
not  a  mere  fancy,  a  mere  intention,  but  that 
which  met  the  case  and  fell  in  with  the  needs  of 
the  age.  This  mode  of  considering  them  also 
excludes  the  so-called  “psychological”  view, 
which,  serving  the  purpose  of  envy  most  effectu¬ 
ally,  contrives  so  to  refer  all  actions  to  the  heart 
— to  bring  them  under  such  a  subjective  aspect 
— as  that  their  authors  appear  to  have  done 
everything  under  the  impulse  of  some  passion, 
mean  or  grand — some  morbid  craving — and  on 
account  of  these  passions  and  cravings  to  have 
been  not  moral  men.  Alexander  of  Macedon 
partly  subdued  Greece,  and  then  Asia;  therefore 
he  was  possessed  by  a  morbid  craving  for  con¬ 
quest.  He  is  alleged  to  have  acted  from  a  craving 
for  fame,  for  conquest;  and  the  proof  that  these 
were  the  impelling  motives  is  that  he  did  that 
which  resulted  in  fame.  What  pedagogue  has  not 
demonstrated  of  Alexander  the  Great,  of  Julius 
Caesar,  that  they  were  instigated  by  such  pas¬ 
sions,  and  were  consequently  immoral  men? 
Whence  the  conclusion  immediately  follows  that 
he,  the  pedagogue,  is  a  better  man  than  they,  be¬ 
cause  he  has  not  such  passions ;  a  proof  of  which 
lies  in  the  fact  that  he  does  not  conquer  Asia — 
vanquish  Darius  andPorus — but  while  he  enjoys 
life  himself,  lets  others  enjoy  it  too.  These  psy¬ 
chologists  are  particularly  fond  of  contemplat¬ 
ing  those  peculiarities  of  great  historical  figures 
which  appertain  to  them  as  private  persons.  Man 
must  eat  and  drink;  he  sustains  relations  to 
friends  and  acquaintances;  he  has  passing  im¬ 
pulses  and  ebullitions  of  temper.  “No  man  is  a 
hero  to  his  valet-de-chambre,”  is  a  well-knowTn 
proverb;  I  have  added — and  Goethe  repeated 
it  ten  years  later — “but  not  because  the  former 
is  no  hero,  but  because  the  latter  is  a  valet.”  He 
takes  off  the  hero’s  boots,  assists  him  to  bed, 
knows  that  he  prefers  champagne,  etc.  Historical 
personages  waited  upon  in  historical  literature 
by  such  psychological  valets  come  poorly  off; 
they  are  brought  down  by  these  their  attendants 
to  a  level  with,  or  rather  a  few  degrees  below  the 
level  of,  the  morality  of  such  exquisite  discern- 
ers  of  spirits.  The  Thersites  of  Homer  who 
abuses  the  kings  is  a  standing  figure  for  all 
times.  Blows,  that  is,  beating  with  a  solid  cudgel, 
he  does  not  get  in  every  age,  as  in  the  Homeric 
one;  but  his  envy,  his  egotism,  is  the  thorn 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


1 68 

which  he  has  to  carry  in  his  flesh;  and  the  un¬ 
dying  worm  that  gnaws  him  is  the  tormenting 
consideration  that  his  excellent  views  and  vitu¬ 
perations  remain  absolutely  without  result  in 
the  world.  But  our  satisfaction  at  the  fate  of 
thersitism  also  may  have  its  sinister  side. 

A  world-historical  individual  is  not  so  unwise 
as  to  indulge  a  variety  of  wishes  to  divide  his 
regards.  He  is  devoted  to  the  one  aim,  regardless 
of  all  else.  It  is  even  possible  that  such  men  may 
treat  other  great,  even  sacred  interests,  incon¬ 
siderately;  conduct  which  is  indeed  obnoxious 
to  moral  reprehension.  But  so  mighty  a  form 
must  trample  down  many  an  innocent  flowTer, 
crush  to  pieces  many  an  object  in  its  path. 

The  special  interest  of  passion  is  thus  insepa¬ 
rable  from  the  active  development  of  a  general 
principle:  for  it  is  from  the  special  and  deter¬ 
minate  and  from  its  negation,  that  the  universal 
results.  Particularity  contends  with  its  like,  and 
some  loss  is  involved  in  the  issue.  It  is  not  the 
general  idea  that  is  implicated  in  opposition  and 
combat,  and  that  is  exposed  to  danger.  It  re¬ 
mains  in  the  background,  untouched  and  unin¬ 
jured.  This  may  be  called  the  cunning  of  reason 
— that  it  sets  the  passions  to  work  for  itself, 
while  that  which  develops  its  existence  through 
such  impulsion  pays  the  penalty,  and  suffers  loss. 
For  it  is  phenomenal  being  that  is  so  treated,  and 
of  this,  part  is  of  no  value,  part  is  positive  and 
real.  The  particular  is  for  the  most  part  of  too 
trifling  value  as  compared  with  the  general:  in¬ 
dividuals  are  sacrificed  and  abandoned.  The  idea 
pays  the  penalty  of  determinate  existence  and 
of  corruptibility,  not  from  itself,  but  from  the 
passions  of  individuals. 

But  though  we  might  tolerate  the  idea  that  in¬ 
dividuals,  their  desires  and  the  gratification  of 
them,  are  thus  sacrificed,  and  their  happiness 
given  up  to  the  empire  of  chance,  to  which  it 
belongs;  and  that  as  a  general  rule,  individuals 
come  under  the  category  of  means  to  an  ulterior 
end — there  is  one  aspect  of  human  individuality 
which  we  should  hesitate  to  regard  in  that  sub¬ 
ordinate  light,  even  in  relation  to  the  highest; 
since  it  is  absolutely  no  subordinate  element,  but 
exists  in  those  individuals  as  inherently  eternal 
and  divine.  I  mean  morality ,  ethics,  religion . 
Even  when  speaking  of  the  realization  of  the 
great  ideal  aim  by  means  of  individuals,  the  sub¬ 
jective  element  in  them — their  interest  and  that 
of  their  cravings  and  impulses,  their  views  and 
judgments,  though  exhibited  as  the  merely  for¬ 
mal  side  of  their  existence — was  spoken  of  as 
having  an  infinite  right  to  be  consulted.  The 
first  idea  that  presents  itself  in  speaking  of 


means  is  that  of  something  external  to  the  ob¬ 
ject  and  having  no  share  in  the  object  itself.  But 
merely  natural  things — even  the  commonest 
lifeless  objects — used  as  means,  must  be  of  such 
a  kind  as  adapts  them  to  their  purpose;  they 
must  possess  something  in  common  with  it.  Hu¬ 
man  beings  least  of  all,  sustain  the  bare  external 
relation  of  mere  means  to  the  great  ideal  aim. 
Not  only  do  they  in  the  very  act  of  realizing  it. 
make  it  the  occasion  of  satisfying  personal  de¬ 
sires,  whose  purport  is  diverse  from  that  aim — 
but  they  share  in  that  ideal  aim  itself ;  and  are 
for  that  very  reason  objects  of  their  own  exist¬ 
ence  ;  not  formally  merely,  as  the  world  of  living 
beings  generally  is — whose  individual  life  is 
essentially  subordinate  to  that  of  man,  and  is 
properly  used  up  as  an  instrument.  Men,  on  the 
contrary,  are  objects  of  existence  to  themselves, 
as  regards  the  intrinsic  import  of  the  aim  in 
question.  To  this  order  belongs  that  in  them 
which  we  would  exclude  from  the  category  of 
mere  means — morality,  ethics,  religion.  That  is 
to  say,  man  is  an  object  of  existence  in  himself 
only  in  virtue  of  the  divine  that  is  in  him — that 
which  was  designated  at  the  outset  as  reason; 
which,  in  view  of  its  activity  and  power  of  self- 
determination,  was  called  freedom.  And  we  af¬ 
firm,  without  entering  at  present  on  the  proof 
of  the  assertion,  that  religion,  morality,  etc. 
have  their  foundation  and  source  in  that  princi¬ 
ple,  and  so  are  essentially  elevated  above  all  alien 
necessity  and  chance.  And  here  we  must  remark 
that  individuals,  to  the  extent  of  their  freedom, 
are  responsible  for  the  depravation  and  enfeeble- 
ment  of  morals  and  religion.  This  is  the  seal  of 
the  absolute  and  sublime  destiny  of  man — that 
he  knows  what  is  good  and  what  is  evil;  that 
his  destiny  is  his  very  ability  to  will  either  good 
or  evil — in  one  word,  that  he  is  the  subject  of 
moral  imputation,  imputation  not  only  of  evil, 
but  of  good;  and  not  only  concerning  this  or 
that  particular  matter,  and  all  that  happens  ab 
extra,  but  also  the  good  and  evil  attaching  to  his 
individual  freedom.  The  brute  alone  is  simply 
innocent.  It  would,  however,  demand  an  exten¬ 
sive  explanation,  as  extensive  as  the  analysis  of 
moral  freedom  itself,  to  preclude  or  obviate  all 
the  misunderstandings  which  the  statement  that 
what  is  called  innocence  imports  the  entire  un¬ 
consciousness  of  evil — is  wont  to  occasion. 

In  contemplating  the  fate  which  virtue,  moral¬ 
ity,  even  piety  experience  in  history,  we  must 
not  fall  into  the  litany  of  lamentations,  that  the 
good  and  pious  often,  or  for  the  most  part,  fare 
ill  in  the  world,  while  the  evil-disposed  and  wicked 
prosper.  The  term  prosperity  is  used  in  a  vari- 


INTRODUCTION 


ety  of  meanings — riches,  outward  honour,  and 
the  like.  But  in  speaking  of  something  which  in 
and  for  itself  constitutes  an  aim  of  existence,  that 
so-called  well  or  ill-faring  of  these  or  those  iso¬ 
lated  individuals  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  essen¬ 
tial  element  in  the  rational  order  of  the  universe. 
With  more  justice  than  happiness — or  a  for¬ 
tunate  environment  for  individuals — it  is  de¬ 
manded  of  the  grand  aim  of  the  world’s  exist¬ 
ence,  that  it  should  foster,  nay  involve  the  exe¬ 
cution  and  ratification  of  good,  moral,  righteous 
purposes.  What  makes  men  morally  discontented 
(a  discontent,  by  the  by,  on  which  they  some¬ 
what  pride  themselves)  is  that  they  do  not  find 
the  present  adapted  to  the  realization  of  aims 
which  they  hold  to  be  right  and  just  (more  espe¬ 
cially  in  modern  times,  ideals  of  political  consti¬ 
tutions)  ;  they  contrast  unfavorably  things  as 
they  are ,  with  their  idea  of  things  as  they  ought 
to  be.  In  this  case  it  is  not  private  interest  nor 
passion  that  desires  gratification, but  reason,  jus¬ 
tice,  liberty;  and  equipped  with  this  title,  the  de¬ 
mand  in  question  assumes  a  lofty  bearing,  and 
readily  adopts  a  position  not  merely  of  discon¬ 
tent,  but  of  open  revolt  against  the  actual  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  world.  To  estimate  such  a  feeling 
and  such  views  aright,  the  demands  insisted  up¬ 
on,  and  the  very  dogmatic  opinions  asserted, 
must  be  examined.  At  no  time  so  much  as  in  our 
own,  have  such  general  principles  and  notions 
been  advanced,  or  with  greater  assurance.  If  in 
days  gone  by,  history  seems  to  present  itself  as 
a  struggle  of  passions;  in  our  time,  though  dis¬ 
plays  of  passion  are  not  wanting,  it  exhibits  part¬ 
ly  a  predominance  of  the  struggle  of  notions  as¬ 
suming  the  authority  of  principles;  partly  that 
of  passions  and  interests  essentially  subjective, 
but  under  the  mask  of  such  higher  sanctions.  The 
pretensions  thus  contended  for  as  legitimate  in 
the  name  of  that  which  has  been  stated  as  the 
ultimate  aim  of  reason,  pass  accordingly,  for  ab¬ 
solute  aims — to  the  same  extent  as  religion, 
morals,  ethics.  Nothing,  as  before  remarked,  is 
now  more  common  than  the  complaint  that  the 
ideals  which  imagination  sets  up  are  not  realized 
— that  these  glorious  dreams  are  destroyed  by 
cold  actuality.  These  ideals,  which  in  the  voyage 
of  life  founder  on  the  rocks  of  hard  reality,  may 
be  in  the  first  instance  only  subjective,  and  be¬ 
long  to  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the  individual,  imag¬ 
ining  himself  the  highest  and  wisest.  Such  do 
not  properly  belong  to  this  category.  For  the 
fancies  which  the  individual  in  his  isolation  in¬ 
dulges,  cannot  be  the  model  for  universal  real¬ 
ity;  just  as  universal  law  is  not  designed  for  the 
units  of  the  mass.  These  as  such  may,  in  fact, 


169 

find  their  interests  decidedly  thrust  into  the 
background.  But  by  the  term  “ideal”  we  also 
understand  the  ideal  of  reason,  of  the  good,  of 
the  true.  Poets,  as,  e.g.,  Schiller,  have  painted 
such  ideals  touchingly  and  with  strong  emotion, 
and  with  the  deeply  melancholy  conviction  that 
they  could  not  be  realized.  In  affirming,  on  the 
contrary,  that  the  universal  reason  does  realize 
itself,  we  have  indeed  nothing  to  do  with  the  in¬ 
dividual  empirically  regarded.  That  admits  of 
degrees  of  better  and  worse,  since  here  chance 
and  speciality  have  received  authority  from  the 
idea  to  exercise  their  monstrous  power.  Much, 
therefore,  in  particular  aspects  of  the  grand  phe¬ 
nomenon  might  be  found  fault  with.  This 
subjective  fault-finding — which,  however,  only 
keeps  in  view  the  individual  and  its  deficiency, 
without  taking  notice  of  reason  pervading  the 
whole — is  easy;  and  inasmuch  as  it  asserts  an 
excellent  intention  with  regard  to  the  good  of 
the  whole,  and  seems  to  result  from  a  kindly 
heart,  it  feels  authorized  to  give  itself  airs  and 
assume  greatconsequence.lt  is  easier  to  discover 
a  deficiency  in  individuals,  in  states,  and  in 
Providence,  than  to  see  their  real  import  and 
value.  For  in  this  merely  negative  fault-finding 
a  proud  position  is  taken,  one  which  overlooks 
the  object,  without  having  entered  into  it,  with¬ 
out  having  comprehended  its  positive  aspect. 
Age  generally  makes  men  more  tolerant ;  youth 
is  always  discontented.  The  tolerance  of  age  is 
the  result  of  the  ripeness  of  a  judgment  which, 
not  merely  as  the  result  of  indifference,  is  satis¬ 
fied  even  with  what  is  inferior;  but,  more  deeply 
taught  by  the  grave  experience  of  life,  has  been 
led  to  perceive  the  substantial,  solid  worth  of 
the  object  in  question.  The  insight  then  to  which 
— in  contradistinction  from  those  ideals — phi¬ 
losophy  is  to  lead  us,  is,  that  the  real  world  is  as 
it  ought  to  be,  that  the  truly  good,  the  universal 
divine  reason,  is  not  a  mere  abstraction,  but  a 
vital  principle  capable  of  realizing  itself.  This 
goody  this  reason,  in  its  most  concrete  form,  is 
God.  God  governs  the  world ;  the  actual  work¬ 
ing  of  His  government,  the  carrying  out  of  His 
plan,  is  the  history  of  the  world.  This  plan  phi¬ 
losophy  strives  to  comprehend;  for  only  that 
which  has  been  developed  as  the  result  of  it 
possesses  bona  fide  reality.  That  which  does  not 
accord  with  it  is  negative,  worthless  existence. 
Before  the  pure  light  of  this  divine  idea,  which 
is  no  mere  ideal,  the  phantom  of  a  world 
whose  events  are  an  incoherent  concourse  of 
fortuitous  circumstances  utterly  vanishes.  Phi¬ 
losophy  wishes  to  discover  the  substantial  pur¬ 
port,  the  real  side  of  the  divine  idea,  and  to 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


170 

justify  the  so  much  despised  reality  of  things; 
for  reason  is  the  comprehension  of  the  divine 
work.  But  as  to  what  concerns  the  perversion, 
corruption,  and  ruin  of  religious,  ethical,  and 
moral  purposes,  and  states  of  society  generally, 
it  must  be  affirmed  that  in  their  essence  these 
are  infinite  and  eternal;  but  that  the  forms  they 
assume  may  be  of  a  limited  order,  and  conse¬ 
quently  belong  to  the  domain  of  mere  nature, 
and  be  subject  to  the  sway  of  chance.  They  are 
therefore  perishable,  and  exposed  to  decay  and 
corruption.  Religion  and  morality,  in  the  same 
way  as  inherently  universal  essences,  have  the 
peculiarity  of  being  present  in  the  individual 
soul,  in  the  full  extent  of  their  idea,  and  there¬ 
fore  truly  and  really;  although,  they  may  not 
manifest  themselves  in  it  in  extenso,  and  are  not 
applied  to  fully  developed  relations.  The  religion, 
the  morality  of  a  limited  sphere  of  life — that  of 
a  shepherd  or  a  peasant,  e.g. — in  its  intensive 
concentration  and  limitation  to  a  few  perfectly 
simple  relations  of  life,  has  infinite  worth;  the 
same  worth  as  the  religion  and  morality  of  ex¬ 
tensive  knowledge,  and  of  an  existence  rich  in 
the  compass  of  its  relations  and  actions.  This 
inner  focus — this  simple  region  of  the  claims 
of  subjective  freedom,  the  home  of  volition, 
resolution,  and  action,  the  abstract  sphere  of 
conscience — that  which  comprises  the  responsi¬ 
bility  and  moral  value  of  the  individual,  remains 
untouched;  and  is  quite  shut  out  from  the  noisy 
din  of  the  world’s  history — including  not  merely 
external  and  temporal  changes,  but  also  those 
entailed  by  the  absolute  necessity  inseparable 
from  the  realization  of  the  idea  of  freedom  it¬ 
self.  But  as  a  general  truth  this  must  be  regarded 
as  settled:  that  whatever  in  the  world  possesses 
claims  as  noble  and  glorious  has  nevertheless  a 
higher  existence  above  it.  The  claim  of  the 
world-spirit  rises  above  all  special  claims. 

These  observations  may  suffice  in  reference  to 
the  means  which  the  world-spirit  uses  for  realiz¬ 
ing  its  idea.  Stated  simply  and  abstractly,  this 
mediation  involves  the  activity  of  personal  ex¬ 
istences  in  whom  reason  is  present  as  their  abso¬ 
lute,  substantial  being;  but  a  basis,  in  the  first 
instance,  still  obscure  and  unknown  to  them.  But 
the  subject  becomes  more  complicated  and  diffi¬ 
cult  when  we  regard  individuals  not  merely  in 
their  aspect  of  activity,  but,  more  concretely,  in 
conjunction  with  a  particular  manifestation  of 
that  activity  in  their  religion  and  morality — 
forms  of  existence  which  are  intimately  con¬ 
nected  with  reason,  and  share  in  its  absolute 
claims.  Here  the  relation  of  mere  means  to  an 
end  disappears,  and  the  chief  bearings  of  this 


seeming  difficulty  in  reference  to  the  absolute 
aim  of  spirit  have  been  briefly  considered. 

(3)  The  third  point  to  be  analysed  is,  there¬ 
fore — what  is  the  object  to  be  realized  by  these 
means;  i.e.,  what  is  the  form  it  assumes  in  the 
realm  of  reality.  We  have  spoken  of  means;  but 
in  the  carrying  out  of  a  subjective,  limited  aim, 
we  have  also  to  take  into  consideration  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  a  material ,  either  already  present  or 
which  has  to  be  procured.  Thus  the  question 
would  arise:  What  is  the  material  in  which  the 
ideal  of  reason  is  wrought  out?  The  primary  an¬ 
swer  would  be — personality  itself — human  de¬ 
sires — subjectivity  generally.  In  human  knowl¬ 
edge  and  volition,  as  its  material  element,  reason 
attains  positive  existence.  We  have  considered 
subjective  volition  where  it  has  an  object  which 
is  the  truth  and  essence  of  a  reality,  viz.,  where 
it  constitutes  a  great  world-historical  passion. 
As  a  subjective  will,  occupied  with  limited  pas¬ 
sions,  it  is  dependent,  and  can  gratify  its  desires 
only  within  the  limits  of  this  dependence.  But 
the  subjective  will  has  also  a  substantial  life — 
a  reality — in  which  it  moves  in  the  region  of  es¬ 
sential  being,  and  has  the  essential  itself  as  the 
object  of  its  existence.  This  essential  being  is  the 
union  of  the  subjective  with  the  rational  will:  it 
is  the  moral  whole,  the  state,  which  is  that  form 
of  reality  in  which  the  individual  has  and  enjoys 
his  freedom;  but  on  the  condition  of  his  recog¬ 
nizing,  believing  in,  and  willing  that  which  is 
common  to  the  whole.  And  this  must  not  be  un¬ 
derstood  as  if  the  subjective  will  of  the  social 
unit  attained  its  gratification  and  enjoyment 
through  that  common  will;  as  if  this  were  a 
means  provided  for  its  benefit;  as  if  the  individ¬ 
ual,  in  his  relations  to  other  individuals,  thus 
limited  his  freedom,  in  order  that  this  universal 
limitation — the  mutual  constraint  of  all — might 
secure  a  small  space  of  liberty  for  each.  Rather, 
we  affirm,  are  law,  morality,  government,  and 
they  alone,  the  positive  reality  and  completion 
of  freedom.  Freedom  of  a  low  and  limited  order 
is  mere  caprice;  which  finds  its  exercise  in  the 
sphere  of  particular  and  limited  desires. 

Subjective  volition — passion — is  that  which 
sets  men  in  activity,  that  which  effects  “prac¬ 
tical”  realization.  The  idea  is  the  inner  spring  of 
action ;  the  state  is  the  actually  existing,  realized 
moral  life.  For  it  is  the  unity  of  the  universal, 
essential  will,  with  that  of  the  individual;  and 
this  is  “morality.”  The  individual  living  in  this 
unity  has  a  moral  life;  possesses  a  value  that 
consists  in  this  substantiality  alone.  Sophocles 
in  his  Antigone,  says,  “The  divine  commands 
are  not  of  yesterday,  nor  of  to-day;  no,  they 


INTRODUCTION  171 


have  an  infinite  existence,  and  no  one  could  say 
whence  they  came.”  The  laws  of  morality  are 
not  accidental,  but  are  the  essentially  rational. 
It  is  the  very  object  of  the  state  that  what  is 
essential  in  the  practical  activity  of  men,  and  in 
their  dispositions,  should  be  duly  recognized; 
that  it  should  have  a  manifest  existence,  and 
maintain  its  position.  It  is  the  absolute  interest 
of  reason  that  this  moral  whole  should  exist ;  and 
herein  lies  the  justification  and  merit  of  heroes 
who  have  founded  states — however  rude  these 
may  have  been.  In  the  history  of  the  world,  only 
those  peoples  can  come  under  our  notice  which 
form  a  state.  For  it  must  be  understood  that  this 
latter  is  the  realization  of  freedom,  i.e.,  of  the 
absolute  final  aim,  and  that  it  exists  for  its  own 
sake.  It  must  further  be  understood  that  all  the 
worth  which  the  human  being  possesses,  all 
spiritual  reality,  he  possesses  only  through  the 
state.  For  his  spiritual  reality  consists  in  this, 
that  his  own  essence — reason — is  objectively 
present  to  him,  that  it  possesses  objective  imme¬ 
diate  existence  for  him.  Thus  only  is  he  fully 
conscious ;  thus  only  is  he  a  partaker  of  morality, 
of  a  just  and  moral  social  and  political  life.  For 
truth  is  the  unity  of  the  universal  and  subjective 
will ;  and  the  universal  is  to  be  found  in  the  state, 
in  its  laws,  its  universal  and  rational  arrange¬ 
ments.  The  state  is  the  divine  idea  as  it  exists 
on  earth.  We  have  in  it,  therefore,  the  object  of 
history  in  a  more  definite  shape  than  before; 
that  in  which  freedom  obtains  objectivity,  and 
lives  in  the  enjoyment  of  this  objectivity.  For 
law  is  the  objectivity  of  spirit;  volition  in  its 
true  form.  Only  that  will  which  obeys  law  is 
free;  for  it  obeys  itself — it  is  independent  and 
so  free.  When  the  state  or  our  country  consti¬ 
tutes  a  community  of  existence;  when  the  sub¬ 
jective  will  of  man  submits  to  laws — the  con¬ 
tradiction  between  liberty  and  necessity  van¬ 
ishes.  The  rational  has  necessary  existence,  as 
being  the  reality  and  substance  of  things,  and  we 
are  free  in  recognizing  it  as  law,  and  following 
it  as  the  substance  of  our  own  being.  The  ob¬ 
jective  and  the  subjective  will  are  then  recon¬ 
ciled,  and  present  one  identical  homogeneous 
whole.  For  the  morality  of  the  state  is  not  of  that 
ethical  reflective  kind,  in  which  one’s  own  con¬ 
viction  bears  sway;  this  latter  is  rather  the 
peculiarity  of  the  modern  time,  while  the  true 
antique  morality  is  based  on  the  principle  of 
abiding  by  one’s  duty.  An  Athenian  citizen  did 
what  was  required  of  him,  as  it  were  from  in¬ 
stinct:  but  if  I  reflect  on  the  object  of  my  ac¬ 
tivity,  I  must  have  the  consciousness  that  my 
will  has  been  called  into  exercise.  But  morality 


is  duty — substantial  right — a  “second  nature,” 
as  it  has  been  justly  called;  for  the  first  nature 
of  man  is  his  primary  merely  animal  existence. 

The  development  in  extenso  of  the  idea  of  the 
state  belongs  to  the  philosophy  of  jurispru¬ 
dence;  but  it  must  be  observed  that  in  the 
theories  of  our  time  various  errors  are  current 
respecting  it,  which  pass  for  established  truths, 
and  have  become  fixed  prejudices.  We  will  men¬ 
tion  only  a  few  of  them,  giving  prominence  to 
such  as  have  a  reference  to  the  object  of  our  his¬ 
tory. 

The  error  which  first  meets  us  is  the  direct 
contradictory  of  our  principle  that  the  state 
presents  the  realization  of  freedom;  the  opinion, 
viz.,  that  man  is  free  by  nature ,  but  that  in  so¬ 
ciety t,  in  the  state,  to  which  nevertheless  he  is  ir¬ 
resistibly  impelled,  he  must  limit  this  natural 
freedom.  That  man  is  free  by  nature  is  quite 
correct  in  one  sense ;  viz.,  that  he  is  so  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  idea  of  humanity;  but  we  imply  there¬ 
by  that  he  is  such  only  in  virtue  of  his  destiny — 
that  he  has  an  undeveloped  power  to  become 
such;  for  the  “nature”  of  an  object  is  exactly 
synonymous  with  its  “idea.”  But  the  view  in 
question  imports  more  than  this.  When  man  is 
spoken  of  as  “free  by  nature,”  the  mode  of  his 
existence  as  well  as  his  destiny  is  implied.  His 
merely  natural  and  primary  condition  is  intend¬ 
ed.  In  this  sense  a  “state  of  nature”  is  assumed 
in  which  mankind  at  large  are  in  the  possession 
of  their  natural  rights  with  the  unconstrained 
exercise  and  enjoyment  of  their  freedom.  This 
assumption  is  not  indeed  raised  to  the  dignity  of 
the  historical  fact;  it  would  indeed  be  difficult, 
were  the  attempt  seriously  made,  to  point  out 
any  such  condition  as  actually  existing,  or  as 
having  ever  occurred.  Examples  of  a  savage 
state  of  life  can  be  pointed  out,  but  they  are 
marked  by  brutal  passions  and  deeds  of  vio¬ 
lence;  while,  however  rude  and  simple  their  con¬ 
ditions,  they  involve  social  arrangements  which 
(to  use  the  common  phrase)  restrain  freedom. 
That  assumption  is  one  of  those  nebulous  im¬ 
ages  which  theory  produces;  an  idea  which  it 
cannot  avoid  originating,  but  which  it  fathers 
upon  real  existence,  without  sufficient  historical 
justification. 

What  we  find  such  a  state  of  nature  to  be  in 
actual  experience  answers  exactly  to  the  idea  of 
a  merely  natural  condition.  Freedom  as  the  ideal 
of  that  which  is  original  and  natural,  does  not 
exist  as  original  and  natural.  Rather  must  it  be 
first  sought  out  and  won;  and  that  by  an  incal¬ 
culable  medial  discipline  of  the  intellectual  and 
moral  powers.  The  state  of  nature  is,  therefore, 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


172 

predominantly  that  of  injustice  and  violence,  of 
untamed  natural  impulses,  of  inhuman  deeds 
and  feelings.  Limitation  is  certainly  produced  by 
society  and  the  state,  but  it  is  a  limitation  of 
the  mere  brute  emotions  and  rude  instincts;  as 
also,  in  a  more  advanced  stage  of  culture,  of  the 
premeditated  self-will  of  caprice  and  passion. 
This  kind  of  constraint  is  part  of  the  instru¬ 
mentality  by  which  only,  the  consciousness  of 
freedom  and  the  desire  for  its  attainment,  in  its 
true — that  is,  rational  and  ideal  form — can  be 
obtained.  To  the  ideal  of  freedom,  law  and  mo¬ 
rality  are  indispensably  requisite;  and  they  are 
in  and  for  themselves,  universal  existences,  ob¬ 
jects  and  aims;  which  are  discovered  only  by 
the  activity  of  thought,  separating  itself  from 
the  merely  sensuous,  and  developing  itself,  in 
opposition  thereto ;  and  which  must  on  the  other 
hand,  be  introduced  into  and  incorporated  with 
the  originally  sensuous  will,  and  that  contrarily 
to  its  natural  inclination.  The  perpetually  re¬ 
curring  misapprehension  of  freedom  consists  in 
regarding  that  term  only  in  its  formal ,  subjec¬ 
tive  sense,  abstracted  from  its  essential  objects 
and  aims;  thus  a  constraint  put  upon  impulse, 
desire,  passion — pertaining  to  the  particular  in¬ 
dividual  as  such — a  limitation  of  caprice  and 
self-will  is  regarded  as  a  fettering  of  freedom. 
We  should  on  the  contrary  look  upon  such  limi¬ 
tation  as  the  indispensable  proviso  of  emanci¬ 
pation.  Society  and  the  state  are  the  very  con¬ 
ditions  in  which  freedom  is  realized. 

We  must  notice  a  second  view,  contravening 
the  principle  of  the  development  of  moral  rela¬ 
tions  into  a  legal  form.  The  patriarchal  condi¬ 
tion  is  regarded — either  in  reference  to  the  en¬ 
tire  race  of  man,  or  to  some  branches  of  it — as 
exclusively  that  condition  of  things  in  which 
the  legal  element  is  combined  w’ith  a  due  recog¬ 
nition  of  the  moral  and  emotional  parts  of  our 
nature;  and  in  which  justice  as  united  with 
these,  truly  and  really  influences  the  intercourse 
of  the  social  units.  The  basis  of  the  patriarchal 
condition  is  the  family  relation;  which  develops 
the  primary  form  of  conscious  morality,  suc¬ 
ceeded  by  that  of  the  state  as  its  second  phase. 
The  patriarchal  condition  is  one  of  transition,  in 
which  the  family  has  already  advanced  to  the 
position  of  a  race  or  people;  where  the  union, 
therefore,  has  already  ceased  to  be  simply  a 
bond  of  love  and  confidence,  and  has  become 
one  of  plighted  service.  We  must  first  examine 
the  ethical  principle  of  the  family.  The  family 
may  be  reckoned  as  virtually  a  single  person; 
since  its  members  have  either  mutually  sur¬ 
rendered  their  individual  personality  (and  con¬ 


sequently  their  legal  position  towards  each  other, 
with  the  rest  of  their  particular  interests  and 
desires),  as  in  the  case  of  the  parents;  or  have 
not  yet  attained  such  an  independent  personal¬ 
ity — (the  children,  w’ho  are  primarily  in  that 
merely  natural  condition  already  mentioned). 
They  live,  therefore,  in  a  unity  of  feeling,  love, 
confidence,  and  faith  in  each  other.  And  in  a  re¬ 
lation  of  natural  love,  the  one  individual  has  the 
consciousness  of  himself  in  the  consciousness 
of  the  other;  he  lives  out  of  self;  and  in  this 
mutual  self-renunciation  each  regains  the  life 
that  had  been  virtually  transferred  to  the  other; 
gains,  in  fact,  that  other’s  existence  and  his  own, 
as  involved  with  that  other.  The  farther  inter¬ 
ests  connected  with  the  necessities  and  external 
concerns  of  life,  as  wrell  as  the  development  that 
has  to  take  place  wathin  their  circle,  i.e of  the 
children,  constitute  a  common  object  for  the 
members  of  the  family.  The  spirit  of  the  family 
— the  Penates — form  one  substantial  being,  as 
much  as  the  spirit  of  a  people  in  the  state;  and 
morality  in  both  cases  consists  in  a  feeling,  a 
consciousness,  and  a  will,  not  limited  to  indi¬ 
vidual  personality  and  interest,  but  embracing 
the  common  interests  of  the  members  generally. 
But  this  unity  is  in  the  case  of  the  family  es¬ 
sentially  one  of  feeling;  not  advancing  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  merely  natural.  The  piety  of  the 
family  relation  should  be  respected  in  the  high¬ 
est  degree  by  the  state;  by  its  means  the  state 
obtains  as  its  members  individuals  who  are  al¬ 
ready  moral  (for  as  mere  persons  they  are  not) 
and  who  in  uniting  to  form  a  state  bring  with 
them  that  sound  basis  of  a  political  edifice — the 
capacity  of  feeling  one  with  a  whole.  But  the 
expansion  of  the  family  to  a  patriarchal  unity 
carries  us  beyond  the  ties  of  blood-relationship 
— the  simply  natural  elements  of  that  basis ;  and 
outside  of  these  limits  the  members  of  the  com¬ 
munity  must  enter  upon  the  position  of  inde¬ 
pendent  personality.  A  review  of  the  patriarchal 
condition,  in  extenso ,  would  lead  us  to  give  spe¬ 
cial  attention  to  the  theocratical  constitution. 
The  head  of  the  patriarchal  clan  is  also  its  priest. 
If  the  family  in  its  general  relations,  is  not  yet 
separated  from  civic  society  and  the  state,  the 
separation  of  religion  from  it  has  also  not  yet 
taken  place ;  and  so  much  the  less  since  the  piety 
of  the  hearth  is  itself  a  profoundly  subjective 
state  of  feeling. 

We  have  considered  two  aspects  of  freedom, 
the  objective  and  the  subjective;  if,  therefore, 
freedom  is  asserted  to  consist  in  the  individuals 
of  a  state  all  agreeing  in  its  arrangements,  it  is 
evident  that  only  the  subjective  aspect  is  re- 


INTRODUCTION  173 


garded.  The  natural  inference  from  this  prin¬ 
ciple  is  that  no  law  can  be  valid  without  the  ap¬ 
proval  of  all.  This  difficulty  is  attempted  to  be 
obviated  by  the  decision  that  the  minority  must 
yield  to  the  majority;  the  majority  therefore 
bear  the  sway.  But  long  ago  J.  J.  Rousseau  re¬ 
marked  that  in  that  case  there  would  be  no 
longer  freedom,  for  the  will  of  the  minority 
would  cease  to  be  respected.  At  the  Polish  Diet 
each  single  member  had  to  give  his  consent  be¬ 
fore  any  political  step  could  be  taken ;  and  this 
kind  of  freedom  it  was  that  ruined  the  state. 
Besides,  it  is  a  dangerous  and  false  prejudice 
that  the  people  alone  have  reason  and  insight, 
and  know  what  justice  is;  for  each  popular  fac¬ 
tion  may  represent  itself  as  the  people,  and  the 
question  as  to  what  constitutes  the  state  is  one 
of  advanced  science  and  not  of  popular  decision. 

If  the  principle  of  regard  for  the  individual 
will  is  recognized  as  the  only  basis  of  political 
liberty,  viz.,  that  nothing  should  be  done  by  or 
for  the  state  to  which  all  the  members  of  the 
body  politic  have  not  given  their  sanction,  we 
have,  properly  speaking,  no  constitution.  The 
only  arrangement  that  would  be  necessary, 
would  be,  first,  a  centre  having  no  will  of  its 
own,  but  which  should  take  into  consideration 
what  appeared  to  be  the  necessities  of  the  state ; 
and,  secondly,  a  contrivance  for  calling  the 
members  of  the  state  together,  for  taking  the 
votes,  and  for  performing  the  arithmetical  op¬ 
erations  of  reckoning  and  comparing  the  number 
of  votes  for  the  different  propositions,  and  there¬ 
by  deciding  upon  them.  The  state  is  an  abstrac¬ 
tion,  having  even  its  generic  existence  in  its 
citizens;  but  it  is  an  actuality,  and  its  simply 
generic  existence  must  embody  itself  in  individ¬ 
ual  will  and  activity.  The  want  of  government 
and  political  administration  in  general  is  felt; 
this  necessitates  the  selection  and  separation 
from  the  rest  of  those  who  have  to  take  the  helm 
in  political  affairs,  to  decide  concerning  them, 
and  to  give  orders  to  other  citizens,  with  a  view 
to  the  execution  of  their  plans.  If,  e.g.,  even  the 
people  in  a  democracy  resolve  on  a  war,  a  gen¬ 
eral  must  head  the  army.  It  is  only  by  a  consti¬ 
tution  that  the  abstraction — the  state — attains 
life  and  reality;  but  this  involves  the  distinction 
between  those  who  command  and  those  who 
obey.  Yet  obedience  seems  inconsistent  with 
liberty,  and  those  who  command  appear  to  do 
the  very  opposite  of  that  which  the  fundamental 
idea  of  the  state,  viz.,  that  of  freedom,  requires. 
It  is,  however,  urged  that — though  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  commanding  and  obeying  is  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary,  because  affairs  could  not  go  on 


without  it — and  indeed  this  seems  only  a  com¬ 
pulsory  limitation,  external  to  and  even  con¬ 
travening  freedom  in  the  abstract — the  consti¬ 
tution  should  be  at  least  so  framed  that  the 
citizens  may  obey  as  little  as  possible,  and  the 
smallest  modicum  of  free  volition  be  left  to 
the  commands  of  the  superiors;  that  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  that  for  which  subordination  is  neces¬ 
sary,  even  in  its  most  important  bearings,  should 
be  decided  and  resolved  on  by  the  people — by 
the  will  of  many  or  of  all  the  citizens ;  though  it 
is  supposed  to  be  thereby  provided  that  the  state 
should  be  possessed  of  vigor  and  strength  as  a 
reality — an  individual  unity. 

The  primary  consideration  is,  then,  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  governing  and  the  gov¬ 
erned,  and  the  political  constitutions  in  the  ab¬ 
stract  have  been  rightly  divided  into  monarchy, 
aristocracy,  and  democracy;  which  gives  oc¬ 
casion,  however,  to  the  remark  that  monarchy 
itself  must  be  further  divided  into  despotism 
and  monarchy  proper;  that  in  all  the  divisions 
to  which  the  leading  idea  gives  rise,  only  the 
generic  character  is  to  be  made  prominent — it 
being  not  intended  thereby  that  the  particular 
category  under  review  should  be  exhausted  as  a 
form,  order,  or  kind  in  its  concrete  develop¬ 
ment.  But  especially  it  must  be  observed  that 
the  above-mentioned  divisions  admit  of  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  particular  modifications — not  only  such 
as  lie  within  the  limits  of  those  classes  them¬ 
selves,  but  also  such  as  are  mixtures  of  several 
of  these  essentially  distinct  classes,  and  which 
are  consequently  misshapen,  unstable,  and  in¬ 
consistent  forms.  In  such  a  collision,  the  con¬ 
cerning  question  is :  what  is  the  best  constitution; 
that  is,  by  what  arrangement,  organization,  or 
mechanism  of  the  power  of  the  state  its  object 
can  be  most  surely  attained.  This  object  may 
indeed  be  variously  understood;  for  instance, 
as  the  calm  enjoyment  of  life  on  the  part  of  the 
citizens,  or  as  universal  happiness.  Such  aims 
have  suggested  the  so-called  ideals  of  constitu¬ 
tions,  and,  as  a  particular  branch  of  the  sub¬ 
ject,  ideals  of  the  education  of  princes  (Fene- 
lon),  or  of  the  governing  body — the  aristocracy 
at  large  (Plato) ;  for  the  chief  point  they  treat 
of  is  the  condition  of  those  subjects  who  stand 
at  the  head  of  affairs;  and  in  these  ideals  the 
concrete  details  of  political  organization  are  not 
at  all  considered.  The  inquiry  into  the  best  con¬ 
stitution  is  frequently  treated  as  if  not  only  the 
theory  were  an  affair  of  subjective  independent 
conviction,  but  as  if  the  introduction  of  a  con¬ 
stitution  recognized  as  the  best — or  as  supe¬ 
rior  to  others — could  be  the  result  of  a  resolve 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


i74 

adopted  in  this  theoretical  manner;  as  if  the 
form  of  a  consitution  were  a  matter  of  free 
choice,  determined  by  nothing  else  but  reflection. 
Of  this  artless  fashion  was  that  deliberation — not 
indeed  of  the  Persian  people ,  but  of  the  Persian 
grandees ,  who  had  conspired  to  overthrow  the 
pseudo-Smerdis  and  the  Magi,  after  their  un¬ 
dertaking  had  succeeded,  and  when  there  was  no 
scion  of  the  royal  family  living — as  to  what 
constitution  they  should  introduce  into  Persia; 
and  Herodotus  gives  an  equally  na'ive  account 
of  this  deliberation. 

In  the  present  day,  the  constitution  of  a 
country  and  people  is  not  represented  as  so  en¬ 
tirely  dependent  on  free  and  deliberate  choice. 
The  fundamental  but  abstractly  (and  therefore 
imperfectly)  entertained  conception  of  free¬ 
dom,  has  resulted  in  the  republic  being  very 
generally  regarded — in  theory — as  the  only  just 
and  true  political  constitution.  Many  even,  who 
occupy  elevated  official  positions  under  mon¬ 
archical  constitutions,  so  far  from  being  op¬ 
posed  to  this  idea,  are  actually  its  supporters; 
only  they  see  that  such  a  constitution,  though 
the  best,  cannot  be  realized  under  all  circum¬ 
stances  ;  and  that,  while  men  are  what  they  are, 
we  must  be  satisfied  with  less  freedom;  the 
monarchical  constitution — under  the  given  cir¬ 
cumstances,  and  the  present  moral  condition  of 
the  people — being  even  regarded  as  the  most  ad¬ 
vantageous.  In  this  view  also,  the  necessity  of  a 
particular  constitution  is  made  to  depend  on  the 
condition  of  the  people  in  such  a  way  as  if  the 
latter  were  non-essential  and  accidental.  This 
representation  is  founded  on  the  distinction 
which  the  reflective  understanding  makes  be¬ 
tween  an  idea  and  the  corresponding  reality; 
holding  to  an  abstract  and  consequently  untrue 
idea;  not  grasping  it  in  its  completeness,  or — 
which  is  virtually,  though  not  in  point  of  form, 
the  same — not  taking  a  concrete  view  of  a  peo¬ 
ple  and  a  state.  We  shall  have  to  show,  further 
on,  that  the  constitution  adopted  by  a  people 
makes  one  substance — one  spirit — with  its  re¬ 
ligion,  its  art  and  philosophy,  or,  at  least,  with 
its  conceptions  and  thoughts — its  culture  gen¬ 
erally;  not  to  expatiate  upon  the  additional  in¬ 
fluences,  ab  extra,  of  climate,  of  neighbors,  of 
its  place  in  the  world.  A  state  is  an  individual 
totality,  of  which  you  cannot  select  any  particu¬ 
lar  side,  although  a  supremely  important  one, 
such  as  its  political  constitution,  and  deliberate 
and  decide  respecting  it  in  that  isolated  form. 
Not  only  is  that  constitution  most  intimately 
connected  with  and  dependent  on  those  other 
spiritual  forces;  but  the  form  of  the  entire  mor¬ 


al  and  intellectual  individuality,  comprising  all 
the  forces  it  embodies,  is  only  a  step  in  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  the  grand  whole — with  its  place 
preappointed  in  the  process;  a  fact  which  gives 
the  highest  sanction  to  the  constitution  in  ques¬ 
tion,  and  establishes  its  absolute  necessity.  The 
origin  of  a  state  involves  imperious  lordship  on 
the  one  hand,  instinctive  submission  on  the 
other.  But  even  obedience — lordly  power,  and 
the  fear  inspired  by  a  ruler — in  itself  implies 
some  degree  of  voluntary  connection.  Even  in 
barbarous  states  this  is  the  case;  it  is  not  the 
isolated  will  of  individuals  that  prevails;  indi¬ 
vidual  pretensions  are  relinquished,  and  the  gen¬ 
eral  will  is  the  essential  bond  of  political  union. 
This  unity  of  the  general  and  the  particular  is 
the  idea  itself,  manifesting  itself  as  a  state,  and 
which  subsequently  undergoes  further  develop¬ 
ment  within  itself.  The  abstract  yet  necessitated 
process  in  the  development  of  truly  independent 
states  is  as  follows:  they  begin  with  regal 
power,  whether  of  patriarchal  or  military  ori¬ 
gin.  In  the  next  phase,  particularity  and  indi¬ 
viduality  assert  themselves  in  the  form  of  aris¬ 
tocracy  and  democracy.  Lastly,  we  have  the  sub¬ 
jection  of  these  separate  interests  to  a  single 
power;  but  which  can  be  absolutely  none  other 
than  one  outside  of  which  those  spheres  have 
an  independent  position,  viz.,  the  monarchical. 
Two  phases  of  royalty,  therefore,  must  be  dis¬ 
tinguished — a  primary  and  a  secondary  one. 
This  process  is  necessitated,  so  that  the  form  of 
government  assigned  to  a  particular  stage  of 
development  must  present  itself :  it  is  therefore 
no  matter  of  choice,  but  is  that  form  which  is 
adapted  to  the  spirit  of  the  people. 

In  a  constitution  the  main  feature  of  interest 
is  the  self -development  of  the  rational,  that  is, 
the  political  condition  of  a  people;  the  setting 
free  of  the  successive  elements  of  the  idea:  so 
that  the  several  powers  in  the  state  manifest 
themselves  as  separate,  attain  their  appropriate 
and  special  perfection,  and  yet  in  this  independ¬ 
ent  condition,  work  together  for  one  object,  and 
are  held  together  by  it — i.e .,  form  an  organic 
whole.  The  state  is  thus  the  embodiment  of  ra¬ 
tional  freedom,  realizing  and  recognizing  itself 
in  an  objective  form.  For  its  objectivity  consists 
in  this — that  its  successive  stages  are  not  merely 
ideal,  but  are  present  in  an  appropriate  reality; 
and  that  in  their  separate  and  several  working, 
they  are  absolutely  merged  in  that  agency  by 
which  the  totality — the  soul,  the  individuate 
unity — is  produced,  and  of  which  it  is  the  result. 

The  state  is  the  idea  of  spirit  in  the  external 
manifestation  of  human  will  and  its  freedom.  It 


INTRODUCTION 


is  to  the  state,  therefore,  that  change  in  the  as¬ 
pect  of  history  indissolubly  attaches  itself ;  and 
the  successive  phases  of  the  idea  manifest  them¬ 
selves  in  it  as  distinct  political  principles.  The 
constitutions  under  which  world-historical  peo¬ 
ples  have  reached  their  culmination,  are  peculiar 
to  them ;  and  therefore  do  not  present  a  general¬ 
ly  applicable  political  basis.  Were  it  otherwise, 
the  differences  of  similar  constitutions  would 
consist  only  in  a  peculiar  method  of  expanding 
and  developing  that  generic  basis ;  whereas  they 
really  originate  in  diversity  of  principle.  From 
the  comparison  therefore  of  the  political  insti¬ 
tutions  of  the  ancient  world-historical  peoples, 
it  so  happens  that,  for  the  most  recent  principle 
of  a  constitution — for  the  principle  of  our  own 
times — nothing  (so  to  speak)  can  be  learned.  In 
science  and  art  it  is  quite  otherwise;  e.g.,  the 
ancient  philosophy  is  so  decidedly  the  basis  of 
the  modern,  that  it  is  inevitably  contained  in  the 
latter,  and  constitutes  its  basis.  In  this  case  the 
relation  is  that  of  a  continuous  development  of 
the  same  structure,  whose  foundation-stone, 
walls,  and  roof  have  remained  what  they  were. 
In  art,  the  Greek  itself,  in  its  original  form,  fur¬ 
nishes  us  the  best  models.  But  in  regard  to  polit¬ 
ical  constitution,  it  is  quite  otherwise:  here  the 
ancient  and  the  modern  have  not  their  essential 
principle  in  common.  Abstract  definitions  and 
dogmas  respecting  just  government — importing 
that  intelligence  and  virtue  ought  to  bear  sway 
— are,  indeed,  common  to  both.  But  nothing  is 
so  absurd  as  to  look  to  Greeks,  Romans,  or 
Orientals,  for  models  for  the  political  arrange¬ 
ments  of  our  time.  From  the  East  may  be  de¬ 
rived  beautiful  pictures  of  a  patriarchal  condi¬ 
tion,  of  paternal  government,  and  of  devotion 
to  it  on  the  part  of  peoples;  from  Greeks  and 
Romans,  descriptions  of  popular  liberty.  Among 
the  latter  we  find  the  idea  of  a  free  constitution 
admitting  all  the  citizens  to  a  share  in  delibera¬ 
tions  and  resolves  respecting  the  affairs  and 
laws  of  the  commonwealth.  In  our  times,  too, 
this  is  its  general  acceptation;  only  with  this 
modification,  that — since  our  states  are  so  large, 
and  there  are  so  many  of  “the  many,”  the  latter, 
direct  action  being  impossible,  should  by  the 
indirect  method  of  elective  substitution  express 
their  concurrence  with  resolves  affecting  the 
common  weal;  that  is,  that  for  legislative  pur¬ 
poses  generally,  the  people  should  be  represent¬ 
ed  by  deputies.  The  so-called  representative  con¬ 
stitution  is  that  form  of  government  with  which 
we  connect  the  idea  of  a  free  constitution ;  and 
this  notion  has  become  a  rooted  prejudice.  On 
this  theory  people  and  government  are  sepa¬ 


rated.  But  there  is  a  perversity  in  this  antithesis; 
an  ill-intentioned  ruse  designed  to  insinuate  that 
the  people  are  the  totality  of  the  state.  Besides, 
the  basis  of  this  view  is  the  principle  of  isolated 
individuality — the  absolute  validity  of  the  sub¬ 
jective  will — a  dogma  which  we  have  already  in¬ 
vestigated.  The  great  point  is  that  freedom  in  its 
ideal  conception  has  not  subjective  will  and 
caprice  for  its  principle,  but  the  recognition  of 
the  universal  will;  and  that  the  process  by 
which  freedom  is  realized  is  the  free  develop¬ 
ment  of  its  successive  stages.  The  subjective 
will  is  a  merely  formal  determination — a  carte 
blanche — not  including  what  it  is  that  is  willed. 
Only  the  rational  will  is  that  universal  principle 
which  independently  determines  and  unfolds  its 
own  being,  and  develops  its  successive  elemental 
phases  as  organic  members.  Of  this  Gothic- 
cathedral  architecture  the  ancients  knew  noth¬ 
ing. 

At  an  earlier  stage  of  the  discussion,  we  estab¬ 
lished  the  two  elemental  considerations:  first, 
the  idea  of  freedom  as  the  absolute  and  final 
aim;  secondly,  the  means  for  realizing  it,  i.e., 
the  subjective  side  of  knowledge  and  will,  with 
its  life,  movement,  and  activity.  We  then  recog¬ 
nized  the  state  as  the  moral  whole  and  the  real¬ 
ity  of  freedom,  and  consequently  as  the  objec¬ 
tive  unity  of  these  two  elements.  For  although 
we  make  this  distinction  into  two  aspects  for 
our  consideration,  it  must  be  remarked  that  they 
are  intimately  connected;  and  that  their  con¬ 
nection  is  involved  in  the  idea  of  each  when  ex¬ 
amined  separately.  We  have,  on  the  one  hand, 
recognized  the  idea  in  the  definite  form  of  free¬ 
dom  conscious  of  and  willing  itself — having  it¬ 
self  alone  as  its  object:  involving  at  the  same 
time,  the  pure  and  simple  idea  of  reason,  and 
likewise,  that  which  we  have  called  subject — 
self-consciousness — spirit  actually  existing  in 
the  world.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  consider 
subjectivity,  we  find  that  subjective  knowledge 
and  will  is  thought.  But  by  the  very  act  of 
thoughtful  cognition  and  volition,  I  will  the  uni¬ 
versal  object — the  substance  of  absolute  reason. 
We  observe,  therefore,  an  essential  union  be¬ 
tween  the  objective  side — the  idea — and  the 
subjective  side — the  personality  that  conceives 
and  wills  it.  The  objective  existence  of  this 
union  is  the  state,  which  is  therefore  the  basis 
and  centre  of  the  other  concrete  elements  of  the 
life  of  a  people — of  art,  of  law,  of  morals,  of 
religion,  of  science.  All  the  activity  of  spirit  has 
only  this  object — the  becoming  conscious  of 
this  union,  i.e.,  of  its  own  freedom.  Among  the 
forms  of  this  conscious  union  religion  occupies 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


176 

the  highest  position.  In  it,  spirit — rising  above 
the  limitations  of  temporal  and  secular  exist¬ 
ence — becomes  conscious  of  the  absolute  spirit, 
and  in  this  consciousness  of  the  self-existent  Be¬ 
ing,  renounces  its  individual  interest;  it  lays 
this  aside  in  devotion — a  state  of  mind  in  which 
it  refuses  to  occupy  itself  any  longer  with  the 
limited  and  particular.  By  sacrifice  man  express¬ 
es  his  renunciation  of  his  property,  his  will,  his 
individual  feelings.  The  religious  concentration 
of  the  soul  appears  in  the  form  of  feeling;  it 
nevertheless  passes  also  into  reflection;  a  form 
of  worship  ( cult  us )  is  a  result  of  reflection.  The 
second  form  of  the  union  of  the  objective  and 
subjective  in  the  human  spirit  is  art.  This  ad¬ 
vances  farther  into  the  realm  of  the  actual  and 
sensuous  than  religion.  In  its  noblest  walk  it  is 
occupied  with  representing,  not  indeed,  the  spirit 
of  God,  but  certainly  the  form  of  God;  and  in 
its  secondary  aims,  that  which  is  divine  and 
spiritual  generally.  Its  office  is  to  render  visible 
the  divine ;  presenting  it  to  the  imaginative  and 
intuitive  faculty.  But  the  true  is  the  object 
not  only  of  conception  and  feeling,  as  in  religion 
— and  of  intuition,  as  in  art — but  also  of  the 
thinking  faculty;  and  this  gives  us  the  third 
form  of  the  union  in  question — philosophy. 
This  is  consequently  the  highest,  freest,  and  wis¬ 
est  phase.  Of  course  we  are  not  intending  to  in¬ 
vestigate  these  three  phases  here;  they  have 
only  suggested  themselves  in  virtue  of  their  oc¬ 
cupying  the  same  general  ground  as  the  object 
here  considered — the  state. 

The  general  principle  which  manifests  itself 
and  becomes  an  object  of  consciousness  in  the 
state,  the  form  under  which  all  that  the  state 
includes  is  brought,  is  the  whole  cf  that  cycle 
of  phenomena  which  constitutes  the  culture  of 
a  nation.  But  the  definite  substance  that  re¬ 
ceives  the  form  of  universality,  and  exists  in 
that  concrete  reality  which  is  the  state — is  the 
spirit  of  the  people  itself.  The  actual  state  is 
animated  by  this  spirit,  in  all  its  particular  af¬ 
fairs — its  wars,  institutions,  etc.  But  man  must 
also  attain  a  conscious  realization  of  this  his 
spirit  and  essential  nature,  and  of  his  original 
identity  with  it.  For  we  said  that  morality  is  the 
identity  of  the  subjective  or  personal  with  the 
universal  will.  Now  the  mind  must  give  itself 
an  express  consciousness  of  this ;  and  the  focus 
of  this  knowledge  is  religion.  Art  and  science  are 
only  various  aspects  and  forms  of  the  same  sub¬ 
stantial  being.  In  considering  religion,  the  chief 
point  of  inquiry  is  whether  it  recognizes  the 
true — the  idea — only  in  its  separate,  abstract 
form,  or  in  its  true  unity;  in  separation — God 


being  represented  in  an  abstract  form  as  the 
Highest  Being,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  living 
in  a  remote  region  far  from  human  actualities — 
or  in  its  unity — God,  as  unity  of  the  universal 
and  individual;  the  individual  itself  assuming 
the  aspect  of  positive  and  real  existence  in  the 
idea  of  the  incarnation.  Religion  is  the  sphere  in 
which  a  nation  gives  itself  the  definition  of  that 
which  it  regards  as  the  true.  A  definition  con¬ 
tains  everything  that  belongs  to  the  essence  of 
an  object ;  reducing  its  nature  to  its  simple  char¬ 
acteristic  predicate,  as  a  mirror  for  every  predi¬ 
cate — the  generic  soul  pervading  all  its  details. 
The  conception  of  God,  therefore,  constitutes 
the  general  basis  of  a  people’s  character. 

In  this  aspect,  religion  stands  in  the  closest 
connection  with  the  political  principle.  Freedom 
can  exist  only  where  individuality  is  recognized 
as  having  its  positive  and  real  existence  in  the 
Divine  Being.  The  connection  may  be  further  ex¬ 
plained  thus; — secular  existence, as  merely  tem¬ 
poral — occupied  with  particular  interests — is 
consequently  only  relative  and  unauthorized; 
and  receives  its  validity  only  in  so  far  as  the 
universal  soul  that  pervades  it — its  principle — 
receives  absolute  validity;  which  it  cannot  have 
unless  it  is  recognized  as  the  definite  manifesta¬ 
tion,  the  phenomenal  existence  of  the  Divine  Es¬ 
sence.  On  this  account  it  is  that  the  state  rests 
on  religion.  We  hear  this  often  repeated  in  our 
times,  though  for  the  most  part  nothing  further 
is  meant  than  that  individual  subjects  as  God¬ 
fearing  men  would  be  more  disposed  and  ready 
to  perform  their  duty;  since  obedience  to  king 
and  law  so  naturally  follows  in  the  train  of  rev¬ 
erence  for  God.  This  reverence,  indeed,  since  it 
exalts  the  general  over  the  special,  may  even 
turn  upon  the  latter,  become  fanatical,  and  work 
with  incendiary  and  destructive  violence  against 
the  state,  its  institutions,  and  arrangements.  Re¬ 
ligious  feeling,  therefore,  it  is  thought,  should 
be  sober,  kept  in  a  certain  degree  of  coolness, 
that  it  may  not  storm  against  and  bear  down 
that  which  should  be  defended  and  preserved  by 
it.  The  possibility  of  such  a  catastrophe  is  at 
least  latent  in  it. 

While,  however,  the  correct  sentiment  is 
adopted,  that  the  state  is  based  on  religion,  the 
position  thus  assigned  to  religion  supposes  the 
state  already  to  exist;  and  that  subsequently, 
in  order  to  maintain  it,  religion  must  be  brought 
into  it — in  buckets  and  bushels  as  it  were — and 
impressed  upon  people’s  hearts.  It  is  quite  true 
that  men  must  be  trained  to  religion,  but  not  as 
to  something  whose  existence  has  yet  to  begin. 
For  in  affirming  that  the  state  is  based  on  re- 


INTRODUCTION  177 


ligion — that  it  has  its  roots  in  it — we  virtually 
assert  that  the  former  has  proceeded  from  the 
latter;  and  that  this  derivation  is  going  on  now 
and  will  always  continue ;  i.e.,  the  principles  of 
the  state  must  be  regarded  as  valid  in  and  for 
themselves,  which  can  only  be  in  so  far  as  they 
are  recognized  as  determinate  manifestations  of 
the  Divine  Nature.  The  form  of  religion,  there¬ 
fore,  decides  that  of  the  state  and  its  constitu¬ 
tion.  The  latter  actually  originated  in  the  par¬ 
ticular  religion  adopted  by  the  nation;  so  that, 
in  fact,  the  Athenian  or  the  Roman  state  was 
possible  only  in  connection  with  the  specific 
form  of  heathenism  existing  among  the  respec¬ 
tive  peoples ;  just  as  a  Catholic  state  has  a  spirit 
and  constitution  different  from  that  of  a  Protes¬ 
tant  one. 

If  that  outcry — that  urging  and  striving  for 
the  implantation  of  religion  in  the  community — 
were  an  utterance  of  anguish  and  a  call  for  help, 
as  it  often  seems  to  be,  expressing  the  danger  of 
religion  having  vanished,  or  being  about  to  van¬ 
ish  entirely  from  the  state — that  would  be  fear¬ 
ful  indeed — worse,  in  fact,  than  this  outcry  sup¬ 
poses;  for  it  implies  the  belief  in  a  resource 
against  the  evil,  viz.,  the  implantation  and  in¬ 
culcation  of  religion;  whereas  religion  is  by 
no  means  a  thing  to  be  so  produced;  its  self - 
production  (and  there  can  be  no  other)  lies 
much  deeper. 

Another  and  opposite  folly  which  we  meet 
with  in  our  time  is  that  of  pretending  to  invent 
and  carry  out  political  constitutions  independ¬ 
ently  of  religion.  The  Catholic  confession,  al¬ 
though  sharing  the  Christian  name  with  the 
Protestant,  does  not  concede  to  the  state  an  in¬ 
herent  justice  and  morality — a  concession  which 
in  the  Protestant  principle  is  fundamental.  This 
tearing  away  of  the  political  morality  of  the 
constitution  from  its  natural  connection,  is  nec¬ 
essary  to  the  genius  of  that  religion,  inasmuch 
as  it  does  not  recognize  justice  and  morality  as 
independent  and  substantial.  But  thus  excluded 
from  intrinsic  worth — torn  away  from  their  last 
refuge,  the  sanctuary  of  conscience,  the  calm  re¬ 
treat  where  religion  has  its  abode — the  princi¬ 
ples  and  institutions  of  political  legislation  are 
destitute  of  a  real  centre,  to  the  same  degree  as 
they  are  compelled  to  remain  abstract  and  in¬ 
definite. 

Summing  up  what  has  been  said  of  the  state, 
we  find  that  we  have  been  led  to  call  its  vital 
principle,  as  actuating  the  individuals  who  com¬ 
pose  it,  morality.  The  state,  its  laws,  its  arrange¬ 
ments,  constitute  the  rights  of  its  members ;  its 
natural  features,  its  mountains,  air,  and  waters, 


are  their  country,  their  fatherland,  their  out¬ 
ward  material  property;  the  history  of  this  state, 
their  deeds ;  what  their  ancestors  have  produced, 
belongs  to  them  and  lives  in  their  memory.  All  is 
their  possession,  just  as  they  are  possessed  by 
it;  for  it  constitutes  their  existence,  their  being. 

Their  imagination  is  occupied  with  the  ideas 
thus  presented,  while  the  adoption  of  these  laws, 
and  of  a  fatherland  so  conditioned  is  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  their  will.  It  is  this  matured  totality 
which  thus  constitutes  one  being,  the  spirit  of 
one  people.  To  it  the  individual  members  be¬ 
long;  each  unit  is  the  son  of  his  nation,  and  at 
the  same  time,  in  as  far  as  the  state  to  which  he 
belongs  is  undergoing  development,  the  son  of 
his  age.  None  remains  behind  it,  still  less  ad¬ 
vances  beyond  it.  This  spiritual  being  (the  spirit 
of  his  time)  is  his;  he  is  a  representative  of  it; 
it  is  that  in  which  he  originated,  and  in  which  he 
lives.  Among  the  Athenians  the  word  Athens 
had  a  double  import;  suggesting  primarily,  a 
complex  of  political  institutions,  but  no  less,  in 
the  second  place,  that  goddess  who  represented 
the  spirit  of  the  people  and  its  unity. 

This  spirit  of  a  people  is  a  determinate  and 
particular  spirit,  and  is,  as  just  stated,  further 
modified  by  the  degree  of  its  historical  develop¬ 
ment.  This  spirit,  then,  constitutes  the  basis  and 
substance  of  those  other  forms  of  a  nation’s 
consciousness,  which  have  been  noticed.  For 
spirit  in  its  self-consciousness  must  become  an 
object  of  contemplation  to  itself,  and  objectiv¬ 
ity  involves,  in  the  first  instance,  the  rise  of  dif¬ 
ferences  which  make  up  a  total  of  distinct 
spheres  of  objective  spirit;  in  the  same  way  as 
the  soul  exists  only  as  the  complex  of  its  facul¬ 
ties,  which  in  their  form  of  concentration  in  a 
simple  unity  produce  that  soul.  It  is  thus  one 
individuality  which,  presented  in  its  essence  as 
God,  is  honoured  and  enjoyed  in  religion;  which 
is  exhibited  as  an  object  of  sensuous  contempla¬ 
tion  in  art;  and  is  apprehended  as  an  intellectual 
conception  in  philosophy.  In  virtue  of  the  orig¬ 
inal  identity  of  their  essence,  purport,  and  ob¬ 
ject,  these  various  forms  are  inseparably  united 
with  the  spirit  of  the  state.  Only  in  connection 
with  this  particular  religion,  can  this  particular 
political  constitution  exist;  just  as  in  such  or 
such  a  state,  such  or  such  a  philosophy  or  order 
of  art. 

The  remark  next  in  order  is  that  each  par¬ 
ticular  national  genius  is  to  be  treated  as  only 
one  individual  in  the  process  of  universal  his¬ 
tory.  For  that  history  is  the  exhibition  of  the 
divine,  absolute  development  of  spirit  in  its 
highest  forms — that  gradation  by  which  it  at- 


1 78  PHILOSOPHY 

tains  its  truth  and  consciousness  of  itself.  The 
forms  which  these  grades  of  progress  assume 
are  the  characteristic  “national  spirits”  of  his¬ 
tory;  the  peculiar  tenor  of  their  moral  life,  of 
their  government,  their  art,  religion,  and  sci¬ 
ence.  To  realize  these  grades  is  the  boundless 
impulse  of  the  world-spirit — the  goal  of  its  ir¬ 
resistible  urging;  for  this  division  into  organic 
members,  and  the  full  development  of  each,  is 
its  idea.  Universal  history  is  exclusively  oc¬ 
cupied  with  showing  how  spirit  comes  to  a  rec¬ 
ognition  and  adoption  of  the  truth:  the  dawn  of 
knowledge  appears ;  it  begins  to  discover  salient 
principles,  and  at  last  it  arrives  at  full  conscious¬ 
ness. 

Having,  therefore,  learned  the  abstract  char¬ 
acteristics  of  the  nature  of  spirit,  the  means 
which  it  uses  to  realize  its  idea,  and  the  shape 
assumed  by  it  in  its  complete  realization  in  phe¬ 
nomenal  existence — namely,  the  state — nothing 
further  remains  for  this  introductory  section  to 
contemplate  but 

III.  The  course  of  the  world’s  history.  The 
mutations  which  history  presents  have  been 
long  characterized  in  the  general,  as  an  advance 
to  something  better,  more  perfect.  The  changes 
that  take  place  in  nature — how  infinitely  mani¬ 
fold  soever  they  may  be — exhibit  only  a  perpet¬ 
ually  self -repeating  cycle;  in  nature  there  hap¬ 
pens  “nothing  new  under  the  sun,”  and  the  mul¬ 
tiform  play  of  its  phenomena  so  far  induces  a 
feeling  of  ennui;  only  in  those  changes  which 
take  place  in  the  region  of  spirit  does  anything 
new  arise.  This  peculiarity  in  the  world  of  mind 
has  indicated  in  the  case  of  man  an  altogether 
different  destiny  from  that  of  merely  natural 
objects — in  which  we  find  always  one  and  the 
same  stable  character,  to  which  all  change  re¬ 
verts — namely,  a  real  capacity  for  change,  and 
that  for  the  better,  an  impulse  of  perfectibility. 
This  principle,  which  reduces  change  itself  un¬ 
der  a  law,  has  met  with  an  unfavorable  reception 
from  religions — such  as  the  Catholic — and  from 
states  claiming  as  their  just  right  a  stereotyped, 
or  at  least  a  stable  position.  If  the  mutability  of 
worldly  things  in  general — political  constitu¬ 
tions,  for  instance — is  conceded,  either  religion 
(as  the  religion  of  truth)  is  absolutely  excepted, 
or  the  difficulty  escaped  by  ascribing  changes, 
revolutions,  and  abrogations  of  immaculate  the¬ 
ories  and  institutions,  to  accidents  or  impru¬ 
dence — but  principally  to  the  levity  and  evil 
passions  of  man.  The  principle  of  perfectibility 
indeed  is  almost  as  indefinite  a  term  as  mutabil¬ 
ity  in  general;  it  is  without  scope  or  goal,  and 
has  no  standard  by  which  to  estimate  the  chang- 


OF  HISTORY 

es  in  question:  the  improved,  more  perfect, 
state  of  things  towards  which  it  professedly 
tends  is  altogether  undetermined. 

The  principle  of  develop?nent  involves  also 
the  existence  of  a  latent  germ  of  being — a  ca¬ 
pacity  or  potentiality  striving  to  realize  itself. 
This  formal  conception  finds  actual  existence  in 
spirit ;  which  has  the  history  of  the  world  for  its 
theatre,  its  possession,  and  the  sphere  of  its 
realization.  It  is  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be 
tossed  to  and  fro  amid  the  superficial  play  of 
accidents,  but  is  rather  the  absolute  arbiter  of 
things;  entirely  unmoved  by  contingencies, 
which,  indeed,  it  applies  and  manages  for  its 
own  purposes.  Development,  however,  is  also  a 
property  of  organized  natural  objects.  Their  ex¬ 
istence  presents  itself,  not  as  an  exclusively  de¬ 
pendent  one,  subjected  to  external  changes,  but 
as  one  which  expands  itself  in  virtue  of  an  in¬ 
ternal  unchangeable  principle;  a  simple  essence 
— whose  existence,  i.e.,  as  a  germ,  is  primarily 
simple — but  which  subsequently  develops  a  va¬ 
riety  of  parts,  that  become  involved  with  other 
objects,  and  consequently  live  through  a  con¬ 
tinuous  process  of  changes — a  process,  never¬ 
theless,  that  results  in  the  very  contrary  of 
change,  and  is  even  transformed  into  a  vis  con- 
servatrix  of  the  organic  principle,  and  the  form 
embodying  it.  Thus  the  organized  individuum 
produces  itself ;  it  expands  itself  actually  to 
what  it  was  always  potentially.  So  spirit  is  only 
that  which  it  attains  by  its  own  efforts;  it  makes 
itself  actually  what  it  always  was  potentially. 
That  development  (of  natural  organisms)  takes 
place  in  a  direct,  unopposed,  unhindered  man¬ 
ner.  Between  the  idea  and  its  realization,  the  es¬ 
sential  constitution  of  the  original  germ  and  the 
conformity  to  it  of  the  existence  derived  from 
it,  no  disturbing  influence  can  intrude.  But  in  re¬ 
lation  to  spirit  it  is  quite  otherwise.  The  realiza¬ 
tion  of  its  idea  is  mediated  by  consciousness  and 
will;  these  very  faculties  are,  in  the  first  in¬ 
stance,  sunk  in  their  primary  merely  natural 
life;  the  first  object  and  goal  of  their  striving  is 
the  realization  of  their  merely  natural  destiny — 
but  which,  since  it  is  spirit  that  animates  it,  is 
possessed  of  vast  attractions  and  displays  great 
power  and  richness.  Thus  spirit  is  at  war  with 
itself ;  it  has  to  overcome  itself  as  its  most  for¬ 
midable  obstacle.  That  development  which  in 
the  sphere  of  nature  is  a  peaceful  growth,  is  in 
that  of  spirit,  a  severe,  a  mighty  conflict  with 
itself.  What  spirit  really  strives  for  is  the  reali¬ 
zation  of  its  ideal  being;  but  in  doing  so,  it  hides 
that  goal  from  its  own  vision,  and  is  proud  and 
well  satisfied  in  this  alienation  from  it. 


INTRODUCTION  179 


Its  expansion,  therefore,  does  not  present  the 
harmless  tranquillity  of  mere  growth,  as  does 
that  of  organic  life,  but  a  stern  reluctant  work¬ 
ing  against  itself.  It  exhibits,  moreover,  not  the 
mere  formal  conception  of  development,  but  the 
attainment  of  a  definite  result.  The  goal  of  at¬ 
tainment  we  determined  at  the  outset:  it  is 
spirit  in  its  completeness ,  in  its  essential  na¬ 
ture,  i.e.y  freedom.  This  is  the  fundamental  ob¬ 
ject,  and  therefore  also  the  leading  principle  of 
the  development — that  whereby  it  receives 
meaning  and  importance  (as  in  the  Roman  his¬ 
tory,  Rome  is  the  object — consequently  that 
which  directs  our  consideration  of  the  facts  re¬ 
lated)  ;  as,  conversely,  the  phenomena  of  the 
process  have  resulted  from  this  principle  alone, 
and  only  as  referred  to  it,  possess  a  sense  of 
value.  There  are  many  considerable  periods  in 
history  in  which  this  development  seems  to  have 
been  intermitted;  in  which,  we  might  rather  say, 
the  whole  enormous  gain  of  previous  culture  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  been  entirely  lost;  after  which, 
unhappily,  a  new  commencement  has  been  neces¬ 
sary,  made  in  the  hope  of  recovering — by  the  as¬ 
sistance  of  some  remains  saved  from  the  wreck 
of  a  former  civilization,  and  by  dint  of  a  re¬ 
newed  incalculable  expenditure  of  strength  and 
time — one  of  the  regions  which  had  been  an  an¬ 
cient  possession  of  that  civilization.  We  behold 
also  continued  processes  of  growth;  structures 
and  systems  of  culture  in  particular  spheres, 
rich  in  kind,  and  well  developed  in  every  direc¬ 
tion.  The  merely  formal  and  indeterminate  view 
of  development  in  general  can  neither  assign  to 
one  form  of  expansion  superiority  over  the 
other,  nor  render  comprehensible  the  object  of 
that  decay  of  older  periods  of  growth;  but  must 
regard  such  occurrences — or,  to  speak  more 
particularly,  the  retrocessions  they  exhibit — as 
external  contingencies;  and  can  only  judge  of 
particular  modes  of  development  from  inde¬ 
terminate  points  of  view;  which — since  the  de¬ 
velopment,  as  such,  is  all  in  all — are  relative  and 
not  absolute  goals  of  attainment. 

Universal  history  exhibits  the  gradation  in 
the  development  of  that  principle  whose  sub¬ 
stantial  purport  is  the  consciousness  of  freedom. 
The  analysis  of  the  successive  grades,  in  their 
abstract  form,  belongs  to  logic;  in  their  concrete 
aspect  to  the  philosophy  of  spirit.  Here  it  is  suf¬ 
ficient  to  state  that  the  first  step  in  the  process 
presents  that  immersion  of  spirit  in  nature 
which  has  been  already  referred  to;  the  second 
shows  it  as  advancing  to  the  consciousness  of 
its  freedom.  But  this  initial  separation  from  na¬ 
ture  is  imperfect  and  partial,  since  it  is  derived 


immediately  from  the  merely  natural  state,  is 
consequently  related  to  it,  and  is  still  encum¬ 
bered  with  it  as  an  essentially  connected  ele¬ 
ment.  The  third  step  is  the  elevation  of  the  soul 
from  this  still  limited  and  special  form  of  free¬ 
dom  to  its  pure  universal  form;  that  state  in 
which  the  spiritual  essence  attains  the  conscious¬ 
ness  and  feeling  of  itself.  These  grades  are  the 
ground-principles  of  the  general  process;  but 
how  each  of  them  on  the  other  hand  involves 
within  itself  a  process  of  formation,  constituting 
the  links  in  a  dialectic  of  transition,  to  particu¬ 
larize  this  must  be  reserved  for  the  sequel. 

Here  we  have  only  to  indicate  that  spirit  be¬ 
gins  with  a  germ  of  infinite  possibility,  but  only 
possibility — containing  its  substantial  existence 
in  an  undeveloped  form,  as  the  object  and  goal 
which  it  reaches  only  in  its  resultant — full  real¬ 
ity.  In  actual  existence  progress  appears  as  an 
advancing  from  the  imperfect  to  the  more  per¬ 
fect;  but  the  former  must  not  be  understood 
abstractly  as  only  the  imperfect,  but  as  some¬ 
thing  which  involves  the  very  opposite  of  itself 
— the  so-called  perfect — as  a  germ  or  impulse. 
So — reflectively,  at  least — possibility  points  to 
something  destined  to  become  actual ;  the  Aris¬ 
totelian  8vva/xis  is  also  potentia ,  power  and 
might.  Thus  the  imperfect,  as  involving  its  op¬ 
posite,  is  a  contradiction,  which  certainly  exists, 
but  which  is  continually  annulled  and  solved; 
the  instinctive  movement,  the  inherent  impulse 
in  the  life  of  the  soul,  to  break  through  the  rind 
of  mere  nature,  sensuousness,  and  that  which  is 
alien  to  it,  and  to  attain  to  the  light  of  conscious¬ 
ness,  i.e.,  to  itself. 

We  have  already  made  the  remark  how  the 
commencement  of  the  history  of  spirit  must  be 
conceived  so  as  to  be  in  harmony  with  its  idea 
— in  its  bearing  on  the  representations  that  have 
been  made  of  a  primitive  “natural  condition,” 
in  which  freedom  and  justice  are  supposed  to 
exist,  or  to  have  existed.  This  was,  however, 
nothing  more  than  an  assumption  of  historical 
existence,  conceived  in  the  twilight  of  theoriz¬ 
ing  reflection.  A  pretension  of  quite  another  or¬ 
der — not  a  mere  inference  of  reasoning,  but 
making  the  claim  of  historical  fact,  and  that 
supernaturally  confirmed — is  put  forth  in  con¬ 
nection  with  a  different  view  that  is  now  widely 
promulgated  by  a  certain  class  of  speculatists. 
This  view  takes  up  the  idea  of  the  primitive 
paradisiacal  condition  of  man,  which  had  been 
previously  expanded  by  the  theologians,  after 
their  fashion — involving,  e.g.y  the  supposition 
that  God  spoke  with  Adam  in  Hebrew — but  re¬ 
modelled  to  suit  other  requirements.  The  high 


180  PHILOSOPHY 

authority  appealed  to  in  the  first  instance  is  the 
Biblical  narrative.  But  this  depicts  the  primitive 
condition,  partly  only  in  the  few  well-known 
traits,  but  partly  either  as  in  man  generically — 
human  nature  at  large — or,  so  far  as  Adam  is  to 
be  taken  as  an  individual,  and  consequently  one 
person — as  existing  and  completed  in  this  one , 
or  only  in  one  human  pair.  The  Biblical  account 
by  no  means  justifies  us  in  imagining  a  people , 
and  a  historical  condition  of  such  people,  exist¬ 
ing  in  that  primitive  form ;  still  less  does  it  war¬ 
rant  us  in  attributing  to  them  the  possession  of 
a  perfectly  developed  knowledge  of  God  and 
nature.  “Nature,”  so  the  fiction  runs,  “like  a. 
clear  mirror  of  God’s  creation,  had  originally 
lain  revealed  and  transparent  to  the  unclouded 
eye  of  man.” 1  Divine  truth  is  imagined  to  have 
been  equally  manifest.  It  is  even  hinted,  though 
left  in  some  degree  of  obscurity,  that  in  this 
primary  condition  men  were  in  possession  of  an 
indefinitely  extended  and  already  expanded  body 
of  religious  truths  immediately  revealed  by  God. 
This  theory  affirms  that  all  religions  had  their 
historical  commencement  in  this  primitive 
knowledge,  and  that  they  polluted  and  obscured 
the  original  truth  by  the  monstrous  creations  of 
error  and  depravity;  though  in  all  the  mytholo¬ 
gies  invented  by  error,  traces  of  that  origin  and 
of  those  primitive  true  dogmas  are  supposed  to 
be  present  and  cognizable.  An  important  inter¬ 
est,  therefore,  accrues  to  the  investigation  of  the 
history  of  ancient  peoples,  that,  viz.,  of  the  en¬ 
deavor  to  trace  their  annals  up  to  the  point 
where  such  fragments  of  the  primary  revelation 
are  to  be  met  with  in  greater  purity  than  lower 
down.2 

1  Fr.  von  Schlegel,  Philosophy  of  History,  p.  91, 
Bohn’s  Standard  Library. 

2  We  have  to  thank  this  interest  for  many  valuable 
discoveries  in  Oriental  literature,  and  for  a  renewed 
study  of  treasures  previously  known  in  the  department 
of  ancient  Asiatic  culture,  mythology,  religions,  and  his¬ 
tory.  In  Catholic  countries,  where  a  refined  literary  taste 
prevails,  governments  have  yielded  to  the  requirements 
of  speculative  inquiry,  and  have  felt  the  necessity  of 
allying  themselves  with  learning  and  philosophy.  Elo¬ 
quently  and  impressively  has  the  Abbe  Lamennais  reck¬ 
oned  it  among  the  criteria  of  the  true  religion  that  it 
must  be  the  universal — that  is,  catholic — and  the  oldest 
in  date;  and  the  congregation  has  labored  zealously  and 
diligently  in  France  towards  rendering  such  assertions 
no  longer  mere  pulpit  tirades  and  authoritative  dicta, 
such  as  were  deemed  sufficient  formerly.  The  religion  of 
Buddha — a  god-man — which  has  prevailed  to  such  an 
enormous  extent,  has  especially  attracted  attention.  The 
Indian  Timurtis,  as  also  the  Chinese  abstraction  of  the 
trinity,  has  furnished  clearer  evidence  in  point  of  subject 
matter.  The  savants,  M.  Abel  Remusat  and  M.  Saint 
Martin,  on  the  one  hand,  have  undertaken  the  most 
meritorious  investigations  in  the  Chinese  literature,  with 
a  view  to  make  this  also  a  base  of  operations  for  re¬ 
searches  in  the  Mongolian  and,  if  such  were  possible,  in 
the  Tibetan;  on  the. other  hand,  Baron  von  Eckstein,  in 
his  way  (t.e.,  adopting  from  Germany  superficial  physi- 


OF  HISTORY 

We  owe  to  the  interest  which  has  occasioned 
these  investigations  very  much  that  is  valu¬ 
able  but  this  investigation  bears  direct  testimony 
against  itself,  for  it  would  seem  to  be  awaiting 
the  issue  of  an  historical  demonstration  of  that 
which  is  presupposed  by  it  as  historically  estab¬ 
lished.  That  advanced  condition  of  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  God,  and  of  other  scientific,  e.g.,  astro¬ 
nomical  knowledge  (such  as  has  been  falsely 
attributed  to  the  Hindus) ;  and  the  assertion 
that  such  a  condition  occurred  at  the  very  begin¬ 
ning  of  history — or  that  the  religions  of  various 
nations  were  traditionally  derived  from  it,  and 
have  developed  themselves  in  degeneracy  and 
depravation  (as  is  represented  in  the  rudely- 
conceived  so-called  “emanation  system”);  all 
these  are  suppositions  which  neither  have,  nor 
— if  we  may  contrast  with  their  arbitrary  sub¬ 
jective  origin,  the  true  conception  of  history — 
can  attain  historical  confirmation. 

The  only  consistent  and  worthy  method  which 
philosophical  investigation  can  adopt  is  to  take 
up  history  where  rationality  begins  to  manifest 
itself  in  the  actual  conduct  of  the  world’s  af¬ 
fairs  (not  where  it  is  merely  an  undeveloped 
potentiality) — where  a  condition  of  things  is 
present  in  which  it  realizes  itself  in  conscious¬ 
ness,  will,  and  action.  The  inorganic  existence  of 
spirit — that  of  abstract  freedom — unconscious 
torpidity  in  respect  to  good  and  evil  (and  conse¬ 
quently  to  laws),  or,  if  we  please  to  term  it  so, 
“blessed  ignorance,”  is  itself  not  a  subject  of 
history.  Natural,  and  at  the  same  time  religious 
morality,  is  the  piety  of  the  family.  In  this  social 
relation,  morality  consists  in  the  members  be¬ 
having  towards  each  other  not  as  individuals — 
possessing  an  independent  will;  not  as  persons. 
The  family,  therefore,  is  excluded  from  that 
process  of  development  in  which  history  takes 
its  rise.  But  when  this  self-involved  spiritual 
unity  steps  beyond  this  circle  of  feeling  and  nat¬ 
ural  love,  and  first  attains  the  consciousness  of 
personality,  we  have  that  dark,  dull  centre  of 
indifference,  in  which  neither  nature  nor  spirit 
is  open  and  transparent;  and  for  which  nature 
and  spirit  can  become  open  and  transparent 

cal  conceptions  and  mannerisms,  in  the  style  of  Fr.  von 
Schlegel,  though  with  more  geniality  than  the  latter)  in 
his  periodical,  Le  Catholique — has  furthered  the  cause 
of  that  primitive  Catholicism  generally,  and  in  particu¬ 
lar  has  gained  for  the  savants  of  the  congregation  the 
support  of  the  government;  so  that  it  has  even  set  on 
foot  expeditions  to  the  East,  in  order  to  discover  there 
treasures  still  concealed;  (from  which  further  disclo¬ 
sures  have  been  anticipated,  respecting  profound  the¬ 
ological  questions,  particularly  on  the  higher  antiquity 
and  sources  of  Buddhism),  and  with  a  view  to  promote 
the  interests  of  Catholicism  by  this  circuitous  but  scien¬ 
tifically  interesting  method. 


INTRODUCTION 


only  by  means  of  a  further  process — a  very 
lengthened  culture  of  that  will,  at  length  become 
self-conscious.  Consciousness  alone  is  clearness ; 
and  is  that  alone  for  which  God  (or  any  other 
existence)  can  be  revealed.  In  its  true  form,  in 
absolute  universality,  nothing  can  be  manifested 
except  to  consciousness  made  percipient  of  it. 
Freedom  is  nothing  but  the  recognition  and 
adoption  of  such  universal  substantial  objects  as 
right  and  law,  and  the  production  of  a  reality 
that  is  accordant  with  them — the  state.  Nations 
may  have  passed  a  long  life  before  arriving  at 
this  their  destination,  and  during  this  period, 
they  may  have  attained  considerable  culture  in 
some  directions.  This  ante-historical  period,  con¬ 
sistently  with  what  has  been  said,  lies  out  of  our 
plan;  whether  a  real  history  followed  it,  or  the 
peoples  in  question  never  attained  a  political 
constitution.  It  is  a  great  discovery  in  history, 
as  of  a  new  world,  which  has  been  made  within 
rather  more  than  the  last  twenty  years,  respect¬ 
ing  the  Sanskrit  and  the  connection  of  the  Euro¬ 
pean  languages  with  it.  In  particular,  the  con¬ 
nection  of  the  German  and  Indian  peoples  has 
been  demonstrated,  with  as  much  certainty  as 
such  subjects  allow  of.  Even  at  the  present  time 
we  know  of  peoples  which  scarcely  form  a  so¬ 
ciety,  much  less  a  state,  but  that  have  been  long 
known  as  existing;  while  with  regard  to  others, 
which  in  their  advanced  condition  excite  our  es¬ 
pecial  interest,  tradition  reaches  beyond  the 
record  of  the  founding  of  the  state,  and  they 
experienced  many  changes  prior  to  that  epoch. 
In  the  connection  just  referred  to,  between  the 
languages  of  nations  so  widely  separated,  we 
have  a  result  before  us,  which  proves  the  dif¬ 
fusion  of  those  nations  from  Asia  as  a  centre, 
and  the  so  dissimilar  development  of  what  had 
been  originally  related,  as  an  incontestable  fact ; 
not  as  an  inference  deduced  by  that  favorite 
method  of  combining,  and  reasoning  from,  cir¬ 
cumstances  grave  and  trivial,  which  has  already 
enriched  and  will  continue  to  enrich  history  with 
so  many  fictions  given  out  as  facts.  But  that  ap¬ 
parently  so  extensive  range  of  events  lies  be¬ 
yond  the  pale  of  history;  in  fact  preceded  it. 

In  our  language  the  term  history  unites  the 
objective  with  the  subjective  side,  and  denotes 
quite  as  much  the  historia  rerum  gestarum,  as 
the  res  gestce  themselves;  on  the  other  hand  it 
comprehends  not  less  what  has  happened,  than 
the  narration  of  what  has  happened.  This  union 
of  the  two  meanings  we  must  regard  as  of  a 
higher  order  than  mere  outward  accident;  we 
must  suppose  historical  narrations  to  have  ap¬ 
peared  contemporaneously  with  historical  deeds 


181 

and  events.  It  is  an  internal  vital  principle  com¬ 
mon  to  both  that  produces  them  synchronously. 
Family  memorials,  patriarchal  traditions,  have 
an  interest  confined  to  the  family  and  the  clan. 
The  uniform  course  of  events  which  such  a  con¬ 
dition  implies  is  no  subject  of  serious  remem¬ 
brance;  though  distinct  transactions  or  turns  of 
fortune,  may  rouse  Mnemosyne  to  form  concep¬ 
tions  of  them — in  the  same  way  as  love  and  the 
religious  emotions  provoke  imagination  to  give 
shape  to  a  previously  formless  impulse.  But  it  is 
the  state  which  first  presents  subject-matter 
that  is  not  only  adapted  to  the  prose  of  history, 
but  involves  the  production  of  such  history  in 
the  very  progress  of  its  own  being.  Instead  of 
merely  subjective  mandates  on  the  part  of  gov¬ 
ernment — sufficing  for  the  needs  of  the  moment 
— a  community  that  is  acquiring  a  stable  exist¬ 
ence,  and  exalting  itself  into  a  state,  requires 
formal  commands  and  laws — comprehensive 
and  universally  binding  prescriptions ;  and  thus 
produces  a  record  as  well  as  an  interest  con¬ 
cerned  with  intelligent,  definite,  and,  in  their  re¬ 
sults,  lasting  transactions  and  occurrences;  on 
which  Mnemosyne,  for  the  behoof  of  the  peren¬ 
nial  object  of  the  formation  and  constitution  of 
the  state,  is  impelled  to  confer  perpetuity.  Pro¬ 
found  sentiments  generally,  such  as  that  of  love, 
as  also  religious  intuition  and  its  conceptions, 
are  in  themselves  complete — constantly  present 
and  satisfying ;  but  that  outward  existence  of  a 
political  constitution  which  is  enshrined  in  its 
rational  laws  and  customs  is  an  imperfect  pres¬ 
ent  ;  and  cannot  be  thoroughly  understood  with¬ 
out  a  knowledge  of  the  past. 

The  periods,  whether  we  suppose  them  to  be 
centuries  or  millennia,  that  were  passed  by  na¬ 
tions  before  history  was  written  among  them — 
and  which  may  have  been  filled  with  revolutions, 
nomadic  wanderings,  and  the  strangest  muta¬ 
tions — are  on  that  very  account  destitute  of  ob¬ 
jective  history,  because  they  present  no  subjec¬ 
tive  history,  no  annals.  We  need  not  suppose 
that  the  records  of  such  periods  have  accidental¬ 
ly  perished;  rather,  because  they  were  not  pos¬ 
sible,  do  we  find  them  wanting.  Only  in  a  state 
cognizant  of  laws,  can  distinct  transactions  take 
place,  accompanied  by  such  a  clear  conscious¬ 
ness  of  them  as  supplies  the  ability  and  suggests 
the  necessity  of  an  enduring  record.  It  strikes 
everyone,  in  beginning  to  form  an  acquaintance 
with  the  treasures  of  Indian  literature,  that  a 
land  so  rich  in  intellectual  products,  and  those 
of  the  profoundest  order  of  thought,  has  no  his¬ 
tory;  and  in  this  respect  contrasts  most  strongly 
with  China — an  empire  possessing  one  so  re- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


182 

markable,  one  going  back  to  the  most  ancient 
times.  India  has  not  only  ancient  books  relating 
to  religion,  and  splendid  poetical  productions, 
but  also  ancient  codes;  the  existence  of  which 
latter  kind  of  literature  has  been  mentioned  as  a 
condition  necessary  to  the  origination  of  history 
— and  yet  history  itself  is  not  found.  But  in  that 
country  the  impulse  of  organization,  in  begin¬ 
ning  to  develop  social  distinctions,  was  immedi¬ 
ately  petrified  in  the  merely  natural  classifica¬ 
tion  according  to  castes;  so  that  although  the 
laws  concern  themselves  with  civil  rights,  they 
make  even  these  dependent  on  natural  distinc¬ 
tions;  and  are  especially  occupied  with  deter¬ 
mining  the  relations  (wrongs  rather  than  rights) 
of  those  classes  towards  each  other,  i.e.,  the 
privileges  of  the  higher  over  the  lower.  Con¬ 
sequently,  the  element  of  morality  is  banished 
from  the  pomp  of  Indian  life  and  from  its  polit¬ 
ical  institutions.  Where  that  iron  bondage  of  dis¬ 
tinctions  derived  from  nature  prevails,  the  con¬ 
nection  of  society  is  nothing  but  wild  arbitrari¬ 
ness,  transient  activity,  or  rather  the  play  of 
violent  emotion  without  any  goal  of  advance¬ 
ment  or  development.  Therefore  no  intelligent 
reminiscence,  no  object  for  Mnemosyne  pre¬ 
sents  itself ;  and  imagination — confused  though 
profound — expatiates  in  a  region,  which,  to  be 
capable  of  history,  must  have  had  an  aim  within 
the  domain  of  reality,  and,  at  the  same  time,  of 
substantial  freedom. 

Since  such  are  the  conditions  indispensable 
to  a  history,  it  has  happened  that  the  growth  of 
families  to  clans,  of  clans  to  peoples,  and  their 
local  diffusion  consequent  upon  this  numerical 
increase — a  series  of  facts  which  itself  suggests 
so  many  instances  of  social  complication,  war, 
revolution,  and  ruin,  a  process  which  is  so  rich 
in  interest,  and  so  comprehensive  in  extent,  has 
occurred  without  giving  rise  to  history;  more¬ 
over,  that  the  extension  and  organic  growth  of 
the  empire  of  articulate  sounds  has  itself  re¬ 
mained  voiceless  and  dumb — a  stealthy,  un¬ 
noticed  advance.  It  is  a  fact  revealed  by  philo¬ 
logical  monuments  that  languages,  during  a  rude 
condition  of  the  nations  that  have  spoken  them, 
have  been  very  highly  developed;  that  the  hu¬ 
man  understanding  occupied  this  theoretical 
region  with  great  ingenuity  and  completeness. 
For  grammar,  in  its  extended  and  consistent 
form,  is  the  work  of  thought,  which  makes  its 
categories  distinctly  visible  therein.  It  is,  more¬ 
over,  a  fact  that, with  advancing  social  and  polit¬ 
ical  civilization,  this  systematic  completeness 
of  intelligence  suffers  attrition,  and  language 
thereupon  becomes  poorer  and  ruder :  a  singular 


phenomenon — that  the  progress  towards  a  more 
highly  intellectual  condition,  while  expanding 
and  cultivating  rationality,  should  disregard 
that  intelligent  amplitude  and  expressiveness — 
should  find  it  an  obstruction  and  contrive  to  do 
without  it.  Speech  is  the  act  of  theoretic  intelli¬ 
gence  in  a  special  sense ;  it  is  its  external  mani¬ 
festation.  Exercises  of  memory  and  imagination 
without  language  are  direct  manifestations. 
But  this  act  of  theoretic  intelligence  itself,  as 
also  its  subsequent  development,  and  the  more 
concrete  class  of  facts  connected  with  it — viz., 
the  spreading  of  peoples  over  the  earth,  their 
separation  from  each  other,  their  comminglings 
and  wanderings — remain  involved  in  the  obscu¬ 
rity  of  a  voiceless  past.  They  are  not  acts  of  will 
becoming  self-conscious — of  freedom,  mirror¬ 
ing  itself  in  a  phenomenal  form,  and  creating 
for  itself  a  proper  reality.  Not  partaking  of  this 
element  of  substantial,  veritable  existence,  those 
nations,  notwithstanding  the  development  of 
language  among  them,  never  advanced  to  the 
possession  of  a  history.  The  rapid  growth  of 
language,  and  the  progress  and  dispersion  of 
nations,  assume  importance  and  interest  for 
concrete  reason  only  when  they  have  come 
in  contact  with  states,  or  begin  to  form  political 
constitutions  themselves. 

After  these  remarks,  relating  to  the  form  of 
the  commencement  of  the  world’s  history,  and 
to  that  ante-historical  period  which  must  be  ex¬ 
cluded  from  it,  we  have  to  state  the  direction  of 
its  course:  though  here  only  formally.  The  fur¬ 
ther  definition  of  the  subject  in  the  concrete, 
comes  under  the  head  of  arrangement. 

Universal  history,  as  already  demonstrated, 
show's  the  development  of  the  consciousness  of 
freedom  on  the  part  of  spirit,  and  of  the  conse¬ 
quent  realization  of  that  freedom.  This  develop¬ 
ment  implies  a  gradation — a  series  of  increasing¬ 
ly  adequate  expressions  or  manifestations  of 
freedom,  which  result  from  its  idea.  The  logical, 
and,  as  still  more  prominent,  the  dialectical  na¬ 
ture  of  the  idea  in  general,  viz.,  that  it  is  self- 
determined — that  it  assumes  successive  forms 
which  it  successively  transcends;  and  by  this 
very  process  of  transcending  its  earlier  stages, 
gains  an  affirmative,  and,  in  fact,  a  richer  and 
more  concrete  shape ;  this  necessity  of  its  nature, 
and  the  necessary  series  of  pure  abstract  forms 
which  the  idea  successively  assumes,  is  exhibited 
in  the  department  of  logic.  Here  wre  need  adopt 
only  one  of  its  results,  viz.,  that  every  step  in  the 
process,  as  differing  from  any  other,  has  its  de¬ 
terminate  peculiar  principle.  In  history  this  prin¬ 
ciple  is  idiosyncrasy  of  spirit — peculiar  national 


INTRODUCTION  183 


genius.  It  is  within  the  limitations  of  this  idio¬ 
syncrasy  that  the  spirit  of  the  nation,  concretely 
manifested,  expresses  every  aspect  of  its  con¬ 
sciousness  and  will — the  whole  cycle  of  its  reali¬ 
zation.  Its  religion,  its  polity,  its  ethics,  its  legis¬ 
lation,  and  even  its  science,  art,  and  mechanical 
skill,  all  bear  its  stamp.  These  special  peculiar¬ 
ities  find  their  key  in  that  common  peculiarity — 
the  particular  principle  that  characterizes  a  peo¬ 
ple;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  facts  which  his¬ 
tory  presents  in  detail,  that  common  character¬ 
istic  principle  may  be  detected.  That  such  or 
such  a  specific  quality  constitutes  the  peculiar 
genius  of  a  people,  is  the  element  of  our  inquiry 
which  must  be  derived  from  experience,  and  his¬ 
torically  proved.  To  accomplish  this,  pre-sup- 
poses  not  only  a  disciplined  faculty  of  abstrac¬ 
tion,  but  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  idea. 
The  investigator  must  be  familiar  a  priori  (if  we 
like  to  call  it  so)  with  the  whole  circle  of  con¬ 
ceptions  to  which  the  principles  in  question  be¬ 
long — just  as  Kepler  (to  name  the  most  illus¬ 
trious  example  in  this  mode  of  philosophizing) 
must  have  been  familiar  a  priori  with  ellipses, 
with  cubes  and  squares,  and  with  ideas  of  their 
relations,  before  he  could  discover,  from  the 
empirical  data,  those  immortal  “laws”  of  his, 
which  are  none  other  than  forms  of  thought  per¬ 
taining  to  those  classes  of  conceptions.  He  who 
is  unfamiliar  with  the  science  that  embraces 
these  abstract  elementary  conceptions  is  as  little 
capable,  though  he  may  have  gazed  on  the  firma¬ 
ment  and  the  motions  of  the  celestial  bodies  for 
a  lifetime,  of  understanding  those  laws,  as  of 
discovering  them.  From  this  want  of  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  the  ideas  that  relate  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  freedom  proceed  a  part  of  those  objec¬ 
tions  which  are  brought  against  the  philosophical 
consideration  of  a  science  usually  regarded  as 
one  of  mere  experience;  the  so-called  a  priori 
method,  and  the  attempt  to  insinuate  ideas  into 
the  empirical  data  of  history,  being  the  chief 
points  in  the  indictment.  Where  this  deficiency 
exists,  such  conceptions  appear  alien — not  lying 
within  the  object  of  investigation.  To  minds 
whose  training  has  been  narrow  and  merely  sub¬ 
jective,  which  have  not  an  acquaintance  and 
familiarity  withideas,  they  are  something  strange 
— not  embraced  in  the  notion  and  conception  of 
the  subject  which  their  limited  intellect  forms. 
Hence  the  statement  that  philosophy  does  not 
understand  such  sciences.  It  must,  indeed,  allow 
that  it  has  not  that  kind  of  understanding  which 
is  the  prevailing  one  in  the  domain  of  those 
sciences,  that  it  does  not  proceed  according  to 
the  categories  of  such  understanding,  but  ac¬ 


cording  to  the  categories  of  reason — though  at 
the  same  time  recognizing  that  understanding, 
and  its  true  value  and  position.  It  must  be  ob¬ 
served  that  in  this  very  process  of  scientific 
under  standing ,  it  is  of  importance  that  the 
essential  should  be  distinguished  and  brought 
into  relief  in  contrast  with  the  so-called  non- 
essential.  But  in  order  to  render  this  possible,  we 
must  know  what  is  essential;  and  that  is — in 
view  of  the  history  of  the  world  in  general — the 
consciousness  of  freedom,  and  the  phases  which 
this  consciousness  assumes  in  developing  itself. 
The  bearing  of  historical  facts  on  this  category 
is  their  bearing  on  the  truly  essential.  Of  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  stated,  and  the  opposition  exhibited  to 
comprehensive  conceptions  in  science,  part  must 
be  referred  to  the  inability  to  grasp  and  under¬ 
stand  ideas.  If  in  natural  history  some  monstrous 
hybrid  growth  is  alleged  as  an  objection  to  the 
recognition  of  clear  and  indubitable  classes  or 
species,  a  sufficient  reply  is  furnished  by  a  senti¬ 
ment  often  vaguely  urged,  that  “the  exception 
confirms  the  rule” ;  i.e .,  that  is  the  part  of  a  well- 
defined  rule,  to  show  the  conditions  in  which  it 
applies,  or  the  deficiency  or  hybridism  of  cases 
that  are  abnormal.  Mere  nature  is  too  weak  to 
keep  its  genera  and  species  pure,  when  conflict¬ 
ing  with  alien  elementary  influences.  If,  e.g.,  on 
considering  the  human  organization  in  its  con¬ 
crete  aspect,  we  assert  that  brain,  heart,  and  so 
forth  are  essential  to  its  organic  life,  some  miser¬ 
able  abortion  may  be  adduced,  which  has  on  the 
whole  the  human  form,  or  parts  of  it — which 
has  been  conceived  in  a  human  body  and  has 
breathed  after  birth  therefrom — in  which  never¬ 
theless  no  brain  and  no  heart  is  found.  If  such 
an  instance  is  quoted  against  the  general  con¬ 
ception  of  a  human  being — the  objector  persist¬ 
ing  in  using  the  name,  coupled  with  a  superficial 
idea  respecting  it — it  can  be  proved  that  a  real, 
concrete  human  being  is  a  truly  different  object, 
that  such  a  being  must  have  a  brain  in  its  head, 
and  a  heart  in  its  breast. 

A  similar  process  of  reasoning  is  adopted,  in 
reference  to  the  correct  assertion  that  genius, 
talent,  moral  virtues,  and  sentiments,  and  piety, 
may  be  found  in  every  zone,  under  all  political 
constitutions  and  conditions ;  in  confirmation  of 
which  examples  are  forthcoming  in  abundance. 
If  in  this  assertion,  the  accompanying  distinc¬ 
tions  are  intended  to  be  repudiated  as  unimpor¬ 
tant  or  non-essential,  reflection  evidently  limits 
itself  to  abstract  categories  and  ignores  the  spe¬ 
cialities  of  the  object  in  question,  which  cer¬ 
tainly  fall  under  no  principle  recognized  by  such 
categories.  That  intellectual  position  which 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


184 

adopts  such  merely  formal  points  of  view,  pre¬ 
sents  a  vast  field  for  ingenious  questions,  erudite 
views,  and  striking  comparisons;  for  profound 
seeming  reflections  and  declamations,  which 
may  be  rendered  so  much  the  more  brilliant  in 
proportion  as  the  subject  they  refer  to  is  in¬ 
definite,  and  are  susceptible  of  new  and  varied 
forms  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  importance 
of  the  results  that  can  be  gained  from  them,  and 
the  certainty  and  rationality  of  their  issues. 
Under  such  an  aspect  the  well-known  Indian 
epopees  may  be  compared  with  the  Homeric; 
perhaps,  since  it  is  the  vastness  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion  by  which  poetical  genius  proves  itself,  pre¬ 
ferred  to  them ;  as,  on  account  of  the  similarity 
of  single  strokes  of  imagination  in  the  attributes 
of  the  divinities,  it  has  been  contended  that 
Greek  mythological  forms  may  be  recognized  in 
those  of  India.  Similarly  the  Chinese  philosophy, 
as  adopting  the  One  as  its  basis,  has  been  alleged 
to  be  the  same  as  at  a  later  period  appeared  as 
Eleatic  philosophy  and  as  the  Spinozistic  sys¬ 
tem;  while  in  virtue  of  its  expressing  itself  also 
in  abstract  numbers  and  lines,  Pythagorean  and 
Christian  principles  have  been  supposed  to  be 
detected  in  it.  Instances  of  bravery  and  indomit¬ 
able  courage,  traits  of  magnanimity,  of  self- 
denial,  and  self-sacrifice,  which  are  found  among 
the  most  savage  and  the  most  pusillanimous  na¬ 
tions,  are  regarded  as  sufficient  to  support  the 
view  that  in  these  nations  as  much  of  social  vir¬ 
tue  and  morality  may  be  found  as  in  the  most 
civilized  Christian  states,  or  even  more.  And  on 
this  ground  a  doubt  has  been  suggested  whether 
in  the  progress  of  history  and  of  general  culture 
mankind  have  become  better;  whether  their 
morality  has  been  increased — morality  being 
regarded  in  a  subjective  aspect  and  view,  as 
founded  on  what  the  agent  holds  to  be  right  and 
wrong,  good  and  evil;  not  on  a  principle  which 
is  considered  to  be  in  and  for  itself  right  and 
good,  or  a  crime  and  evil,  or  on  a  particular  reli¬ 
gion  believed  to  be  the  true  one. 

We  may  fairly  decline  on  this  occasion  the 
task  of  tracing  the  formalism  and  error  of  such 
a  view,  and  establishing  the  true  principles  of 
morality,  or  rather  of  social  virtue  in  opposition 
to  false  morality.  For  the  history  of  the  world 
occupies  a  higher  ground  than  that  on  which 
morality  has  properly  its  position ;  which  is  per¬ 
sonal  character,  the  conscience  of  individuals, 
their  particular  will  and  mode  of  action;  these 
have  a  value,  imputation,  reward  or  punishment 
proper  to  themselves.  What  the  absolute  aim  of 
spirit  requires  and  accomplishes,  what  provi¬ 
dence  does,  transcends  the  obligations,  and  the 


liability  to  imputation  and  the  ascription  of  good 
or  bad  motives,  which  attach  to  individuality  in 
virtue  of  its  social  relations.  They  who  on  moral 
grounds,  and  consequently  with  noble  intention, 
have  resisted  that  which  the  advance  of  the 
spiritual  idea  makes  necessary,  stand  higher  in 
moral  worth  than  those  whose  crimes  have  been 
turned  into  the  means — under  the  direction  of  a 
superior  principle — of  realizing  the  purposes  of 
that  principle.  But  in  such  revolutions  both  par¬ 
ties  generally  stand  within  the  limits  of  the  same 
circle  of  transient  and  corruptible  existence. 
Consequently  it  is  only  a  formal  rectitude,  de¬ 
serted  by  the  living  Spirit  and  by  God,  which 
those  who  stand  upon  ancient  right  and  order 
maintain.  The  deeds  of  great  men,  who  are  the 
individuals  of  the  world’s  history,  thus  appear 
not  only  justified  in  view  of  that  intrinsic  re¬ 
sult  of  which  they  were  not  conscious,  but  also 
from  the  point  of  view  occupied  by  the  secular 
moralist.  But  looked  at  from  this  point,  moral 
claims  that  are  irrelevant,  must  not  be  brought 
into  collision  with  world-historical  deeds  and 
their  accomplishment.  The  litany  of  private  vir¬ 
tues — modesty,  humility,  philanthropy,  and  for¬ 
bearance — must  not  be  raised  against  them.  The 
history  of  the  world  might,  on  principle,  entirely 
ignore  the  circle  within  which  morality  and  the 
so  much  talked  of  distinction  between  the  moral 
and  the  politic  lies — not  only  in  abstaining  from 
judgments,  for  the  principles  involved,  and  the 
necessary  reference  of  the  deeds  in  question 
to  those  principles,  are  a  sufficient  judgment  of 
them — but  in  leaving  individuals  quite  out  of 
view  and  unmentioned.  What  it  has  to  record  is 
the  activity  of  the  spirit  of  peoples,  so  that  the 
individual  forms  which  that  spirit  has  assumed 
in  the  sphere  of  outward  reality,  might  be  left 
to  the  delineation  of  special  histories. 

The  same  kind  of  formalism  avails  itself  in  its 
peculiar  manner  of  the  indefiniteness  attaching 
to  genius,  poetry,  and  even  philosophy;  thinks 
equally  that  it  finds  these  everywhere.  We  have 
here  products  of  reflective  thought;  and  it  is 
familiarity  with  those  general  conceptions  which 
single  out  and  name  real  distinctions  without 
fathoming  the  true  depth  of  the  matter,  that  we 
call  culture.  It  is  something  merely  formal,  inas¬ 
much  as  it  aims  at  nothing  more  than  the  analysis 
of  the  subject,  whatever  it  be,  into  its  constit¬ 
uent  parts,  and  the  comprehension  of  these  in 
their  logical  definitions  and  forms.  It  is  not  the 
free  universality  of  conception  necessary  for 
making  an  abstract  principle  the  object  of  con¬ 
sciousness.  Such  a  consciousness  of  thought  it¬ 
self,  and  of  its  forms  isolated  from  a  particular 


INTRODUCTION  185 


object,  is  philosophy.  This  has,  indeed,  the  con¬ 
dition  of  its  existence  in  culture;  that  condi¬ 
tion  being  the  taking  up  of  the  object  of  thought, 
and  at  the  same  time  clothing  it  with  the  form 
of  universality,  in  such  a  way  that  the  material 
content  and  the  form  given  by  the  intellect  are 
held  in  an  inseparable  state ;  inseparable  to  such 
a  degree  that  the  object  in  question — which,  by 
the  analysis  of  one  conception  into  a  multitude 
of  conceptions,  is  enlarged  to  an  incalculable 
treasure  of  thought — is  regarded  as  a  merely 
empirical  datum  in  whose  formation  thought  has 
had  no  share. 

But  it  is  quite  as  much  an  act  of  thought,  of 
the  understanding  in  particular,  to  embrace  in 
one  simple  conception  object  which  of  itself 
comprehends  a  concrete  and  large  significance 
(as  earth,  man,  Alexander  or  Caesar)  and  to 
designate  it  by  one  word,  as  to  resolve  such  a 
conception,  duly  to  isolate  in  idea  the  concep¬ 
tions  which  it  contains,  and  to  give  them  partic¬ 
ular  names.  And  in  reference  to  the  view  which 
gave  occasion  to  what  has  just  been  said,  thus 
much  will  be  clear — that  as  reflection  produces 
what  we  include  under  the  general  terms  genius, 
talent,  art,  science — formal  culture  on  every 
grade  of  intellectual  development,  not  only  can, 
but  must  grow,  and  attain  a  mature  bloom,  while 
the  grade  in  question  is  developing  itself  to  a 
state,  and  on  this  basis  of  civilization  is  advanc¬ 
ing  to  intelligent  reflection  and  to  general  forms 
of  thought — as  in  laws,  so  in  regard  to  all  else. 
In  the  very  association  of  men  in  a  state  lies 
the  necessity  of  formal  culture — consequently 
of  the  rise  of  the  sciences  and  of  a  cultivated 
poetry  and  art  generally.  The  arts  designated 
plastic  require  besides,  even  in  their  technical 
aspect,  the  civilized  association  of  men.  The 
poetic  art — which  has  less  need  of  external  re¬ 
quirements  and  means,  and  which  has  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  immediate  existence,  the  voice,  as  its 
material — steps  forth  with  great  boldness  and 
with  matured  expression,  even  under  the  condi¬ 
tions  presented  by  a  people  not  yet  united  in  a 
political  combination;  since, as  remarked  above, 
language  attains  on  its  own  particular  ground  a 
high  intellectual  development,  prior  to  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  civilization. 

Philosophy  also  must  make  its  appearance 
where  political  life  exists;  since  that  in  virtue 
of  which  any  series  of  phenomena  is  reduced 
within  the  sphere  of  culture,  as  above  stated, 
is  the  form  strictly  proper  to  thought;  and  thus 
for  philosophy,  which  is  nothing  other  than  the 
consciousness  of  this  form  itself — the  thinking 
of  thinking — the  material  of  which  its  edifice 


is  to  be  constructed,  is  already  prepared  by  gen¬ 
eral  culture.  If  in  the  development  of  the  state 
itself,  periods  are  necessitated  which  impel  the 
soul  of  nobler  natures  to  seek  refuge  from  the 
present  in  ideal  regions — in  order  to  find  in  them 
that  harmony  with  itself  which  it  can  no  longer 
enjoy  in  the  discordant  real  world,  where  the  re¬ 
flective  intelligence  attacks  all  that  is  holy  and 
deep,  which  had  been  spontaneously  inwrought 
into  the  religion,  laws  and  manners  of  nations, 
and  brings  them  down  and  attenuates  them  to 
abstract  godless  generalities — thought  will  be 
compelled  to  become  thinking  reason,  with  the 
view  of  effecting,  in  its  own  element,  the  restora¬ 
tion  of  its  principles  from  the  ruin  to  which  they 
had  been  brought. 

We  find  then,  it  is  true,  among  all  world- 
historical  peoples,  poetry,  plastic  art,  science, 
even  philosophy;  but  not  only  is  there  a  diver¬ 
sity  in  style  and  bearing  generally,  but  still 
more  remarkably  in  subject-matter;  and  this  is 
a  diversity  of  the  most  important  kind,  affecting 
the  rationality  of  that  subject-matter.  It  is  use¬ 
less  for  a  pretentious  aesthetic  criticism  to  de¬ 
mand  that  our  good  pleasure  should  not  be  made 
the  rule  for  the  matter — the  substantial  part  of 
their  contents — and  to  maintain  that  it  is  the 
beautiful  form  as  such,  the  grandeur  of  the 
fancy,  and  so  forth,  which  fine  art  aims  at,  and 
which  must  be  considered  and  enjoyed  by  a 
liberal  taste  and  cultivated  mind.  A  healthy  in¬ 
tellect  does  not  tolerate  such  abstractions,  and 
cannot  assimilate  productions  of  the  kind  above 
referred  to.  Granted  that  the  Indian  epopees 
might  be  placed  on  a  level  with  the  Homeric, 
on  account  of  a  number  of  those  qualities  of 
form — grandeur  of  invention  and  imaginative 
power,  liveliness  of  images  and  emotions,  and 
beauty  of  diction;  yet  the  infinite  difference  of 
matter  remains ;  consequently  one  of  substantial 
importance  and  involving  the  interest  of  reason, 
which  is  immediately  concerned  with  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  the  idea  of  freedom,  and  its  ex¬ 
pression  in  individuals.  There  is  not  only  a 
classical  jorm,  but  a  classical  order  of  subject- 
matter;  and  in  a  work  of  art  form  and  subject- 
matter  are  so  closely  united  that  the  former  can 
only  be  classical  to  the  extent  to  which  the  latter 
is  so.  With  a  fantastical,  indeterminate  material 
— and  rule  is  the  essence  of  reason — the  form 
becomes  measureless  and  formless,  or  mean  and 
contracted.  In  the  same  way,  in  that  comparison 
of  the  various  systems  of  philosophy  of  which 
we  have  already  spoken,  the  only  point  of  im¬ 
portance  is  overlooked,  namely,  the  character  of 
that  unity  which  is  found  alike  in  the  Chinese, 


186  PHILOSOPHY 

the  Eleatic,  and  the  Spinozistic  philosophy — the 
distinction  between  the  recognition  of  that  unity 
as  abstract  and  as  concrete — concrete  to  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  being  a  unity  in  and  by  itself — a  unity 
synonymous  with  spirit.  But  that  co-ordination 
proves  that  it  recognizes  only  such  an  abstract 
unity;  so  that  while  it  gives  judgment  respect¬ 
ing  philosophy,  it  is  ignorant  of  that  very  point 
which  constitutes  the  interest  of  philosophy. 

But  there  are  also  spheres  which,  amid  all  the 
variety  that  is  presented  in  the  substantial  con¬ 
tent  of  a  particular  form  of  culture,  remain  the 
same.  The  difference  above-mentioned  in  art, 
science,  philosophy,  concerns  the  thinking  rea¬ 
son  and  freedom,  which  is  the  self-consciousness 
of  the  former,  and  which  has  the  same  one  root 
with  thought.  As  it  is  not  the  brute,  but  only  the 
man  that  thinks,  he  only,  and  only  because  he  is 
a  thinking  being,  has  freedom.  His  conscious¬ 
ness  imports  this,  that  the  individual  compre¬ 
hends  itself  as  a  person,  that  is,  recognizes  itself 
in  its  single  existence  as  possessing  universality, 
as  capable  of  abstraction  from,  and  of  surrender¬ 
ing  all  speciality;  and,  therefore,  as  inherently 
infinite.  Consequently  those  spheres  of  intelli¬ 
gence  which  lie  beyond  the  limits  of  this  con¬ 
sciousness  are  a  common  ground  among  those 
substantial  distinctions.  Even  morality,  which  is 
so  intimately  connected  with  the  consciousness 
of  freedom,  can  be  very  pure  while  that  con¬ 
sciousness  is  still  wanting;  as  far,  that  is  to  say, 
as  it  expresses  duties  and  rights  only  as  objective 
commands;  or  even  as  far  as  it  remains  satisfied 
with  the  merely  formal  elevation  of  the  soul — 
the  surrender  of  the  sensual,  and  of  all  sensual 
motives — in  a  purely  negative,  self-denying 
fashion.  The  Chinese  morality,  since  Europeans 
have  become  acquainted  with  it  and  with  the 
writings  of  Confucius,  has  obtained  the  greatest 
praise  and  proportionate  attention  from  those 
who  are  familiar  with  the  Christian  morality. 
There  is  a  similar  acknowledgment  of  the  sub¬ 
limity  with  which  the  Indian  religion  and  poetry 
(a  statement  that  must,  however,  be  limited  to 
the  higher  kind),  but  especially  the  Indian  phi¬ 
losophy,  expatiate  upon  and  demand  the  removal 
and  sacrifice  of  sensuality.  Yet  both  these  na¬ 
tions  are,  it  must  be  confessed,  entirely  wanting 
in  the  essential  consciousness  of  the  idea  of  free¬ 
dom.  To  the  Chinese  their  moral  laws  are  just 
like  natural  laws,  external,  positive  commands, 
claims  established  by  force,  compulsory  duties 
or  rules  of  courtesy  towards  each  other.  Free¬ 
dom,  through  which  alone  the  essential  deter¬ 
minations  of  reason  become  moral  sentiments, 
is  wanting.  Morality  is  a  political  affair,  and  its 


OF  HISTORY 

laws  are  administered  by  officers  of  government 
and  legal  tribunals.  Their  treatises  upon  it  (which 
are  not  law'  books,  but  are  certainly  addressed  to 
the  subjective  will  and  individual  disposition) 
read,  as  do  the  moral  writings  of  the  Stoics,  like 
a  string  of  commands  stated  as  necessary  for 
realizing  the  goal  of  happiness;  so  that  it  seems 
to  be  left  free  to  men,  on  their  part,  to  adopt 
such  commands,  to  observe  them  or  not;  while 
the  conception  of  an  abstract  subject,  “a  wise 
man”  forms  the  culminating  point  among  the 
Chinese,  as  also  among  the  Stoic  moralists.  Also 
in  the  Indian  doctrine  of  the  renunciation  of  the 
sensuality  of  desires  and  earthly  interests,  posi¬ 
tive  moral  freedom  is  not  the  object  and  end, 
but  the  annihilation  of  consciousness — spiritual 
and  even  physical  privation  of  life. 

It  is  the  concrete  spirit  of  a  people  which  we 
have  distinctly  to  recognize,  and  since  it  is  spirit 
it  can  only  be  comprehended  spiritually,  that  is, 
by  thought.  It  is  this  alone  which  takes  the 
lead  in  all  the  deeds  and  tendencies  of  that  peo¬ 
ple,  and  which  is  occupied  in  realizing  itself,  in 
satisfying  its  ideal  and  becoming  self-conscious, 
for  its  great  business  is  self-production.  But  for 
spirit,  the  highest  attainment  is  self-knowledge; 
an  advance  not  only  to  the  intuition,  but  to  the 
thought — the  clear  conception  of  itself.  This  it 
must  and  is  also  destined  to  accomplish;  but  the 
accomplishment  is  at  the  same  time  its  dissolu¬ 
tion,  and  the  rise  of  another  spirit,  another 
world-historical  people,  another  epoch  of  uni¬ 
versal  history.  This  transition  and  connection 
lead  us  to  the  connection  of  the  whole,  the  idea 
of  the  world’s  history  as  such,  which  we  have 
now  to  consider  more  closely,  and  of  which  we 
have  to  give  a  representation. 

History  in  general  is  therefore  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  spirit  in  time,  as  nature  is  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  idea  in  space. 

If  then  we  cast  a  glance  over  the  world’s  his¬ 
tory  generally,  we  see  a  vast  picture  of  changes 
and  transactions;  of  infinitely  manifold  forms 
of  peoples,  states,  individuals,  in  unresting  suc¬ 
cession.  Everything  that  can  enter  into  and  in¬ 
terest  the  soul  of  man,  all  our  sensibility  to 
goodness,  beauty ,  and  greatness,  is  called  into 
play.  On  every  hand  aims  are  adopted  and  pur¬ 
sued,  which  we  recognize,  whose  accomplish¬ 
ment  we  desire — we  hope  and  fear  for  them.  In 
all  these  occurrences  and  changes  we  behold  hu¬ 
man  action  and  suffering  predominant;  every¬ 
where  something  akin  to  ourselves,  and  therefore 
everywhere  something  that  excites  our  interest 
for  or  against.  Sometimes  it  attracts  us  by 
beauty,  freedom,  and  rich  variety,  sometimes 


INTRODUCTION  187 


by  energy  such  as  enables  even  vice  to  make  it¬ 
self  interesting.  Sometimes  we  see  the  more 
comprehensive  mass  of  some  general  interest  ad¬ 
vancing  with  comparative  slowness,  and  subse¬ 
quently  sacrificed  to  an  infinite  complication  of 
trifling  circumstances,  and  so  dissipated  into 
atoms.  Then,  again,  with  a  vast  expenditure  of 
power  a  trivial  result  is  produced;  while  from 
what  appears  unimportant  a  tremendous  issue 
proceeds.  On  every  hand  there  is  the  motliest 
throng  of  events  drawing  us  within  the  circle  of 
its  interest,  and  when  one  combination  vanishes 
another  immediately  appears  in  its  place. 

The  general  thought — the  category  which 
first  presents  itself  in  this  restless  mutation  of 
individuals  and  peoples,  existing  for  a  time  and 
then  vanishing — is  that  of  change  at  large.  The 
sight  of  the  ruins  of  some  ancient  sovereignty 
directly  leads  us  to  contemplate  this  thought  of 
change  in  its  negative  aspect.  What  traveller 
among  the  ruins  of  Carthage,  of  Palmyra,  Per- 
sepolis,  or  Rome,  has  not  been  stimulated  to  re¬ 
flections  on  the  transiency  of  kingdoms  and  men, 
and  to  sadness  at  the  thought  of  a  vigorous  and 
rich  life  now  departed — a  sadness  which  does 
not  expend  itself  on  personal  losses  and  the  un¬ 
certainty  of  one’s  own  undertakings, but  is  a  dis¬ 
interested  sorrow  at  the  decay  of  a  splendid  and 
highly  cultured  national  life!  But  the  next  con¬ 
sideration  which  allies  itself  with  that  of  change 
is  that  change,  while  it  imports  dissolution,  in¬ 
volves  at  the  same  time  the  rise  of  a  new  life — 
that  while  death  is  the  issue  of  life,  life  is  also 
the  issue  of  death.  This  is  a  grand  conception ; 
one  which  the  Oriental  thinkers  attained,  and 
which  is  perhaps  the  highest  in  their  metaphysics. 
In  the  idea  of  metempsychosis  we  find  it  evolved 
in  its  relation  to  individual  existence;  but  a 
myth  more  generally  known  is  that  of  the 
phoenix  as  a  type  of  the  life  of  nature;  eternally 
preparing  for  itself  its  funeral  pile,  and  consum¬ 
ing  itself  upon  it;  but  so  that  from  its  ashes  is 
produced  the  new,  renovated,  fresh  life.  But 
this  image  is  only  Asiatic ;  Oriental  not  Occiden¬ 
tal.  Spirit,  consuming  the  envelope  of  its  exist¬ 
ence,  does  not  merely  pass  into  another  en¬ 
velope,  nor  rise  rejuvenescent  from  the  ashes  of 
its  previous  form;  it  comes  forth  exalted,  glori¬ 
fied,  a  purer  spirit.  It  certainly  makes  war  upon 
itself,  consumes  its  own  existence;  but  in  this 
very  destruction  it  works  up  that  existence  into 
a  new  form,  and  each  successive  phase  becomes 
in  its  turn  a  material,  working  on  which  it  exalts 
itself  to  a  new  grade. 

If  we  consider  spirit  in  this  aspect — regarding 
its  changes  not  merely  as  rejuvenescent  transi¬ 


tions,  i.e.}  returns  to  the  same  form,  but  rather 
as  manipulations  of  itself,  by  which  it  multiplies 
the  material  for  future  endeavors — we  see  it 
exerting  itself  in  a  variety  of  modes  and  direc¬ 
tions;  developing  its  powers  and  gratifying  its 
desires  in  a  variety  which  is  inexhaustible;  be¬ 
cause  every  one  of  its  creations,  in  which  it  has 
already  found  gratification,  meets  it  anew  as 
material,  and  is  a  new  stimulus  to  plastic  activ¬ 
ity.  The  abstract  conception  of  mere  change 
gives  place  to  the  thought  of  spirit  manifesting, 
developing,  and  perfecting  its  powers  in  every 
direction  which  its  manifold  nature  can  follow. 
What  powers  it  inherently  possesses  we  learn 
from  the  variety  of  products  and  formations 
which  it  originates.  In  this  pleasurable  activity, 
it  has  to  do  only  with  itself.  As  involved  with 
the  conditions  of  mere  nature,  internal  and  ex¬ 
ternal,  it  will  indeed  meet  in  these  not  only  op¬ 
position  and  hindrance,  but  will  often  see  its 
endeavors  thereby  fail;  often  sink  under  the 
complications  in  which  it  is  entangled  either  by 
nature  or  by  itself.  But  in  such  case  it  perishes 
in  fulfilling  its  own  destiny  and  proper  function, 
and  even  thus  exhibits  the  spectacle  of  self¬ 
demonstration  as  spiritual  activity. 

The  very  essence  of  spirit  is  activity ;  it  rea¬ 
lizes  its  potentiality,  makes  itself  its  own  deed, 
its  own  work,  and  thus  it  becomes  an  object  to 
itself ;  contemplates  itself  as  an  objective  exist¬ 
ence.  Thus  is  it  with  the  spirit  of  a  people:  it  is 
a  spirit  having  strictly  defined  characteristics, 
which  erects  itself  into  an  objective  world,  that 
exists  and  persists  in  a  particular  religious  form 
of  worship,  customs,  constitution,  and  political 
laws,  in  the  wThole  complex  of  its  institutions, 
in  the  events  and  transactions  that  make  up  its 
history.  That  is  its  work — that  is  what  this  par¬ 
ticular  nation  is.  Nations  are  what  their  deeds 
are.  Every  Englishman  will  say :  We  are  the  men 
who  navigate  the  ocean,  and  have  the  commerce 
of  the  world;  to  whom  the  East  Indies  belong 
and  their  riches;  who  have  a  parliament,  juries, 
etc.  The  relation  of  the  individual  to  that  spirit 
is  that  he  appropriates  to  himself  this  substantial 
existence;  that  it  becomes  his  character  and 
capability,  enabling  him  to  have  a  definite  place 
in  the  world — to  be  something.  For  he  finds  the 
being  of  the  people  to  which  he  belongs  an  al¬ 
ready  established,  firm  world,  objectively  pres¬ 
ent  to  him,  with  which  he  has  to  incorporate 
himself.  In  this  its  work,  therefore — its  world 
— the  spirit  of  the  people  enjoys  its  existence 
and  finds  its  satisfaction.  A  nation  is  moral,  vir¬ 
tuous,  vigorous,  while  it  is  engaged  in  realizing 
its  grand  objects,  and  defends  its  work  against 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


188 

external  violence  during  the  process  of  giving  to 
its  purposes  an  objective  existence.  The  contra¬ 
diction  between  its  potential,  subjective  being — 
its  inner  aim  and  life — and  its  actual  being  is  re¬ 
moved;  it  has  attained  full  reality,  has  itself 
objectively  present  to  it.  But  this  having  been 
attained,  the  activity  displayed  by  the  spirit  of 
the  people  in  question  is  no  longer  needed;  it 
has  its  desire.  The  nation  can  still  accomplish 
much  in  war  and  peace  at  home  and  abroad; 
but  the  living  substantial  soul  itself  may  be  said 
to  have  ceased  its  activity.  The  essential,  su¬ 
preme  interest  has  consequently  vanished  from 
its  life,  for  interest  is  present  only  where  there 
is  opposition.  The  nation  lives  the  same  kind  of 
life  as  the  individual  when  passing  from  matu¬ 
rity  to  old  age,  in  the  enjoyment  of  itself,  in  the 
satisfaction  of  being  exactly  what  it  desired  and 
was  able  to  attain.  Although  its  imagination 
might  have  transcended  that  limit,  it  neverthe¬ 
less  abandoned  any  such  aspirations  as  objects 
of  actual  endeavor ,  if  the  real  world  was  less 
than  favorable  to  their  attainment,  and  restricted 
its  aim  by  the  conditions  thus  imposed.  This 
mere  customary  life  (the  watch  wound  up  and 
going  on  of  itself)  is  that  which  brings  on  nat¬ 
ural  death.  Custom  is  activity  without  opposi¬ 
tion,  for  which  there  remains  only  a  formal  dura¬ 
tion  ;  in  which  the  fulness  and  zest  that  originally 
characterized  the  aim  of  life  are  out  of  the 
question — a  merely  external  sensuous  existence 
which  has  ceased  to  throw  itself  enthusiastically 
into  its  object.  Thus  perish  individuals,  thus  per¬ 
ish  peoples  by  a  natural  death ;  and  though  the 
latter  may  continue  in  being,  it  is  an  existence 
without  intellect  or  vitality;  having  no  need  of 
its  institutions,  because  the  need  for  them  is 
satisfied — a  political  nullity  and  tedium.  In 
order  that  a  truly  universal  interest  may  arise, 
the  spirit  of  a  people  must  advance  to  the  adop¬ 
tion  of  some  new  purpose ;  but  whence  can  this 
new  purpose  originate?  It  would  be  a  higher, 
more  comprehensive  conception  of  itself,  a 
transcending  of  its  principle,  but  this  very  act 
would  involve  a  principle  of  a  new  order,  a  new 
national  spirit. 

Such  a  new  principle  does  in  fact  enter  into 
the  spirit  of  a  people  that  has  arrived  at  full  de¬ 
velopment  and  self-realization;  it  dies  not  a 
simply  natural  death,  for  it  is  not  a  mere  single 
individual,  but  a  spiritual,  generic  life;  in  its 
case  natural  death  appears  to  imply  destruction 
through  its  own  agency.  The  reason  of  this  dif¬ 
ference  from  the  single  natural  individual,  is 
that  the  spirit  of  a  people  exists  as  a  genus,  and 
consequently  carries  within  it  its  own  negation, 


in  the  very  generality  which  characterizes  it.  A 
people  can  only  die  a  violent  death  when  it  has 
become  naturally  dead  in  itself,  as,  e.g.,  the  Ger¬ 
man  imperial  cities,  the  German  imperial  con¬ 
stitution. 

It  is  not  of  the  nature  of  the  all-pervading 
spirit  to  die  this  merely  natural  death;  it  does 
not  simply  sink  into  the  senile  life  of  mere  cus¬ 
tom,  but,  as  being  a  national  spirit  belonging 
to  universal  history,  attains  to  the  consciousness 
of  what  its  work  is;  it  attains  to  a  conception  of 
itself.  In  fact  it  is  world-historical  only  in  so  far 
as  a  universal  principle  has  lain  in  its  funda¬ 
mental  element,  in  its  grand  aim:  only  so  far  is 
the  work  which  such  a  spirit  produces,  a  moral, 
political  organization.  If  it  be  mere  desires  that 
impel  nations  to  activity,  such  deeds  pass  over 
without  leaving  a  trace;  or  their  traces  are  only 
ruin  and  destruction.  Thus,  it  was  first  Chronos 
— Time — that  ruled;  the  Golden  Age,  without 
moral  products;  and  what  was  produced — the 
offspring  of  that  Chronos — was  devoured  by  it. 
It  was  Jupiter,  from  whose  head  Minerva 
sprang,  and  to  whose  circle  of  divinities  belong 
Apollo  and  the  Muses,  that  first  put  a  constraint 
upon  Time,  and  set  a  bound  to  its  principle  of 
decadence.  He  is  the  political  god,  who  produced 
a  moral  work — the  state. 

In  the  very  element  of  an  achievement  the 
quality  of  generality,  of  thought,  is  contained; 
without  thought  it  has  no  objectivity;  that  is  its 
basis.  The  highest  point  in  the  development  of 
a  people  is  this — to  have  gained  a  conception  of 
its  life  and  condition,  to  have  reduced  its  laws, 
its  ideas  of  justice  and  morality  to  a  science ;  for 
in  this  unity  lies  the  most  intimate  unity  that 
spirit  can  attain  to  in  and  with  itself.  In  its  work 
it  is  employed  in  rendering  itself  an  object  of 
its  own  contemplation;  but  it  cannot  develop 
itself  objectively  in  its  essential  nature,  except 
in  thinking  itself. 

At  this  point,  then,  spirit  is  acquainted  with 
its  principles — the  general  character  of  its  acts. 
But  at  the  same  time,  in  virtue  of  its  very  gen¬ 
erality,  this  work  of  thought  is  different  in  point 
of  form  from  the  actual  achievements  of  the 
national  genius,  and  from  the  vital  agency  by 
which  those  achievements  have  been  performed. 
We  have  then  before  us  a  real  and  an  ideal  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  spirit  of  the  nation.  If  we  wish  to 
gain  the  general  idea  and  conception  of  what  the 
Greeks  were,  we  find  it  in  Sophocles  and  Aristo¬ 
phanes,  in  Thucydides  and  Plato.  In  these  in¬ 
dividuals  the  Greek  spirit  conceived  and  thought 
itself.  This  is  the  profounder  kind  of  satisfaction 
which  the  spirit  of  a  people  attains;  but  it  is 


INTRODUCTION  189 

“ideal,”  and  distinct  from  its  “real”  activity.  the  source  and  birthplace  of  a  new,  and  in  fact 

At  such  a  time,  therefore,  we  are  sure  to  see  higher  form,  in  a  principle  which  while  it  pre- 

a  people  finding  satisfaction  in  the  idea  of  vir-  serves,  dignifies  its  material.  For  thought  is  that 


tue ;  putting  talk  about  virtue  partly  side  by  side 
with  actual  virtue,  but  partly  in  the  place  of  it. 
On  the  other  hand  pure,  universal  thought,  since 
its  nature  is  universality,  is  apt  to  bring  the  spe¬ 
cial  and  spontaneous — belief,  trust,  customary 
morality — to  reflect  upon  itself,  and  its  primi¬ 
tive  simplicity;  to  show  up  the  limitation  with 
which  it  is  fettered,  partly  suggesting  reasons 
for  renouncing  duties,  partly  itself  demanding 
reasons,  and  the  connection  of  such  require¬ 
ments  with  universal  thought;  and  not  finding 
that  connection,  seeking  to  impeach  the  author¬ 
ity  of  duty  generally,  as  destitute  of  a  sound 
foundation. 

At  the  same  time  the  isolation  of  individuals 
from  each  other  and  from  the  whole  makes  its 
appearance ;  their  aggressive  selfishness  and  van¬ 
ity;  their  seeking  personal  advantage  and  con¬ 
sulting  this  at  the  expense  of  the  state  at  large. 
That  inward  principle  in  transcending  its  out¬ 
ward  manifestations  is  subjective  also  in  form — 
viz.,  selfishness  and  corruption  in  the  unbound 
passions  and  egotistic  interests  of  men. 

Zeus,  therefore,  who  is  represented  as  having 
put  a  limit  to  the  devouring  agency  of  Time,  and 
stayed  this  transiency  by  having  established 
something  inherentlyand  independently  durable 
— Zeus  and  his  race  are  themselves  swallowed 
up,  and  that  by  the  very  power  that  produced 
them — the  principle  of  thought,  perception,  rea¬ 
soning,  insight  derived  from  rational  grounds, 
and  the  requirement  of  such  grounds. 

Time  is  the  negative  element  in  the  sensuous 
world.  Thought  is  the  same  negativity,  but  it  is 
the  deepest,  the  infinite  form  of  it,  in  which 
therefore  all  existence  generally  is  dissolved; 
first  finite  existence,  determinate,  limited  form: 
but  existence  generally,  in  its  objective  char¬ 
acter,  is  limited;  it  appears  therefore  as  a  mere 
datum — something  immediate,  authority — and 
is  either  intrinsically  finite  and  limited,  or  pre¬ 
sents  itself  as  a  limit  for  the  thinking  subject, 
and  its  infinite  reflection  on  itself. 

But  first  we  must  observe  how  the  life  which 
proceeds  from  death  is  itself,  on  the  other  hand, 
only  individual  life;  so  that,  regarding  the  spe¬ 
cies  as  the  real  and  substantial  in  this  vicissitude, 
the  perishing  of  the  individual  is  a  regress  of  the 
species  into  individuality.  The  perpetuation  of 
the  race  is,  therefore,  none  other  than  the  mo¬ 
notonous  repetition  of  the  same  kind  of  exist¬ 
ence.  Further,  we  must  remark  how  perception 
— the  comprehension  of  being  by  thought — is 


universal,  that  species  which  is  immortal,  which 
preserves  identity  with  itself.  The  particular 
form  of  spirit  not  merely  passes  away  in  the 
world  by  natural  causes  in  time,  but  is  annulled 
in  the  automatic  self-mirroring  activity  of  con¬ 
sciousness.  Because  this  annulling  is  an  activity 
of  thought,  it  is  at  the  same  time  conservative 
and  elevating  in  its  operation.  While  then,  on 
the  one  side,  spirit  annuls  the  reality,  the  per¬ 
manence  of  that  which  it  is,  it  gains  on  the  other 
side,  the  essence,  the  thought,  the  universal  ele¬ 
ment  of  that  which  it  only  was.  Its  principle  is 
no  longer  that  immediate  import  and  aim  which 
it  was  previously,  but  the  essence  of  that  im¬ 
port  and  aim. 

The  result  of  this  process  is  then  that  spirit, 
in  rendering  itself  objective  and  making  this  its 
being  an  object  of  thought,  on  the  one  hand  de¬ 
stroys  the  determinate  form  of  its  being,  on  the 
other  hand  gains  a  comprehension  of  the  univer¬ 
sal  element  which  it  involves,  and  thereby  gives 
a  new  form  to  its  inherent  principle.  In  virtue 
of  this,  the  substantial  character  of  the  national 
spirit  has  been  altered;  that  is,  its  principle  has 
risen  into  another,  and  in  fact  a  higher  principle. 

It  is  of  the  highest  importance  in  apprehending 
and  comprehending  history  to  have  and  to  un¬ 
derstand  the  thought  involved  in  this  transition. 
The  individual  traverses  as  a  unity  various  grades 
of  development,  and  remains  the  same  individ¬ 
ual;  in  like  manner  also  does  a  people,  till  the 
spirit  which  it  embodies  reaches  the  grade  of 
universality.  In  this  point  lies  the  fundamental, 
the  ideal  necessity  of  transition.  This  is  the  soul, 
the  essential  consideration,  of  the  philosophical 
comprehension  of  history. 

Spirit  is  essentially  the  result  of  its  own  ac¬ 
tivity:  its  activity  is  the  transcending  of  imme¬ 
diate,  simple,  unreflected  existence,  the  negation 
of  that  existence,  and  the  returning  into  itself. 
We  may  compare  it  with  the  seed;  for  with  this 
the  plant  begins,  yet  it  is  also  the  result  of  the 
plant’s  entire  life.  But  the  weak  side  of  life  is 
exhibited  in  the  fact  that  the  commencement 
and  the  result  are  disjoined  from  each  other. 
Thus  also  is  it  in  the  life  of  individuals  and  peo¬ 
ples.  The  life  of  a  people  ripens  a  certain  fruit; 
its  activity  aims  at  the  complete  manifestation 
of  the  principle  which  it  embodies.  But  this 
fruit  does  not  fall  back  into  the  bosom  of  the 
people  that  produced  and  matured  it;  on  the 
contrary,  it  becomes  a  poison-draught  to  it.  That 
poison-draught  it  cannot  let  alone,  for  it  has 


1 9o  PHILOSOPHY 

an  insatiable  thirst  for  it:  the  taste  of  the 
draught  is  its  annihilation,  though  at  the  same 
time  the  rise  of  a  new  principle. 

We  have  already  discussed  the  final  aim  of 
this  progression.  The  principles  of  the  successive 
phases  of  spirit  that  animate  the  nations,  in  a 
necessitated  gradation,  are  themselves  only  steps 
in  the  development  of  the  one  universal  spirit, 
which  through  them  elevates  and  completes  it¬ 
self  to  a  self-comprehending  totality. 

While  we  are  thus  concerned  exclusively  with 
the  idea  of  spirit,  and  in  the  history  of  the  world 
regard  everything  as  only  its  manifestation,  we 
have,  in  traversing  the  past,  however  extensive 
its  periods,  only  to  do  with  what  is  present;  for 
philosophy,  as  occuping  itself  with  the  true,  has 
to  do  with  the  eternally  present.  Nothing  in  the 
past  is  lost  for  it,  for  the  idea  is  ever  present; 
spirit  is  immortal;  with  it  there  is  no  past,  no 
future,  but  an  essential  now.  This  necessarily 
implies  that  the  present  form  of  spirit  compre¬ 
hends  within  it  all  earlier  steps.  These  have  in¬ 
deed  unfolded  themselves  in  succession  inde¬ 
pendently  ;  but  what  spirit  it  is  it  has  always  been 
essentially;  distinctions  are  only  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  this  essential  nature.  The  life  of  the 
ever  present  spirit  is  a  circle  of  progressive  em¬ 
bodiments,  which  looked  at  in  one  aspect  still 
exist  beside  each  other,  and  only  as  looked  at 
from  another  point  of  view  appear  as  past.  The 
grades  which  spirit  seems  to  have  left  behind  it, 
it  still  possesses  in  the  depths  of  its  present. 

GEOGRAPHICAL  BASIS  OF  HISTORY 

Contrasted  with  the  universality  of  the  moral 
whole  and  with  the  unity  of  that  individuality 
which  is  its  active  principle,  the  natural  connec¬ 
tion  that  helps  to  produce  the  spirit  of  a  people, 
appears  an  extrinsic  element;  but  inasmuch  as 
we  must  regard  it  as  the  ground  on  which  that 
spirit  plays  its  part,  it  is  an  essential  and  neces¬ 
sary  basis.  We  began  with  the  assertion  that,  in 
the  history  of  the  world,  the  idea  of  spirit  ap¬ 
pears  in  its  actual  embodiment  as  a  series  of  ex¬ 
ternal  forms,  each  one  of  which  declares  itself 
as  an  actually  existing  people.  This  existence 
falls  under  the  category  of  time  as  well  as  space, 
in  the  way  of  natural  existence ;  and  the  special 
principle,  which  every  world-historical  people 
embodies,  has  this  principle  at  the  same  time  as 
a  natural  characteristic.  Spirit,  clothing  itself  in 
this  form  of  nature,  suffers  its  particular  phases 
to  assume  separate  existence;  for  mutual  exclu¬ 
sion  is  the  mode  of  existence  proper  to  mere  na¬ 
ture.  These  natural  distinctions  must  be  first  of 


OF  HISTORY 

all  regarded  as  special  possibilities,  from  which 
the  spirit  of  the  people  in  question  germinates, 
and  among  them  is  the  geographical  basis.  It  is 
not  our  concern  to  become  acquainted  with  the 
land  occupied  by  nations  as  an  external  locale, 
but  with  the  natural  type  of  the  locality,  as  inti¬ 
mately  connected  with  the  type  and  character 
of  the  people  which  is  the  offspring  of  such  a  soil. 
This  character  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the 
mode  and  form  in  which  nations  make  their  ap¬ 
pearance  in  history,  and  take  place  and  position 
in  it.  Nature  should  not  be  rated  too  high  nor  too 
low:  the  mild  Ionic  sky  certainly  contributed 
much  to  the  charm  of  the  Homeric  poems,  yet 
this  alone  can  produce  no  Homers.  Nor  in  fact 
does  it  continue  to  produce  them;  under  Turkish 
government  no  bards  have  arisen.  We  must  first 
take  notice  of  those  natural  conditions  which 
have  to  be  excluded  once  for  all  from  the  drama 
of  the  world’s  history.  In  the  Frigid  and  in  the 
Torrid  Zone  the  locality  of  world-historical  peo¬ 
ples  cannot  be  found.  For  awakening  conscious¬ 
ness  takes  its  rise  surrounded  by  natural  influ¬ 
ences  alone,  and  every  development  of  it  is  the 
reflection  of  spirit  back  upon  itself  in  opposition 
to  the  immediate,  unreflected  character  of  mere 
nature.  Nature  is  therefore  one  element  in  this 
antithetic  abstracting  process;  nature  is  the  first 
standpoint  from  which  man  can  gain  freedom 
within  himself,  and  this  liberation  must  not  be 
rendered  difficult  by  natural  obstructions.  Na¬ 
ture,  as  contrasted  with  spirit,  is  a  quantitative 
mass,  whose  power  must  not  be  so  great  as  to 
make  its  single  force  omnipotent.  In  the  extreme 
zones  man  cannot  come  to  free  movement;  cold 
and  heat  are  here  too  powerful  to  allow  spirit  to 
build  up  a  world  for  itself.  Aristotle  said  long 
ago,  “When  pressing  needs  are  satisfied,  man 
turns  to  the  general  and  more  elevated.”  But  in 
the  extreme  zones  such  pressure  may  be  said 
never  to  oease,  never  to  be  warded  off ;  men  are 
constantly  impelled  to  direct  attention  to  nature, 
to  the  glowing  rays  of  the  sun,  and  the  icy  frost. 
The  true  theatre  of  history  is  therefore  the  Tem¬ 
perate  Zone;  or, rather, its  northern  half, because 
the  earth  there  presents  itself  in  a  continental 
form,  and  has  a  broad  breast,  as  the  Greeks  say. 
In  the  south,  on  the  contrary,  it  divides  itself, 
and  runs  out  into  many  points.  The  same  pecu¬ 
liarity  shows  itself  in  natural  products.  The  north 
has  many  kinds  of  animals  and  plants  with  com¬ 
mon  characteristics;  in  the  south, where  the  land 
divides  itself  into  points,  natural  forms  also 
present  individual  features  contrasted  with  each 
other. 

The  world  is  divided  into  Old  and  New ;  the 


INTRODUCTION  191 


name  of  New  having  originated  in  the  fact  that 
America  and  Australia  have  only  lately  become 
known  to  us.  But  these  parts  of  the  world  are 
not  only  relatively  new,  but  intrinsically  so  in 
respect  of  their  entire  physical  and  psychical 
constitution.  Their  geological  antiquity  we  have 
nothing  to  do  with.  I  will  not  deny  the  New 
World  the  honour  of  having  emerged  from  the 
sea  at  the  world’s  formation  contemporaneously 
with  the  old:  yet  the  archipelago  between  South 
America  and  Asia  shows  a  physical  immaturity. 
The  greater  part  of  the  islands  are  so  consti¬ 
tuted  that  they  are,  as  it  were,  only  a  superficial 
deposit  of  earth  over  rocks, which  shoot  up  from 
the  fathomless  deep,  and  bear  the  character  of 
novel  origination.  New  Holland1  shows  a  not 
less  immature  geographical  character;  for  in 
penetrating  from  the  settlements  of  the  English 
farther  into  the  country,  we  discover  immense 
streams,  which  have  not  yet  developed  them¬ 
selves  to  such  a  degree  as  to  dig  a  channel  for 
themselves,  but  lose  themselves  in  marshes.  Of 
America  and  its  grade  of  civilization,  especially 
in  Mexico  and  Peru,  we  have  information,  but 
it  imports  nothing  more  than  that  this  culture 
was  an  entirely  national  one,  which  must  expire 
as  soon  as  spirit  approached  it.  America  has  al¬ 
ways  shown  itself  physically  and  psychically 
powerless,  and  still  shows  itself  so.  For  the  abo¬ 
rigines,  after  the  landing  of  the  Europeans  in 
America,  gradually  vanished  at  the  breath  of 
European  activity.  In  the  United  States  of  North 
America  all  the  citizens  are  of  European  descent, 
with  whom  the  old  inhabitants  could  not  amalga¬ 
mate,  but  were  driven  back.  The  aborigines  have 
certainly  adopted  some  arts  and  usages  from 
the  Europeans,  among  others  that  of  brandy¬ 
drinking,  which  has  operated  with  deadly  effect. 
In  the  south  the  natives  were  treated  with  much 
greater  violence,  and  employed  in  hard  labours 
to  which  their  strength  was  by  no  means  com¬ 
petent.  A  mild  and  passionless  disposition,  want 
of  spirit,  and  a  crouching  submissiveness  to¬ 
wards  a  Creole,  and  still  more  towards  a  Eu¬ 
ropean,  are  the  chief  characteristics  of  the  native 
Americans;  and  it  will  be  long  before  the  Eu¬ 
ropeans  succeed  in  producing  any  independence 
of  feeling  in  them.  The  inferiority  of  these  indi¬ 
viduals  in  all  respects,  even  in  regard  to  size,  is 
very  manifest;  only  the  quite  southern  races  in 
Patagonia  are  more  vigorous  natures,  but  still 
abiding  in  their  natural  condition  of  rudeness  and 
barbarism.  When  the  Jesuits  and  the  Catholic 
clergy  proposed  to  accustom  the  Indians  to  Eu¬ 
ropean  culture  and  manners  (they  have,  as  is 
1  A  former  name  for  Australia. — Ed. 


well  known,  founded  a  state  in  Paraguay  and 
convents  in  Mexico  and  California),  they  com¬ 
menced  a  close  intimacy  with  them,  and  pre¬ 
scribed  for  them  the  duties  of  the  day,  which, 
slothful  though  their  disposition  was,  they  com¬ 
plied  with  under  the  authority  of  the  friars. 
These  prescripts  (at  midnight  a  bell  had  to  re¬ 
mind  them  even  of  their  matrimonial  duties) 
were  first,  and  very  wisely,  directed  to  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  wants — the  springs  of  human  activity 
generally.  The  weakness  of  the  American  phy¬ 
sique  was  a  chief  reason  for  bringing  the  Negroes 
to  America,  to  employ  their  labour  in  the  work 
that  had  to  be  done  in  the  New  World;  for  the 
Negroes  are  far  more  susceptible  of  European 
culture  than  the  Indians,  and  an  English  traveller 
has  adduced  instances  of  Negroes  having  become 
competent  clergymen,  medical  men,  etc.  (a  Ne¬ 
gro  first  discovered  the  use  of  the  Peruvian 
bark),  while  only  a  single  native  was  known  to 
him  whose  intellect  was  sufficiently  developed 
to  enable  him  to  study,  but  who  had  died  soon 
after  beginning,  through  excessive  brandy¬ 
drinking.  The  weakness  of  the  human  physique 
of  America  has  been  aggravated  by  a  deficiency 
in  the  mere  tools  and  appliances  of  progress — 
the  want  of  horses  and  iron ,  the  chief  instru¬ 
ments  by  which  they  were  subdued. 

The  original  nation  having  vanished  or  nearly 
so,  the  effective  population  comes  for  the  most 
part  from  Europe;  and  what  takes  place  in 
America  is  but  an  emanation  from  Europe.  Eu¬ 
rope  has  sent  its  surplus  population  to  America 
in  much  the  same  way  as  from  the  old  imperial 
cities,  where  trade-guilds  were  dominant  and 
trade  was  stereotyped,  many  persons  escaped  to 
other  towns  which  were  not  under  such  a  yoke, 
and  where  the  burden  of  imposts  was  not  so 
heavy.  Thus  arose,  by  the  side  of  Hamburg, 
Altona — by  Frankfort,  Offenbach — by  Niirn- 
burg,  Fiirth — and  Carouge  by  Geneva.  The  rela¬ 
tion  between  North  America  and  Europe  is 
similar.  Many  Englishmen  have  settled  there, 
where  burdens  and  imposts  do  not  exist,  and 
where  the  combination  of  European  appliances 
and  European  ingenuity  has  availed  to  realize 
some  produce  from  the  extensive  and  still  virgin 
soil.  Indeed  the  emigration  in  question  offers 
many  advantages.  The  emigrants  have  got  rid 
of  much  that  might  be  obstructive  to  their  inter¬ 
ests  at  home,  while  they  take  with  them  the  ad¬ 
vantages  of  European  independence  of  spirit, 
and  acquired  skill ;  while  for  those  who  are  wil¬ 
ling  to  work  vigorously,  but  who  have  not  found 
in  Europe  opportunities  for  doing  so,  a  sphere 
of  action  is  certainly  presented  in  America. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


192 

America,  as  is  well  known,  is  divided  into  two 
parts,  connected  indeed  by  an  isthmus,  but  which 
has  not  been  the  means  of  establishing  inter¬ 
course  between  them.  Rather,  these  two  divi¬ 
sions  are  most  decidedly  distinct  from  each 
other.  North  America  shows  us  on  approaching 
it,  along  its  eastern  shore  a  wide  border  of  level 
coast,  behind  which  is  stretched  a  chain  of 
mountains — the  Blue  Mountains  or  Appalach¬ 
ians;  further  north  the  Alleghanies.  Streams  is¬ 
suing  from  them  water  the  country  towards  the 
coast,  which  affords  advantages  of  the  most  de¬ 
sirable  kind  to  the  United  States,  whose  origin 
belongs  to  this  region.  Behind  that  mountain 
chain  the  St.  Lawrence  River  flows  (in  connec¬ 
tion  with  huge  lakes),  from  south  to  north,  and 
on  this  river  lie  the  northern  colonies  of  Canada. 
Farther  west  we  meet  the  basin  of  the  vast  Mis¬ 
sissippi,  and  the  basins  of  the  Missouri  and 
Ohio,  which  it  receives,  and  then  debouches  into 
the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  On  the  western  side  of  this 
region  we  have  in  like  manner  a  long  mountain 
chain,  running  through  Mexico  and  the  Isthmus 
of  Panama,  and,  under  the  names  of  the  Andes 
or  Cordillera,  cutting  off  an  edge  of  coast  along 
the  whole  west  side  of  South  America.  The  bor¬ 
der  formed  by  this  is  narrower  and  offers  fewer 
advantages  than  that  of  North  America.  There 
lie  Peru  and  Chile.  On  the  east  side  flow  east¬ 
ward  the  monstrous  streams  of  the  Orinoco  and 
Amazons;  they  form  great  valleys,  not  adapted 
however  for  cultivation,  since  they  are  only  wide 
desert  steppes.  Towards  the  south  flows  the  Rio 
de  la  Plata,  whose  tributaries  have  their  origin 
partly  in  the  Cordilleras,  partly  in  the  northern 
chain  of  mountains  which  separates  the  basin  of 
the  Amazon  from  its  own.  To  the  district  of  the 
Rio  de  la  Plata  belong  Brazil,  and  the  Spanish 
Republics.  Colombia  is  the  northern  coast-land 
of  South  America,  at  the  west  of  which,  flowing 
along  the  Andes,  the  Magdalena  debouches  into 
the  Caribbean  Sea. 

With  the  exception  of  Brazil,  republics  have 
come  to  occupy  South  as  well  as  North  America. 
In  comparing  South  America  (reckoning  Mexico 
as  part  of  it)  with  North  America,  we  observe 
an  astonishing  contrast. 

In  North  America  we  witness  a  prosperous 
state  of  things;  an  increase  of  industry  and  pop¬ 
ulation,  civil  order  and  firm  freedom;  the  whole 
federation  constitutes  but  a  single  state,  and  has 
its  political  centres.  In  South  America,  on  the 
contrary,  the  republics  depend  only  on  military 
force;  their  whole  history  is  a  continued  revolu¬ 
tion;  federated  states  become  disunited;  others 
previously  separated  become  united;  and  all 


these  changes  originate  in  military  revolutions. 
The  more  special  differences  between  the  two 
parts  of  America  show  us  two  opposite  direc¬ 
tions,  the  one  in  political  respects,  the  other  in 
regard  to  religion.  South  America,  where  the 
Spaniards  settled  and  asserted  supremacy,  is 
Catholic;  North  America,  although  a  land  of 
sects  of  every  name,  is  yet  fundamentally,  Prot¬ 
estant.  A  wider  distinction  is  presented  in  the 
fact,  that  South  America  was  conquered,  but 
North  America  colonized.  The  Spaniards  took 
possession  of  South  America  to  govern  it,  and  to 
become  rich  through  occupying  political  offices, 
and  by  exactions.  Depending  on  a  very  distant 
mother  country,  their  desires  found  a  larger 
scope,  and  by  force,  address  and  confidence  they 
gained  a  great  predominance  over  the  Indians. 
The  North  American  states  were,  on  the  other 
hand,  entirely  colonized ,  by  Europeans.  Since  in 
England,  Puritans,  Episcopalians,  and  Catholics 
were  engaged  in  perpetual  conflict,  and  now  one 
party,  now  the  other,  had  the  upper  hand,  many 
emigrated  to  seek  religious  freedom  on  a  foreign 
shore.  These  were  industrious  Europeans,  who 
betook  themselves  to  agriculture,  tobacco,  and 
cotton  planting,  etc.  Soon  the  whole  attention 
of  the  inhabitants  was  given  to  labour,  and  the 
basis  of  their  existence  as  a  united  body  lay  in 
the  necessities  that  bind  man  to  man,  the  desire 
of  repose,  the  establishment  of  civil  rights,  secu¬ 
rity  and  freedom,  and  a  community  arising  from 
the  aggregation  of  individuals  as  atomic  con¬ 
stituents;  so  that  the  state  was  merely  some¬ 
thing  external  for  the  protection  of  property. 
From  the  Protestant  religion  sprang  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  mutual  confidence  of  individuals — 
trust  in  the  honourable  dispositions  of  other 
men;  for  in  the  Protestant  Church  the  entire 
life,  its  activity  generally,  is  the  field  for  what  it 
deems  religious  works.  Among  Catholics,  on  the 
contrary,  the  basis  of  such  a  confidence  can¬ 
not  exist;  for  in  secular  matters  only  force 
and  voluntary  subservience  are  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  action;  and  the  forms  which  are  called 
constitutions  are  in  this  case  only  a  resort  of 
necessity,  and  are  no  protection  against  mis¬ 
trust. 

If  we  compare  North  America  further  with 
Europe,  we  shall  find  in  the  former  the  perma¬ 
nent  example  of  a  republican  constitution.  A 
subjective  unity  presents  itself;  for  there  is  a 
president  at  the  head  of  the  state,  who.  for  the 
sake  of  security  against  any  monarchical  ambi¬ 
tion,  is  chosen  only  for  four  years.  Universal 
protection  for  property,  and  a  something  ap¬ 
proaching  entire  immunity  from  public  burdens, 


INTRODUCTION 


are  facts  which  are  constantly  held  up  to  com¬ 
mendation.  We  have  in  these  facts  the  funda¬ 
mental  character  of  the  community — the  en¬ 
deavor  of  the  individual  after  acquisition,  com¬ 
mercial  profit,  and  gain ;  the  preponderance  of 
private  interest,  devoting  itself  to  that  of  the 
community  only  for  its  own  advantage.  We  find, 
certainly,  legal  relations,  a  formal  code  of  laws; 
but  respect  for  law  exists  apart  from  genuine 
probity,  and  the  American  merchants  commonly 
lie  under  the  imputation  of  dishonest  dealings 
under  legal  protection.  If,  on  the  one  side,  the 
Protestant  Church  develops  the  essential  prin¬ 
ciple  of  confidence,  as  already  stated,  it  thereby 
involves  on  the  other  hand  the  recognition  of 
the  validity  of  the  element  of  feeling  to  such  a 
degree  as  gives  encouragement  to  unseemly  va¬ 
rieties  of  caprice.  Those  who  adopt  this  stand¬ 
point  maintain  that,  as  everyone  may  have  his 
peculiar  way  of  viewing  things  generally ,  so  he 
may  have  also  a  religion  peculiar  to  himself. 
Thence  the  splitting  up  into  so  many  sects, 
which  reach  the  very  acme  of  absurdity;  many 
of  which  have  a  form  of  worship  consisting  in 
convulsive  movements,  and  sometimes  in  the 
most  sensuous  extravagances.  This  complete 
freedom  of  worship  is  developed  to  such  a  de¬ 
gree  that  the  various  congregations  choose  min¬ 
isters  and  dismiss  them  according  to  their  abso¬ 
lute  pleasure;  for  the  church  is  no  independent 
existence — having  a  substantial  spiritual  being, 
and  correspondingly  permanent  external  ar¬ 
rangement — but  the  affairs  of  religion  are  regu¬ 
lated  by  the  good  pleasure  for  the  time  being  of 
the  members  of  the  community.  In  North  Amer¬ 
ica  the  most  unbounded  license  of  imagination 
in  religious  matters  prevails,  and  that  religious 
unity  is  wanting  which  has  been  maintained  in 
European  States,  where  deviations  are  limited 
to  a  few  confessions.  As  to  the  political  condi¬ 
tion  of  North  America,  the  general  object  of  the 
existence  of  this  state  is  not  yet  fixed  and  deter¬ 
mined,  and  the  necessity  for  a  firm  combination 
does  not  yet  exist;  for  a  real  state  and  a  real 
government  arise  only  after  a  distinction  of 
classes  has  arisen,  when  wealth  and  poverty  be¬ 
come  extreme,  and  when  such  a  condition  of 
things  presents  itself  that  a  large  portion  of  the 
people  can  no  longer  satisfy  its  necessities  in  the 
way  in  which  it  has  been  accustomed  so  to  do. 
But  America  is  hitherto  exempt  from  this  pres¬ 
sure,  for  it  has  the  outlet  of  colonization  con¬ 
stantly  and  widely  open, and  multitudes  are  con¬ 
tinually  streaming  into  the  plains  of  the  Mis¬ 
sissippi.  By  this  means  the  chief  source  of  dis¬ 
content  is  removed,  and  the  continuation  of  the 


193 

existing  civil  condition  is  guaranteed.  A  com¬ 
parison  of  the  United  States  of  North  America 
with  European  lands  is  therefore  impossible; 
for  in  Europe,  such  a  natural  outlet  for  popula¬ 
tion,  notwithstanding  all  the  emigrations  that 
take  place,  does  not  exist.  Had  the  woods  of 
Germany  been  in  existence,  the  French  Revolu¬ 
tion  would  not  have  occurred.  North  America 
will  be  comparable  with  Europe  only  after  the 
immeasurable  space  which  that  country  pre¬ 
sents  to  its  inhabitants  shall  have  been  occupied, 
and  the  members  of  the  political  body  shall  have 
begun  to  be  pressed  back  on  each  other.  North 
America  is  still  in  the  condition  of  having  land 
to  begin  to  cultivate.  Only  when,  as  in  Europe, 
the  direct  increase  of  agriculturists  is  checked, 
will  the  inhabitants,  instead  of  pressing  out¬ 
wards  to  occupy  the  fields,  press  inwards  upon 
each  other — pursuing  town  occupations,  and 
trading  with  their  fellow-citizens;  and  so  form 
a  compact  system  of  civil  society,  and  require 
an  organized  state.  The  North  American  federa¬ 
tion  have  no  neighbouring  state  (towards  which 
they  occupy  a  relation  similar  to  that  of  Euro¬ 
pean  states  to  each  other)  one  which  they  re¬ 
gard  with  mistrust,  and  against  which  they  must 
keep  up  a  standing  army.  Canada  and  Mexico 
are  not  objects  of  fear,  and  England  has  had 
fifty  years’  experience,  that  free  America  is 
more  profitable  to  her  than  it  was  in  a  state  of 
dependence.  The  militia  of  the  North  American 
Republic  proved  themselves  quite  as  brave  in 
the  War  of  Independence,  as  the  Dutch  under 
Philip  II ;  but  generally,  where  independence  is 
not  at  stake,  less  power  is  displayed,  and  in  the 
year  1814  the  militia  held  out  but  indifferently 
against  the  English. 

America  is  therefore  the  land  of  the  future, 
where,  in  the  ages  that  lie  before  us,  the  burden 
of  the  world’s  history  shall  reveal  itself — per¬ 
haps  in  a  contest  between  North  and  South 
America.  It  is  a  land  of  desire  for  all  those  who 
are  weary  of  the  historical  lumber-room  of  old 
Europe.  Napoleon  is  reported  to  have  said: 
“Cette  vieille  Europe  m’ennuie.”  It  is  for  Amer¬ 
ica  to  abandon  the  ground  on  which  hitherto  the 
history  of  the  world  has  developed  itself.  What 
has  taken  place  in  the  New  World  up  to  the 
present  time  is  only  an  echo  of  the  Old  World — 
the  expression  of  a  foreign  life;  and  as  a  land  of 
the  future,  it  has  no  interest  for  us  here,  for,  as 
regards  history ,  our  concern  must  be  with  that 
which  has  been  and  that  which  is.  In  regard  to 
philosophy,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  to  do 
with  that  which  (strictly  speaking)  is  neither 
past  nor  future,  but  with  that  which  is,  which 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


194 

has  an  eternal  existence — with  reason ;  and  this 
is  quite  sufficient  to  occupy  us. 

Dismissing,  then,  the  New  World,  and  the 
dreams  to  which  it  may  give  rise,  we  pass  over 
to  the  Old  World — the  scene  of  the  world's  his¬ 
tory;  and  must  first  direct  attention  to  the 
natural  elements  and  conditions  of  existence 
which  it  presents.  America  is  divided  into  two 
parts,  which  are  indeed  connected  by  an  isth¬ 
mus.  but  which  forms  only  an  external,  material 
bond  of  union.  The  Old  World,  on  the  contrary, 
which  lies  opposite  to  America,  and  is  separated 
from  it  by  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  has  its  continuity 
interrupted  by  a  deep  inlet — the  Mediterranean 
Sea.  The  three  continents  that  compose  it  have 
an  essential  relation  to  each  other,  and  consti¬ 
tute  a  totality.  Their  peculiar  feature  is  that 
they  lie  round  this  sea.  and  therefore  have  an 
easy  means  of  communication;  for  rivers  and 
seas  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  disjoining,  but  as 
uniting.  England  and  Brittany.  Norway  and 
Denmark,  Sweden  andLivonia.have  been  united. 
For  the  three  quarters  of  the  globe  the  Medi¬ 
terranean  Sea  is  similarly  the  uniting  element, 
and  the  centre  of  world  history.  Greece  lies  here, 
the  focus  of  light  in  history.  Then  in  Syria  we 
have  Jerusalem,  the  centre  of  Judaism  and  of 
Christianity;  southeast  of  it  lie  Mecca  and  Me¬ 
dina,  the  cradle  of  the  Mussulman  faith;  to¬ 
wards  the  west  Delphi  and  Athens;  farther  west 
still.  Rome;  on  the  Mediterranean  Sea  we  have 
also  Alexandria  and  Carthage.  The  Mediterra¬ 
nean  is  thus  the  heart  of  the  Old  World,  for  it  is 
that  which  conditioned  and  vitalized  it.  Without 
it  the  history  of  the  world  could  not  be  con¬ 
ceived;  it  would  be  like  ancient  Rome  or  Athens 
without  the  forum,  where  all  the  life  of  the  city 
came  together.  The  extensive  tract  of  eastern 
Asia  is  severed  from  the  process  of  general  his¬ 
torical  development,  and  has  no  share  in  it ;  so 
also  northern  Europe,  which  took  part  in  the 
world’s  history  only  at  a  later  date,  and  had  no 
part  in  it  while  the  Old  World  lasted;  for  this 
was  exclusively  limited  to  the  countries  lying 
round  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  Julius  Caesar’s 
crossing  the  Alps,  the  conquest  of  Gaul  and  the 
relation  into  which  the  Germans  thereby  en¬ 
tered  with  the  Roman  Empire,  makes  conse¬ 
quently  an  epoch  in  history;  for  in  virtue  of  this 
it  begins  to  extend  its  boundaries  beyond  the 
Alps.  Eastern  Asia  and  that  trans-Alpine  coun¬ 
try  are  the  extremes  of  this  agitated  focus  of 
human  life  around  the  Mediterranean,  the  be¬ 
ginning  and  end  of  history,  its  rise  and  decline. 

The  more  special  geographical  distinctions 
must  now  be  established,  and  they  are  to  be  re¬ 


garded  as  essential,  rational  distinctions,  in  con¬ 
trast  with  the  variety  of  merely  accidental  cir¬ 
cumstances.  Of  these  characteristic  differences 
there  are  three :  — 

(1)  The  arid  elevated  land  with  its  extensive 
steppes  and  plains. 

(2)  The  valley  plains — the  land  of  transition 
permeated  and  watered  by  great  streams. 

(3)  The  coast  region  in  immediate  connection 
with  the  sea. 

These  three  geographical  elements  are  the  es¬ 
sential  ones,  and  we  shall  see  each  quarter  of  the 
globe  triply  divided  accordingly.  The  first  is  the 
substantial,  unvarying. metallic, elevated  region, 
intractably  shut  up  within  itself,  but  perhaps 
adapted  to  send  forth  impulses  over  the  rest  of 
the  world;  the  second  forms  centres  of  civiliza¬ 
tion,  and  is  the  yet  undeveloped  independence; 
the  third  offers  the  means  of  connecting  the 
world  together,  and  of  maintaining  the  connec¬ 
tion. 

( 1)  The  elevated  land.  We  see  such  a  descrip¬ 
tion  of  country  in  middle  Asia  inhabited  by 
Mongolians  (using  the  word  in  a  general  sense) : 
from  the  Caspian  Sea  these  steppes  stretch  in  a 
northerly  direction  towards  the  Black  Sea.  As 
similar  tracts  may  be  cited  the  deserts  of  Arabia 
and  of  Barbary  in  Africa;  in  South  America  the 
country  round  the  Orinoco,  and  in  Paraguay. 
The  peculiarity  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  ele¬ 
vated  region,  which  is  watered  sometimes  only 
by  rain,  or  by  the  overflowing  of  a  river  (as  are 
the  plains  of  the  Orinoco) — is  the  patriarchal 
life,  the  division  into  single  families.  The  region 
which  these  families  occupy  is  unfruitful  or  pro¬ 
ductive  only  temporarily;  the  inhabitants  have 
their  property  not  in  the  land,  from  which  they 
derive  only  a  trifling  profit,  but  in  the  animals 
that  wander  with  them.  For  a  long  time  these 
find  pasture  in  the  plains,  and  when  they  are 
depastured,  the  tribe  moves  to  other  parts  of  the 
country.  They  are  careless  and  provide  nothing 
for  the  winter,  on  which  account  therefore,  half 
of  the  herd  is  frequently  cut  off.  Among  these 
inhabitants  of  the  upland  there  exist  no  legal 
relations,  and  consequently  there  are  exhibited 
among  them  the  extremes  of  hospitality  and 
rapine ;  the  last  more  especially  when  they  are 
surrounded  by  civilized  nations,  as  the  Arabians, 
who  are  assisted  in  their  depredations  by  their 
horses  and  camels.  The  Mongolians  feed  on 
mare’s  milk,  and  thus  the  horse  supplies  them  at 
the  same  time  with  appliances  for  nourishment 
and  for  war.  Although  this  is  the  form  of  their 
patriarchal  life,  it  often  happens  that  they  co¬ 
here  together  in  great  masses  and,  by  an  impulse 


INTRODUCTION  195 


of  one  kind  or  another,  are  excited  to  external 
movement.  Though  previously  of  peaceful  dis¬ 
position,  they  then  rush  as  a  devastating  inunda¬ 
tion  over  civilized  lands,  and  the  revolution 
which  ensues  has  no  other  result  than  destruc¬ 
tion  and  desolation.  Such  an  agitation  was  ex¬ 
cited  among  those  tribes  under  Genghis  Khan 
and  Tamerlane :  they  destroyed  all  before  them ; 
then  vanished  again,  as  does  an  overwhelming 
forest-torrent — possessing  no  inherent  principle 
of  vitality.  From  the  uplands  they  rush  down 
into  the  dells:  there  dwell  peaceful  mountain¬ 
eers — herdsmen  who  also  occupy  themselves 
with  agriculture,  as  do  the  Swiss.  Asia  has  also 
such  a  people :  they  are  however  on  the  whole  a 
less  important  element. 

(2)  The  valley  plains.  These  are  plains,  per¬ 
meated  by  rivers,  and  which  owe  the  whole  of 
their  fertility  to  the  streams  by  which  they  are 
formed.  Such  a  valley-plain  is  China ;  India,  tra¬ 
versed  by  the  Indus  and  the  Ganges ;  Babylonia, 
where  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris  flow;  Egypt, 
watered  by  the  Nile.  In  these  regions  extensive 
kingdoms  arise,  and  the  foundation  of  great 
states  begins.  For  agriculture,  which  prevails 
here  as  the  primary  principle  of  subsistence  for 
individuals,  is  assisted  by  the  regularity  of  sea¬ 
sons,  which  require  corresponding  agricultural 
operations;  property  in  land  commences,  and 
the  consequent  legal  relations ;  that  is  to  say,  the 
basis  and  foundation  of  the  state,  which  be¬ 
comes  possible  only  in  connection  with  such  re¬ 
lations. 

(3)  The  coast  land.  A  river  divides  districts 
of  country  from  each  other,  but  still  more  does 
the  sea ;  and  we  are  accustomed  to  regard  water 
as  the  separating  element.  Especially  in  recent 
times  has  it  been  insisted  upon  that  states  must 
necessarily  have  been  separated  by  natural  fea¬ 
tures.  Yet  on  the  contrary,  it  may  be  asserted  as 
a  fundamental  principle  that  nothing  unites  so 
much  as  water,  for  countries  are  nothing  else 
than  districts  occupied  by  streams.  Silesia,  for 
instance,  is  the  valley  of  the  Oder;  Bohemia  and 
Saxony  are  the  valley  of  the  Elbe ;  Egypt  is  the 
valley  of  the  Nile.  With  the  sea  this  is  not  less 
the  case,  as  has  been  already  pointed  out.  Only 
mountains  separate.  Thus  the  Pyrenees  decided¬ 
ly  separate  Spain  from  France.  The  Europeans 
have  been  in  constant  connection  with  America 
and  the  East  Indies  ever  since  they  were  dis¬ 
covered  ;  but  they  have  scarcely  penetrated  into 
the  interior  of  Africa  and  Asia,  because  inter¬ 
course  by  land  is  much  more  difficult  than  by 
water.  Only  through  the  fact  of  being  a  sea  has 
the  Mediterranean  become  a  focus  of  national 


life.  Let  us  now  look  at  the  character  of  the  na¬ 
tions  that  are  conditioned  by  this  third  element. 

The  sea  gives  us  the  idea  of  the  indefinite,  the 
unlimited,  and  infinite;  and  in  feeling  his  own 
infinite  in  that  infinite,  man  is  stimulated  and 
emboldened  to  stretch  beyond  the  limited:  the 
sea  invites  man  to  conquest,  and  to  piratical 
plunder,  but  also  to  honest  gain  and  to  com¬ 
merce.  The  land,  the  mere  valley-plain  attaches 
him  to  the  soil;  it  involves  him  in  an  infinite 
multitude  of  dependencies,  but  the  sea  carries 
him  out  beyond  these  limited  circles  of  thought 
and  action.  Those  who  navigate  the  sea,  have 
indeed  gain  for  their  object,  but  the  means  are 
in  this  respect  paradoxical,  inasmuch  as  they 
hazard  both  property  and  life  to  attain  it.  The 
means  therefore  are  the  very  opposite  to  that 
which  they  aim  at.  This  is  what  exalts  their 
gain  and  occupation  above  itself,  and  makes  it 
something  brave  and  noble.  Courage  is  neces¬ 
sarily  introduced  into  trade,  daring  is  joined 
with  wisdom.  For  the  daring  which  encounters 
the  sea  must  at  the  same  time  embrace  wariness 
— cunning — since  it  has  to  do  with  the  treacher¬ 
ous,  the  most  unreliable  and  deceitful  element. 
This  boundless  plain  is  absolutely  yielding,  with¬ 
standing  no  pressure,  not  even  a  breath  of  wind. 
It  looksboundlessly  innocent,  submissive,  friend¬ 
ly,  and  insinuating;  and  it  is  exactly  this  sub¬ 
missiveness  which  changes  the  sea  into  the  most 
dangerous  and  violent  element.  To  this  deceit¬ 
fulness  and  violence  man  opposes  merely  a  sim¬ 
ple  piece  of  wood ;  confides  entirely  in  his  cour¬ 
age  and  presence  of  mind;  and  thus  passes  from 
a  firm  ground  to  an  unstable  support,  taking  his 
artificial  ground  with  him.  The  ship — that  swan 
of  the  sea,  which  cuts  the  watery  plain  in  agile 
and  arching  movements  or  describes  circles  up¬ 
on  it — is  a  machine  whose  invention  does  the 
greatest  honour  to  the  boldness  of  man  as  well 
as  to  his  understanding.  This  stretching  out  of 
the  sea  beyond  the  limitations  of  the  land,  is 
wanting  to  the  splendid  political  edifices  of 
Asiatic  states,  although  they  themselves  border 
on  the  sea — as  for  example,  China.  For  them  the 
sea  is  only  the  limit,  the  ceasing  of  the  land: 
they  have  no  positive  relation  to  it.  The  activity 
to  which  the  sea  invites,  is  a  quite  peculiar  one : 
thence  arises  the  fact  that  the  coastlands  al¬ 
most  always  separate  themselves  from  the  states 
of  the  interior  although  they  are  connected  with 
these  by  a  river.  Thus  Holland  has  severed  it¬ 
self  from  Germany,  Portugal  from  Spain. 

In  accordance  with  these  data  we  may  now 
consider  the  three  portions  of  the  globe  with 
which  history  is  concerned,  and  here  the  three 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


196 

characteristic  principles  manifest  themselves  in 
a  more  or  less  striking  manner:  Africa  has  for 
its  leading  classical  feature  the  upland,  Asia  the 
contrast  of  river  regions  with  the  upland,  Europe 
the  mingling  of  these  several  elements. 

Africa  must  be  divided  into  three  parts :  one 
is  that  which  lies  south  of  the  desert  of  Sahara — 
Africa  proper — the  upland  almost  entirely  un¬ 
known  to  us,  with  narrow  coast-tracts  along  the 
sea;  the  second  is  that  to  the  north  of  the  desert, 
European  Africa  (if  we  may  so  call  it),  a  coast- 
land;  the  third  is  the  river  region  of  the  Nile, 
the  only  valley-land  of  Africa,  and  which  is  in 
connection  with  Asia. 

Africa  proper,  as  far  as  history  goes  back,  has 
remained,  for  all  purposes  of  connection  with 
the  rest  of  the  world,  shut  up;  it  is  the  gold-land 
compressed  within  itself — the  land  of  childhood, 
which  lying  beyond  the  day  of  self-conscious 
history,  is  enveloped  in  the  dark  mantle  of  night. 
Its  isolated  character  originates,  not  merely  in 
its  tropical  nature,  but  essentially  in  its  geo¬ 
graphical  condition.  The  triangle  which  it  forms 
(if  we  take  the  west  coast — which  in  the  Gulf 
of  Guinea  makes  a  strongly  indented  angle — for 
one  side,  and  in  the  same  way  the  east  coast  to 
Cape  Gardafu  for  another),  is  on  two  sides  so 
constituted  for  the  most  part,  as  to  have  a  very 
narrow  coast  tract,  habitable  only  in  a  few  iso¬ 
lated  spots.  Next  to  this  towards  the  interior, 
follows  to  almost  the  same  extent,  a  girdle  of 
marsh  land  with  the  most  luxuriant  vegetation, 
the  especial  home  of  ravenous  beasts,  snakes  of 
all  kinds — a  border  tract  whose  atmosphere  is 
poisonous  to  Europeans.  This  border  constitutes 
the  base  of  a  cincture  of  high  mountains,  which 
are  only  at  distant  intervals  traversed  by 
streams,  and  where  they  are  so,  in  such  a  way  as 
to  form  no  means  of  union  with  the  interior ;  for 
the  interruption  occurs  but  seldom  below  the 
upper  part  of  the  mountain  ranges,  and  only  in 
individual  narrow  channels,  where  are  frequent¬ 
ly  found  innavigable  waterfalls  and  torrents 
crossing  each  other  in  wild  confusion.  During 
the  three  or  three  and  a  half  centuries  that  the 
Europeans  have  known  this  border  land  and 
have  taken  places  in  it  into  their  possession, 
they  have  only  here  and  there  (and  that  but  for 
a  short  time)  passed  these  mountains,  and  have 
nowhere  settled  down  beyond  them.  The  land 
surrounded  by  these  mountains  is  an  unknown 
upland,  from  which  on  the  other  hand  the  Ne¬ 
groes  have  seldom  made  their  way  through.  In 
the  sixteenth  century  occurred,  at  many  very 
distant  points,  outbreaks  of  terrible  hordes 
which  rushed  down  upon  the  more  peaceful  in¬ 


habitants  of  the  declivities.  Whether  any  inter¬ 
nal  movement  had  taken  place,  or  if  so,  of  what 
character,  we  do  not  know.  What  we  do  know 
of  these  hordes  is  the  contrast  between  their 
conduct  in  their  wars  and  forays  themselves — 
which  exhibited  the  most  reckless  inhumanity 
and  disgusting  barbarism — and  the  fact  that 
afterwards,  when  their  rage  was  spent,  in  the 
calm  time  of  peace,  they  showed  themselves 
mild  and  well  disposed  towards  the  Europeans, 
when  they  became  acquainted  with  them.  This 
holds  good  of  the  Fullahs  and  of  the  Mandingo 
tribes,  who  inhabit  the  mountain  terraces  of  the 
Senegal  and  Gambia.  The  second  portion  of  Af¬ 
rica  is  the  river  district  of  the  Nile — Egypt; 
which  was  adapted  to  become  a  mighty  centre 
of  independent  civilization,  and  therefore  is  as 
isolated  and  singular  in  Africa  as  Africa  itself 
appears  in  relation  to  the  other  parts  of  the 
world.  The  northern  part  of  Africa,  which  may 
be  specially  called  that  of  the  coast  territory 
(for  Egypt  has  been  frequently  driven  back  on 
itself,  by  the  Mediterranean),  lies  on  the  Medi¬ 
terranean  and  the  Atlantic;  a  magnificent  terri¬ 
tory,  on  which  Carthage  once  lay — the  site  of 
the  modern  Morocco,  Algiers,  Tunis,  and  Trip¬ 
oli.  This  part  was  to  be,  must  be  attached  to 
Europe:  the  French  have  lately  made  a  success¬ 
ful  effort  in  this  direction:  like  the  Near  East, 
it  looks  Europe-wards.  Here  in  their  turn  have 
Carthaginians,  Romans,  and  Byzantines,  Mus¬ 
sulmans,  Arabians,  had  their  abode,  and  the  in¬ 
terests  of  Europe  have  always  striven  to  get  a 
footing  in  it. 

The  peculiarly  African  character  is  difficult  to 
comprehend,  for  the  very  reason  that  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  it,  we  must  quite  give  up  the  principle 
which  naturally  accompanies  all  our  ideas — the 
category  of  universality.  In  Negro  life  the  char¬ 
acteristic  point  is  the  fact  that  consciousness 
has  not  yet  attained  to  the  realization  of  any 
substantial  objective  existence — as  for  example, 
God,  or  law — in  which  the  interest  of  man’s 
volition  is  involved  and  in  which  he  realizes  his 
own  being.  This  distinction  between  himself  as 
an  individual  and  the  universality  of  his  essen¬ 
tial  being,  the  African  in  the  uniform,  undevel¬ 
oped  oneness  of  his  existence  has  not  yet  at¬ 
tained;  so  that  the  knowledge  of  an  absolute 
being,  an  other  and  a  higher  than  his  individual 
self,  is  entirely  wanting.  The  Negro,  as  already 
observed,  exhibits  the  natural  man  in  his  com¬ 
pletely  wild  and  untamed  state.  We  must  lay 
aside  all  thought  of  reverence  and  morality,  all 
that  we  call  feeling,  if  we  would  rightly  compre¬ 
hend  him;  there  is  nothing  harmonious  with 


INTRODUCTION 


humanity  to  be  found  in  this  type  of  character. 
The  copious  and  circumstantial  accounts  of  mis¬ 
sionaries  completely  confirm  this,  and  Moham¬ 
medanism  appears  to  be  the  only  thing  which  in 
any  way  brings  the  Negroes  within  the  range  of 
culture.  The  Mohammedans  too  understand  bet¬ 
ter  than  the  Europeans  how  to  penetrate  into 
the  interior  of  the  country.  The  grade  of  culture 
which  the  Negroes  occupy  may  be  more  nearly 
appreciated  by  considering  the  aspect  which  re¬ 
ligion  presents  among  them.  That  which  forms 
the  basis  of  religious  conceptions  is  the  con¬ 
sciousness  on  the  part  of  man  of  a  higher  power 
— even  though  this  is  conceived  only  as  a  vis 
natnrce — in  relation  to  which  he  feels  himself  a 
weaker,  humbler  being.  Religion  begins  with  the 
consciousness  that  there  is  something  higher 
than  man.  But  even  Herodotus  called  the  Ne¬ 
groes  sorcerers :  now  in  sorcery  we  have  not  the 
idea  of  a  God,  of  a  moral  faith;  it  exhibits  man 
as  the  highest  power,  regarding  him  as  alone 
occupying  a  position  of  command  over  the  pow¬ 
er  of  nature.  We  have  here  therefore  nothing  to 
do  with  a  spiritual  adoration  of  God,  nor  with 
an  empire  of  right.  God  thunders,  but  is  not  on 
that  account  recognized  as  God.  For  the  soul  of 
man,  God  must  be  more  than  a  thunderer,  where¬ 
as  among  the  Negroes  this  is  not  the  case.  Al¬ 
though  they  are  necessarily  conscious  of  de¬ 
pendence  upon  nature — for  they  need  the  bene¬ 
ficial  influence  of  storm,  rain,  cessation  of  the 
rainy  period,  and  so  on — yet  this  does  not  con¬ 
duct  them  to  the  consciousness  of  a  higher 
power:  it  is  they  who  command  the  elements, 
and  this  they  call  “magic.”  The  kings  have  a 
class  of  ministers  through  whom  they  command 
elemental  changes,  and  every  place  possesses 
such  magicians,  who  perform  special  ceremo¬ 
nies,  with  all  sorts  of  gesticulations,  dances,  up¬ 
roar,  and  shouting,  and  in  the  midst  of  this  con¬ 
fusion  commence  their  incantations.  The  sec¬ 
ond  element  in  their  religion,  consists  in  their 
giving  an  outward  form  to  this  supernatural 
power — projecting  their  hidden  might  into  the 
world  of  phenomena  by  means  of  images.  What 
they  conceive  of  as  the  power  in  question,  is 
therefore  nothing  really  objective,  having  a  sub¬ 
stantial  being  and  different  from  themselves,  but 
the  first  thing  that  comes  in  their  way.  This, 
taken  quite  indiscriminately,  they  exalt  to  the 
dignity  of  a  “genius”;  it  may  be  an  animal,  a 
tree,  a  stone,  or  a  wooden  figure.  This  is  their 
fetich — a  word  to  which  the  Portuguese  first 
gave  currency,  and  which  is  derived  from  feitizo, 
magic.  Here,  in  the  fetich,  a  kind  of  objective 
independence  as  contrasted  with  the  arbitrary 


fancy  of  the  individual  seems  to  manifest  itself; 
but  as  the  objectivity  is  nothing  other  than  the 
fancy  of  the  individual  projecting  itself  into 
space,  the  human  individuality  remains  master 
of  the  image  it  has  adopted.  If  any  mischance 
occurs  which  the  fetich  has  not  averted,  if  rain 
is  suspended,  if  there  is  a  failure  in  the  crops, 
they  bind  and  beat  or  destroy  the  fetich  and  so 
get  rid  of  it,  making  another  immediately,  and 
thus  holding  it  in  their  own  power.  Such  a  fetich 
has  no  independence  as  an  object  of  religious 
worship;  still  less  has  it  aesthetic  independence 
as  a  work  of  art ;  it  is  merely  a  creation  that  ex¬ 
presses  the  arbitrary  choice  of  its  maker,  and 
which  always  remains  in  his  hands.  In  short 
there  is  no  relation  of  dependence  in  this  re¬ 
ligion.  There  is  however  one  feature  that  points 
to  something  beyond ;  the  worship  of  the  dead , 
in  which  their  deceased  forefathers  and  ances¬ 
tors  are  regarded  by  them  as  a  power  influencing 
the  living.  Their  idea  in  the  matter  is  that  these 
ancestors  exercise  vengeance  and  inflict  upon 
man  various  injuries,  exactly  in  the  sense  in 
which  this  was  supposed  of  witches  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  ages.  Yet  the  power  of  the  dead  is  not  held 
superior  to  that  of  the  living,  for  the  Negroes 
command  the  dead  and  lay  spells  upon  them. 
Thus  the  power  in  question  remains  substantial¬ 
ly  always  in  bondage  to  the  living  subject.  Death 
itself  is  looked  upon  by  the  Negroes  as  no  uni¬ 
versal  natural  law;  even  this,  they  think,  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  evil-disposed  magicians.  In  this  doc¬ 
trine  is  certainly  involved  the  elevation  of  man 
over  Nature;  to  such  a  degree  that  the  chance 
volition  of  man  is  superior  to  the  merely  natural 
— that  he  looks  upon  this  as  an  instrument  to 
which  he  does  not  pay  the  compliment  of  treat¬ 
ing  it  in  a  way  conditioned  by  itself,  but  which 
he  commands. 

But  from  the  fact  that  man  is  regarded  as  the 
highest,  it  follows  that  he  has  no  respect  for 
himself;  for  only  with  the  consciousness  of  a 
higher  being  does  he  reach  a  point  of  view  which 
inspires  him  with  real  reverence.  For  if  arbitrary 
choice  is  the  absolute,  the  only  substantial  ob¬ 
jectivity  that  is  realized,  the  mind  cannot  in 
such  be  conscious  of  any  universality.  The  Ne¬ 
groes  indulge,  therefore,  that  perfect  co?itempt 
for  humanity,  which  in  its  bearing  on  justice  and 
morality  is  the  fundamental  characteristic  of 
the  race.  They  have  moreover  no  knowledge  of 
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  although  spectres 
are  supposed  to  appear.  The  undervaluing  of 
humanity  among  them  reaches  an  incredible  de¬ 
gree  of  intensity.  Tyranny  is  regarded  as  no 
wrong,  and  cannibalism  is  looked  upon  as  quite 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


198 

customary  and  proper.  Among  us  instinct  deters 
from  it,  if  we  can  speak  of  instinct  at  all  as  ap¬ 
pertaining  to  man.  But  with  the  Negro  this  is  not 
the  case,  and  the  devouring  of  human  flesh  is 
altogether  consonant  with  the  general  principles 
of  the  African  race;  to  the  sensual  Negro, human 
flesh  is  but  an  object  of  sense — mere  flesh.  At 
the  death  of  a  king  hundreds  are  killed  and 
eaten;  prisoners  are  butchered  and  their  flesh 
sold  in  the  markets;  the  victor  is  accustomed  to 
eat  the  heart  of  his  slain  foe.  When  magical  rites 
are  performed,  it  frequently  happens  that  the 
sorcerer  kills  the  first  that  comes  in  his  way  and 
divides  his  body  among  the  bystanders.  Another 
characteristic  fact  in  reference  to  the  Negroes 
is  slavery.  Negroes  are  enslaved  by  Europeans 
and  sold  to  America.  Bad  as  this  may  be,  their 
lot  in  their  own  land  is  even  worse,  since  there 
a  slavery  quite  as  absolute  exists;  for  it  is  the 
essential  principle  of  slavery,  that  man  has  not 
yet  attained  a  consciousness  of  his  freedom  and 
consequently  sinks  down  to  a  mere  thing — an 
object  of  no  value.  Among  the  Negroes  moral 
sentiments  are  quite  weak,  or  more  strictly 
speaking,  non-existent.  Parents  sell  their  chil¬ 
dren,  and  conversely  children  their  parents,  as 
either  has  the  opportunity.  Through  the  pervad¬ 
ing  influence  of  slavery  all  those  bonds  of  moral 
regard  which  we  cherish  towards  each  other  dis¬ 
appear,  and  it  does  not  occur  to  the  Negro  mind 
to  expect  from  others  what  we  are  enabled  to 
claim.  The  polygamy  of  the  Negroes  has  fre¬ 
quently  for  its  object  the  having  many  children, 
to  be  sold,  every  one  of  them,  into  slavery;  and 
very  often  naive  complaints  on  this  score  are 
heard,  as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  a  Negro  in 
London,  who  lamented  that  he  was  now  quite  a 
poor  man  because  he  had  already  sold  all  his 
relations.  In  the  contempt  of  humanity  dis¬ 
played  by  the  Negroes,  it  is  not  so  much  a  de¬ 
spising  of  death  as  a  want  of  regard  for  life  that 
forms  the  characteristic  feature.  To  this  want 
of  regard  for  life  must  be  ascribed  the  great 
courage,  supported  by  enormous  bodily  strength, 
exhibited  by  the  Negroes,  who  allow  themselves 
to  be  shot  down  by  thousands  in  war  with  Euro¬ 
peans.  Life  has  a  value  only  when  it  has  some¬ 
thing  valuable  as  its  object. 

Turning  our  attention  in  the  next  place  to  the 
category  of  political  constitution,  we  shall  see 
that  the  entire  nature  of  this  race  is  such  as  to 
preclude  the  existence  of  any  such  arrangement. 
The  standpoint  of  humanity  at  this  grade  is 
mere  sensuous  volition  with  energy  of  will;  since 
universal  spiritual  laws  (for  example,  that  of 
the  morality  of  the  family)  cannot  be  recog¬ 


nized  here.  Universality  exists  only  as  arbitrary 
subjective  choice.  The  political  bond  can  there¬ 
fore  not  possess  such  a  character  as  that  free 
laws  should  unite  the  community.  There  is  abso¬ 
lutely  no  bond,  no  restraint  upon  that  arbitrary 
volition.  Nothing  but  external  force  can  hold 
the  state  together  for  a  moment.  A  ruler  stands 
at  the  head,  for  sensuous  barbarism  can  only 
be  restrained  by  despotic  power.  But  since  the 
subjects  are  of  equally  violent  temper  with  their 
master,  they  keep  him  on  the  other  hand  within 
limits.  Under  the  chief  there  are  many  other 
chiefs  with  whom  the  former,  whom  we  will  call 
the  king,  takes  counsel,  and  whose  consent  he 
must  seek  to  gain,  if  he  wishes  to  undertake  a 
war  or  impose  a  tax.  In  this  relation  he  can  ex¬ 
ercise  more  or  less  authority,  and  by  fraud  or 
force  can  on  occasion  put  this  or  that  chieftain 
out  of  the  way.  Besides  this  the  kings  have  other 
specified  prerogatives.  Among  the  Ashanti  the 
king  inherits  all  the  property  left  by  his  subjects 
at  their  death.  In  other  places  all  unmarried 
women  belong  to  the  king,  and  whoever  wishes 
a  wife,  must  buy  her  from  him.  If  the  Negroes 
are  discontented  with  their  king  they  depose  and 
kill  him.  In  Dahomey,  when  they  are  thus  dis¬ 
pleased,  the  custom  is  to  send  parrots’  eggs  to 
the  king,  as  a  sign  of  dissatisfaction  with  his 
government.  Sometimes  also  a  deputation  is 
sent,  which  intimates  to  him,  that  the  burden 
of  government  must  have  been  very  trouble¬ 
some  to  him,  and  that  he  had  better  rest  a  little. 
The  king  then  thanks  his  subjects,  goes  into  his 
apartments,  and  has  himself  strangled  by  the 
women.  Tradition  alleges  that  in  former  times  a 
state  composed  of  women  made  itself  famous 
by  its  conquests:  it  was  a  state  at  whose  head 
was  a  woman.  She  is  said  to  have  pounded  her 
own  son  in  a  mortar,  to  have  besmeared  herself 
with  the  blood,  and  to  have  had  the  blood  of 
pounded  children  constantly  at  hand.  She  is  said 
to  have  driven  away  or  put  to  death  all  the 
males,  and  commanded  the  death  of  all  male 
children.  These  furies  destroyed  everything  in 
the  neighborhood,  and  were  driven  to  constant 
plunderings,  because  they  did  not  cultivate  the 
land.  Captives  in  war  were  taken  as  husbands : 
pregnant  women  had  to  betake  themselves  out¬ 
side  the  encampment;  and  if  they  had  born  a 
son,  put  him  out  of  the  way.  This  infamous 
state,  the  report  goes  on  to  say,  subsequently 
disappeared.  Accompanying  the  king  we  con¬ 
stantly  find  in  Negro  states,  the  executioner, 
whose  office  is  regarded  as  of  the  highest  con¬ 
sideration,  and  by  whose  hands  the  king,  though 
he  makes  use  of  him  for  putting  suspected  per- 


INTRODUCTION  199 


sons  to  death,  may  himself  suffer  death,  if  the 
grandees  desire  it.  Fanaticism,  which,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  yielding  disposition  of  the  Negro 
in  other  respects,  can  be  excited, surpasses,  when 
roused,  all  belief.  An  English  traveller  states 
that  when  a  war  is  determined  on  in  Ashanti, 
solemn  ceremonies  precede  it:  among  other 
things  the  bones  of  the  king’s  mother  are  laved 
with  human  blood.  As  a  prelude  to  the  war,  the 
king  ordains  an  onslaught  upon  his  own  me¬ 
tropolis,  as  if  to  excite  the  due  degree  of  frenzy. 
The  king  sent  word  to  the  English  Hutchinson : 
“Christian,  take  care,  and  watch  well  over  your 
family.  The  messenger  of  death  has  drawn  his 
sword  and  will  strike  the  neck  of  many  Ashanti; 
when  the  drum  sounds  it  is  the  death  signal  for 
multitudes.  Come  to  the  King,  if  you  can,  and 
fear  nothing  for  yourself.”  The  drum  beat,  and 
a  terrible  carnage  was  begun;  all  who  came  in 
the  way  of  the  frenzied  Negroes  in  the  streets 
were  stabbed.  On  such  occasions  the  king  has 
all  whom  he  suspects  killed,  and  the  deed  then 
assumes  the  character  of  a  sacred  act.  Every 
idea  thrown  into  the  mind  of  the  Negro  is  caught 
up  and  realized  with  the  whole  energy  of  his 
will;  but  this  realization  involves  a  wholesale 
destruction.  These  people  continue  long  at  rest, 
but  suddenly  their  passions  ferment,  and  then 
they  are  quite  beside  themselves.  The  destruc¬ 
tion  which  is  the  consequence  of  their  excite¬ 
ment,  is  caused  by  the  fact  that  it  is  no  positive 
idea,  no  thought  which  produces  these  commo¬ 
tions  ;  a  physical  rather  than  a  spiritual  enthusi¬ 
asm.  In  Dahomey,  when  the  king  dies,  the  bonds 
of  society  are  loosed;  in  his  palace  begins  indis¬ 
criminate  havoc  and  disorganization.  All  the 
wives  of  the  king  (in  Dahomey  their  number  is 
exactly  3333)  are  massacred,  and  through  the 
whole  town  plunder  and  carnage  run  riot.  The 
wives  of  the  king  regard  this  their  death  as  a 
necessity;  they  go  richly  attired  to  meet  it.  The 
authorities  have  to  hasten  to  proclaim  the  new 
governor,  simply  to  put  a  stop  to  massacre. 

From  these  various  traits  it  is  manifest  that 
want  of  self-control  distinguishes  the  character 
of  the  Negroes.  This  condition  is  capable  of  no 
development  or  culture,  and  as  we  see  them  at 
this  day,  such  have  they  always  been.  The  only 
essential  connection  that  has  existed  and  con¬ 
tinued  between  the  Negroes  and  the  Europeans 
is  that  of  slavery.  In  this  the  Negroes  see  noth¬ 
ing  unbecoming  them,  and  the  English  who  have 
done  most  for  abolishing  the  slave-trade  and 
slavery,  are  treated  by  the  Negroes  themselves 
as  enemies.  For  it  is  a  point  of  first  importance 
with  the  kings  to  sell  their  captured  enemies,  or 


even  their  own  subjects ;  and  viewed  in  the  light 
of  such  facts,  we  may  conclude  slavery  to  have 
been  the  occasion  of  the  increase  of  human  feel¬ 
ing  among  the  Negroes.  The  doctrine  which  we 
deduce  from  this  condition  of  slavery  among 
the  Negroes,  and  which  constitutes  the  only  side 
of  the  question  that  has  an  interest  for  our  in¬ 
quiry,  is  that  which  we  deduce  from  the  Idea: 
viz.,  that  the  “natural  condition”  itself  is  one 
of  absolute  and  thorough  injustice,  contraven¬ 
tion  of  the  right  and  just.  Every  intermediate 
grade  between  this  and  the  realization  of  a  ra¬ 
tional  state  retains,  as  might  be  expected,  ele¬ 
ments  and  aspects  of  injustice;  therefore  we 
find  slavery  even  in  the  Greek  and  Roman  states, 
as  we  do  serfdom  down  to  the  latest  times.  But 
thus  existing  in  a  state,  slavery  is  itself  a  phase 
of  advance  from  the  merely  isolated  sensual 
existence,  a  phase  of  education,  a  mode  of  be¬ 
coming  participant  in  a  higher  morality  and  the 
culture  connected  with  it.  Slavery  is  in  and  for 
itself  injustice,  for  the  essence  of  humanity  is 
freedom;  but  for  this  man  must  be  matured. 
The  gradual  abolition  of  slavery  is  therefore 
wiser  and  more  equitable  than  its  sudden  re¬ 
moval. 

At  this  point  we  leave  Africa,  not  to  mention 
it  again.  For  it  is  no  historical  part  of  the  world ; 
it  has  no  movement  or  development  to  exhibit. 
Historical  movements  in  it — that  is,  in  its  north¬ 
ern  part — belong  to  the  Asiatic  or  European 
world.  Carthage  displayed  there  an  important 
transitionary  phase  of  civilization;  but,  as  a 
Phoenician  colony,  it  belongs  to  Asia.  Egypt  will 
be  considered  in  reference  to  the  passage  of  the 
human  mind  from  its  eastern  to  its  western 
phase,  but  it  does  not  belong  to  the  African 
spirit.  What  we  properly  understand  by  Africa, 
is  the  unhistorical,  undeveloped  spirit,  still  in¬ 
volved  in  the  conditions  of  mere  nature,  and 
which  had  to  be  presented  here  only  as  on  the 
threshold  of  the  world’s  history. 

Having  eliminated  this  introductory  element, 
we  find  ourselves  for  the  first  time  on  the  real 
theatre  of  history.  It  now  only  remains  for  us  to 
give  a  prefatory  sketch  of  the  geographical 
basis  of  the  Asiastic  and  European  world.  Asia 
is,  characteristically,  the  Orient  quarter  of  the 
globe — the  region  of  origination.  It  is  indeed  a 
western  world  for  America;  but  as  Europe  pre¬ 
sents  on  the  whole,  the  centre  and  end  of  the  old 
world,  and  is  absolutely  the  West — so  Asia  is 
absolutely  the  East. 

In  Asia  arose  the  light  of  spirit,  and  therefore 
the  history  of  the  world. 

We  must  now  consider  the  various  localities 


200 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


of  Asia.  Its  physical  constitution  presents  direct 
antitheses,  and  the  essential  relation  of  these 
antitheses.  Its  various  geographical  principles 
are  formations  in  themselves  developed  and  per¬ 
fected. 

First,  the  northern  slope,  Siberia,  must  be  e- 
liminated.  This  slope,  from  the  Altai  chain,  with 
its  fine  streams,  that  pour  their  waters  into  the 
northern  ocean,  does  not  at  all  concern  us  here; 
because  the  northern  zone,  as  already  stated, 
lies  out  of  the  pale  of  history.  But  the  remain¬ 
der  includes  three  very  interesting  localities. 
The  first  is,  as  in  Africa,  a  massive  upland,  with 
a  mountain  girdle  which  contains  the  highest 
summits  in  the  world.  This  upland  is  bounded 
on  the  south  and  southeast,  by  the  Mus-Tag 
or  Imaus,  parallel  to  which,  farther  south,  runs 
the  Himalaya  chain.  Towards  the  east,  a  moun¬ 
tain  chain  running  from  south  to  north,  parts 
off  the  basin  of  the  Amur.  On  the  north  lie  the 
Altai  and  Songarian  mountains;  in  connection 
with  the  latter,  in  the  northwest  the  Musart 
and  in  the  west  the  Belur  Tag,  which  by  the 
Hindu  Kush  chain  are  again  united  with  the 
Mus-Tag. 

This  high  mountain-girdle  is  broken  through 
by  streams,  which  are  dammed  up  and  form 
great  valley  plains.  These,  more  or  less  inun¬ 
dated,  present  centres  of  excessive  luxuriance 
and  fertility,  and  are  distinguished  from  the 
European  river  districts  in  their  not  forming,  as 
those  do,  proper  valleys  with  valleys  branching 
out  from  them,  but  river-plains.  Of  this  kind 
are  the  Chinese  valley  plain,  formed  by  the 
Hwang  Ho  and  Yangtze  Kiang  (the  Yellow  and 
Blue  Streams), next  that  of  India, formed  by  the 
Ganges;  less  important  is  the  Indus,  which  in 
the  north,  gives  character  to  the  Punjab,  and  in 
the  south  flows  through  plains  of  sand.  Farther 
on,  the  lands  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  which 
rise  in  Armenia  and  hold  their  course  along  the 
Persian  mountains.  The  Caspian  Sea  has  similar 
river  valleys;  in  the  east  those  formed  by  the 
Oxus  and  Jaxartes  (Gihon  and  Sihon)  which 
pour  their  waters  into  the  Sea  of  Aral ;  on  the 
west  those  of  the  Cyrus  and  Araxes  (Kur  and 
Aras).  The  upland  and  the  plains  must  be  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  each  other;  the  third  element 
is  their  intermixture,  which  occurs  in  the  Near 
East.  To  this  belongs  Arabia,  the  land  of  the 
desert,  the  upland  of  plains,  the  empire  of  fa¬ 
naticism.  To  this  belong  Syria  and  Asia  Minor, 
connected  with  the  sea,  and  having  constant  in¬ 
tercourse  with  Europe. 

In  regard  to  Asia  the  remark  above  offered 
respecting  geographical  differences  is  especially 


true;  viz.,  that  the  rearing  of  cattle  is  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  upland,  agriculture  and  industrial 
pursuits  that  of  the  valley-plains,  while  com¬ 
merce  and  navigation  form  the  third  and  last 
item.  Patriarchal  independence  is  strictly  bound 
up  with  the  first  condition  of  society;  property 
and  the  relation  of  lord  and  serf  with  the  sec¬ 
ond;  civil  freedom  with  the  third.  In  the  up¬ 
land,  where  the  various  kinds  of  cattle  breeding, 
the  rearing  of  horses,  camels,  and  sheep  (not  so 
much  of  oxen)  deserve  attention,  we  must  also 
distinguish  the  calm  habitual  life  of  nomad 
tribes  from  the  wild  and  restless  character 
they  display  in  their  conquests.  These  people, 
without  developing  themselves  in  a  really  his¬ 
torical  form,  are  swayed  by  a  powerful  impulse 
leading  them  to  change  their  aspect  as  nations; 
and  although  they  have  not  attainedan historical 
character,  the  beginning  of  history  may  be 
traced  to  them.  It  must  however  be  allowed  that 
the  peoples  of  the  plains  are  more  interesting.  In 
agriculture  itself  is  involved,  ipso  facto ,  the  ces¬ 
sation  of  a  roving  life.  It  demands  foresight  and 
solicitude  for  the  future:  reflection  on  a  general 
idea  is  thus  awakened;  and  herein  lies  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  property  and  productive  industry. 
China,  India,  Babylonia,  have  risen  to  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  cultivated  lands  of  this  kind.  But  as  the 
peoples  that  have  occupied  these  lands  have  been 
shut  up  within  themselves,  and  have  not  appro¬ 
priated  that  element  of  civilization  which  the  sea 
supplies  (or  at  any  rate  only  at  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  their  civilization),  and  as  their  naviga¬ 
tion  of  it,  to  whatever  extent  it  may  have  taken 
place,  remained  without  influence  on  their  cul¬ 
ture — a  relation  to  the  rest  of  history  could  only 
exist  in  their  case,  through  their  being  sought 
out,  and  their  character  investigated  by  others. 
The  mountain-girdle  of  the  upland,  the  upland 
itself,  and  the  river-plains,  characterize  Asia 
physically  and  spiritually :  but  they  themselves 
are  not  concretely,  really,  historical  elements. 
The  opposition  between  the  extremes  is  simply 
recognized,  not  harmonized;  a  firm  settlement 
in  the  fertile  plains  is  for  the  mobile,  restless, 
roving,  condition  of  the  mountain  and  upland 
races,  nothing  more  than  a  constant  object  of 
endeavour.  Physical  features  distinct  in  the 
sphere  of  nature,  assume  an  essential  historical 
relation.  The  Near  East  has  both  elements  in 
one,  and  has,  consequently,  a  relation  to  Europe ; 
for  what  is  most  remarkable  in  it,  this  land  has 
not  kept  for  itself,  but  sent  over  to  Europe.  It 
presents  the  origination  of  all  religious  and  po¬ 
litical  principles,  but  Europe  has  been  the  scene 
of  their  development. 


INTRODUCTION 


Europe,  to  which  we  now  come,  has  not  the 
physical  varieties  which  we  noticed  in  Asia  and 
Africa.  The  European  character  involves  the 
disappearance  of  the  contrast  exhibited  by 
earlier  varieties,  or  at  least  a  modification  of  it; 
so  that  we  have  the  milder  qualities  of  a  transi¬ 
tion  state.  We  have  in  Europe  no  uplands  im¬ 
mediately  contrasted  with  plains.  The  three  sec¬ 
tions  of  Europe  require  therefore  a  different 
basis  of  classification. 

The  first  part  is  southern  Europe,  looking  to¬ 
wards  the  Mediterranean.  North  of  the  Pyre¬ 
nees,  mountain  chains  run  through  France,  con¬ 
nected  with  the  Alps  that  separate  and  cut  off 
Italy  from  France  and  Germany.  Greece  also 
belongs  to  this  part  of  Europe.  Greece  and  Italy 
long  presented  the  theatre  of  the  world’s  his¬ 
tory;  and  while  the  middle  and  north  of  Europe 
were  uncultivated,  the  world-spirit  found  its 
home  here. 


201 

The  second  portion  is  the  heart  of  Europe, 
which  Caesar  opened  when  conquering  Gaul. 
This  achievement  was  one  of  manhood  on  the 
part  of  the  Roman  general,  and  more  produc¬ 
tive  than  that  youthful  one  of  Alexander,  who 
undertook  to  exalt  the  East  to  a  participation 
in  Greek  life;  and  whose  work,  though  in  its 
purport  the  noblest  and  fairest  for  the  imagina¬ 
tion,  soon  vanished,  as  a  mere  ideal,  in  the 
sequel.  In  this  centre  of  Europe,  France,  Ger¬ 
many,  and  England  are  the  principal  countries. 

Lastly,  the  third  part  consists  of  the  north¬ 
eastern  states  of  Europe — Poland,  Russia,  and 
the  Slavonic  kingdoms.  They  come  only  late 
into  the  series  of  historical  states,  and  form  and 
perpetuate  the  connection  with  Asia.  In  con¬ 
trast  with  the  physical  peculiarities  of  the  earlier 
divisions,  these  are,  as  already  noticed,  not  pres¬ 
ent  in  a  remarkable  degree,  but  counterbalance 
each  other. 


. 


CLASSIFICATION  OF  HISTORIC  DATA 


In  the  geographical  survey,  the  course  of  the 
world’s  history  has  been  marked  out  in  its  gen¬ 
eral  features.  The  sun — the  light — rises  in  the 
east.  Light  is  a  simply  self-involved  existence; 
but  though  possessing  thus  in  itself  universality, 
it  exists  at  the  same  time  as  an  individuality  in 
the  sun.  Imagination  has  often  pictured  to  itself 
the  emotions  of  a  blind  man  suddenly  becoming 
possessed  of  sight,  beholding  the  bright  glim¬ 
mering  of  the  dawn,  the  growing  light,  and  the 
flaming  glory  of  the  ascending  sun.  The  bound¬ 
less  forgetfulness  of  his  individuality  in  this 
pure  splendor,  is  his  first  feeling — utter  aston¬ 
ishment.  But  when  the  sun  is  risen,  this  aston¬ 
ishment  is  diminished ;  objects  around  are  per¬ 
ceived,  and  from  them  the  individual  proceeds 
to  the  contemplation  of  his  own  inner  being,  and 
thereby  the  advance  is  made  to  the  perception 
of  the  relation  between  the  two.  Then  inactive 
contemplation  is  quitted  for  activity;  by  the 
close  of  day  man  has  erected  a  building  con¬ 
structed  from  his  own  inner  sun;  and  when  in 
the  evening  he  contemplates  this,  he  esteems  it 
more  highly  than  the  original  external  sun.  For 
now  he  stands  in  a  conscious  relation  to  his 
spirit,  and  therefore  a  free  relation.  If  we  hold 
this  image  fast  in  mind,  we  shall  find  it  symbol¬ 
izing  the  course  of  history,  the  great  day’s  work 
of  spirit. 

The  history  of  the  world  travels  from  east  to 
west,  for  Europe  is  absolutely  the  end  of  his¬ 
tory,  Asia  the  beginning.  The  history  of  the 
world  has  an  east  k<lt  (the  term  east  in 

itself  is  entirely  relative),  for  although  the  earth 
forms  a  sphere,  history  performs  no  circle  round 
it,  but  has  on  the  contrary  a  determinate  east, 
viz.,  Asia.  Here  rises  the  outward  physical  sun, 
and  in  the  west  it  sinks  down:  here  consentane¬ 
ously  rises  the  sun  of  self-consciousness,  which 
diffuses  a  nobler  brilliance.  The  history  of  the 
world  is  the  discipline  of  the  uncontrolled  nat¬ 
ural  will,  bringing  it  into  obedience  to  a  uni¬ 
versal  principle  and  conferring  subjective  free¬ 
dom.  The  East  knew  and  to  the  present  day 
knows  only  that  one  is  free;  the  Greek  and  Ro¬ 
man  world,  that  some  are  free;  the  German 
world  knows  that  all  are  free.  The  first  political 
form  therefore  which  we  observe  in  history,  is 


despotism,  the  second  democracy  and  aristoc¬ 
racy,  the  third  monarchy. 

To  understand  this  division  we  must  remark 
that  as  the  state  is  the  universal  spiritual  life,  to 
which  individuals  by  birth  sustain  a  relation  of 
confidence  and  habit,  and  in  which  they  have 
their  existence  and  reality — the  first  question  is, 
whether  their  actual  life  is  an  unreflecting  use 
and  habit  combining  them  in  this  unity,  or 
whether  its  constituent  individuals  are  reflective 
and  personal  beings  having  a  properly  subjec¬ 
tive  and  independent  existence.  In  view  of  this, 
substantial  freedom  must  be  distinguished  from 
subjective  freedom.  Substantial  freedom  is  the 
abstract  undeveloped  reason  implicit  in  volition, 
proceeding  to  develop  itself  in  the  state.  But  in 
this  phase  of  reason  there  is  still  wanting  per¬ 
sonal  insight  and  will,  that  is,  subjective  free¬ 
dom,  which  is  realized  only  in  the  individual, 
and  which  constitutes  the  reflection  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  in  his  own  conscience.  Where  there  is 
merely  substantial  freedom,  commands  and  laws 
are  regarded  as  something  fixed  and  abstract,  to 
which  the  subject  holds  himself  in  absolute 
servitude.  These  laws  need  not  concur  with  the 
desire  of  the  individual,  and  the  subjects  are 
consequently  like  children,  who  obey  their  par¬ 
ents  without  will  or  insight  of  their  own.  But  as 
subjective  freedom  arises,  and  man  descends 
from  the  contemplation  of  external  reality  into 
his  own  soul,  the  contrast  suggested  by  reflec¬ 
tion  arises,  involving  the  negation  of  reality. 
The  drawing  back  from  the  actual  world  forms 
ipso  facto  an  antithesis,  of  which  one  side  is  the 
absolute  being — the  divine — the  other  the  hu¬ 
man  subject  as  an  individual.  In  that  immedi¬ 
ate,  unreflected  consciousness  which  character¬ 
izes  the  East,  these  two  are  not  yet  distin¬ 
guished.  The  substantial  world  is  distinct  from 
the  individual,  but  the  antithesis  has  not  yet 
created  a  schism  between  spirit. 

The  first  phase,  that  with  which  we  have  to 
begin,  is  the  East.  Unreflected  consciousness — 
substantial,  objective,  spiritual  existence — forms 
the  basis;  to  which  the  subjective  will  first  sus¬ 
tains  a  relation  in  the  form  of  faith,  confidence, 
obedience.  In  the  political  life  of  the  East  we 
find  a  realized  rational  freedom,  developing 


203 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


204 

itself  without  advancing  to  subjective  freedom. 
It  is  the  childhood  of  history.  Substantial  forms 
constitute  the  gorgeous  edifices  of  Oriental  em¬ 
pires  in  which  we  find  all  rational  ordinances 
and  arrangements,  but  in  such  a  way,  that  indi¬ 
viduals  remain  as  mere  accidents.  These  revolve 
round  a  centre,  round  the  sovereign,  who,  as 
patriarch,  not  as  despot  in  the  sense  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  imperial  constitution,  stands  at  the  head. 
For  he  has  to  enforce  the  moral  and  substantial : 
he  has  to  uphold  those  essential  ordinances 
which  are  already  established;  so  that  what 
among  us  belongs  entirely  to  subjective  freedom, 
here  proceeds  from  the  entire  and  general  body 
of  the  state.  The  glory  of  Oriental  conception  is 
the  one  individual  as  that  substantial  being  to 
which  all  belongs,  so  that  no  other  individual 
has  a  separate  existence,  or  mirrors  himself  in 
his  subjective  freedom.  All  the  riches  of  imagi¬ 
nation  and  nature  are  appropriated  to  that  dom¬ 
inant  existence  in  which  subjective  freedom  is 
essentially  merged;  the  latter  looks  for  its  dig¬ 
nity  not  in  itself,  but  in  that  absolute  object.  All 
the  elements  of  a  complete  state — even  subjec¬ 
tivity — may  be  found  there,  but  not  yet  har¬ 
monized  with  the  grand  substantial  being.  For 
outside  the  one  power — before  which  nothing 
can  maintain  an  independent  existence — there 
is  only  revolting  caprice,  which,  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  central  power,  roves  at  will  without 
purpose  or  result.  Accordingly  we  find  the  wild 
hordes  breaking  out  from  the  upland,  falling 
upon  the  countries  in  question,  and  laying  them 
waste,  or  settling  down  in  them,  and  giving  up 
their  wild  life;  but  in  all  cases  resultlessly  lost  in 
the  central  substance.  This  phase  of  substan¬ 
tiality,  since  it  has  not  taken  up  its  antithesis 
into  itself  and  overcome  it,  directly  divides  it¬ 
self  into  two  elements.  On  the  one  side,  we  see 
duration,  stability — empires  belonging  to  mere 
space,  as  it  were,  unhistorical  history;  as  for 
example,  in  China,  the  state  based  on  the  family 
relation;  a  paternal  government,  which  holds 
together  the  constitution  by  its  provident  care, 
its  admonitions,  retributive  or  rather  disciplin¬ 
ary  inflictions;  a  prosaic  empire,  because  the 
antithesis  of  form,  viz.,  infinity,  ideality,  has 
not  yet  asserted  itself.  On  the  other  side,  the 
form  of  time  stands  contrasted  with  this  spatial 
stability.  The  states  in  question,  without  under¬ 
going  any  change  in  themselves,  or  in  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  their  existence,  are  constantly  changing 
their  position  towards  each  other.  They  are  in 
ceaseless  conflict,  which  brings  on  rapid  destruc¬ 
tion.  The  opposing  principle  of  individuality  en¬ 
ters  into  these  conflicting  relations ;  but  it  is  it¬ 


self  as  yet  only  unconscious,  merely  natural  uni¬ 
versality — light,  which  is  not  yet  the  light  of 
the  personal  soul.  This  history,  too  ( i.e .,  of  the 
struggles  before-mentioned)  is,  for  the  most 
part,  really  unhistorical,  for  it  is  only  the  repeti¬ 
tion  of  the  same  majestic  ruin.  The  new  ele¬ 
ment,  which  in  the  shape  of  bravery,  prowess, 
magnanimity,  occupies  the  place  of  the  previous 
despotic  pomp,  goes  through  the  same  circle  of 
decline  and  subsidence.  This  subsidence  is  there¬ 
fore  not  really  such,  for  through  all  this  restless 
change  no  advance  is  made.  History  passes  at 
this  point,  and  only  outwardly,  i.e.,  without 
connection  with  the  previous  phase,  to  Central 
Asia.  Continuing  the  comparison  with  the  ages 
of  the  individual  man,  this  would  be  the  boy¬ 
hood  of  history,  no  longer  manifesting  the  re¬ 
pose  and  trustingness  of  the  child,  but  boister¬ 
ous  and  turbulent.  The  Greek  world  may  then 
be  compared  with  the  period  of  adolescence, 
for  here  we  have  individualities  forming  them¬ 
selves.  This  is  the  second  main  principle  in  hu¬ 
man  history.  Morality  is,  as  in  Asia,  a  principle; 
but  it  is  morality  impressed  on  individuality, 
and  consequently  denoting  the  free  volition  of 
individuals.  Here,  then,  is  the  union  of  the  moral 
with  the  subjective  will,  or  the  kingdom  of 
beautiful  freedom,  for  the  idea  is  united  with 
a  plastic  form.  It  is  not  yet  regarded  abstracted¬ 
ly,  but  immediately  bound  up  with  the  real,  as 
in  a  beautiful  work  of  art;  the  sensuous  bears 
the  stamp  and  expression  of  the  spiritual.  This 
kingdom  is  consequently  true  harmony;  the 
world  of  the  most  charming,  but  perishable  or 
quickly  passing  bloom:  it  is  the  natural,  unre¬ 
flecting  observance  of  what  is  becoming — not 
yet  true  morality.  The  individual  will  of  the 
subject  adopts  unreflectingly  the  conduct  and 
habit  prescribed  by  justice  and  the  laws.  The  in¬ 
dividual  is  therefore  in  unconscious  unity  with 
the  idea — the  social  weal.  That  which  in  the 
East  is  divided  into  two  extremes — the  substan¬ 
tial  as  such,  and  the  individuality  absorbed  in 
it — meets  here.  But  these  distinct  principles  are 
only  immediately  in  unity,  and  consequently  in¬ 
volve  the  highest  degree  of  contradiction;  for 
this  aesthetic  morality  has  not  yet  passed  through 
the  struggle  of  subjective  freedom,  in  its  second 
birth,  its  palingenesis ;  it  is  not  yet  purified  to 
the  standard  of  the  free  subjectivity  that  is  the 
essence  of  true  morality. 

The  third  phase  is  the  realm  of  abstract  uni¬ 
versality  (in  which  the  social  aim  absorbs  all  in¬ 
dividual  aims) :  it  is  the  Roman  State,  the  se¬ 
vere  labors  of  the  manhood  of  history.  For  true 
manhood  acts  neither  in  accordance  with  the 


INTRODUCTION  205 


caprice  of  a  despot,  nor  in  obedience  to  a  grace¬ 
ful  caprice  of  its  own;  but  works  for  a  general 
aim,  one  in  which  the  individual  perishes  and 
realizes  his  own  private  object  only  in  that  gen¬ 
eral  aim.  The  state  begins  to  have  an  abstract 
existence,  and  to  develop  itself  for  a  definite 
object,  in  accomplishing  which  its  members 
have  indeed  a  share,  but  not  a  complete  and  con¬ 
crete  one.  Free  individuals  are  sacrificed  to  the 
severe  demands  of  the  national  objects,  to  which 
they  must  surrender  themselves  in  this  service 
of  abstract  generalization.  The  Roman  State  is 
not  a  repetition  of  such  a  state  of  individuals  as 
the  Athenian  polis  was.  The  geniality  and  joy  of 
soul  that  existed  there  have  given  place  to  harsh 
and  rigorous  toil.  The  interest  of  history  is  de¬ 
tached  from  individuals,  but  these  gain  for 
themselves  abstract,  formal  universality.  The 
universal  subjugates  the  individuals;  they  have 
to  merge  their  own  interests  in  it ;  but  in  return 
the  abstraction  which  they  themselves  embody 
— that  is  to  say,  their  personality — is  recog¬ 
nized  :  in  their  individual  capacity  they  become 
persons  with  definite  rights  as  such.  In  the  same 
sense  as  individuals  may  be  said  to  be  incorpo¬ 
rated  in  the  abstract  idea  of  person,  national  in¬ 
dividualities  (those  of  the  Roman  provinces) 
have  also  to  experience  this  fate :  in  this  form  of 
universality  their  concrete  forms  are  crushed, 
and  incorporated  with  it  as  a  homogeneous  and 
indifferent  mass.  Rome  becomes  a  pantheon  of 
all  deities,  and  of  all  spiritual  existence,  but  these 
divinities  and  this  spirit  do  not  retain  their 
proper  vitality.  The  development  of  the  state  in 
question  proceeds  in  two  directions.  On  the  one 
hand,  as  based  on  reflection — abstract  univer¬ 
sality — it  has  the  express  outspoken  antithesis 
in  itself :  it  therefore  essentially  involves  in  it¬ 
self  the  struggle  which  that  antithesis  supposes ; 
with  the  necessary  issue,  that  individual  caprice, 
the  purely  contingent  and  thoroughly  worldly 
power  of  one  despot ,  gets  the  better  of  that  ab¬ 
stract  universal  principle.  At  the  very  outset  we 
have  the  antithesis  between  the  aim  of  the  state 
as  the  abstract  universal  principle  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  abstract  personality  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  on  the  other  hand.  But  when  subsequent¬ 
ly,  in  the  historical  development,  individuality 
gains  the  ascendant,  and  the  breaking  up  of  the 
community  into  its  component  atoms  can  only 
be  restrained  by  external  compulsion,  then  the 
subjective  might  of  individual  despotism  comes 
forward  to  play  its  part,  as  if  summoned  to  fulfil 
this  task.  For  the  mere  abstract  compliance  with 
law  implies  on  the  part  of  the  subject  of  law  the 
supposition  that  he  has  not  attained  to  self¬ 


organization  and  self-control;  and  this  principle 
of  obedience,  instead  of  being  hearty  and  volun¬ 
tary,  has  for  its  motive  and  ruling  power  only 
the  arbitrary  and  contingent  disposition  of  the 
individual ;  so  that  the  latter  is  led  to  seek  con¬ 
solation  for  the  loss  of  his  freedom  in  exercis¬ 
ing  and  developing  his  private  right.  This  is  the 
purely  worldly  harmonization  of  the  antithesis. 
But  in  the  next  place,  the  pain  inflicted  by  des¬ 
potism  begins  to  be  felt,  and  spirit  driven  back 
into  its  utmost  depths,  leaves  the  godless  world, 
seeks  for  a  harmony  in  itself,  and  begins  now  an 
inner  life — a  complete  concrete  subjectivity, 
which  possesses  at  the  same  time  a  substantial¬ 
ity  that  is  not  grounded  in  mere  external  exist¬ 
ence.  Within  the  soul  therefore  arises  the  spirit¬ 
ual  pacification  of  the  struggle,  in  the  fact  that 
the  individual  personality,  instead  of  following 
its  own  capricious  choice,  is  purified  and  ele¬ 
vated  into  universality;  a  subjectivity  that  of 
its  own  free  will  adopts  principles  tending  to 
the  good  of  all — reaches,  in  fact,  a  divine  per¬ 
sonality.  To  that  worldly  empire,  this  spiritual 
one  wears  a  predominant  aspect  of  opposition, 
as  the  empire  of  a  subjectivity  that  has  attained 
to  the  knowledge  of  itself — itself  in  its  essen¬ 
tial  nature — the  empire  of  spirit  in  its  full 
sense. 

The  German  world  appears  at  this  point  of  de¬ 
velopment — the  fourth  phase  of  world  history. 
This  would  answer  in  the  comparison  with  the 
periods  of  human  life  to  its  old  age.  The  old 
age  of  nature  is  weakness ;  but  that  of  spirit  is 
its  perfect  maturity  and  strength ,  in  which  it  re¬ 
turns  to  unity  with  itself,  but  in  its  fully  de¬ 
veloped  character  as  spirit.  This  fourth  phase 
begins  with  the  reconciliation  presented  in  Chris¬ 
tianity;  but  only  in  the  germ,  without  national 
or  political  development.  We  must  therefore  re¬ 
gard  it  as  commencing  rather  with  the  enormous 
contrast  between  the  spiritual,  religious  princi¬ 
ple,  and  the  barbarian  real  world.  For  spirit  as 
the  consciousness  of  an  inner  world  is,  at  the 
commencement,  itself  still  in  an  abstract  form. 
All  that  is  secular  is  consequently  given  over 
to  rudeness  and  capricious  violence.  The  Mo¬ 
hammedan  principle,  the  enlightenment  of  the 
Oriental  world,  is  the  first  to  contravene  this 
barbarism  and  caprice.  We  find  it  developing 
itself  later  and  more  rapidly  than  Christianity; 
for  the  latter  needed  eight  centuries  to  grow  up 
into  a  political  form.  But  that  principle  of  the 
German  world  which  we  are  now  discussing,  at¬ 
tained  concrete  reality  only  in  the  history  of  the 
German  nations.  The  contrast  of  the  spiritual 
principle  animating  the  ecclesiastical  state,  with 


206  PHILOSOPHY 

the  rough  and  wild  barbarism  of  the  secular 
state,  is  here  likewise  present.  The  secular 
ought  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  spiritual  prin¬ 
ciple,  but  we  find  nothing  more  than  the  recog¬ 
nition  of  that  obligation.  The  secular  power  for¬ 
saken  by  the  spirit,  must  in  the  first  instance 
vanish  in  presence  of  the  ecclesiastical;  but 
while  this  latter  degrades  itself  to  mere  secular- 
ity,  it  loses  its  influence  with  the  loss  of  its 
proper  character  and  vocation.  From  this  cor¬ 
ruption  of  the  ecclesiastical  element — that  is, 
of  the  church — results  the  higher  form  of  ra¬ 
tional  thought.  Spirit  once  more  driven  back  up¬ 
on  itself,  produces  its  work  in  an  intellectual 
shape,  and  becomes  capable  of  realizing  the  ideal 
of  reason  from  the  secular  principle  alone.  Thus 
it  happens,  that  in  virtue  of  elements  of  univer¬ 
sality,  which  have  the  principle  of  spirit  as  their 


OF  HISTORY 

basis,  the  empire  of  thought  is  established  actu¬ 
ally  and  concretely.  The  antithesis  of  church 
and  state  vanishes.  The  spiritual  becomes  recon¬ 
nected  with  the  secular,  and  develops  this  latter 
as  an  independently  organic  existence.  The  state 
no  longer  occupies  a  position  of  real  inferiority 
to  the  church,  and  is  no  longer  subordinate  to  it. 
The  latter  asserts  no  prerogative,  and  the  spirit¬ 
ual  is  no  longer  an  element  foreign  to  the  state. 
Freedom  has  found  the  means  of  realizing  its 
ideal — its  true  existence.  This  is  the  ultimate 
result  which  the  process  of  history  is  intended 
to  accomplish,  and  we  have  to  traverse  in  detail 
the  long  track  which  has  been  thus  cursorily 
traced  out.  Yet  length  of  time  is  something  en¬ 
tirely  relative,  and  the  element  of  spirit  is 
eternity.  Duration,  properly  speaking,  cannot 
be  said  to  belong  to  it. 


FIRST  PART 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


We  have  to  begin  with  the  oriental  world,  but 
not  before  the  period  in  which  we  discover  states 
in  it.  The  diffusion  of  language  and  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  races  lie  beyond  the  limits  of  history. 
History  is  prose,  and  myths  fall  short  of  history. 
The  consciousness  of  external  definite  existence 
only  arises  in  connection  with  the  power  to  form 
abstract  distinctions  and  assign  abstract  predi¬ 
cates;  and  in  proportion  as  a  capacity  for  ex¬ 
pressing  laws  is  acquired,  in  the  same  proportion 
does  the  ability  manifest  itself,  to  comprehend 
objects  in  an  unpoetical  form.  While  the  ante- 
historical  is  that  which  precedes  political  life,  it 
also  lies  beyond  self-cognizant  life;  though  sur¬ 
mises  and  suppositions  may  be  entertained  re¬ 
specting  that  period,  these  do  not  amount  to 
facts.  The  Oriental  world  has  as  its  inherent  and 
distinctive  principle  the  substantial,  in  morality. 
We  have  the  first  example  of  a  subjugation  of  the 
mere  arbitrary  will,  which  is  merged  in  this  sub¬ 
stantiality.  Moral  distinctions  and  requirements 
are  expressed  as  laws,  but  so  that  the  subjective 
will  is  governed  by  these  laws  as  by  an  external 
force.  Nothing  subjective  in  the  shape  of  dis¬ 
position,  conscience,  formal  freedom,  is  recog¬ 
nized.  Justice  is  administered  only  on  the  basis 
of  external  morality,  and  government  exists  only 
as  the  prerogative  of  compulsion.  Our  civil  law 
contains  indeed  some  purely  compulsory  ordi¬ 
nances.  I  can  be  compelled  to  give  up  another 
man’s  property,  or  to  keep  an  agreement  which 
I  have  made ;  but  the  moral  is  not  placed  by  us 
in  the  mere  compulsion,  but  in  the  disposition 
of  the  subjects,  their  sympathy  with  the  require¬ 
ments  of  law.  Morality  is  in  the  East  likewise  a 
subject  of  positive  legislation,  and  although  the 
moral  prescriptions  (the  substance  of  their  eth¬ 
ics)  may  be  perfect,  what  should  be  internal 
subjective  sentiment  is  made  a  matter  of  exter¬ 
nal  arrangement.  There  is  no  want  of  a  will  to 
command  moral  actions,  but  of  a  will  to  perform 
them  because  commanded  from  within .  Since 
spirit  has  not  yet  attained  subjectivity,  it  wears 
the  appearance  of  spirituality  still  involved  in 


the  conditions  of  nature.  Since  the  external  and 
the  internal,  law  and  moral  sense,  are  not  yet 
distinguished — still  form  an  undivided  unity — 
so  also  do  religion  and  the  state.  The  constitu¬ 
tion  generally  is  a  theocracy,  and  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  to  the  same  extent  also  a  secular  king¬ 
dom  as  the  secular  kingdom  is  also  divine.  What 
we  call  God  has  not  yet  in  the  East  been  realized 
in  consciousness,  for  our  idea  of  God  involves  an 
elevation  of  the  soul  to  the  supersensual.  While 
we  obey,  because  what  we  are  required  to  do  is 
confirmed  by  an  internal  sanction,  there  the  law 
is  regarded  as  inherently  and  absolutely  valid 
without  a  sense  of  the  want  of  this  subjective 
confirmation.  In  the  law  men  recognize  not.  their 
own  will,  but  one  entirely  foreign. 

Of  the  several  parts  of  Asia  we  have  already 
eliminated  as  unhistorical,  upper  Asia  (so  far  and 
so  long  as  its  nomad  population  do  not  appear 
on  the  scene  of  history),  and  Siberia.  The  rest 
of  the  Asiatic  world  is  divided  into  four  districts: 
first,  the  river-plains,  formed  by  the  Yellow  and 
Blue  Streams,  and  the  upland  of  farther  Asia — 
China  and  the  Mongols.  Secondly,  the  valley  of 
the  Ganges  and  that  of  the  Indus.  The  third 
theatre  of  history  comprises  the  river-plains  of 
the  Oxus  and  Jaxartes,  the  upland  of  Persia,  and 
the  other  valley-plains  of  the  Euphrates  and  Ti¬ 
gris,  to  which  the  Near  East  attaches  itself. 
Fourthly,  the  river-plain  of  the  Nile. 

With  China  and  the  Mongols,  the  realm  of  the¬ 
ocratic  despotism,  history  begins.  Both  have  the 
patriarchal  constitution  for  their  principle — so 
modified  in  China,  as  to  admit  the  development 
of  an  organized  system  of  secular  polity;  while 
among  the  Mongols  it  limits  itself  to  the  simple 
form  of  a  spiritual,  religious  sovereignty.  In 
China  the  monarch  is  chief  as  patriarch.  The  laws 
of  the  state  are  partly  civil  ordinances,  partly 
moral  requirements;  so  that  the  internal  law, 
the  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  individual  of 
the  nature  of  his  volition,  as  his  own  inmost  self 
— even  this  is  the  subject  of  external  statutory 
enactment.  The  sphere  of  subjectivity  does  not 


207 


208  PHILOSOPHY 

then  attain  to  maturity  here,  since  moral  laws 
are  treated  as  legislative  enactments,  and  law  on 
its  part  has  an  ethical  aspect.  All  that  we  call 
subjectivity  is  concentrated  in  the  supreme  head 
of  the  state,  who,  in  all  his  legislation  has  an  eye 
to  the  health,  wealth,  and  benefit  of  the  whole. 
Contrasted  with  this  secular  empire  is  the  spirit¬ 
ual  sovereignty  of  the  Mongols,  at  the  head  of 
which  stands  the  Lama,  who  is  honored  as  God. 
In  this  spiritual  empire  no  secular  political  life 
can  be  developed. 

In  the  second  phase — the  Indian  realm — we 
see  the  unity  of  political  organization,  a  perfect 
civil  machinery,  such  as  exists  in  China,  in  the 
first  instance,  broken  up.  The  several  powers  of 
society  appear  as  dissevered  and  free  in  relation 
to  each  other.  The  different  castes  are  indeed, 
fixed;  but  in  view  of  the  religious  doctrine  that 
establish  them,  they  wear  the  aspect  of  natural 
distinctions.  Individuals  are  thereby  still  further 
stripped  of  proper  personality,  although  it  might 
appear  as  if  they  derived  gain  from  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  distinctions  in  question.  For  though 
we  find  the  organization  of  the  state  no  longer, 
as  in  China,  determined  and  arranged  by  the 
one  all-absorbing  personality,  the  distinctions 
that  exist  are  attributed  to  nature  and  so  become 
differences  of  caste.  The  unity  in  which  these  di¬ 
visions  must  finally  meet,  is  a  religious  one ;  and 
thus  arises  theocratic  aristocracy  and  its  despot¬ 
ism.  Here  begins,  therefore,  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  spiritual  consciousness  and  secular  con¬ 
ditions  ;  but  as  the  separation  implied  in  the  above 
mentioned  distinctions  is  the  cardinal  considera¬ 
tion,  so  also  we  find  in  the  religion  the  principle 
of  the  isolation  of  the  constituent  elements  of 
the  idea;  a  principle  which  posits  the  harshest 
antithesis — the  conception  of  the  purely  abstract 
unity  of  God,  and  of  the  purely  sensual  powers 
of  nature.  The  connection  of  the  two  is  only  a 
constant  change,  a  restless  hurrying  from  one  ex¬ 
treme  to  the  other,  a  wild  chaos  of  fruitless  vari¬ 
ation,  which  must  appear  as  madness  to  a  duly 
regulated,  intelligent  consciousness. 

The  third  important  form,  presenting  a  con¬ 
trast  to  the  immovable  unity  of  China  and  to  the 
wild  and  turbulent  unrest  of  India,  is  the  Persian 
realm.  China  is  quite  peculiarly  oriental ;  India 
we  might  compare  with  Greece;  Persia  on  the 
other  hand  with  Rome.  In  Persia  namely,  the 
theocratic  power  appears  as  a  monarchy.  Now 
monarchy  is  that  kind  of  constitution  which  does 
indeed  unite  the  members  of  the  body  politic  in 
the  head  of  the  government  as  in  a  point;  but 
regards  that  head  neither  as  the  absolute  director 
nor  the  arbitrary  ruler,  but  as  a  power  whose  will 


OF  HISTORY 

is  regulated  by  the  same  principle  of  law  as  the 
obedience  of  the  subject.  We  have  thus  a  general 
principle,  a  law,  lying  at  the  basis  of  the  whole, 
but  which,  still  regarded  as  a  dictum  of  mere  na¬ 
ture,  is  clogged  by  an  antithesis.  The  representa¬ 
tion,  therefore,  which  spirit  makes  of  itself  is,  at 
this  grade  of  progress,  of  a  purely  natural  kind — 
light.  This  universal  principle  is  as  much  a  regu¬ 
lative  one  for  the  monarch  as  for  each  of  his  sub¬ 
jects,  and  the  Persian  spirit  is  accordingly  clear, 
illuminated — the  idea  of  a  people  living  in  pure 
morality,  as  in  a  sacred  community.  But  this  has 
on  the  one  hand  as  a  merely  natural  ecclesia,  the 
above  antithesis  still  unreconciled;  and  its  sanc¬ 
tity  displays  the  characteristics  of  a  compulsory, 
external  one.  On  the  other  hand  this  antithesis 
is  exhibited  in  Persia  in  its  being  the  empire  of 
hostile  peoples,  and  the  union  of  the  most  widely 
differing  nations.  The  Persian  unity  is  not  that 
abstract  one  of  the  Chinese  Empire;  it  is  adapted 
to  rule  over  many  and  various  nationalities, 
which  it  unites  under  the  mild  power  of  univer¬ 
sality  as  a  beneficial  sun  shining  over  all — wak¬ 
ing  them  into  life  and  cherishing  their  growth. 
This  universal  principle,  occupying  the  position 
of  a  root  only,  allows  the  several  members  a  free 
growth  for  unrestrained  expansion  and  ramifica¬ 
tion.  In  the  organization  of  these  several  peoples, 
the  various  principles  and  forms  of  life  have 
full  play  and  continue  to  exist  together.  We  find 
in  this  multitude  of  nations,  roving  nomads;  then 
we  see  in  Babylonia  and  Syria  commerce  and  in¬ 
dustrial  pursuits  in  full  vigour,  the  wildest  sensu¬ 
ality,  the  most  uncontrolled  turbulence.  The 
coasts  mediate  a  connection  with  foreign  lands. 
In  the  midst  of  this  confusion  the  spiritual  God 
of  the  Jews  arrests  our  attention — like  Brahma, 
existing  only  for  thought,  yet  jealous  and  exclud¬ 
ing  from  his  being  and  abolishing  all  distinct 
speciality  of  manifestations,  such  as  are  freely 
allowed  in  other  religions.  This  Persian  Empire, 
then — since  it  can  tolerate  these  several  princi¬ 
ples,  exhibits  the  antithesis  in  a  lively  active 
form,  and  is  not  shut  up  within  itself,  abstract 
and  calm,  as  are  China  and  India — makes  a  real 
transition  in  the  history  of  the  world. 

If  Persia  forms  the  external  transition  to  Greek 
life,  the  internal,  mental  transition  is  mediated 
by  Egypt.  Here  the  antitheses  in  their  abstract 
form  are  broken  through;  a  breaking  through 
which  effects  their  nullification.  This  undeveloped 
reconciliation  exhibits  the  struggle  of  the  most 
contradictory  principles,  which  are  not  yet  capa¬ 
ble  of  harmonizing  themselves,  but,  setting  up 
the  birth  of  this  harmony  as  the  problem  to  be 
solved,  make  themselves  a  riddle  for  themselves 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  209 


and  for  others,  the  solution  of  which  is  only  to 
be  found  in  the  Greek  world. 

If  we  compare  these  kingdoms  in  the  light  of 
their  various  fates,  we  find  the  empire  of  the  two 
Chinese  rivers  the  only  durable  kingdom  in  the 
world.  Conquests  cannot  affect  such  an  empire. 
The  world  of  the  Ganges  and  the  Indus  has  also 
been  preserved.  A  state  of  things  so  destitute  of 
thought  is  likewise  imperishable,  but  it  is  in  its 
very  nature  destined  to  be  mixed  with  other 
races — to  be  conquered  and  subjugated.  While 
these  two  realms  have  remained  to  the  present 
day,  of  the  empires  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates 
on  the  contrary  nothing  remains,  except,  at  most, 
a  heap  of  bricks;  for  the  Persian  Kingdom,  as 
that  of  transition,  is  by  nature  perishable,  and 
the  kingdoms  of  the  Caspian  Sea  are  given  up 
to  the  ancient  struggle  of  Iran  and  Turan.  The 
empire  of  the  solitary  Nile  is  only  present  be¬ 
neath  the  ground,  in  its  speechless  dead,  ever  and 
anon  stolen  away  to  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  and 
in  their  majestic  habitations ;  for  what  remains 
above  ground  is  nothing  else  but  such  splendid 
tombs. 

Section  I 

CHINA 

With  the  empire  of  China  history  has  to  begin, 
for  it  is  the  oldest,  as  far  as  history  gives  us  any 
information ;  and  its  principle  has  such  substan¬ 
tiality,  that  for  the  empire  in  question  it  is  at 
once  the  oldest  and  the  newest.  Early  do  we  see 
China  advancing  to  the  condition  in  which  it  is 
found  at  this  day;  for  as  the  contrast  between 
objective  existence  and  subjective  freedom  of 
movement  in  it,  is  still  wanting,  every  change  is 
excluded,  and  the  fixedness  of  a  character  which 
recurs  perpetually,  takes  the  place  of  what  we 
should  call  the  truly  historical.  China  and  India 
lie,  as  it  were,  still  outside  the  world’s  history, 
as  the  mere  presupposition  of  elements  whose 
combination  must  be  waited  for  to  constitute 
their  vital  progress.  The  unity  of  substantiality 
and  subjective  freedom  so  entirely  excludes  the 
distinction  and  contrast  of  the  two  elements, 
that  by  this  very  fact,  substance  cannot  arrive  at 
reflection  or  itself — at  subjectivity.  The  substan¬ 
tial  in  its  moral  aspect,  rules  therefore,  not  as  the 
moral  disposition  of  the  subject ,  but  as  the  des¬ 
potism  of  the  sovereign . 

No  people  has  a  so  strictly  continuous  series 
of  writers  of  history  as  the  Chinese.  Other  Asiatic 
peoples  also  have  ancient  traditions,  but  no  his¬ 
tory.  The  Vedas  of  the  Indians  are  not  such. 
The  traditions  of  the  Arabs  are  very  old,  but  are 


not  attached  to  a  political  constitution  and  its 
development.  But  such  a  constitution  exists  in 
China,  and  that  in  a  distinct  and  prominent  form. 
The  Chinese  traditions  ascend  to  three  thousand 
years  before  Christ;  and  the  Shu-King,  their 
canonical  document,  beginning  with  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Yao,  places  this  2357  years  before  Christ. 
It  may  here  be  incidentally  remarked,  that  the 
other  Asiatic  kingdoms  also  reach  a  high  an¬ 
tiquity.  According  to  the  calculation  of  an  Eng¬ 
lish  writer,  the  Egyptian  history,  e.g.,  reaches  to 
2207  years  before  Christ,  the  Assyrian  to  2221, 
the  Indian  to  2204.  Thus  the  traditions  respect¬ 
ing  the  principal  kingdoms  of  the  East  reach  to 
about  2300  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ. 
Comparing  this  with  the  history  of  the  Old 
Testament,  a  space  of  2400  years,  according  to 
the  common  acceptation,  intervened  between 
the  Deluge  and  the  Christian  era.  But  Johannes 
von  Muller  has  adduced  weighty  objections  to 
this  number.  He  places  the  Deluge  in  the  year 
3473  before  Christ — thus  about  a  thousand  years 
earlier — supporting  his  view  by  the  Septuagint. 
I  remark  this  only  to  obviate  a  difficulty  that 
may  appear  to  arise  when  we  meet  with  dates  of 
a  higher  age  than  2400  years  before  Christ,  and 
yet  find  nothing  about  the  Flood. 

The  Chinese  have  certain  ancient  canonical 
documents,  from  which  their  history,  constitu¬ 
tion,  and  religion  can  be  gathered.  The  Vedas 
and  the  Mosaic  records  are  similar  books;  as 
also  the  Homeric  poems.  Among  the  Chinese 
these  books  are  called  Kings,  and  constitute  the 
foundation  of  all  their  studies.  The  Shu-King 
contains  their  history,  treats  of  the  government 
of  the  ancient  kings,  and  gives  the  statutes  en¬ 
acted  by  this  or  that  monarch.  The  V -King  con¬ 
sists  of  figures,  which  have  been  regarded  as  the 
bases  of  the  Chinese  written  character,  and  this 
book  is  also  considered  the  groundwork  of  the 
Chinese  meditation.  For  it  begins  with  the  ab¬ 
stractions  of  unity  and  duality,  and  then  treats 
of  the  concrete  existences  pertaining  to  these 
abstract  forms  of  thought.  Lastly,  the  Shi-King 
is  the  book  of  the  oldest  poems  in  a  great  variety 
of  styles.  The  high  officers  of  the  kingdom  were 
anciently  commissioned  to  bring  with  them  to 
the  annual  festival  all  the  poems  composed  in 
their  province  within  the  year.  The  emperor  in 
full  court  was  the  judge  of  these  poems,  and 
those  recognized  as  good  received  public  appro¬ 
bation.  Besides  these  three  books  of  archives 
which  are  specially  honoured  and  studied,  there 
are  besides  two  others,  less  important,  viz.,  the 
Li-Ki  (or  Li-King)  which  records  the  customs 
and  ceremonial  observances  pertaining  to  the 


210 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


imperial  dignity,  and  that  of  the  state  function¬ 
aries  (with  an  appendix,  Yo-King,  treating  of 
music) ;  and  the  Tshun-tsin,  the  chronicle  of  the 
kingdom  Lu,  where  Confucius  appeared.  These 
books  are  the  groundwork  of  the  history,  the 
manners  and  the  laws  of  China. 

This  empire  early  attracted  the  attention  of 
Europeans,  although  only  vague  stories  about  it 
had  reached  them.  It  was  always  marvelled  at 
as  a  country  which,  self-originated,  appeared  to 
have  no  connection  with  the  outer  world. 

In  the  thirteenth  century  a  Venetian  (Marco 
Polo)  explored  it  for  the  first  time,  but  his  re¬ 
ports  were  deemed  fabulous.  In  later  times,  ev¬ 
erything  that  he  had  said  respecting  its  extent 
and  greatness  was  entirely  confirmed.  By  the 
lowest  calculation,  China  has  150,000,000  inhab¬ 
itants;  another  makes  the  number  200,000,000, 
and  the  highest  raises  it  even  to  300,000,000. 
From  the  far  north  it  stretches  towards  the  south 
to  India ;  on  the  east  it  is  bounded  by  the  vast 
Pacific,  and  on  the  west  it  extends  towards  Persia 
and  the  Caspian.  China  proper  is  overpopulated. 
On  both  rivers,  the  Hwang  Ho  and  the  Yangtze 
Kiang,  dwell  many  millions  of  human  beings,  liv¬ 
ing  on  rafts  adapted  to  all  the  requirements  of 
their  mode  of  life.  The  population  and  the  thor¬ 
oughly  organized  state-arrangements,  descend¬ 
ing  even  to  the  minutest  details,  have  astonished 
Europeans;  and  a  matter  of  especial  astonish¬ 
ment  is  the  accuracy  with  which  their  historical 
works  are  executed.  For  in  China  the  historians 
are  some  of  the  highest  functionaries.  Two  min¬ 
isters  constantly  in  attendance  on  the  emperor, 
are  commissioned  to  keep  a  journal  of  every¬ 
thing  the  emperor  does,  commands,  and  says, 
and  their  notes  are  then  worked  up  and  made 
use  of  by  the  historians.  We  cannot  go  further 
into  the  minutiae  of  their  annals,  which,  as  they 
themselves  exhibit  no  development,  would  only 
hinder  us  in  ours.  Their  history  ascends  to  very 
ancient  times,  in  which  Fohi  is  named  as  the  dif¬ 
fuser  of  culture,  he  having  been  the  original 
civilizer  of  China.  He  is  said  to  have  lived  in  the 
twenty-ninth  century  before  Christ — before  the 
time,  therefore,  at  which  the  Shu-King  begins; 
but  the  mythical  and  prehistorical  is  treated  by 
Chinese  historians  as  perfectly  historical.  The 
first  region  of  Chinese  history  is  the  north¬ 
western  corner— China  proper— towards  that 
point  where  the  Hwang  Ho  descends  from  the 
mountains;  for  only  at  a  later  period  did  the 
Chinese  empire  extend  itself  towards  the  south, 
to  the  Yangtze  Kiang.  The  narrative  begins  with 
the  period  in  which  men  lived  in  a  wild  state,  i.e., 
in  the  woods,  when  they  fed  on  the  fruits  of  the 


earth,  and  clothed  themselves  with  the  skins  of 
wild  beasts.  There  was  no  recognition  of  definite 
laws  among  them.  To  Fohi  (who  must  be  duly 
distinguished  from  Fo,  the  founder  of  a  new  re¬ 
ligion),  is  ascribed  the  instruction  of  men  in 
building  themselves  huts  and  making  dwellings. 
He  is  said  to  have  directed  their  attention  to  the 
change  and  return  of  seasons,  to  barter  and  trade ; 
to  have  established  marriage;  to  have  taught 
that  reason  came  from  heaven,  and  to  have  giv¬ 
en  instructions  for  rearing  silkworms,  building 
bridges,  and  making  use  of  beasts  of  burden.  The 
Chinese  historians  are  very  diffuse  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  these  various  origins.  The  progress  of  the 
history  is  the  extension  of  the  culture  thus  orig¬ 
inated,  to  the  south,  and  the  beginning  of  a  state 
and  a  government.  The  great  empire  which  had 
thus  gradually  been  formed,  was  soon  broken  up 
into  many  provinces,  which  carried  on  long  wars 
with  each  other,  and  were  then  re-united  into  a 
whole.  The  dynasties  in  China  have  often  been 
changed,  and  the  one  now  dominant  is  generally 
marked  as  the  twenty-second.  In  connection  with 
the  rise  and  fall  of  these  dynasties  arose  the  dif¬ 
ferent  capital  cities  that  are  found  in  this  em¬ 
pire.  For  a  long  time  Nanking  was  the  capital; 
now  it  is  Peking ;  at  an  earlier  period  other  cities. 
China  has  been  compelled  to  wage  many  wars 
with  the  Tartars,  who  penetrated  far  into  the 
country.  The  long  wall  built  by  Shih  Huang  Ti, 
and  which  has  always  been  regarded  as  a  most 
astounding  achievement,  was  raised  as  a  barrier 
against  the  inroads  of  the  northern  nomads.  This 
prince  divided  the  whole  empire  into  thirty-six 
provinces,  and  made  himself  especially  remark¬ 
able  by  his  attacks  on  the  old  literature,  es¬ 
pecially  on  the  historical  books  and  historical 
studies  generally.  He  did  this  with  the  design  of 
strengthening  his  own  dynasty,  by  destroying 
the  remembrance  of  the  earlier  one.  After  the 
historical  books  had  been  collected  and  burned, 
many  hundreds  of  the  literati  fled  to  the  moun¬ 
tains,  in  order  to  save  what  remained.  Every  one 
that  fell  into  the  emperor’s  hands  experienced 
the  same  fate  as  the  books.  This  book -burning 
is  a  very  important  circumstance,  for  in  spite 
of  it  the  strictly  canonical  books  were  saved,  as 
is  generally  the  case.  The  first  connection  of 
China  with  the  West  occurred  about  64  a.d.  At 
that  epoch  a  Chinese  emperor  despatched  am¬ 
bassadors  (it  is  said)  to  visit  the  wise  sages  of 
the  West.  Twenty  years  later  a  Chinese  general 
is  reported  to  have  penetrated  as  far  as  Judea. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century  after 
Christ,  the  first  Christians  are  reputed  to  have 
gone  to  China,  of  which  visit  later  visitors  assert 


211 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


that  they  found  traces  and  monuments.  A  Tartar 
kingdom,  Lyau-Tong,  existing  in  the  north  of 
China,  is  said  to  have  been  reduced  and  taken 
possession  of  by  the  Chinese  with  the  help  of 
the  western  Tartars,  about  i  ioo  a.d.  This,  never¬ 
theless,  gave  these  very  Tartars  an  opportunity 
of  securing  a  footing  in  China.  Similarly  they  ad¬ 
mitted  the  Manchus  with  whom  they  engaged  in 
war  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries, 
which  resulted  in  the  present  dynasty’s  obtain¬ 
ing  possession  of  the  throne.  Yet  this  new  dy¬ 
nasty  has  not  effected  further  change  in  the 
country,  any  more  than  did  the  earlier  conquest 
of  the  Mongols  in  the  year  1281.  The  Manchus 
that  live  in  China  have  to  conform  to  Chinese 
laws,  and  study  Chinese  sciences. 

We  pass  now  from  these  few  dates  in  Chinese 
history  to  the  contemplation  of  the  spirit  of  the 
constitution,  which  has  always  remained  the 
same.  We  can  deduce  it  from  the  general  prin¬ 
ciple,  which  is,  the  immediate  unity  of  the  sub¬ 
stantial  spirit  and  the  individual;  but  this  is 
equivalent  to  the  spirit  of  the  family,  which  is 
here  extended  over  the  most  populous  of  coun¬ 
tries.  The  element  of  subjectivity — that  is  to 
say,  the  reflection  upon  itself  of  the  individual 
will  in  antithesis  to  the  substantial  (as  the  power 
in  which  it  is  absorbed)  or  the  recognition  of 
this  power  as  one  with  its  own  essential  being , 
in  which  it  knows  itself  free — is  not  found  on 
this  grade  of  development.  The  universal  will  dis¬ 
plays  its  activity  immediately  through  that  of 
the  individual:  the  latter  has  no  self -cognizance 
at  all  in  antithesis  to  substantial,  positive 
being,  which  it  does  not  yet  regard  as  a  power 
standing  over  against  it — as,  e.g., in  Judaism,  the 
“Jealous  God”  is  known  as  the  negation  of  the 
individual.  In  China  the  universal  will  immedi¬ 
ately  commands  what  the  individual  is  to  do, 
and  the  latter  complies  and  obeys  with  propor¬ 
tionate  renunciation  of  reflection  and  personal 
independence.  If  he  does  not  obey,  if  he  thus 
virtually  separates  himself  from  the  substance 
of  his  being,  inasmuch  as  this  separation  is  not 
mediated  by  a  retreat  within  a  personality  of  his 
own,  the  punishment  he  undergoes  does  not  af¬ 
fect  his  subjective  and  internal,  but  simply  his 
outward  existence.  The  element  of  subjectivity 
is  therefore  as  much  wanting  to  this  political 
totality  as  the  latter  is  on  its  side  altogether  des¬ 
titute  of  a  foundation  in  the  moral  disposition  of 
the  subject.  For  the  substance  is  simply  an  in¬ 
dividual — the  emperor — whose  law  constitutes 
all  the  disposition.  Nevertheless,  this  ignoring 
of  inclination  does  not  imply  caprice,  which 
would  itself  indicate  inclination — that  is,  sub¬ 


jectivity  and  mobility.  Here  we  have  the  one  be¬ 
ing  of  the  state  supremely  dominant — the  sub¬ 
stance,  which,  still  hard  and  inflexible,  resembles 
nothing  but  itself,  includes  no  other  element. 

This  relation,  then,  expressed  more  definitely 
and  more  conformably  with  its  conception,  is 
that  of  the  family.  On  this  form  of  moral  union 
alone  rests  the  Chinese  state,  and  it  is  objective 
family  piety  that  characterizes  it.  The  Chinese 
regard  themselves  as  belonging  to  their  family, 
and  at  the  same  time  as  children  of  the  state.  In 
the  family  itself  they  are  not  personalities,  for 
the  consolidated  unity  in  which  they  exist  as 
members  of  it  is  consanguinity  and  natural  ob¬ 
ligation.  In  the  state  they  have  as  little  inde¬ 
pendent  personality;  for  there  the  patriarchal 
relation  is  predominant,  and  the  government  is 
based  on  the  paternal  management  of  the  em¬ 
peror,  who  keeps  all  departments  of  the  state  in 
order.  Five  duties  are  stated  in  the  Shu-King  as 
involving  grave  and  unchangeable  fundamental 
relations.  1.  The  mutual  one  of  the  emperor  and 
people.  2.  Of  the  fathers  and  children.  3.  Of  an 
elder  and  younger  brother.  4.  Of  husband  and 
wife.  5.  Of  friend  and  friend.  It  may  be  here  in¬ 
cidentally  remarked,  that  the  number  five  is  re¬ 
garded  as  fundamental  among  the  Chinese,  and 
presents  itself  as  often  as  the  number  three 
among  us.  They  have  five  elements  of  nature — 
air,  water,  earth,  metal,  and  wood.  They  recog¬ 
nize  four  quarters  of  heaven  and  a  centre.  Holy 
places,  where  altars  are  erected,  consist  of  four 
elevations,  and  one  in  the  centre. 

The  duties  of  the  family  are  absolutely  bind¬ 
ing,  and  established  and  regulated  by  law.  The 
son  may  not  accost  the  father,  when  he  comes 
into  the  room ;  he  must  seem  to  contract  himself 
to  nothing  at  the  side  of  the  door,  and  may  not 
leave  the  room  without  his  father’s  permission. 
When  the  father  dies,  the  son  must  mourn  for 
three  years — abstaining  from  meat  and  wine. 
The  business  in  which  he  was  engaged,  even 
that  of  the  state,  must  be  suspended,  for  he  is 
obliged  to  quit  it.  Even  the  emperor,  who  has 
just  commenced  his  government,  does  not  de¬ 
vote  himself  to  his  duties  during  this  time.  No 
marriage  may  be  contracted  in  the  family  with¬ 
in  the  period  of  mourning.  Only  the  having 
reached  his  fiftieth  year  exempts  the  bereaved 
from  the  excessive  strictness  of  the  regulations, 
which  are  then  relaxed  that  he  may  not  be  re¬ 
duced  in  person  by  them.  The  sixtieth  year  re¬ 
laxes  them  still  further,  and  the  seventieth  limits 
mourning  to  the  color  of  the  dress.  A  mother  is 
honored  equally  with  a  father.  When  Lord  Ma¬ 
cartney  saw  the  emperor,  the  latter  was  sixty- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


212 

eight  years  old  (sixty  years  is  among  the  Chi¬ 
nese  a  fundamental  round  number,  as  one  hun¬ 
dred  is  among  us),  notwithstanding  which  he 
visited  his  mother  every  morning  on  foot,  to 
demonstrate  his  respect  for  her.  The  New  Year’s 
congratulations  are  offered  even  to  the  mother  of 
the  emperor;  and  the  emperor  himself  cannot 
receive  the  homage  of  the  grandees  of  the  court 
until  he  has  paid  his  to  his  mother.  The  latter  is 
the  first  and  constant  counsellor  of  her  son,  and 
all  announcements  concerning  his  family  are 
made  in  her  name.  The  merits  of  a  son  are  as¬ 
cribed  not  to  him,  but  to  his  father.  When  on 
one  occasion  the  prime  minister  asked  the  em¬ 
peror  to  confer  titles  of  honour  on  his  father,  the 
emperor  issued  an  edict  in  which  it  was  said: 
“Famine  was  desolating  the  empire:  Thy  father 
gave  rice  to  the  starving.  What  beneficence! 
The  empire  was  on  the  edge  of  ruin :  Thy  father 
defended  it  at  the  hazard  of  his  life.  What  fidel¬ 
ity !  The  government  of  the  kingdom  was  intrust¬ 
ed  to  thy  father:  he  made  excellent  laws,  main¬ 
tained  peace  and  concord  with  the  neighboring 
princes,  and  asserted  the  rights  of  my  crown. 
What  wisdom!  The  title  therefore  which  I  award 
to  him  is:  beneficent,  faithful  and  wise.”  The 
son  had  done  all  that  is  here  ascribed  to  the 
father.  In  this  way  ancestors,  a  fashion  the  re¬ 
verse  of  ours,  obtain  titles  of  honour  through 
their  posterity.  But  in  return,  every  father  of  a 
family  is  responsible  for  the  transgressions  of 
his  descendants;  duties  ascend,  but  none  can  be 
properly  said  to  descend. 

It  is  a  great  object  with  the  Chinese,  to  have 
children  who  may  give  them  the  due  honours  of 
burial,  pay  respect  to  their  memory  after  death, 
and  decorate  their  grave.  Although  a  Chinese 
may  have  many  wives,  one  only  is  the  mistress 
of  the  house,  and  the  children  of  the  subordinate 
wives  have  to  honor  her  absolutely  as  a  mother. 
If  a  Chinese  husband  has  no  children  by  any  of 
his  wives,  he  may  proceed  to  adoption  with  a 
view  to  this  posthumous  honour.  For  it  is  an  in¬ 
dispensable  requirement  that  the  grave  of  par¬ 
ents  be  annually  visited.  Here  lamentations  are 
annually  renewed,  and  many,  to  give  full  vent 
to  their  grief,  remain  there  sometimes  one  or 
two  months.  The  body  of  a  deceased  father  is 
often  kept  three  or  four  months  in  the  house, 
and  during  this  time  no  one  may  sit  down  on  a 
chair  or  sleep  in  a  bed.  Every  family  in  China 
has  a  hall  of  ancestors  where  all  the  members  an¬ 
nually  assemble;  there  are  placed  representa¬ 
tions  of  those  who  have  filled  exalted  posts, 
while  the  names  of  those  men  and  women  who 
have  been  of  less  importance  in  the  family  are 


inscribed  on  tablets;  the  whole  family  then  par¬ 
take  of  a  meal  together,  and  the  poor  members 
are  entertained  by  the  more  wealthy.  It  is  said 
that  a  mandarin  who  had  become  a  Christian, 
having  ceased  to  honor  his  ancestors  in  this  way. 
exposed  himself  to  great  persecutions  on  the 
part  of  his  relatives.  The  same  minuteness  of 
regulation  which  prevails  in  the  relation  between 
father  and  children,  characterizes  also  that  be¬ 
tween  the  elder  brother  and  the  younger  ones. 
The  former  has,  though  in  a  less  degree  than  par¬ 
ents,  claims  to  reverence. 

This  family  basis  is  also  the  basis  of  the  consti¬ 
tution,  if  we  can  speak  of  such.  For  although  the 
emperor  has  the  right  of  a  monarch,  standing  at 
the  summit  of  a  political  edifice,  he  exercises  it 
paternally.  He  is  the  patriarch,  and  everything 
in  the  state  that  can  make  any  claim  to  rever¬ 
ence  is  attached  to  him.  For  the  emperor  is  chief 
both  in  religious  affairs  and  in  science — a  subject 
which  will  be  treated  of  in  detail  further  on. 
This  paternal  care  on  the  part  of  the  emperor, 
and  the  spirit  of  his  subjects — who  like  children 
do  not  advance  beyond  the  ethical  principle  of 
the  family  circle,  and  can  gain  for  themselves 
no  independent  and  civil  freedom — makes  the 
whole  an  empire,  administration,  and  social 
code,  which  is  at  the  same  time  moral  and  thor¬ 
oughly  prosaic;  that  is,  a  product  of  the  under¬ 
standing  without  free  reason  and  imagination. 

The  emperor  claims  the  deepest  reverence.  In 
virtue  of  his  position  he  is  obliged  personally  to 
manage  the  government,  and  must  himself  be 
acquainted  with  and  direct  the  legislative  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  Empire,  although  the  tribunals  give 
their  assistance.  Notwithstanding  this,  there  is 
little  room  for  the  exercise  of  his  individual  will ; 
for  the  whole  government  is  conducted  on  the 
basis  of  certain  ancient  maxims  of  the  empire, 
while  his  constant  oversight  is  not  the  less  neces¬ 
sary.  The  imperial  princes  are  therefore  edu¬ 
cated  on  the  strictest  plan.  Their  physical  frames 
are  hardened  by  discipline,  and  the  sciences  are 
their  occupation  from  their  earliest  years.  Their 
education  is  conducted  under  the  emperor’s  su¬ 
perintendence,  and  they  are  early  taught  that  the 
emperor  is  the  head  of  the  state  and  therefore 
must  appear  as  the  first  and  best  in  everything. 
An  examination  of  the  princes  takes  place  every 
year,  and  a  circumstantial  report  of  the  affair  is 
published  through  the  whole  empire,  which  feels 
the  deepest  interest  in  these  matters.  China  has 
therefore  succeeded  in  getting  the  greatest  and 
best  governors,  to  whom  the  expression  “Solo- 
monian  wisdom”  might  be  applied;  and  the  pres¬ 
ent  Manchu  dynasty  has  especially  distinguished 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


itself  by  abilities  of  mind  and  body.  All  the  ideals 
of  princes  and  of  princely  education  which  have 
been  so  numerous  and  varied  since  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  Fenelon’s  Telemaque  are  realized  here. 
In  Europe  there  can  be  no  Solomons.  But  here 
are  the  place  and  the  necessity  for  such  govern¬ 
ment  ;  since  the  rectitude,  the  prosperity,  the  se¬ 
curity  of  all,  depend  on  the  one  impulse  given  to 
the  first  link  in  the  entire  chain  of  this  hierarchy. 
The  deportment  of  the  emperor  is  represented  to 
us  as  in  the  highest  degree  simple,  natural,  noble 
and  intelligent.  Free  from  a  proud  taciturnity  or 
repelling  hauteur  in  speech  or  manners,  he  lives 
in  the  consciousness  of  his  own  dignity  and  in 
the  exercise  of  imperial  duties  to  whose  observ¬ 
ance  he  has  been  disciplined  from  his  earliest 
youth.  Besides  the  imperial  dignity  there  is  prop¬ 
erly  no  elevated  rank,  no  nobility  among  the 
Chinese;  only  the  princes  of  the  imperial  house, 
and  the  sons  of  the  ministers  enjoy  any  prece¬ 
dence  of  the  kind,  and  they  rather  by  their  posi¬ 
tion  than  by  their  birth.  Otherwise  all  are  equal, 
and  only  those  have  a  share  in  the  administration 
of  affairs  who  have  ability  for  it.  Official  stations 
are  therefore  occupied  by  men  of  the  greatest 
intellect  and  education.  The  Chinese  state  has 
consequently  been  often  set  up  as  an  ideal  which 
may  serve  even  us  for  a  model. 

The  next  thing  to  be  considered  is  the  admin¬ 
istration  of  the  empire.  We  cannot  speak,  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  China,  of  a  constitution ;  for  this  would 
imply  that  individuals  and  corporations  have  in¬ 
dependent  rights — partly  in  respect  of  their  par¬ 
ticular  interests,  partly  in  respect  of  the  entire 
state.  This  element  must  be  wanting  here,  and  we 
can  only  speak  of  an  administration  of  the  em¬ 
pire.  In  China,  we  have  the  reality  of  absolute 
equality,  and  all  the  differences  that  exist  are 
possible  only  in  connection  with  that  administra¬ 
tion,  and  in  virtue  of  the  worth  which  a  person 
may  acquire,  enabling  him  to  fill  a  high  post  in 
the  government.  Since  equality  prevails  in  China, 
but  without  any  freedom,  despotism  is  necessar¬ 
ily  the  mode  of  government.  Among  us,  men  are 
equal  only  before  the  law,  and  in  the  respect 
paid  to  the  property  of  each;  but  they  have  also 
many  interests  and  peculiar  privileges,  which 
must  be  guaranteed,  if  we  are  to  have  what  we 
call  freedom.  But  in  the  Chinese  Empire  these 
special  interests  enjoy  no  consideration  on  their 
own  account, and  the  government  proceeds  from 
the  emperor  alone,  who  sets  it  in  movement  as 
a  hierarchy  of  officials  or  mandarins.  Of  these, 
there  are  two  kinds — learned  and  military  man¬ 
darins — the  latter  corresponding  to  our  officers. 
The  learned  mandarins  constitute  the  higher 


213 

rank,  for,  in  China,  civilians  take  precedence  of 
the  military.  Government  officials  are  educated 
at  the  schools ;  elementary  schools  are  instituted 
for  obtaining  elementary  knowledge.  Institutions 
for  higher  cultivation,  such  as  our  universities, 
may,  perhaps,  be  said  not  to  exist.  Those  who 
wish  to  attain  high  official  posts  must  undergo 
several  examinations — usually  three  in  number. 
To  the  third  and  last  examination,  at  which  the 
emperor  himself  is  present,  only  those  can  be 
admitted  who  have  passed  the  first  and  second 
with  credit;  and  the  reward  for  having  succeed¬ 
ed  in  this  is  the  immediate  introduction  into  the 
highest  council  of  the  empire.  The  sciences,  an 
acquaintance  with  which  is  especially  required, 
are  the  history  of  the  empire,  jurisprudence,  and 
the  science  of  customs  and  usages,  and  of  the 
organization  and  administration  of  government. 
Besides  this,  the  mandarins  are  said  to  have  a 
talent  for  poetry  of  the  most  refined  order.  We 
have  the  means  of  judging  of  this,  particularly 
from  the  romance,  Ju-kiao-li,  or,  The  Two  Cous¬ 
ins  f  translated  by  Abel  Remusat :  in  this,  a  youth 
is  introduced  who  having  finished  his  studies,  is 
endeavoring  to  attain  high  dignities.  The  offi¬ 
cers  of  the  army,  also,  must  have  some  mental 
acquirements;  they  too  are  examined;  but  civil 
functionaries  enjoy,  as  stated  above,  far  greater 
respect.  At  the  great  festivals  the  emperor  ap¬ 
pears  with  a  retinue  of  two  thousand  doctors, 
i.e.y  mandarins  in  civil  offices,  and  the  same 
number  of  military  mandarins.  (In  the  whole 
Chinese  state,  there  are  about  15,000  civil,  and 
20,000  military  mandarins.)  The  mandarins  who 
have  not  yet  obtained  an  office,  nevertheless  be¬ 
long  to  the  court,  and  are  obliged  to  appear  at 
the  great  festivals  in  the  spring  and  autumn, 
when  the  emperor  himself  guides  the  plough. 
These  functionaries  are  divided  into  eight  class¬ 
es.  The  first  are  those  that  attend  the  emperor, 
then  follow  the  viceroys,  and  so  on.  The  emper¬ 
or  governs  by  means  of  administrative  bodies, 
for  the  most  part  composed  of  mandarins.  The 
council  of  the  empire  is  the  highest  body  of  the 
kind:  it  consists  of  the  most  learned  and  tal¬ 
ented  men.  From  these  are  chosen  the  presidents 
of  the  other  colleges.  The  greatest  publicity  pre¬ 
vails  in  the  business  of  government.  The  sub¬ 
ordinate  officials  report  to  the  council  of  the 
empire,  and  the  latter  lay  the  matter  before  the 
emperor,  whose  decision  is  made  known  in  the 
court  journal.  The  emperor  often  accuses  him¬ 
self  of  faults ;  and  should  his  princes  have  been 
unsuccessful  in  their  examination,  he  blames 
them  severely.  In  every  ministry,  and  in  various 
parts  of  the  empire,  there  is  a  censor  ( Ko-tao ), 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


who  has  to  give  the  emperor  an  account  of  ev¬ 
erything.  These  censors  enjoy  a  permanent  of¬ 
fice,  and  are  very  much  feared.  They  exercise  a 
strict  surveillance  over  everything  that  concerns 
the  government,  and  the  public  and  private  con¬ 
duct  of  the  mandarins,  and  make  their  report 
immediately  to  the  emperor.  They  have  also  the 
right  of  remonstrating  with  and  blaming  him. 
Chinese  history  gives  many  examples  of  the 
noble-mindedness  and  courage  of  these  Ko-taos. 
For  example:  A  censor  had  remonstrated  with 
a  tyrannical  sovereign,  but  had  been  severely 
repulsed.  Nevertheless,  he  was  not  turned  away 
from  his  purpose,  but  betook  himself  once  more 
to  the  Emperor  to  renew  his  remonstrances. 
Foreseeing  his  death,  he  had  the  coffin  brought 
in  with  him,  in  which  he  was  to  be  buried.  It  is 
related  of  the  censors,  that,  cruelly  lacerated  by 
the  torturers  and  unable  to  utter  a  sound,  they 
have  even  written  their  animadversions  with 
their  own  blood  in  the  sand.  These  censors  them¬ 
selves  form  yet  another  tribunal  which  has  the 
oversight  of  the  whole  empire.  The  mandarins 
are  responsible  also  for  performing  duties  aris¬ 
ing  from  unforeseen  exigencies  in  the  state.  If 
famine,  disease,  conspiracy,  religious  disturb¬ 
ances  occur,  they  have  to  report  the  facts;  not, 
however,  to  wait  for  further  orders  from  gov¬ 
ernment,  but  immediately  to  act  as  the  case  re¬ 
quires.  The  whole  of  the  administration  is  thus 
covered  by  a  network  of  officials.  Functionaries 
are  appointed  to  superintend  the  roads,  the  riv¬ 
ers,  and  the  coasts.  Everything  is  arranged  with 
the  greatest  minuteness.  In  particular,  great  at¬ 
tention  is  paid  to  the  rivers;  in  the  Shu-King 
are  to  be  found  many  edicts  of  the  emperor,  de¬ 
signed  to  secure  the  land  from  inundations.  The 
gates  of  every  town  are  guarded  by  a  watch,  and 
the  streets  are  barred  all  night.  Government  of¬ 
ficers  are  always  answerable  to  the  higher  coun¬ 
cil.  Every  mandarin  is  also  bound  to  make  known 
the  faults  he  has  committed,  every  five  years; 
and  the  trustworthiness  of  his  statement  is  at¬ 
tested  by  a  board  of  control — the  censorship.  In 
the  case  of  any  grave  crime  not  confessed,  the 
mandarins  and  their  families  are  punished  most 
severely.  From  all  this  it  is  clear  that  the  emper¬ 
or  is  the  centre,  around  which  everything  turns ; 
consequently  the  well-being  of  the  country  and 
people  depends  on  him.  The  whole  hierarchy  of 
the  administration  works  more  or  less  according 
to  a  settled  routine,  which  in  a  peaceful  condi¬ 
tion  of  things  becomes  a  convenient  habit.  Uni¬ 
form  and  regular,  like  the  course  of  nature,  it 
goes  its  own  way, at  one  time  as  at  another  time; 
but  the  emperor  is  required  to  be  the  moving, 


ever  wakeful,  spontaneously  active  soul.  If  then 
the  personal  character  of  the  emperor  is  not  of 
the  order  described — namely,  thoroughly  mor¬ 
al,  laborious,  and,  while  maintaining  dignity, 
full  of  energy — everything  is  relaxed,  and  the 
government  is  paralyzed  from  head  to  foot,  and 
given  over  to  carelessness  and  caprice.  For  there 
is  no  other  legal  power  or  institution  extant,  but 
this  superintendence  and  oversight  of  the  em¬ 
peror.  It  is  not  their  own  conscience,  their  own 
honour,  which  keeps  the  offices  of  government  up 
to  their  duty,  but  an  external  mandate  and  the 
severe  sanctions  by  which  it  is  supported.  In  the 
instance  of  the  revolution  that  occurred  in  the 
middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  last  em¬ 
peror  of  the  dynasty  was  very  amiable  and  hon¬ 
ourable;  but  through  the  mildness  of  his  char¬ 
acter,  the  reins  of  government  were  relaxed,  and 
disturbances  naturally  ensued.  The  rebels  called 
the  Manchus  into  the  country.  The  emperor 
killed  himself  to  avoid  falling  into  the  hands  of 
his  enemies,  and  with  his  blood  wrote  on  the 
border  of  his  daughter’s  robe  a  few  words,  in 
which  he  complained  bitterly  of  the  injustice  of 
his  subjects.  A  mandarin,  who  was  with  him, 
buried  him,  and  then  killed  himself  on  his  grave. 
The  empress  and  her  attendants  followed  the 
example.  The  last  prince  of  the  imperial  house, 
who  was  besieged  in  a  distant  province,  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy  and  was  put  to  death. 
All  the  other  attendant  mandarins  died  a  volun¬ 
tary  death. 

Passing  from  the  administration  to  the  juris¬ 
prudence  of  China,  we  find  the  subjects  regarded 
as  in  a  state  of  nonage,  in  virtue  of  the  principle 
of  patriarchal  government.  N o  independent  class¬ 
es  or  orders,  as  in  India,  have  interests  of  their 
own  to  defend.  All  is  directed  and  superintend¬ 
ed  from  above.  All  legal  relations  are  definitely 
settled  by  rules;  free  sentiment,  the  moral  stand¬ 
point  generally,  is  thereby  thoroughly  obliter¬ 
ated.  It  is  formally  determined  by  the  laws  in 
what  way  the  members  of  the  family  should  be 
disposed  towards  each  other,  and  the  transgres¬ 
sion  of  these  laws  entails  in  some  cases  severe 
punishment.  The  second  point  to  be  noticed 
here,  is  the  legal  externality  of  the  family  rela¬ 
tions,  which  becomes  almost  slavery.  Every  one 
has  the  power  of  selling  himself  and  his  chil¬ 
dren;  every  Chinese  buys  his  wife.  Only  the 
chief  wife  is  a  free  woman.  The  concubines  are 
slaves,  and,  like  the  children  and  every  other 
chattel,  may  be  seized  upon  in  case  of  confisca¬ 
tion. 

A  third  point  is  that  punishments  are  general¬ 
ly  corporal  chastisements.  Among  us,  this  would 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  215 


be  an  insult  to  honour;  not  so  in  China,  where 
the  feeling  of  honour  has  not  yet  developed  it¬ 
self.  A  dose  of  cudgelling  is  the  most  easily  for¬ 
gotten;  yet  it  is  the  severest  punishment  for  a 
man  of  honour,  who  desires  not  to  be  esteemed 
physically  assailable,  but  who  is  vulnerable  in 
directions  implying  a  more  refined  sensibility. 
But  the  Chinese  do  not  recognize  a  subjectivity 
in  honour;  they  are  the  subjects  rather  of  correc¬ 
tive  than  retributive  punishment,  as  are  chil¬ 
dren  among  us;  for  corrective  punishment  aims 
at  improvement,  that  which  is  retributive  im¬ 
plies  veritable  imputation  of  guilt.  In  the  cor - 
rective ,  the  deterring  principle  is  only  the  fear 
of  punishment,  not  any  consciousness  of  wrong; 
for  here  we  cannot  presume  upon  any  reflection 
upon  the  nature  of  the  action  itself.  Among  the 
Chinese  all  crimes,  those  committed  against  the 
laws  of  the  family  relation,  as  well  as  against 
the  State,  are  punished  externally.  Sons  who 
fail  in  paying  due  honour  to  their  father  or  moth¬ 
er,  younger  brothers  who  are  not  sufficiently  re¬ 
spectful  to  elder  ones,  are  bastinadoed.  If  a  son 
complains  of  injustice  done  to  him  by  his  fa¬ 
ther,  or  a  younger  brother  by  an  elder,  he  re¬ 
ceives  a  hundred  blows  with  a  bamboo,  and  is 
banished  for  three  years,  if  he  is  in  the  right; 
if  not,  he  is  strangled.  If  a  son  should  raise  his 
hand  against  his  father,  he  is  condemned  to  have 
his  flesh  torn  from  his  body  with  red-hot  pin¬ 
cers.  The  relation  between  husband  and  wife  is, 
like  all  other  family  relations,  very  highly  es¬ 
teemed,  and  unfaithfulness — which,  however,  on 
account  of  the  seclusion  in  which  the  women  are 
kept,  can  very  seldom  present  itself — meets  with 
severe  animadversion.  Similar  penalties  await 
the  exhibition  on  the  part  of  a  Chinese  of  great¬ 
er  affection  to  one  of  his  inferior  wives  than  to 
the  matron  who  heads  his  establishment,  should 
the  latter  complain  of  such  disparagement.  In 
China,  every  mandarin  is  authorized  to  inflict 
blows  with  the  bamboo;  even  the  highest  and 
most  illustrious — ministers,  viceroys,  and  even 
the  favorites  of  the  emperor  himself — are  pun¬ 
ished  in  this  fashion.  The  friendship  of  the  Em¬ 
peror  is  not  withdrawn  on  account  of  such  chas¬ 
tisement,  and  they  themselves  appear  not  sensi¬ 
bly  touched  by  it.  When,  on  one  occasion,  the 
last  English  embassy  to  China  was  conducted 
home  from  the  palace  by  the  princes  and  their 
retinue,  the  master  of  the  ceremonies,  in  order 
to  make  room,  without  any  ceremony  cleared  the 
way  among  the  princes  and  nobles  with  a  whip. 

As  regards  responsibility,  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  malice  prepense  and  blameless  or  acci¬ 
dental  commission  of  an  act  is  not  regarded;  for 


accident  among  the  Chinese  is  as  much  charged 
with  blame,  as  intention.  Death  is  the  penalty  of 
accidental  homicide.  This  ignoring  of  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  accident  and  intention  occa¬ 
sions  most  of  the  disputes  between  the  English 
and  the  Chinese;  for  should  the  former  be  at¬ 
tacked  by  the  latter — should  a  ship  of  war,  be¬ 
lieving  itself  attacked,  defend  itself,  and  a  Chi¬ 
nese  be  killed  as  the  consequence — the  Chinese 
are  accustomed  to  require  that  the  Englishman 
who  fired  the  fatal  shot  should  lose  his  life.  Ev¬ 
eryone  who  is  in  any  way  connected  with  the 
transgressor,  shares,  especially  in  the  case  of 
crimes  against  the  emperor,  the  ruin  of  the  ac¬ 
tual  offender:  all  his  near  kinsmen  are  tortured 
to  death.  The  printers  of  an  objectionable  book 
and  those  who  read  it,  are  similarly  exposed  to 
the  vengeance  of  the  law.  The  direction  which 
this  state  of  things  gives  to  private  revenge  is 
singular.  It  may  be  said  of  the  Chinese  that  they 
are  extremely  sensitive  to  injuries  and  of  a  vin¬ 
dictive  nature.  To  satisfy  his  revenge  the  of¬ 
fended  person  does  not  venture  to  kill  his  oppo¬ 
nent,  because  the  whole  family  of  the  assassin 
would  be  put  to  death;  he  therefore  inflicts  an 
injury  on  himself,  to  ruin  his  adversary.  In  many 
towns  it  has  been  deemed  necessary  to  contract 
the  openings  of  wells,  to  put  a  stop  to  suicides 
by  drowning.  For  when  anyone  has  committed  su¬ 
icide,  the  laws  ordain  that  the  strictest  investi¬ 
gation  shall  be  made  into  the  cause.  All  the  ene¬ 
mies  of  the  suicide  are  arrested  and  put  to  the 
torture,  and  if  the  person  who  has  committed 
the  insult  which  led  to  the  act,  can  be  discover¬ 
ed,  he  and  his  whole  family  are  executed.  In  case 
of  insult  therefore,  a  Chinese  prefers  killing  him¬ 
self  rather  than  his  opponent ;  since  in  either  case 
he  must  die,  but  in  the  former  contingency  will 
have  the  due  honours  of  burial,  and  may  cherish 
the  hope  that  his  family  will  acquire  the  proper¬ 
ty  of  his  adversary.  Such  is  the  fearful  state  of 
things  in  regard  to  responsibility  and  non-re¬ 
sponsibility;  all  subjective  freedom  and  moral 
concernment  with  an  action  are  ignored.  In  the 
Mosaic  Laws,  where  the  distinction  between  do¬ 
lus,  culpa,  and  casus,  is  also  not  yet  clearly  rec¬ 
ognized,  there  is  nevertheless  an  asylum  opened 
for  the  innocent  homicide,  to  which  he  may  be¬ 
take  himself. 

There  is  in  China  no  distinction  in  the  penal 
code  between  higher  and  lower  classes.  A  field- 
marshal  of  the  empire,  who  had  very  much  dis¬ 
tinguished  himself,  was  traduced  on  some  ac¬ 
count,  to  the  emperor;  and  the  punishment  for 
the  alleged  crime,  was  that  he  should  be  a  spy 
upon  those  who  did  not  fulfil  their  duty  in  clear- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


216 

ing  away  the  snow  from  the  streets. 

Among  the  legal  relations  of  the  Chinese  we 
have  also  to  notice  changes  in  the  rights  of  pos¬ 
session  and  the  introduction  of  slavery,  which  is 
connected  there  with  it.  The  soil  of  China,  in 
which  the  chief  possessions  of  the  Chinese  con¬ 
sist,  was  regarded  only  at  a  late  epoch  as  essen¬ 
tially  the  property  of  the  state.  At  that  time  the 
ninth  of  all  moneys  from  estates  was  allotted 
by  law  to  the  emperor.  At  a  still  later  epoch  serf¬ 
dom  was  established, and  its  enactment  has  been 
ascribed  to  the  Emperor  Shih  Huang  Ti,  who  in 
the  year  213  b.c.,  built  the  Great  Wall;  who  had 
all  the  writings  that  recorded  the  ancient  rights 
of  the  Chinese,  burned;  and  who  brought  many 
independent  principalities  of  China  under  his 
dominion.  His  wars  caused  the  conquered  lands 
to  become  private  property,  and  the  dwellers  on 
these  lands,  serfs.  In  China,  however,  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  slavery  and  freedom  is  neces¬ 
sarily  not  great,  since  all  are  equal  before  the 
emperor — that  is,  all  are  alike  degraded.  As  no 
honour  exists,  and  no  one  has  an  individual  right 
in  respect  of  others,  the  consciousness  of  debase¬ 
ment  predominates,  and  this  easily  passes  into 
that  of  utter  abandonment.  With  this  abandon¬ 
ment  is  connected  the  great  immorality  of  the 
Chinese.  They  are  notorious  for  deceiving  wher¬ 
ever  they  can.  Friend  deceives  friend,  and  no 
one  resents  the  attempt  at  deception  on  the  part 
of  another,  if  the  deceit  has  not  succeeded  in  its 
object,  or  comes  to  the  knowledge  of  the  person 
sought  to  be  defrauded.  Their  frauds  are  most 
astutely  and  craftily  performed,  so  that  Euro¬ 
peans  have  to  be  painfully  cautious  in  dealing 
with  them.  Their  consciousness  of  moral  aban¬ 
donment  shows  itself  also  in  the  fact  that  the 
religion  of  Fo  is  so  widely  diffused;  a  religion 
which  regards  as  the  highest  and  absolute — as 
God — pure  nothing ;  which  sets  up  contempt  for 
individuality,  for  personal  existence,  as  the  high¬ 
est  perfection. 

We  come,  then,  to  the  consideration  of  the  re¬ 
ligious  side  of  the  Chinese  polity.  In  the  patri¬ 
archal  condition  the  religious  exaltation  of  man 
has  merely  a  human  reference — simple  moral¬ 
ity  and  right-doing.  The  absolute  itself,  is  regard¬ 
ed  partly  as  the  abstract,  simple  rule  of  this  right¬ 
doing — eternal  rectitude;  partly  as  the  power 
which  is  its  sanction.  Except  in  these  simple  as¬ 
pects,  all  the  relations  of  the  natural  world,  the 
postulates  of  subjectivity,  of  heart  and  soul,  are 
entirely  ignored.  The  Chinese  in  their  patriar¬ 
chal  despotism  need  no  such  connection  or  me¬ 
diation  with  the  highest  Being;  for  education, 
the  laws  of  morality  and  courtesy,  and  the  com¬ 


mands  and  government  of  the  emperor  embody 
all  such  connection  and  mediation  as  far  as  they 
feel  the  need  of  it.  The  emperor,  as  he  is  the  su¬ 
preme  head  of  the  state,  is  also  the  chief  of  its 
religion.  Consequently,  religion  is  in  China  es¬ 
sentially  state-religion.  The  distinction  between 
it  and  Lamaism  must  be  observed,  since  the  lat¬ 
ter  is  not  developed  to  a  state,  but  contains  re¬ 
ligion  as  a  free,  spiritual,  disinterested  conscious¬ 
ness.  That  Chinese  religion,  therefore,  cannot  be 
what  we  call  religion.  For  to  us  religion  means 
the  retirement  of  the  spirit  within  itself,  in  con¬ 
templating  its  essential  nature,  its  inmost  being. 
In  these  spheres,  then,  man  is  withdrawn  from 
his  relation  to  the  state,  and  betaking  himself  to 
this  retirement,  is  able  to  release  himself  from 
the  power  of  secular  government.  But  in  China 
religion  has  not  risen  to  this  grade,  for  true  faith 
is  possible  only  where  individuals  can  seclude 
themselves,  can  exist  for  themselves  independ¬ 
ently  of  any  external  compulsory  power.  In 
China  the  individual  has  no  such  life,  does  not 
enjoy  this  independence:  in  any  direction  he  is 
therefore  dependent;  in  religion  as  well  as  in 
other  things;  that  is,  dependent  on  objects  of 
nature,  of  which  the  most  exalted  is  the  material 
heaven.  On  this  depend  harvest,  the  seasons  of 
the  year,  the  abundance  and  sterility  of  crops. 
The  emperor,  as  crown  of  all,  the  embodiment  of 
power,  alone  approaches  heaven;  individuals,  as 
such,  enjoy  no  such  privilege.  He  it  is,  who  pre¬ 
sents  the  offerings  at  the  four  feasts ;  gives  thanks, 
at  the  head  of  his  court,  for  the  harvest  and  in¬ 
vokes  blessings  on  the  sowing  of  the  seed.  This 
“heaven”  might  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  our 
term  “God,”  as  the  Lord  of  nature  (we  say,  for 
example,  “Heaven  protect  us!”) ;  but  such  a  re¬ 
lation  is  beyond  the  scope  of  Chinese  thought, 
for  here  the  one  isolated  self-consciousness  is 
substantial  being,  the  emperor  himself,  the  su¬ 
preme  power.  Heaven  has  therefore  no  higher 
meaning  than  nature.  The  Jesuits  indeed,  yielded 
to  Chinese  notions  so  far  as  to  call  the  Christian 
God,  “Heaven” — “Tien” ;  but  they  were  on  that 
account  accused  to  the  Pope  by  other  Christian 
orders.  The  Pope  consequently  sent  a  cardinal  to 
China,  who  died  there.  A  bishop  who  was  sub¬ 
sequently  despatched,  enacted  that  instead  of 
“Heaven,”  the  term  “Lord  of  Heaven”  should 
be  adopted.  The  relation  to  Tien  is  supposed  to 
be  such,  that  the  good  conduct  of  individuals 
and  of  the  emperor  brings  blessing;  their  trans¬ 
gressions  on  the  other  hand  cause  want  and  evil  of 
allkinds.  The  Chinese  religion  involves  that  prim¬ 
itive  element  of  magical  influence  over  nature, 
inasmuch  as  human  conduct  absolutely  deter- 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  217 


mines  the  course  of  events.  If  the  emperor  be¬ 
haves  well,  prosperity  cannot  but  ensue ;  Heaven 
must  ordain  prosperity.  A  second  side  of  this 
religion  is,  that  as  the  general  aspect  of  the  re¬ 
lation  to  Heaven  is  bound  up  with  the  person  of 
the  emperor,  he  has  also  its  more  special  bear¬ 
ings  in  his  hands ;  viz.,  the  particular  well-being 
of  individuals  and  provinces.  These  have  each 
an  appropriate  genius  {Chen),  which  is  subject 
to  the  emperor,  who  pays  adoration  only  to  the 
general  power  of  heaven,  while  the  several  spirits 
of  the  natural  world  follow  his  laws.  He  is  thus 
made  the  proper  legislator  for  heaven  as  well  as 
for  earth.  To  these  genii,  each  of  which  enjoys 
a  worship  peculiar  to  itself,  certain  sculptured 
forms  are  assigned.  These  are  disgusting  idols, 
which  have  not  yet  attained  the  dignity  of  art, 
because  nothing  spiritual  is  represented  in  them. 
They  are  therefore  only  terrific,  frightful  and 
negative ;  they  keep  watch — as  among  the  Greeks 
do  the  river-gods,  the  nymphs,  and  dryads — over 
single  elements  and  natural  objects.  Each  of  the 
five  elements  has  its  genius,  distinguished  by  a 
particular  colour.  The  sovereignty  of  the  dynasty 
that  occupies  the  throne  of  China  also  depends 
on  a  genius,  and  this  one  has  a  yellow  colour.  Not 
less  does  every  province  and  town,  every  moun¬ 
tain  and  river  possess  an  appropriate  genius.  All 
these  spirits  are  subordinate  to  the  emperor,  and 
in  the  annual  directory  of  the  Empire  are  regis¬ 
tered  the  functionaries  and  genii  to  whom  such 
or  such  a  brook,  river,  etc.,  has  been  intrusted. 
If  a  mischance  occurs  in  any  part,  the  genius  is 
deposed  as  a  mandarin  would  be.  The  genii  have 
innumerable  temples  (in  Peking  nearly  10,000) 
to  which  a  multitude  of  priests  and  convents  are 
attached.  These  “bonzes”  live  unmarried,  and  in 
all  cases  of  distress  are  applied  to  by  the  Chinese 
for  counsel.  In  other  respects,  however,  neither 
they  nor  the  temples  are  much  venerated  Lord 
Macartney’s  embassy  was  even  quartered  in  a 
temple — such  buildings  being  used  as  inns.  The 
emperor  has  sometimes  thought  fit  to  secularize 
many  thousands  of  these  convents;  to  compel 
the  bonzes  to  return  to  civil  life;  and  to  impose 
taxes  on  the  estates  appertaining  to  the  founda¬ 
tions.  The  bonzes  are  soothsayers  and  exorcists : 
for  the  Chinese  are  given  up  to  boundless  super¬ 
stitions.  This  arises  from  the  want  of  subjective 
independence,  and  presupposes  the  very  opposite 
of  freedom  of  spirit.  In  every  undertaking,  e.g., 
if  the  site  of  a  house,  or  of  a  grave,  etc.,  is  to  be 
determined,  the  advice  of  the  soothsayers  is 
asked.  In  the  Y-King  certain  lines  are  given, 
which  supply  fundamental  forms  and  categories 
— on  account  of  which  this  book  is  called  the 


Book  of  Fates.  A  certain  meaning  is  ascribed  to 
the  combination  of  such  lines,  and  prophetic  an¬ 
nouncements  are  deduced  from  this  groundwork. 
Or  a  number  of  little  sticks  are  thrown  into  the 
air,  and  the  fate  in  question  is  prognosticated 
from  the  way  in  which  they  fall.  What  we  regard 
as  chance,  as  natural  connection,  the  Chinese 
seek  to  deduce  or  attain  by  magical  arts ;  and  in 
this  particular  also,  their  want  of  spiritual  reli¬ 
gion  is  manifested. 

With  this  deficiency  of  genuine  subjectivity  is 
connected  moreover,  the  form  which  Chinese 
science  assumes.  In  mentioning  Chinese  sciences 
we  encounter  a  considerable  clamour  about  their 
perfection  and  antiquity.  Approaching  the  sub¬ 
ject  more  closely,  we  see  that  the  sciences  enjoy 
very  great  respect,  and  that  they  are  even 
publicly  extolled  and  promoted  by  the  govern¬ 
ment.  The  emperor  himself  stands  at  the  apex 
of  literature.  A  college  exists  whose  special  busi¬ 
ness  it  is  to  edit  the  decrees  of  the  emperor, 
with  a  view  to  their  being  composed  in  the  best 
style;  and  this  redaction  assumes  the  character 
of  an  important  affair  of  state.  The  mandarins 
in  their  notifications  have  to  study  the  same 
perfection  of  style,  for  the  form  is  expected  to 
correspond  with  the  excellence  of  the  matter. 
One  of  the  highest  governmental  boards  is  the 
academy  of  sciences.  The  emperor  himself  ex¬ 
amines  its  members;  they  live  in  the  palace, and 
perform  the  functions  of  secretaries,  historians 
of  the  empire,  natural  philosophers,  and  geogra¬ 
phers.  Should  a  new  law  be  proposed,  the  acad¬ 
emy  must  report  upon  it.  By  way  of  introduc¬ 
tion  to  such  report  it  must  give  the  history  of  ex¬ 
isting  enactments;  or  if  the  law  in  question  af¬ 
fects  foreign  countries,  a  description  of  them  is 
required.  The  emperor  himself  writes  the  pref¬ 
aces  to  the  works  thus  composed.  Among  recent 
emperors,  K'ien-Lung  especially  distinguished 
himself  by  his  scientific  acquirements.  He  him¬ 
self  wrote  much,  but  became  far  more  remark¬ 
able  by  publishing  the  principal  works  that  China 
has  produced.  At  the  head  of  the  commission 
appointed  to  correct  the  press,  was  a  prince  of 
the  empire;  and  after  the  work  had  passed 
through  the  hands  of  all,  it  came  once  more 
back  to  the  emperor,  who  severely  punished 
every  error  that  had  been  committed. 

Though  in  one  aspect  the  sciences  appear  thus 
pre-eminently  honoured  and  fostered,  there  are 
wanting  to  them  on  the  other  side  that  free 
ground  of  subjectivity,  and  that  properly  scien¬ 
tific  interest,  which  make  them  a  truly  theoret¬ 
ical  occupation  of  the  mind.  A  free,  ideal,  spirit¬ 
ual  kingdom  has  here  no  place.  What  may  be 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


218 

called  scientific  is  of  a  merely  empirical  nature, 
and  is  made  absolutely  subservient  to  the  useful 
on  behalf  of  the  state — its  requirements  and 
those  of  individuals.  The  nature  of  their  written 
language  is  at  the  outset  a  great  hindrance  to  the 
development  of  the  sciences.  Rather,  converse¬ 
ly,  because  a  true  scientific  interest  does  not 
exist,  the  Chinese  have  acquired  no  better  in¬ 
strument  for  representing  and  imparting  thought. 
They  have,  as  is  well  known,  beside  a  spoken 
language,  a  written  language;  which  does  not 
express,  as  ours  does,  individual  sounds — does 
not  present  the  spoken  words  to  the  eye,  but 
represents  the  ideas  themselves  by  signs.  This 
appears  at  first  sight  a  great  advantage,  and  has 
gained  the  suffrages  of  many  great  men — among 
others,  of  Leibnitz.  In  reality,  it  is  anything  but 
such.  For  if  we  consider  in  the  first  place,  the 
effect  of  such  a  mode  of  writing  on  the  spoken 
language,  we  shall  find  this  among  the  Chinese 
very  imperfect,  on  account  of  that  separation. 
For  our  spoken  language  is  matured  to  distinct¬ 
ness  chiefly  through  the  necessity  of  finding  signs 
for  each  single  sound,  which  latter,  by  reading,  we 
learn  to  express  distinctly.  The  Chinese,  to  whom 
such  a  means  of  orthoepic  development  is  want¬ 
ing,  do  not  mature  the  modifications  of  sounds 
in  their  language  to  distinct  articulations  capa¬ 
ble  of  being  represented  by  letters  and  syllables. 
Their  spoken  language  consists  of  an  inconsid¬ 
erable  number  of  monosyllabic  words,  which  are 
used  with  more  than  one  signification.  The  sole 
methods  of  denoting  distinctions  of  meaning  are 
the  connection,  the  accent,  and  the  pronuncia¬ 
tion — quicker  or  slower,  softer  or  louder.  The 
ears  of  the  Chinese  have  become  very  sensible 
to  such  distinctions.  Thus  I  find  that  the  word 
po  has  eleven  different  meanings  according  to 
the  tone,  denoting:  glass,  to  boil,  to  winnow 
wheat,  to  cleave  asunder,  to  water,  to  prepare, 
an  old  woman,  a  slave,  a  liberal  man,  a  wise  per¬ 
son,  a  little. 

As  to  their  written  language,  I  will  specify 
only  the  obstacles  which  it  presents  to  the  ad¬ 
vance  of  the  sciences.  Our  written  language  is 
very  simple  for  a  learner,  as  we  analyze  our 
spoken  language  into  about  twenty-five  articula¬ 
tions,  by  which  analysis,  speech  is  rendered  def¬ 
inite,  the  multitude  of  possible  sounds  is  limited, 
and  obscure  intermediate  sounds  are  banished: 
we  have  to  learn  only  these  signs  and  their  com¬ 
binations.  Instead  of  twenty-five  signs  of  this 
sort,  the  Chinese  have  many  thousands  to  learn. 
The  number  necessary  for  use  is  reckoned  at 
9,353,  or  even  10,516,  if  we  add  those  recently 
introduced;  and  the  number  of  characters  gen¬ 


erally,  for  ideas  and  their  combinations  as  they 
are  presented  in  books,  amounts  to  from  80,000 
to  90,000.  As  to  the  sciences  themselves,  history 
among  the  Chinese  comprehends  the  bare  and 
definite  facts,  without  any  opinion  or  reasoning 
upon  them.  In  the  same  way  their  jurisprudence 
gives  only  fixed  laws, and  their  ethics  only  deter¬ 
minate  duties,  without  raising  the  question  of  a 
subjective  foundation  for  them.  The  Chinese 
have,  however,  in  addition  to  other  sciences,  a 
philosophy ,  whose  elementary  principles  are  of 
great  antiquity,  since  the  Y-King ,  the  Book  of 
Fates,  treats  of  origination  and  destruction.  In 
this  book  are  found  the  purely  abstract  ideas  of 
unity  and  duality;  the  philosophy  of  the  Chi¬ 
nese  appears  therefore  to  proceed  from  the  same 
fundamental  ideas  as  that  of  Pythagoras.1  The 
fundamental  principle  recognized  is  reason — tao ; 
that  essence  lying  at  the  basis  of  the  whole,  which 
effects  everything.  To  become  acquainted  with 
its  forms  is  regarded  among  the  Chinese  also  as 
the  highest  science;  yet  this  has  no  connection 
with  the  educational  pursuits  which  more  nearly 
concern  the  state.  The  works  of  Lao-tsu,  and  espe¬ 
cially  his  work  T  ao-te-ching,  are  celebrated. 
Confucius  visited  this  philosopher  in  the  sixth 
century  before  Christ,  to  testify  his  reverence 
for  him.  Although  every  Chinaman  is  at  liberty 
to  study  these  philosophical  works,  a  particular 
sect,  calling  itself  Tao-tse ,  “Honorers  of  Rea¬ 
son,”  makes  this  study  its  special  business.  Those 
who  compose  it  are  isolated  from  civil  life;  and 
there  is  much  that  is  enthusiastic  and  mystic  in¬ 
termingled  with  their  views.  They  believe,  for  in¬ 
stance,  that  he  who  is  acquainted  with  reason, 
possesses  an  instrument  of  universal  power, 
which  may  be  regarded  as  all-powerful,  and 
which  communicates  a  supernatural  might;  so 
that  the  possessor  is  enabled  by  it  to  exalt  him¬ 
self  to  heaven,  and  is  not  subject  to  death  (much 
the  same  as  the  universal  elixir  of  life  once  talked 
of  among  us).  With  the  works  of  Confucius  we 
have  become  more  intimately  acquainted.  To 
him,  China  owes  the  publication  of  the  Kings, 
and  many  original  works  on  morality  besides, 
which  form  the  basis  of  the  customs  and  conduct 
of  the  Chinese.  In  the  principal  work  of  Con¬ 
fucius,  which  has  been  translated  into  English, 
are  found  correct  moral  apophthegms;  but  there 
is  a  circumlocution,  a  reflex  character,  and  cir¬ 
cuitousness  in  the  thought,  which  prevents  it 
from  rising  above  mediocrity.  As  to  the  other 
sciences,  they  are  not  regarded  as  such,  but 
rather  as  branches  of  knowledge  for  the  behoof 

1  Vide  Hegel's  V orlesungen  iiber  die  Geschichte  der 
Philo sophie,  vol.  i.  p.  138,  etc. 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  219 


of  practical  ends.  The  Chinese  are  far  behind  in 
mathematics,  physics,  and  astronomy,  notwith¬ 
standing  their  quondam  reputation  in  regard  to 
them.  They  knew  many  things  at  a  time  when 
Europeans  had  not  discovered  them,  but  they 
have  not  understood  how  to  apply  their  knowl¬ 
edge:  as,  e.g.,  the  magnet,  and  the  art  of  printing. 
But  they  have  made  no  advance  in  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  these  discoveries.  In  the  latter,  for  in¬ 
stance,  they  continue  to  engrave  the  letters  in 
wooden  blocks  and  then  print  them  off:  they 
know  nothing  of  movable  types.  Gunpowder,  too, 
they  pretended  to  have  invented  before  the  Euro¬ 
peans;  but  the  Jesuits  were  obliged  to  found  their 
first  cannon.  As  to  mathematics,  they  understand 
well  enough  how  to  reckon, but  the  higher  aspect 
of  the  science  is  unknown.  The  Chinese  also  have 
long  passed  as  great  astronomers.  Laplace  has  in¬ 
vestigated  their  acquisitions  in  this  department, 
and  discovered  that  they  possess  some  ancient  ac¬ 
counts  and  notices  of  lunar  and  solar  eclipses ; 
but  these  certainly  do  not  constitute  a  science. 
The  notices  in  question  are,  moreover,  so  in¬ 
definite,  that  they  cannot  properly  be  put  in  the 
category  of  knowledge.  In  the  Shu-King,  e.g., 
we  have  two  eclipses  of  the  sun  mentioned  in  the 
space  of  1,500  years.  The  best  evidence  of  the 
state  of  astronomy  among  the  Chinese,  is  the 
fact  that  for  many  hundred  years  the  Chinese 
calendars  have  been  made  by  Europeans.  In 
earlier  times,  when  Chinese  astronomers  con¬ 
tinued  to  compose  the  calendar,  false  announce¬ 
ments  of  lunar  and  solar  eclipses  often  occurred, 
entailing  the  execution  of  the  authors.  The  tele¬ 
scopes  which  the  Chinese  have  received  as  pres¬ 
ents  from  the  Europeans,  are  set  up  for  orna¬ 
ment  ;  but  they  have  not  an  idea  how  to  make 
further  use  of  them.  Medicine,  too,  is  studied  by 
the  Chinese, but  only  empirically ;  and  the  gross¬ 
est  superstition  is  connected  with  its  practice. 
The  Chinese  have  as  a  general  characteristic, 
a  remarkable  skill  in  imitation,  which  is  exer¬ 
cised  not  merely  in  daily  life,  but  also  in  art. 
They  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  representing 
the  beautiful,  as  beautiful;  for  in  their  painting, 
perspective  and  shadow  are  wanting.  And  al¬ 
though  a  Chinese  painter  copies  European  pic¬ 
tures  (as  the  Chinese  do  everything  else),  cor¬ 
rectly;  although  he  observes  accurately  how 
many  scales  a  carp  has ;  how  many  indentations 
there  are  in  the  leaves  of  a  tree;  what  is  the 
form  of  various  trees,  and  how  the  branches 
bend; — the  exalted,  the  ideal  and  beautiful  is 
not  the  domain  of  his  art  and  skill.  The  Chinese 
are,  on  the  other  hand,  too  proud  to  learn  any¬ 
thing  from  Europeans,  although  they  must  often 


recognize  their  superiority.  A  merchant  in  Can¬ 
ton  had  a  European  ship  built,  but  at  the  com¬ 
mand  of  the  governor  it  was  immediately  de¬ 
stroyed.  The  Europeans  are  treated  as  beggars, 
because  they  are  compelled  to  leave  their  home, 
and  seek  for  support  elsewhere  than  in  their 
own  country.  Besides,  the  Europeans,  just  be¬ 
cause  of  their  intelligence,  have  not  yet  been 
able  to  imitate  the  superficial  and  perfectly  nat¬ 
ural  cleverness  of  the  Chinese.  Their  prepara¬ 
tion  of  varnishes,  their  working  of  metals,  and 
especially  their  art  of  casting  them  extremely 
thin,  their  porcelain  manufacture  and  many 
other  things,  have  not  yet  been  completely  mas¬ 
tered  by  Europeans. 

This  is  the  character  of  the  Chinese  people 
in  its  various  aspects.  Its  distinguishing  feature 
is,  that  everything  which  belongs  to  spirit — un¬ 
constrained  morality,  in  practice  and  theory, 
heart,  inward  religion,  science  and  art  properly 
so-called — is  alien  to  it.  The  emperor  always 
speaks  with  majesty  and  paternal  kindness  and 
tenderness  to  the  people;  who,  however,  cherish 
the  meanest  opinion  of  themselves,  and  believe 
that  they  are  born  only  to  drag  the  car  of  im¬ 
perial  power.  The  burden  which  presses  them  to 
the  ground,  seems  to  them  to  be  their  inevitable 
destiny;  and  it  appears  nothing  terrible  to  them 
to  sell  themselves  as  slaves,  and  to  eat  the  bitter 
bread  of  slavery.  Suicide,  the  result  of  revenge, 
and  the  exposure  of  children,  as  a  common,  even 
daily  occurrence,  show  the  little  respect  in  which 
they  hold  themselves  individually,  and  human¬ 
ity  in  general.  And  though  there  is  no  distinction 
conferred  by  birth,  and  everyone  can  attain  the 
highest  dignity,  this  very  equality  testifies  to  no 
triumphant  assertion  of  the  worth  of  the  inner 
man, but  a  servile  consciousness — one  which  has 
not  yet  matured  itself  so  far  as  to  recognize  dis¬ 
tinctions. 

Section  II 

INDIA 

India,  like  China,  is  a  phenomenon  antique  as 
well  as  modern ;  one  which  has  remained  station¬ 
ary  and  fixed,  and  has  received  a  most  perfect 
home-sprung  development.  It  has  always  been 
the  land  of  imaginative  aspiration,  and  appears 
to  us  still  as  a  fairy  region,  an  enchanted  world. 
In  contrast  with  the  Chinese  state,  which  pre¬ 
sents  only  the  most  prosaic  understanding,  India 
is  the  region  of  phantasy  and  sensibility.  The 
point  of  advance  in  principle  which  it  exhibits 
to  us  may  be  generally  stated  as  follows:  in 
China  the  patriarchal  principle  rules  a  people  in 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


220 

a  condition  of  nonage,  the  part  of  whose  moral 
resolution  is  occupied  by  the  regulating  law,  and 
the  moral  oversight  of  the  emperor.  Now  it  is 
the  interest  of  spirit  that  external  conditions 
should  become  internal  ones;  that  the  natural 
and  the  spiritual  world  should  be  recognized  in 
the  subjective  aspect  belonging  to  intelligence; 
by  which  process  the  unity  of  subjectivity  and 
being  generally — or  the  idealism  of  existence — 
is  established.  This  idealism,  then,  is  found  in 
India,  but  only  as  an  idealism  of  imagination, 
without  distinct  conceptions; — one  which  does 
indeed  free  existence  from beginningand  matter, 
but  changes  everything  into  the  merely  imagina¬ 
tive;  for  although  the  latter  appears  interwoven 
with  definite  conceptions  and  thought  presents 
itself  as  an  occasional  concomitant,  this  happens 
only  through  accidental  combination.  Since, 
however,  it  is  the  abstract  and  absolute  thought 
itself  that  enters  into  these  dreams  as  their 
material,  we  may  say  that  absolute  being  is  pre¬ 
sented  here  as  in  the  ecstatic  state  of  a  dream¬ 
ing  condition.  For  we  have  not  the  dreaming  of 
an  actual  individual,  possessing  distinct  person¬ 
ality,  and  simply  unfettering  the  latter  from 
limitation,  but  we  have  the  dreaming  of  the 
unlimited  absolute  spirit. 

There  is  a  beauty  of  a  peculiar  kind  in  women, 
in  which  their  countenance  presents  a  trans¬ 
parency  of  skin,  a  light  and  lovely  roseate  hue, 
which  is  unlike  the  complexion  of  mere  health 
and  vital  vigor — a  more  refined  bloom,  breathed, 
as  it  were,  by  the  soul  within — and  in  which  the 
features,  the  light  of  the  eye,  the  position  of  the 
mouth,  appear  soft,  yielding,  and  relaxed.  This 
almost  unearthly  beauty  is  perceived  in  women 
in  those  days  which  immediately  succeed  child¬ 
birth;  when  freedom  from  the  burden  of  preg¬ 
nancy  and  the  pains  of  travail  is  added  to  the 
joy  of  soul  that  welcomes  the  gift  of  a  beloved 
infant.  A  similar  tone  of  beauty  is  seen  also  in 
women  during  the  magical  somnambulic  sleep, 
connecting  them  with  a  world  of  superterrestrial 
beauty.  A  great  artist  (Schoreel)  has  moreover 
given  this  tone  to  the  dying  Mary,  whose  spirit 
is  already  rising  to  the  regions  of  the  blessed, 
but  once  more,  as  it  were,  lights  up  her  dying 
countenance  for  a  farewell  kiss.  Such  a  beauty 
we  find  also  in  its  loveliest  form  in  the  Indian 
world ;  a  beauty  of  enervation  in  which  all  that 
is  rough,  rigid,  and  contradictory  is  dissolved, 
and  we  have  only  the  soul  in  a  state  of  emotion; 
a  soul,  however,  in  which  the  death  of  free  self- 
reliant  spirit  is  perceptible.  For  should  we  ap¬ 
proach  the  charm  of  this  flower-life,  a  charm 
rich  in  imagination  and  genius,  in  which  its  whole 


environment  and  all  its  relations  are  permeated 
by  the  rose-breath  of  the  soul,  and  the  world  is 
transformed  into  a  garden  of  love — should  we 
look  at  it  more  closely,  and  examine  it  in  the 
light  of  human  dignity  and  freedom — the  more 
attractive  the  first  sight  of  it  had  been,  so  much 
the  more  unworthy  shall  we  ultimately  find  it 
in  every  respect. 

The  character  of  spirit  in  a  state  of  dream,  as 
the  generic  principle  of  the  Hindu  nature,  must 
be  further  defined.  In  a  dream,  the  individual 
ceases  to  be  conscious  of  self  as  stick,  in  contra¬ 
distinction  from  objective  existences.  When 
awake,  I  exist  for  myself,  and  the  rest  of  crea¬ 
tion  is  an  external,  fixed  objectivity,  as  I  myself 
am  for  it.  As  external,  the  rest  of  existence  ex¬ 
pands  itself  to  a  rationally  connected  whole;  a 
system  of  relations,  in  which  my  individual  be¬ 
ing  is  itself  a  member — an  individual  being 
united  with  that  totality.  This  is  the  sphere  of 
Understanding.  In  the  state  of  dreaming,  on 
the  contrary,  this  separation  is  suspended.  Spirit 
has  ceased  to  exist  for  itself  in  contrast  with 
alien  existence,  and  thus  the  separation  of  the 
external  and  individual  dissolves  before  its  uni¬ 
versality — its  essence.  The  dreaming  Indian  is 
therefore  all  that  we  call  finite  and  individual; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  as  infinitely  universal  and 
unlimited,  a  something  intrinsically  divine.  The 
Indian  view  of  things  is  a  universal  pantheism, 
a  pantheism,  however,  of  imagination,  not  of 
thought.  One  substance  pervades  the  whole  of 
things,  and  all  individualizations  are  directly 
vitalized  and  animated  into  particular  powers. 
The  sensuous  matter  and  content  are  in  each 
case  simply  and  in  the  rough  taken  up,  and 
carried  over  into  the  sphere  of  the  universal  and 
immeasurable.  It  is  not  liberated  by  the  free 
power  of  spirit  into  a  beautiful  form,  and  ideal¬ 
ized  in  the  spirit,  so  that  the  sensuous  might  be 
a  merely  subservient  and  compliant  expression 
of  the  spiritual;  but  is  expanded  into  the  im¬ 
measurable  and  undefined,  and  the  divine  is 
thereby  made  bizarre,  confused,  and  ridiculous 
These  dreams  are  not  mere  fables,  a  play  of  the 
imagination,  in  which  the  soul  only  revelled  in 
fantastic  gambols:  it  is  lost  in  them;  hurried 
to  and  fro  by  these  reveries,  as  by  something 
that  exists  really  and  seriously  for  it.  It  is  de¬ 
livered  over  to  these  limited  objects  as  to  its 
lords  and  gods.  Everything,  therefore :  sun, moon, 
stars,  the  Ganges,  the  Indus,  beasts,  flowers, 
everything  is  a  god  to  it.  And  while,  in  this 
deification,  the  finite  loses  its  consistency  and 
substantiality,  intelligent  conception  of  it  is  im¬ 
possible.  Conversely  the  divine,  regarded  as  es- 


221 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


sentially  changeable  and  unfixed,  is  also  by  the 
base  form  which  it  assumes,  defiled  and  made 
absurd.  In  this  universal  deification  of  all  finite 
existence,  and  consequent  degradation  of  the 
divine,  the  idea  of  theanthropy,  the  incarnation 
of  God,  is  not  a  particularly  important  concep¬ 
tion.  The  parrot,  the  cow,  the  ape,  etc.,  are  like¬ 
wise  incarnations  of  God,  yet  are  not  therefore 
elevated  above  their  nature.  The  divine  is  not  in¬ 
dividualized  to  a  subject,  to  concrete  spirit, 
but  degraded  to  vulgarity  and  senselessness. 
This  gives  us  a  general  idea  of  the  Indian  view  of 
the  universe.  Things  are  as  much  stripped  of 
rationality,  of  finite  consistent  stability  of  cause 
and  effect,  as  man  is  of  the  steadfastness  of  free 
individuality,  of  personality,  and  freedom. 

Externally,  India  sustains  manifold  relations 
to  the  history  of  the  world.  In  recent  times  the 
discovery  has  been  made,  that  the  Sanskrit  lies 
at  the  foundation  of  all  those  further  develop¬ 
ments  which  form  the  languages  of  Europe;  e.g ., 
the  Greek,  Latin,  German.  India,  moreover,  was 
the  centre  of  emigration  for  all  the  western 
world ;  but  this  external  historical  relation  is  to 
be  regarded  rather  as  a  merely  physical  diffusion 
of  peoples  from  this  point.  Although  in  India 
the  elements  of  further  developments  might  be 
discovered,  and  although  we  could  find  traces  of 
their  being  transmitted  to  the  west,  this  transmis¬ 
sion  has  been  nevertheless  so  abstract  that  that 
which  among  later  peoples  attracts  our  interest  is 
not  anything  derived  from  India,  but  rather  some¬ 
thing  concrete,  which  they  themselves  have 
formed,  and  in  regard  to  which  they  have  done 
their  best  to  forget  Indian  elements  of  culture. 
The  spread  of  Indian  culture  is  prehistorical, 
for  history  is  limited  to  that  which  makes  an 
essential  epoch  in  the  development  of  spirit.  On 
the  whole,  the  diffusion  of  Indian  culture  is 
only  a  dumb,  deedless  expansion ;  that  is,  it  pre¬ 
sents  no  political  action.  The  people  of  India 
have  achieved  no  foreign  conquests,  but  have 
been  on  every  occasion  vanquished  themselves. 
And  as  in  this  silent  way,  northern  India 
has  been  a  centre  of  emigration,  productive  of 
merely  physical  diffusion,  India  as  a  land  of  de¬ 
sire  forms  an  essential  element  in  general  his¬ 
tory.  From  the  most  ancient  times  downwards, 
all  nations  have  directed  their  wishes  and  long¬ 
ings  to  gaining  access  to  the  treasures  of  this 
land  of  marvels,  the  most  costly  which  the  earth 
presents;  treasures  of  nature — pearls,  dia¬ 
monds,  perfumes, rose-essences,  elephants, lions, 
etc. — as  also  treasures  of  wisdom.  The  way  by 
which  these  treasures  have  passed  to  the  west, 
has  at  all  times  been  a  matter  of  world-historical 


importance,  bound  up  with  the  fate  of  nations. 
Those  wishes  have  been  realized;  this  land  of 
desire  has  been  attained;  there  is  scarcely  any 
great  nation  of  the  east,  nor  of  the  modern 
European  west,  that  has  not  gained  for  itself  a 
smaller  or  larger  portion  of  it.  In  the  old  world, 
Alexander  the  Great  was  the  first  to  penetrate 
by  land  to  India,  but  even  he  only  just  touched 
it.  The  Europeans  of  the  modern  world  have 
been  able  to  enter  into  direct  connection  with 
this  land  of  marvels  only  circuitously  from  the 
other  side;  and  by  way  of  the  sea,  which,  as  has 
been  said,  is  the  general  uniter  of  countries.  The 
English,  or  rather  the  East  India  Company,  are 
the  lords  of  the  land;  for  it  is  the  necessary  fate 
of  Asiatic  empires  to  be  subjected  to  Europeans; 
and  China  will,  some  day  or  other,  be  obliged  to 
submit  to  this  fate.  Thenumber  of  inhabitants  is 
near  200,000,000,  of  whom  from  100,000,000  to 
112,000,000  are  directly  subject  to  the  English. 
The  princes  who  are  not  immediately  subject  to 
them  have  English  agents  at  their  courts,  and 
English  troops  in  their  pay.  Since  the  country  of 
the  Mahrattas  was  conquered  by  the  English,  no 
part  of  India  has  asserted  its  independence  of 
their  sway.  They  have  already  gained  a  footing 
in  the  Burman  Empire,  and  passed  the  Brahma¬ 
putra,  which  bounds  India  on  the  east. 

India  proper  is  the  country  which  the  English 
divide  into  two  large  sections:  the  Deccan — the 
great  peninsula  which  has  the  Bay  of  Bengal 
on  the  east,  and  the  Indian  Sea  on  the  west — 
and  Hindostan,  formed  by  the  valley  of  the 
Ganges,  and  extending  in  the  direction  of  Persia. 
To  the  northeast,  Hindostan  is  bordered  by  the 
Himalaya,  which  has  been  ascertained  by  Euro¬ 
peans  to  be  the  highest  mountain  range  in  the 
world,  for  its  summits  are  about  26,000  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea.  On  the  other  side  of 
the  mountains  the  level  again  declines ;  the  do¬ 
minion  of  the  Chinese  extends  to  that  point,  and 
when  the  English  wished  to  go  to  Lhasa  to  the 
Dalai  Lama,  they  were  prevented  by  the  Chi¬ 
nese.  Towards  the  west  of  India  flows  the  Indus, 
in  which  the  five  rivers  are  united,  which  are 
called  the  Pent  jab  (Punjab),  into  which  Alex¬ 
ander  the  Great  penetrated.  The  dominion  of 
the  English  does  not  extend  to  the  Indus;  the 
sect  of  the  Sikhs  inhabits  that  district,  whose 
constitution  is  thoroughly  democratic,  and  who 
have  broken  off  from  the  Indian  as  well  as  from 
the  Mohammedan  religion,  and  occupy  an  inter¬ 
mediate  ground — acknowledging  only  one  su¬ 
preme  Being.  They  are  a  powerful  nation,  and 
have  reduced  to  subjection  Kabul  and  Kashmir. 
Besides  these  there  dwell  along  the  Indus  gen- 


222 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


uine  Indian  tribes  of  the  warrior-caste.  Between 
the  Indus  and  its  twin-brother,  the  Ganges,  are 
great  plains.  The  Ganges,  on  the  other  hand, 
forms  large  kingdoms  around  it,  in  which  the 
sciences  have  been  so  highly  developed,  that  the 
countries  around  the  Ganges  enjoy  a  still  greater 
reputation  than  those  around  the  Indus.  The 
Kingdom  of  Bengal  is  especially  flourishing. 
The  Nerbudda  forms  the  boundary  between  the 
Deccan  and  Hindostan.  The  peninsula  of  the 
Deccan  presents  a  far  greater  variety  than  Hin¬ 
dostan,  and  its  rivers  possess  almost  as  great  a 
sanctity  as  the  Indus  and  the  Ganges — which 
latter  has  become  a  general  name  for  all  the 
rivers  in  India,  as  the  River  kclt  i£o\rjv-  We  call 
the  inhabitants  of  the  great  country  which  we 
have  now  to  consider  Indians ,  from  the  river 
Indus ,  (the  English  call  them  Hindus).  They 
themselves  have  never  given  a  name  to  the 
whole,  for  it  has  never  become  one  empire,  and 
yet  we  consider  it  as  such. 

With  regard  to  the  political  life  of  the  Indians, 
we  must  first  consider  the  advance  it  presents  in 
contrast  with  China.  In  China  there  prevailed 
an  equality  among  all  the  individuals  composing 
the  empire;  consequently  all  government  was 
absorbed  in  its  centre,  the  emperor,  so  that  in¬ 
dividual  members  could  not  attain  to  independ¬ 
ence  and  subjective  freedom.  The  next  degree 
in  advance  of  this  unity  is  difference,  maintain¬ 
ing  its  independence  against  the  all-subduing 
power  of  unity.  An  organic  life  requires  in  the 
first  place  one  soul,  and  in  the  second  place,  a  di¬ 
vergence  into  differences,  which  become  organic 
members,  and  in  their  several  offices  develop 
themselves  to  a  complete  system;  in  such  a 
way,  however,  that  their  activity  reconstitutes 
that  one  soul.  This  freedom  of  separation  is 
wanting  in  China.  The  deficiency  is  that  diver¬ 
sities  cannot  attain  to  independent  existence.  In 
this  respect,  the  essential  advance  is  made  in 
India,  viz. :  that  independent  members  ramify 
from  the  unity  of  despotic  power.  Yet  the  dis¬ 
tinctions  which  these  imply  are  referred  to  na¬ 
ture.  Instead  of  stimulating  the  activity  of  a 
soul  as  their  centre  of  union,  and  spontaneously 
realizing  that  soul — as  is  the  case  in  organic  life, 
they  petrify  and  become  rigid,  and  by  their 
stereotyped  character  condemn  the  Indian  peo¬ 
ple  to  the  most  degrading  spiritual  serfdom.  The 
distinctions  in  question  are  the  castes.  In  every 
rational  state  there  are  distinctions  which  must 
manifest  themselves.  Individuals  must  arrive 
at  subjective  freedom,  and  in  doing  so,  give  an 
objective  form  to  these  diversities.  But  Indian 
culture  has  not  attained  to  a  recognition  of  free¬ 


dom  and  inward  morality ;  the  distinctions  which 
prevail  are  only  those  of  occupations,  and  civil 
conditions.  In  a  free  state  also,  such  diversities 
give  rise  to  particular  classes,  so  combined, 
however,  that  their  members  can  maintain  their 
individuality.  In  India  we  have  only  a  division 
in  masses — a  division,  however,  that  influences 
the  whole  political  life  and  the  religious  con¬ 
sciousness.  The  distinctions  of  class,  like  that 
unity  in  China,  remain  consequently  on  the  same 
original  grade  of  substantiality ,  i.e.,  they  are  not 
the  result  of  the  free  subjectivity  of  individuals. 
Examining  the  idea  of  a  state  and  its  various 
functions,  we  recognize  the  first  essential  func¬ 
tion  as  that  whose  scope  is  the  absolutely  univer¬ 
sal;  of  which  man  becomes  conscious  first  in 
religion,  then  in  science.  God,  the  divine  is  the 
absolutely  universal.  The  highest  class  there¬ 
fore  will  be  the  one  by  which  the  divine  is  pre¬ 
sented  and  brought  to  bear  on  the  community 
— the  class  of  Brahmans.  The  second  element 
or  class,  will  represent  subjective  power  and 
valour.  Such  power  must  assert  itself,  in  order 
that  the  whole  may  stand  its  ground,  and  retain 
its  integrity  against  other  such  totalities  or 
states.  This  class  is  that  of  the  warriors  and 
governors — the  Kshattriyas ;  although  Brah¬ 
mans  often  become  governors.  The  third  order 
of  occupation  recognized  is  that  which  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  specialities  of  life,  the  satisfy¬ 
ing  of  its  necessities,  and  comprehends  agri¬ 
culture,  crafts  and  trade;  the  class  of  the  Vais- 
yas.  Lastly,  the  fourth  element  is  the  class  of 
service,  the  mere  instrument  for  the  comfort 
of  others,  whose  business  it  is  to  work  for  others 
for  wages  affording  a  scanty  subsistence — the 
caste  of  Sudras.  This  servile  class,  properly 
speaking,  constitutes  no  special  organic  class 
in  the  state,  because  its  members  only  serve  in¬ 
dividuals:  their  occupations  are  therefore  dis¬ 
persed  among  them  and  are  consequently  at¬ 
tached  to  that  of  the  previously  mentioned 
castes.  Against  the  existence  of  “classes”  gen¬ 
erally,  an  objection  has  been  brought,  especially 
in  modern  times,  drawn  from  the  consideration 
of  the  state  in  its  “aspect”  of  abstract  equity. 
But  equality  in  civil  life  is  something  absolutely 
impossible;  for  individual  distinctions  of  sex 
and  age  will  always  assert  themselves ;  and  even 
if  an  equal  share  in  the  government  is  accorded 
to  all  citizens,  women  and  children  are  immedi¬ 
ately  passed  by,  and  remain  excluded.  The  dis¬ 
tinction  between  poverty  and  riches,  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  skill  and  talent,  can  be  as  little  ignored 
— utterly  refuting  those  abstract  assertions.  But 
while  this  principle  leads  us  to  put  up  with  vari- 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  223 


ety  of  occupations,  and  distinction  of  the  classes 
to  which  they  are  intrusted,  we  are  met  here  in 
India  by  the  peculiar  circumstance  that  the  in¬ 
dividual  belongs  to  such  a  class  essentially  by 
birth,  and  is  bound  to  it  for  life.  All  the  concrete 
vitality  that  makes  its  appearance  sinks  back 
into  death.  A  chain  binds  down  the  life  that  was 
just  upon  the  point  of  breaking  forth.  The  prom¬ 
ise  of  freedom  which  these  distinctions  hold  out 
is  therewith  completely  nullified.  What  birth 
has  separated  mere  arbitrary  choice  has  no  right 
to  join  together  again:  therefore,  the  castes  pre¬ 
serving  distinctness  from  their  very  origin,  are 
presumed  not  to  be  mixed  or  united  by  marriage. 
Yet  even  Arrian  ( Indica  n)  reckoned  seven 
castes,  and  in  later  times  more  than  thirty  have 
been  made  out ;  which,  notwithstanding  all  ob¬ 
stacles,  have  arisen  from  the  union  of  the  vari¬ 
ous  classes.  Polygamy  necessarily  tends  to  this. 
A  Brahman,  e.g.,  is  allowed  three  wives  from  the 
three  other  castes,  provided  he  has  first  taken 
one  from  his  own.  The  offspring  of  such  mixtures 
originally  belonged  to  no  caste,  but  one  of  the 
kings  invented  a  method  of  classifying  these 
casteless  persons,  which  involved  also  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  arts  and  manufactures.  The  chil¬ 
dren  in  question  were  assigned  to  particular  em¬ 
ployments;  one  section  became  weavers,  another 
wrought  in  iron,  and  thus  different  classes  arose 
from  these  different  occupations.  The  highest 
of  these  mixed  castes  consists  of  those  who  are 
born  from  the  marriage  of  a  Brahman  with  a 
wife  of  the  warrior  caste;  the  lowest  is  that  of 
the  Chandalas,  who  have  to  remove  corpses,  to 
execute  criminals,  and  to  perform  impure  offices 
generally.  The  members  of  this  caste  are  ex¬ 
communicated  and  detested;  and  are  obliged  to 
live  separate  and  far  from  association  with 
others.  The  Chandalas  are  obliged  to  move  out 
of  the  way  for  their  superiors,  and  a  Brahman 
may  knock  down  any  that  neglect  to  do  so.  If  a 
Chandala  drinks  out  of  a  pond  it  is  defiled,  and 
requires  to  be  consecrated  afresh. 

We  must  next  consider  the  relative  position 
of  these  castes.  Their  origin  is  referred  to  a 
myth,  which  tells  us  that  the  Brahman  caste 
proceeded  from  Brahma’s  mouth;  the  warrior 
caste  from  his  arms;  the  industrial  classes  from 
his  loins;  the  servile  caste  from  his  foot.  Many 
historians  have  set  up  the  hypothesis  that  the 
Brahmans  originally  formed  a  separate  sacerdo¬ 
tal  nation,  and  this  fable  is  especially  counte¬ 
nanced  by  the  Brahmans  themselves.  A  people 
consisting  of  priests  alone  is,  assuredly,  the 
greatest  absurdity,  for  we  know  a  priori,  that 
a  distinction  of  classes  can  exist  only  within  a 


people ;  in  every  nation  the  various  occupations 
of  life  must  present  themselves,  for  they  belong 
to  the  objectivity  of  spirit.  One  class  necessarily 
supposes  another,  and  the  rise  of  castes  gener¬ 
ally,  is  only  a  result  of  the  united  life  of  a  nation. 
A  nation  of  priests  cannot  exist  without  agri¬ 
culturists  and  soldiers.  Classes  cannot  be  brought 
together  from  without;  they  are  developed  only 
from  within.  They  come  forth  from  the  interior 
of  national  life,  and  not  conversely.  But  that 
these  distinctions  are  here  attributed  to  nature, 
is  a  necessary  result  of  the  Idea  which  the  East 
embodies.  For  while  the  individual  ought  prop¬ 
erly  to  be  empowered  to  choose  his  occupation, 
in  the  East,  on  the  contrary,  internal  subjectiv¬ 
ity  is  not  yet  recognized  as  independent;  and 
if  distinction  obtrude  themselves,  their  recogni¬ 
tion  is  accompanied  by  the  belief  that  the  in¬ 
dividual  does  not  choose  his  particular  position 
for  himself,  but  receives  it  from  nature.  In 
China  the  people  are  dependent,  without  distinc¬ 
tion  of  classes,  on  the  laws  and  moral  decision 
of  the  emperor;  consequently  on  a  human  will. 
Plato,  in  his  Republic,  assigns  the  arrangement 
in  different  classes  with  a  view  to  various  occu¬ 
pations,  to  the  choice  of  the  governing  body. 
Here,  therefore,  a  moral,  a  spiritual  power  is 
the  arbiter.  In  India,  nature  is  this  governing 
power.  But  this  natural  destiny  need  not  have 
led  to  that  degree  of  degradation  which  we  ob¬ 
serve  here,  if  the  distinctions  had  been  limited 
to  occupation  with  what  is  earthly — to  forms 
of  objective  spirit.  In  the  feudalism  of  mediae¬ 
val  times,  individuals  were  also  confined  to  a 
certain  station  in  life;  but  for  all  there  was  a 
higher  being,  superior  to  the  most  exalted  earth¬ 
ly  dignity,  and  admission  to  holy  orders  was  open 
to  all.  This  is  the  grand  distinction,  that  here 
religion  holds  the  same  position  towards  all; 
that,  although  the  son  of  a  mechanic  becomes 
a  mechanic,  the  son  of  a  peasant  a  peasant,  and 
free  choice  is  often  limited  by  many  restric¬ 
tive  circumstances,  the  religious  element  stands 
in  the  same  relation  to  all,  and  all  are  in¬ 
vested  with  an  absolute  value  by  religion.  In 
India  the  direct  contrary  is  the  case.  Another 
distinction  between  the  classes  of  society  as 
they  exist  in  the  Christian  world  and  those  in 
Hindostan  is  the  moral  dignity  which  exists 
among  us  in  every  class,  constituting  that  which 
man  must  possess  in  and  through  himself.  In 
this  respect  the  higher  classes  are  equal  to  the 
lower;  and  while  religion  is  the  higher  sphere  in 
which  all  sun  themselves,  equality  before  the 
law,  rights  of  person  and  of  property,  are  gained 
for  every  class.  But  by  the  fact  that  in  India, 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


224 

as  already  observed,  differences  extend  not  only 
to  the  objectivity  of  spirit,  but  also  to  its  abso¬ 
lute  subjectivity,  and  thus  exhaust  all  its  rela¬ 
tions — neither  morality, nor  justice, nor  religios¬ 
ity  is  to  be  found. 

Every  caste  has  its  especial  duties  and  rights. 
Duties  and  rights,  therefore,  are  not  recognized 
as  pertaining  to  mankind  generally,  but  as  those 
of  a  particular  caste.  While  we  say,  “Bravery 
is  a  virtue,”  the  Hindus  say,  on  the  contrary, 
“Bravery  is  the  virtue  of  the  Kshattriyas.”  Hu¬ 
manity  generally,  human  duty  and  human  feel¬ 
ing  do  not  manifest  themselves;  we  find  only 
duties  assigned  to  the  several  castes.  Everything 
is  petrified  into  these  distinctions,  and  over  this 
petrification  a  capricious  destiny  holds  sway. 
Morality  and  human  dignity  are  unknown;  evil 
passions  have  their  full  swing;  the  spirit  wan¬ 
ders  into  the  dream-world,  and  the  highest  state 
is  annihilation. 

To  gain  a  more  accurate  idea  of  what  the 
Brahmans  are,  and  in  what  the  Brahmanical 
dignity  consists,  we  must  investigate  the  Hindu 
religion  and  the  conceptions  it  involves,  to  which 
we  shall  have  to  return  further  on;  for  the  re¬ 
spective  rights  of  castes  have  their  basis  in  a 
religious  relation.  Brahma  (neuter)  is  the  Su¬ 
preme  in  religion,  but  there  are  besides  chief 
divinities  Brahma  (masc.)  Vishnu  or  Krishna , 
incarnate  in  infinitely  diverse  forms,  and  Siva. 
These  form  a  connected  trinity.  Brahma  is  the 
highest;  but  Vishnu  or  Krishna,  Siva,  the  sun 
moreover,  the  air,  etc.,  are  also  Brahm,  i.e.,  sub¬ 
stantial  unity.  To  Brahm  itself  no  sacrifices  are 
offered ;  it  is  not  honoured ;  but  prayers  are  pre¬ 
sented  to  all  other  idols.  Brahm  itself  is  the  sub¬ 
stantial  unity  of  all.  The  highest  religious  posi¬ 
tion  of  man,  therefore  is,  being  exalted  to 
Brahm.  If  a  Brahman  is  asked  what  Brahm  is, 
he  answers:  When  I  fall  back  within  myself, 
and  close  all  external  senses,  and  say  dm  to  my¬ 
self,  that  is  Brahm.  Abstract  unity  with  God  is 
realized  in  this  abstraction  from  humanity.  An 
abstraction  of  this  kind  may  in  some  cases  leave 
everything  else  unchanged,  as  does  devotional 
feeling,  momentarily  excited.  But  among  the 
Hindus  it  holds  a  negative  position  towards  all 
that  is  concrete;  and  the  highest  state  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  this  exaltation,  by  which  the  Hindu 
raises  himself  to  deity.  The  Brahmans,  in  virtue 
of  their  birth,  are  already  in  possession  of  the 
divine.  The  distinction  of  castes  involves,  there¬ 
fore,  a  distinction  between  present  deities  and 
mere  limited  mortals.  The  other  castes  may 
likewise  become  partakers  in  a  regeneration; 
but  they  must  subject  themselves  to  immense 


self-denial,  torture,  and  penance.  Contempt  of 
life,  and  of  living  humanity,  is  the  chief  feature 
in  this  ascesis.  A  large  number  of  the  non- 
Brahmanical  population  strive  to  attain  regen¬ 
eration.  They  are  called  Yogis.  An  Englishman 
who,  on  a  journey  to  Tibet  to  visit  the  Dalai 
Lama,  met  such  a  yogi,  gives  the  following  ac¬ 
count  :  Theyogi  was  already  on  the  second  grade 
in  his  ascent  to  Brahmanical  dignity.  He  had 
passed  the  first  grade  by  remaining  for  twelve 
years  on  his  legs,  without  ever  sitting  or  lying 
down.  At  first  he  had  bound  himself  fast  to  a 
tree  with  a  rope,  until  he  had  accustomed  him¬ 
self  to  sleep  standing.  The  second  grade  required 
him  to  keep  his  hands  clasped  together  over  his 
head  for  twelve  years  in  succession.  Already  his 
nails  had  almost  grown  into  his  hands.  The 
third  grade  is  not  always  passed  through  in  the 
same  way ;  generally  the  yogi  has  to  spend  a  day 
between  five  fires ,  that  is,  between  four  fires 
occupying  the  four  quarters  of  heaven,  and 
the  sun.  He  must  then  swing  backwards  and  for¬ 
wards  over  the  fire,  a  ceremony  occupying  three 
hours  and  three-quarters.  Englishmen  present 
at  an  act  of  this  kind,  say  that  in  half  an  hour 
the  blood  streamed  forth  from  every  part  of  the 
devotee’s  body;  he  was  taken  down  and  pres¬ 
ently  died.  If  this  trial  is  also  surmounted,  the 
aspirant  is  finally  buried  alive,  that  is  put  into 
the  ground  in  an  upright  position  and  quite 
covered  over  with  soil;  after  three  hours  and 
three-quarters  he  is  drawn  out,  and  if  he  lives, 
he  is  supposed  to  have  at  last  attained  the 
spiritual  power  of  a  Brahman. 

Thus  only  by  such  negation  of  his  existence 
does  anyone  attain  Brahmanical  power.  In  its 
highest  degree  this  negation  consists  in  a  sort  of 
hazy  consciousness  of  having  attained  perfect 
mental  immobility — the  annihilation  of  all  emo¬ 
tion  and  all  volition;  a  condition  which  is  re¬ 
garded  as  the  highest  among  the  Buddhists  also. 
However  pusillanimous  and  effeminate  the  Hin¬ 
dus  may  be  in  other  respects,  it  is  evident  how 
little  they  hesitate  to  sacrifice  themselves  to  the 
highest — to  annihilation.  Another  instance  of 
the  same  is  the  fact  of  wives  burning  themselves 
after  the  death  of  their  husbands.  Should  a 
woman  contravene  this  traditional  usage,  she 
would  be  severed  from  society,  and  perish  in 
solitude.  An  Englishman  states  that  he  also  saw 
a  woman  burn  herself  because  she  had  lost  her 
child.  He  did  all  that  he  could  to  divert  her  away 
from  her  purpose;  at  last  he  applied  to  her  hus¬ 
band  who  was  standing  by,  but  he  showed  him¬ 
self  perfectly  indifferent,  as  he  had  more  wives 
at  home.  Sometimes  twenty  women  are  seen 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


throwing  themselves  at  once  into  the  Ganges, 
and  on  the  Himalaya  range  an  English  traveller 
found  three  women  seeking  the  source  of  the 
Ganges,  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  their  life  in 
this  holy  river.  At  a  religious  festival  in  the  cele¬ 
brated  temple  of  Juggernaut  in  Orissa,  on  the 
Bay  of  Bengal,  where  millions  of  Hindus  assem¬ 
ble,  the  image  of  the  god  Vishnu  is  drawn  in 
procession  on  a  car:  about  five  hundred  men  set 
it  in  motion,  and  many  fling  themselves  down 
before  its  wheels  to  be  crushed  to  pieces.  The 
whole  seashore  is  already  strewed  with  the 
bodies  of  persons  who  have  thus  immolated 
themselves.  Infanticide  is  also  very  common  in 
India.  Mothers  throw  their  children  into  the 
Ganges,  or  let  them  pine  away  under  the  rays 
of  the  sun.  The  morality  which  is  involved  in  re¬ 
spect  for  human  life,  is  not  found  among  the 
Hindus.  There  are  besides  those  already  men¬ 
tioned,  infinite  modifications  of  the  same  prin¬ 
ciple  of  conduct,  all  pointing  to  annihilation. 
This,  e.g.,  is  the  leading  principle  of  the  gym- 
nosophists,  as  the  Greeks  called  them.  Naked 
fakirs  wander  about  without  any  occupation, 
like  the  mendicant  friars  of  the  Catholic  Church; 
live  on  the  alms  of  others,  and  make  it  their  aim 
to  reach  the  highest  degree  of  abstraction — the 
perfect  deadening  of  consciousness;  a  point  from 
which  the  transition  to  physical  death  is  no 
great  step. 

This  elevation  which  others  can  only  attain 
by  toilsome  labour  is,  as  already  stated,  the  birth¬ 
right  of  the  Brahmans.  The  Hindu  of  another 
caste,  must,  therefore,  reverence  the  Brah¬ 
man  as  a  divinity;  fall  down  before  him, and  say 
to  him:  “Thou  art  God.”  And  this  elevation 
cannot  have  anything  to  do  with  moral  conduct, 
but,  inasmuch  as  all  internal  morality  is  absent, 
is  rather  dependent  on  a  farrago  of  observances 
relating  to  the  merest  externalities  and  trivial¬ 
ities  of  existence.  Human  life,  it  is  said,  ought  to 
be  a  perpetual  worship  of  God.  It  is  evident  how 
hollow  such  general  aphorisms  are,  when  we 
consider  the  concrete  forms  which  they  may  as¬ 
sume.  They  require  another,  a  further  qualifica¬ 
tion,  if  they  are  to  have  a  meaning.  The  Brah¬ 
mans  are  a  present  deity,  but  their  spirituality 
has  not  yet  been  reflected  inwards  in  contrast  with 
nature ;  and  thus  that  which  is  purely  indifferent 
is  treated  as  of  absolute  importance.  The  em¬ 
ployment  of  the  Brahmans  consists  principally 
in  the  reading  of  the  Vedas:  they  only  have  a 
right  to  read  them.  Were  a  Sudra  to  read  the 
Vedas,  or  to  hear  them  read,  he  would  be  severe¬ 
ly  punished,  and  burning  oil  must  be  poured  into 
his  ears.  The  external  observances  binding  on 


the  Brahmans  are  prodigiously  numerous,  and 
the  laws  of  Manu  treat  of  them  as  the  most 
essential  part  of  duty.  The  Brahman  must  rest 
on  one  particular  foot  in  rising,  then  wash  in  a 
river;  his  hair  and  nails  must  be  cut  in  neat 
curves,  his  whole  body  purified,  his  garments 
white ;  in  his  hand  must  be  a  staff  of  a  specified 
kind;  in  his  ears  a  golden  earring.  If  the  Brah¬ 
man  meets  a  man  of  an  inferior  caste,  he  must 
turn  back  and  purify  himself.  He  has  also  to  read 
in  the  Vedas ,  in  various  ways :  each  word  separate¬ 
ly,  or  doubling  them  alternately,  or  backwards. 
He  may  not  look  to  the  sun  when  rising  or  set¬ 
ting,  or  when  overcast  by  clouds  or  reflected  in 
the  water.  He  is  forbidden  to  step  over  a  rope  to 
which  a  calf  is  fastened,  or  to  go  out  when  it 
rains.  He  may  not  look  at  his  wife  when  she  eats, 
sneezes,  gapes,  or  is  quietly  seated.  At  the  mid¬ 
day  meal  he  may  only  have  one  garment  on,  in 
bathing  never  be  quite  naked.  How  minute  these 
directions  are,  may  be  especially  judged  of  from 
the  observances  binding  on  the  Brahmans  in  re¬ 
gard  to  satisfying  the  calls  of  nature.  This  is  for¬ 
bidden  to  them  in  a  great  thoroughfare,  on  ashes, 
on  ploughed  land,  on  a  hill,  a  nest  of  white  ants, 
on  wood  destined  for  fuel,  in  a  ditch,  walking  or 
standing,  on  the  bank  of  a  river,  etc.  At  such  a 
time  they  may  not  look  at  the  sun,  at  water,  or 
at  animals.  By  day  they  should  keep  their  face 
generally  directed  to  the  north,  but  by  night  to 
the  south ;  only  in  the  shade  are  they  allowed  to 
turn  to  which  quarter  they  like.  It  is  forbidden 
to  everyone  who  desires  a  long  life,  to  step  on 
potsherds,  cotton  seeds,  ashes,  or  sheaves  of 
corn,  or  his  urine.  In  the  episode  Nala,  in  the 
poem  of  Mahabharata,  we  have  a  story  of  a  virgin 
who  in  her  21st  year,  the  age  in  which  the  maidens 
themselves  have  a  right  to  choose  a  husband, 
makes  a  selection  from  among  her  wooers.  There 
are  five  of  them;  but  the  maiden  remarks  that 
four  of  them  do  not  stand  firmly  on  their  feet, 
and  thence  infers  correctly  that  they  are  gods. 
She  therefore  chooses  the  fifth,  who  is  a  verita¬ 
ble  man.  But  besides  the  four  despised  divinities 
there  are  two  malevolent  ones,  whom  her  choice 
had  not  favored,  and  who  on  that  account  wish 
for  revenge.  They  therefore  keep  a  strict  watch 
on  the  husband  of  their  beloved  in  every  step  and 
act  of  life,  with  the  design  of  inflicting  injury 
upon  him  if  he  commits  a  misdemeanour.  The 
persecuted  husband  does  nothing  that  can  be 
brought  against  him,  until  at  last  he  is  so  incau¬ 
tious  as  to  step  on  his  urine.  The  genius  has  now 
an  advantage  over  him;  he  afflicts  him  with  a 
passion  for  gambling,  and  so  plunges  him  into 
the  abyss. 


2  26  PHILOSOPHY 

While,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Brahmans  are 
subject  to  these  strict  limitations  and  rules,  on 
the  other  hand  their  life  is  sacred;  it  cannot  an¬ 
swer  for  crimes  of  any  kind;  and  their  property 
is  equally  secure  from  being  attacked.  The  se¬ 
verest  penalty  which  the  ruler  can  inflict  upon 
them  amounts  to  nothingmore  than  banishment. 
The  English  wished  to  introduce  trial  by  jury 
into  India,  the  jury  to  consist  half  of  Europeans, 
half  of  Hindus,  and  submitted  to  the  natives, 
whose  wishes  on  the  subject  were  consulted,  the 
powers  with  which  the  panel  would  be  intrusted. 
The  Hindus  were  for  making  a  number  of  ex¬ 
ceptions  and  limitations.  They  said,  among 
other  things,  that  they  could  not  consent  that  a 
Brahman  should  be  condemned  to  death;  not  to 
mention  other  objections,  e.g.,  that  looking  at 
and  examining  a  corpse  was  out  of  the  question. 
Although  in  the  case  of  a  warrior  the  rate  of  in¬ 
terest  may  be  as  high  as  three  per  cent,  in  that 
of  a  Vaisya  four  per  cent,  a  Brahman  is  never 
required  to  pay  more  than  two  per  cent.  The 
Brahman  possesses  such  a  power,  that  heaven’s 
lightning  would  strike  the  king  who  ventured  to 
lay  hands  on  him  or  his  property.  For  the  mean¬ 
est  Brahman  is  so  far  exalted  above  the  king, 
that  he  would  be  polluted  by  conversing  with 
him,  and  would  be  dishonored  by  his  daughters 
choosing  a  prince  in  marriage.  In  Manu’s  code 
it  is  said:  “If  anyone  presumes  to  teach  a  Brah¬ 
man  his  duty,  the  king  must  order  that  hot  oil 
be  poured  into  the  ears  and  mouth  of  such  an  in¬ 
structor.  If  one  who  is  only  once-born,  loads  one 
who  is  twice-born  with  reproaches,  a  red  hot 
iron  bar  ten  inches  long  shall  be  thrust  into  his 
mouth.”  On  the  other  hand  a  Sudrais  condemned 
to  have  a  red  hot  iron  thrust  into  him  from  be¬ 
hind  if  he  rests  himself  in  the  chair  of  a  Brah¬ 
man,  and  to  have  his  foot  or  his  hand  hewed 
off  if  he  pushes  against  a  Brahman  with  hands  or 
feet.  It  is  even  permittedto  give  false  testimony, 
and  to  lie  before  a  court  of  justice,  if  a  Brahman 
can  be  thereby  freed  from  condemnation. 

As  the  Brahmans  enjoy  advantages  over  the 
other  castes,  the  latter  in  their  turn  have  privi¬ 
leges  according  to  precedence,  over  their  inferi¬ 
ors.  If  a  Sudrais  defiled  by  contact  with  a  Pariah, 
he  has  the  right  to  knock  him  down  on  the  spot. 
Humanity  on  the  part  of  a  higher  caste  towards 
an  inferior  one  is  entirely  forbidden,  and  a  Brah¬ 
man  would  never  think  of  assisting  a  member  of 
another  caste,  even  when  in  danger.  The  other 
castes  deem  it  a  great  honour  when  a  Brahman 
takes  their  daughters  as  his  wives — a  thing  how¬ 
ever,  which  is  permitted  him,  as  already  stated, 
only  when  he  has  already  taken  one  from  his 


OF  HISTORY 

own  caste.  Thence  arises  the  freedom  the  Brah¬ 
mans  enjoy  in  getting  wives.  At  the  great  re¬ 
ligious  festivals  they  go  among  the  people  and 
choose  those  that  please  them  best;  but  they 
also  repudiate  them  at  pleasure. 

If  a  Brahman  or  a  member  of  any  other  caste 
transgresses  the  above  cited  laws  and  precepts, 
he  is  himself  excluded  from  his  caste,  and  in 
order  to  be  received  back  again,  he  must  have 
a  hook  bored  through  the  hips,  and  be  swung 
repeatedly  backwards  and  forwards  in  the  air. 
There  are  also  other  forms  of  restoration.  A 
rajah  who  thought  himself  injured  by  an  Eng¬ 
lish  governor,  sent  two  Brahmans  to  England 
to  detail  his  grievances.  But  the  Hindus  are  for¬ 
bidden  to  cross  the  sea,  and  these  envoys  on 
their  return  were  declared  excommunicated  from 
their  caste,  and  in  order  to  be  restored  to  it, 
they  had  to  be  born  again  from  a  golden  cow. 
The  imposition  was  so  far  lightened,  that  only 
those  parts  of  the  cow  out  of  which  they  had 
to  creep  were  obliged  to  be  golden;  the  rest 
might  consist  of  wood.  These  various  usages 
and  religious  observances  to  which  every  caste 
is  subject,  have  occasioned  great  perplexity  to 
the  English,  especially  in  enlisting  soldiers.  At 
first  these  were  taken  from  the  Sudra  caste, 
which  is  not  bound  to  observe  so  many  cere¬ 
monies;  but  nothing  could  be  done  with  them, 
they  therefore  betook  themselves  to  the  Kshat- 
triya  class.  These  however  have  an  immense 
number  of  regulations  to  observe:  they  may  not 
eat  meat,  touch  a  dead  body,  drink  out  of  a  pool 
in  which  cattle  or  Europeans  have  drunk,  not 
eat  what  others  have  cooked,  etc.  Each  Hindu 
assumes  one  definite  occupation,  and  that  only, 
so  that  one  must  have  an  infinity  of  servants ;  a 
lieutenant  has  thirty,  a  major  sixty.  Thus  every 
caste  has  its  own  duties;  the  lower  the  caste, 
the  less  it  has  to  observe;  and  as  each  individual 
has  his  position  assigned  by  birth,  beyond  this 
fixed  arrangement  everything  is  governed  by 
caprice  and  force.  In  the  code  of  Manu  punish¬ 
ments  increase  in  proportion  to  the  inferiority 
of  castes,  and  there  is  a  distinction  in  other  re¬ 
spects.  If  a  man  of  a  higher  caste  brings  an  accu¬ 
sation  against  an  inferior  without  proof,  the 
former  is  not  punished;  if  the  converse  occurs, 
the  punishment  is  very  severe.  Cases  of  theft 
are  exceptional ;  in  this  case  the  higher  the  caste 
the  heavier  is  the  penalty. 

In  respect  to  property  the  Brahmans  have  a 
great  advantage,  for  they  pay  no  taxes.  The 
prince  receives  half  the  income  from  the  lands 
of  others;  the  remainder  has  to  suffice  for  the 
cost  of  cultivation  and  the  support  of  the  labor- 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  227 


ers.  It  is  an  extremely  important  question, 
whether  the  cultivated  land  in  India  is  recog¬ 
nized  as  belonging  to  the  cultivator,  or  belongs 
to  a  so-called  manorial  proprietor.  The  English 
themselves  have  had  great  difficulty  in  establish¬ 
ing  a  clear  understanding  about  it.  For  when 
they  conquered  Bengal,  it  was  of  great  impor¬ 
tance  to  them,  to  determine  the  mode  in  which 
taxes  were  to  be  raised  on  property,  and  they 
had  to  ascertain  whether  these  should  be  im¬ 
posed  on  the  tenant  cultivators  or  the  lord  of 
the  soil.  They  imposed  the  tribute  on  the  latter ; 
but  the  result  was  that  the  proprietors  acted  in 
the  most  arbitrary  manner:  drove  away  the 
tenant  cultivators,  and  declaring  that  such  or 
such  an  amount  of  land  was  not  under  culti¬ 
vation,  gained  an  abatement  of  tribute.  They 
then  took  back  the  expelled  cultivators  as  day- 
labourers,  at  a  low  rate  of  wages,  and  had  the 
land  cultivated  on  their  own  behalf.  The  whole 
income  belonging  to  every  village  is,  as  already 
stated,  divided  into  two  parts,  of  which  one  be¬ 
longs  to  the  rajah,  the  other  to  the  cultivators; 
but  proportionate  shares  are  also  received  by  the 
provost  of  the  place,  the  judge,  the  water- 
surveyor,  the  Brahman  who  superintends  re¬ 
ligious  worship,  the  astrologer  (who  is  also  a 
Brahman,  and  announces  the  days  of  good  and 
ill  omen),  the  smith,  the  carpenter,  the  potter, 
the  washerman,  the  barber,  the  physician,  the 
dancing  girls,  the  musician,  the  poet.  This  ar¬ 
rangement  is  fixed  and  immutable,  and  subject 
to  no  one’s  will.  All  political  revolutions,  there¬ 
fore,  are  matters  of  indifference  to  the  common 
Hindu,  for  his  lot  is  unchanged. 

The  view  given  of  the  relation  of  castes  leads 
directly  to  the  subject  of  religion.  For  the  claims 
of  caste  are,  as  already  remarked,  not  merely 
secular,  but  essentially  religious,  and  the  Brah¬ 
mans  in  their  exalted  dignity  are  the  very  gods 
bodily  present.  In  the  laws  of  Manu  it  is  said: 
“Let  the  king,  even  in  extreme  necessity,  beware 
of  exciting  the  Brahmans  against  him;  for  they 
can  destroy  him  with  their  power — they  who 
create  fire,  sun,  moon,  etc.”  They  are  servants 
neither  of  God  nor  of  his  people,  but  are  God 
himself  to  the  other  castes — a  position  of  things 
which  constitutes  the  perverted  character  of  the 
Hindu  mind.  The  dreaming  unity  of  spirit  and 
nature,  which  involves  a  monstrous  bewilder¬ 
ment  in  regard  to  all  phenomena  and  relations, 
we  have  already  recognized  as  the  principle  of 
the  Hindu  spirit.  The  Hindu  mythology  is  there¬ 
fore  only  a  wild  extravagance  of  fancy,  in 
which  nothing  has  a  settled  form;  which  takes 
us  abruptly  from  the  meanest  to  the  highest, 


from  the  most  sublime  to  the  most  disgusting 
and  trivial.  Thus  it  is  also  difficult  to  discover 
what  the  Hindus  understand  by  Brahm.  We  are 
apt  to  take  our  conception  of  Supreme  Divinity 
— the  One — the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth — 
and  apply  it  to  the  Indian  Brahm.  Brahma  is  dis¬ 
tinct  from  Brahm — the  former  constituting  one 
personality  in  contrasted  relation  to  Vishnu  and 
Siva.  Many  therefore  call  the  supreme  existence 
who  is  over  the  first  mentioned  deity,  Para- 
brahma.  The  English  have  taken  a  good  deal  of 
trouble  to  find  out  what  Brahm  properly  is. 
Wilford  has  asserted  that  Hindu  conceptions 
recognize  two  heavens:  the  first,  the  earthly 
paradise,  the  second,  heaven  in  a  spiritual  sense. 
To  attain  them,  two  different  modes  of  worship 
are  supposed  to  be  required.  The  one  involves 
external  ceremonies,  idol-worship;  the  other  re¬ 
quires  that  the  Supreme  Being  should  be  honour¬ 
ed  in  spirit.  Sacrifices,  purifications,  pilgrimages 
are  not  needed  in  the  latter.  This  authority  states 
moreover  that  there  are  few  Hindus  ready  to 
pursue  the  second  way,  because  they  cannot 
understand  in  what  the  pleasure  of  the  second 
heaven  consists,  and  that  if  one  asks  a  Hindu 
whether  he  worships  idols,  every  one  says  “Yes!” 
but  to  the  question,  “Do  you  worship  the  Su¬ 
preme  Being?”  every  one  answers  “No.”  If  the 
further  question  is  put,  “What  is  the  meaning 
of  that  practice  of  yours,  that  silent  meditation 
which  some  of  your  learned  men  speak  of?”  they 
respond,  “When  I  pray  to  the  honour  of  one  of 
the  gods,  I  sit  down,  the  foot  of  either  leg  on 
the  thigh  of  the  other,  look  towards  heaven,  and 
calmly  elevate  my  thoughts  with  my  hands 
folded  in  silence;  then  I  say,  I  am  Brahm  the 
Supreme  Being.  We  are  not  conscious  to  our¬ 
selves  of  being  Brahm,  by  reason  of  Maya  (the 
delusion  occasioned  by  the  outward  world).  It  is 
forbidden  to  pray  to  him,  and  to  offer  sacrifices 
to  him  in  his  own  nature ;  for  this  would  be  to 
adore  ourselves.  In  every  case  therefore,  it  is  only 
emanations  of  Brahm  that  we  address.”  Translat¬ 
ing  these  ideas  then  into  our  own  process  of 
thought,  we  should  call  Brahm  the  pure  unity  of 
thought  in  itself — God  in  the  incomplexity  of  his 
existence.  No  temples  are  consecrated  to  him,  and 
he  receives  no  worship.  Similarly,  in  the  Catholic 
religion,  the  Churches  are  not  dedicated  to  God, 
but  to  the  saints.  Other  Englishmen,  who  have 
devoted  themselves  to  investigating  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  Brahm,  have  thought  Brahm  to  be  an 
unmeaning  epithet,  applied  to  all  gods:  so  that 
Vishnu  says,  “I  am  Brahm”;  and  the  sun,  the 
air,  the  seas  are  called  Brahm.  Brahm  would  on 
this  supposition  be  substance  in  its  simplicity, 


22g  PHILOSOPHY 

which  by  its  very  nature  expands  itself  into  the 
limitless  variety  of  phenomenal  diversities.  For 
this  abstraction,  this  pure  unity,  is  that  which 
lies  at  the  foundation  of  all — the  root  of  all 
definite  existence.  In  the  intellection  of  this 
unity,  all  objectivity  falls  away;  for  the  purely 
abstract  is  intellection  itself  in  its  greatest  va¬ 
cuity.  To  attain  this  death  of  life  during  life  it¬ 
self,  to  constitute  this  abstraction,  requires  the 
disappearance  of  all  moral  activity  and  volition, 
and  of  all  intellection  too,  as  in  the  religion  of 
Fo;  and  this  is  the  object  of  the  penances  al¬ 
ready  spoken  of. 

The  complement  to  the  abstraction  Brahm 
must  then  be  looked  for  in  the  concrete  complex 
of  things;  for  the  principle  of  the  Hindu  religion 
is  the  manifestation  of  diversity.  These  then, 
fall  outside  that  abstract  unity  of  thought,  and 
as  that  which  deviates  from  it,  constitute  the 
variety  found  in  the  world  of  sense,  the  variety 
of  intellectual  conceptions  in  an  unreflected 
sensuous  form.  In  this  way  the  concrete  complex 
of  material  things  is  isolated  from  spirit,  and, 
presented  in  wild  distraction,  except  as  re-ab¬ 
sorbed  in  the  pure  ideality  of  Brahm.  The  other 
deities  are  therefore  things  of  sense:  mountains, 
streams,  beasts,  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  Ganges. 
The  next  stage  is  the  concentration  of  this  wild 
variety  into  substantial  distinctions,  and  the 
comprehension  of  them  as  a  series  of  divine  per¬ 
sons.  Vishnu,  Siva,  Mahadeva  are  thus  distin¬ 
guished  from  Brahma.  In  the  embodiment 
Vishnu,  are  presented  those  incarnations  in 
which  God  has  appeared  as  man,  and  which  are 
always  historical  personages,  who  effected  im¬ 
portant  changes  and  new  epochs.  The  power  of 
procreation  is  likewise  a  substantial  embodi¬ 
ment;  and  in  the  excavations,  grottos  and  pago¬ 
das  of  the  Hindus,  the  lingam  is  always  found 
as  symbolizing  the  male,  and  the  lotus  the  fe¬ 
male  vis  procreandi. 

With  this  duality,  abstract  unity  on  the  one 
side  and  the  abstract  isolation  of  the  world  of 
sense  on  the  other  side,  exactly  corresponds  the 
double  form  of  worship,  in  the  relation  of  the 
human  subjectivity  to  God.  The  one  side  of  this 
duality  of  worship,  consists  in  the  abstraction 
of  pure  self-elevation — the  abrogation  of  real 
self-consciousness ;  a  negativity  which  is  conse¬ 
quently  manifested,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  at¬ 
tainment  of  torpid  unconsciousness — on  the 
other  hand,  in  suicide  and  the  extinction  of  all 
that  is  worth  calling  life,  by  self-inflicted  tor¬ 
tures.  The  other  side  of  worship  consists  in  a 
wild  tumult  of  excess;  when  all  sense  of  indi¬ 
viduality  has  vanished  from  consciousness  by 


OF  HISTORY 

immersion  in  the  merely  natural,  with  which  in¬ 
dividuality  thus  makes  itself  identical — destroy¬ 
ing  its  consciousness  of  distinction  from  nature. 
In  all  the  pagodas,  therefore,  prostitutes  and 
dancing  girls  are  kept,  whom  the  Brahmans  in¬ 
struct  most  carefully  in  dancing,  in  beautiful 
postures  and  attractive  gestures,  and  who  have 
to  comply  with  the  wishes  of  all  comers  at  a 
fixed  price.  Theological  doctrine,  relation  of  re¬ 
ligion  to  morality,  is  here  altogether  out  of  the 
question.  On  the  one  hand  love,  heaven,  in  short, 
everything  spiritual,  is  conceived  by  the  fancy 
of  the  Hindu;  but  on  the  other  hand,  his  con¬ 
ceptions  have  an  actual  sensuous  embodiment, 
and  he  immerses  himself  by  a  voluptuous  intoxi¬ 
cation  in  the  merely  natural.  Objects  of  reli¬ 
gious  worship  are  thus  either  disgusting  forms 
produced  by  art,  or  those  presented  by  nature. 
Every  bird,  every  monkey  is  a  present  god,  an 
absolutely  universal  existence.  The  Hindu  is  in¬ 
capable  of  holding  fast  an  object  in  his  mind  by 
means  of  rational  predicates  assigned  to  it,  for 
this  requires  reflection.  While  a  universal  es¬ 
sence  is  wrongly  transmuted  into  sensuous  ob¬ 
jectivity,  the  latter  is  also  driven  from  its  defi¬ 
nite  character  into  universality — a  process 
whereby  it  loses  its  footing  and  is  expanded  to 
indefiniteness. 

If  we  proceed  to  ask  how  far  their  religion  ex¬ 
hibits  the  morality  of  the  Hindus,  the  answer 
must  be  that  the  former  is  as  distinct  from  the 
latter,  as  Brahm  from  the  concrete  existence  of 
which  he  is  the  essence.  To  us,  religion  is  the 
knowledge  of  that  Being  who  is  emphatically 
our  Being,  and  therefore  the  substance  of  our 
knowledge  and  volition;  the  proper  office  of 
which  latter  is  to  be  the  mirror  of  this  funda¬ 
mental  substance.  But  that  requires  this  Being 
to  be  in  se  a  personality,  pursuing  divine  aims, 
such  as  can  become  the  purport  of  human  ac¬ 
tion.  Such  an  idea  of  a  relation  of  the  Being  of 
God  as  constituting  the  universal  basis  or  sub¬ 
stance  of  human  action — such  a  morality  can¬ 
not  be  found  among  the  Hindus;  for  they  have 
not  the  spiritual  as  the  import  of  their  conscious¬ 
ness.  On  the  one  hand,  their  virtue  consists  in 
the  abstraction  from  all  activity — the  condition 
they  call  “Brahm.”  On  the  other  hand,  every  ac¬ 
tion  with  them  is  a  prescribed  external  usage; 
not  free  activity,  the  result  of  inward  personal¬ 
ity.  Thus  the  moral  condition  of  the  Hindus  (as 
already  observed)  shows  itself  most  abandoned. 
In  this  all  Englishmen  agree.  Our  judgment  of 
the  morality  of  the  Hindus  is  apt  to  be  warped 
by  representations  of  their  mildness,  tenderness, 
beautiful  and  sentimental  fancy.  But  we  must 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


reflect  that  in  nations  utterly  corrupt  there  are 
sides  of  character  which  may  be  called  tender 
and  noble.  We  have  Chinese  poems  in  which 
the  tenderest  relations  of  love  are  depicted;  in 
which  delineations  of  deep  emotion,  humility, 
modesty,  propriety  are  to  be  found;  and  which 
may  be  compared  with  the  best  that  European 
literature  contains.  The  same  characteristics 
meet  us  in  many  Hindu  poems;  but  rectitude, 
morality,  freedom  of  soul,  consciousness  of  in¬ 
dividual  right  are  quite  another  thing.  The  an¬ 
nihilating  of  spiritual  and  physical  existence  has 
nothing  concrete  in  it;  and  absorption  in  the  ab¬ 
stractly  universal  has  no  connection  with  the 
real.  Deceit  and  cunning  are  the  fundamental 
characteristics  of  the  Hindu.  Cheating,  stealing, 
robbing,  murdering  are  with  him  habitual. Hum¬ 
bly  crouching  and  abject  before  a  victor  and 
lord,  he  is  recklessly  barbarous  to  the  vanquished 
and  subject.  Characteristic  of  the  Hindu’s  hu¬ 
manity  is  the  fact  that  he  kills  no  brute  animal, 
founds  and  supports  rich  hospitals  for  brutes, 
especially  for  old  cows  and  monkeys — but  that 
through  the  whole  land,  no  single  institution  can 
be  found  for  human  beings  who  are  diseased  or 
infirm  from  age.  The  Hindus  will  not  tread  upon 
ants,  but  they  are  perfectly  indifferent  when 
poor  wanderers  pine  away  with  hunger.  The 
Brahmans  are  especially  immoral.  According  to 
English  reports,  they  do  nothing  but  eat  and 
sleep.  In  what  is  not  forbidden  them  by  the 
rules  of  their  order  they  follow  natural  impulses 
entirely.  When  they  take  any  part  in  public  life 
they  show  themselves  avaricious,  deceitful,  vo¬ 
luptuous.  With  those  whom  they  have  reason  to 
fear,  they  are  humble  enough;  for  which  they 
avenge  themselves  on  their  dependents.  “I  do 
not  know  an  honest  man  among  them,”  says  an 
English  authority.  Children  have  no  respect  for 
their  parents:  sons  maltreat  their  mothers. 

It  would  lead  us  too  far  to  give  a  detailed  no¬ 
tice  of  Hindu  art  and  science.  But  we  may  make 
the  general  remark,  that  a  more  accurate  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  its  real  value  has  not  a  little  di¬ 
minished  the  widely  bruited  fame  of  Indian  wis¬ 
dom.  According  to  the  Hindu  principle  of  pure 
self-renouncing  ideality,  and  that  variety  which 
goes  to  the  opposite  extreme  of  sensuousness,  it 
is  evident  that  nothing  but  abstract  thought  and 
imagination  can  be  developed.  Thus,  e.g.,  their 
grammar  has  advanced  to  a  high  degree  of  con¬ 
sistent  regularity;  but  when  substantial  matter 
in  sciences  and  works  of  art  is  in  question,  it  is 
useless  to  look  for  it  here.  When  the  English  had 
become  masters  of  the  country,  the  work  of  re¬ 
storing  to  light  the  records  of  Indian  culture  was 


229 

commenced,  and  William  Jones  first  disinterred 
the  poems  of  the  Golden  Age.  The  English  exhib¬ 
ited  plays  at  Calcutta :  this  led  to  a  representa¬ 
tion  of  dramas  on  the  part  of  the  Brahmans, e.g., 
the  Sakuntala  of  Kalidasa,  etc.  In  the  enthusiasm 
of  discovery  the  Hindu  culture  was  very  highly 
rated;  and  as, when  new  beauties  are  discovered, 
the  old  ones  are  commonly  looked  down  upon 
with  contempt,  Hindu  poetry  and  philosophy 
were  extolled  as  far  superior  to  the  Greek.  For 
our  purpose  the  most  important  documents  are 
the  ancient  and  canonical  books  of  the  Hindus, 
especially  the  Vedas.  They  comprise  many  divi¬ 
sions,  of  which  the  fourth  is  of  more  recent  ori¬ 
gin.  They  consist  partly  of  religious  prayers, 
partly  of  precepts  to  be  observed.  Some  manu¬ 
scripts  of  these  Vedas  have  come  to  Europe, 
though  in  a  complete  form  they  are  exceedingly 
rare.  The  writing  is  on  palm  leaves,  scratched  in 
with  a  needle.  The  Vedas  are  very  difficult  to  un¬ 
derstand,  since  they  date  from  the  most  remote 
antiquity,  and  the  language  is  a  much  older 
Sanskrit.  Colebrooke  has  indeed  translated  a 
part,  but  this  itself  is  perhaps  taken  from  a  com¬ 
mentary,  of  which  there  are  very  many.1  Two 
great  epic  poems,  Ramayana  and  Mahabharata, 
have  also  reached  Europe.  Three  quarto  vol¬ 
umes  of  the  former  have  been  printed,  the 
second  volume  is  extremely  rare.  Besides  these 
works,  the  Puranas  must  be  particularly  noticed. 
The  Puranas  contain  the  history  of  a  god  or  of 
a  temple.  They  are  entirely  fanciful.  Another 
Hindu  classical  book  is  the  Code  of  Manu.  This 
Hindu  lawgiver  has  been  compared  with  the 
Cretan  Minos,  a  name  which  also  occurs  among 
the  Egyptians ;  and  certainly  this  extensive  oc¬ 
currence  of  the  same  name  is  noteworthy  and 
cannot  be  ascribed  to  chance.  Manu’s  code  of 
morals  (published  at  Calcutta  with  an  English 
translation  by  Sir  W.  Jones)  forms  the  basis  of 
Hindu  legislation.  It  begins  with  a  theogony, 
which  is  not  only  entirely  different  from  the 
mythological  conceptions  of  other  peoples  (as 
might  be  expected), but  also  deviates  essentially 
from  the  Hindu  traditions  themselves.  For  in 
these  also  there  are  only  some  leading  features 
that  pervade  the  whole.  In  other  respects  every¬ 
thing  is  abandoned  to  chance,  caprice,  and 
fancy;  the  result  of  which  is  that  the  most  mul¬ 
tiform  traditions,  shapes,  and  names,  appear  in 
never  ending  procession.  The  time  when  Manu’s 

1  Only  recently  has  Professor  Rosen,  residing  in  Lon¬ 
don,  gone  thoroughly  into  the  matter  and  given  a  speci¬ 
men  of  the  text  with  a  translation,  Rig-Vedce  Specimen, 
ed.  Fr.  Rosen.  Lond.  1830.  [More  recently,  since  Ro¬ 
sen’s  death,  the  whole  Rig-Veda,  London,  1839,  has 
been  published  from  MSS.  left  by  him.] 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


230 

code  was  composed,  is  also  entirely  unknown 
and  undetermined.  The  traditions  reach  beyond 
twenty-three  centuries  before  the  birth  of 
Christ:  a  dynasty  of  the  Children  of  the  Sun  is 
mentioned,  on  which  followed  one  of  the  Chil¬ 
dren  of  the  Moon.  This  much,  however,  is  cer¬ 
tain,  that  the  code  in  question  is  of  high  antiq¬ 
uity;  and  an  acquaintance  with  it  is  of  the 
greatest  importance  to  the  English,  as  their 
knowledge  of  Hindu  law  is  derived  from  it. 

After  pointing  out  the  Hindu  principle  in  the 
distinctions  of  caste,  in  religion  and  literature, 
we  must  also  mention  the  mode  and  form  of 
their  political  existence — the  polity  of  the  Hin¬ 
du  state.  A  state  is  a  realization  of  spirit,  such 
that  in  it  the  self-conscious  being  of  spirit,  the 
freedom  of  the  will,  is  realized  as  law.  Such  an 
institution  then,  necessarily  presupposes  the 
consciousness  of  free  will.  In  the  Chinese  state 
the  moral  will  of  the  emperor  is  the  law:  but  so 
that  subjective,  inward  freedom  is  thereby  re¬ 
pressed,  and  the  law  of  freedom  governs  indi¬ 
viduals  only  as  from  without.  In  India  the  pri¬ 
mary  aspect  of  subjectivity — viz.,  that  of  the 
imagination — presents  a  union  of  the  natural 
and  spiritual,  in  which  nature  on  the  one  hand, 
does  not  present  itself  as  a  world  embodying 
reason,  nor  the  spiritual,  on  the  other  hand,  as 
consciousness  in  contrast  with  nature.  Here  the 
antithesis  in  the  principle  is  wanting.  Freedom 
both  as  abstract  will  and  as  subjective  freedom 
is  absent.  The  proper  basis  of  the  state,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  freedom  is  altogether  absent:  there  can¬ 
not  therefore  be  any  state  in  the  true  sense  of 
the  term.  This  is  the  first  point  to  be  observed: 
if  China  may  be  regarded  as  nothing  else  but  a 
state,  Hindu  political  existence  presents  us  with 
a  people,  but  no  state.  Secondly,  while  we  found 
a  moral  despotism  in  China ,  whatever  may  be 
called  a  relic  of  political  life  in  India,  is  a 
despotism  without  a  principle,  without  any  rule 
of  morality  and  religion:  for  morality  and  re¬ 
ligion  (as  far  as  the  latter  has  a  reference  to 
human  action)  have  as  their  indispensable  con¬ 
dition  and  basis  the  freedom  of  the  will.  In 
India,  therefore,  the  most  arbitrary,  wicked,  de¬ 
grading  despotism  has  its  full  swing.  China, 
Persia,  Turkey,  in  fact  Asia  generally,  is  the 
scene  of  despotism,  and,  in  a  bad  sense,  of 
tyranny;  but  it  is  regarded  as  contrary  to  the 
due  order  of  things,  and  is  disapproved  by  re¬ 
ligion  and  the  moral  consciousness  of  individu¬ 
als.  In  those  countries,  tyranny  rouses  men  to 
resentment;  they  detest  it  and  groan  under  it 
as  a  burden.  To  them  it  is  an  accident  and  an 
irregularity,  not  a  necessity:  it  ought  not  to 


exist.  But  in  India  it  is  normal:  for  here  there 
is  no  sense  of  personal  independence  with  which 
a  state  of  despotism  could  be  compared,  and 
which  would  raise  revolt  in  the  soul;  nothing 
approaching  even  a  resentful  protest  against  it 
is  left,  except  the  corporeal  smart,  and  the  pain 
of  being  deprived  of  absolute  necessaries  and 
of  pleasure. 

In  the  case  of  such  a  people,  therefore,  that 
which  we  call  in  its  double  sense,  history,  is  not 
to  be  looked  for;  and  here  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  China  and  India  is  most  clearly  and 
strongly  manifest.  The  Chinese  possess  a  most 
minute  history  of  their  country,  and  it  has  been 
already  remarked  what  arrangements  are  made 
in  China  for  having  everything  accurately  noted 
down  in  their  annals.  The  contrary  is  the  case  in 
India.  Though  the  recent  discoveries  of  the 
treasures  of  Indian  literature  have  shown  us 
what  a  reputation  the  Hindus  have  acquired  in 
geometry,  astronomy,  and  algebra — that  they 
have  made  great  advances  in  philosophy,  and 
that  among  them  grammar  has  been  so  far  cul¬ 
tivated  that  no  language  can  be  regarded  as 
more  fully  developed  than  the  Sanskrit — we 
find  the  department  of  history  altogether  neg¬ 
lected,  or  rather  non-existent.  For  history  re¬ 
quires  understanding — the  power  of  looking  at 
an  object  in  an  independent  objective  light,  and 
comprehending  it  in  its  rational  connection  with 
other  objects.  Those  peoples  therefore  are  alone 
capable  of  history,  and  of  prose  generally,  who 
have  arrived  at  that  period  of  development  (and 
can  make  that  their  starting  point),  at  which  in¬ 
dividuals  comprehend  their  own  existence  as  in¬ 
dependent,  i.e .,  possess  self-consciousness. 

The  Chinese  are  to  be  rated  at  what  they 
have  made  of  themselves,  looking  at  them  in  the 
entirety  of  their  state.  While  they  have  thus  at¬ 
tained  an  existence  independent  of  nature,  they 
can  also  regard  objects  as  distinct  from  them¬ 
selves,  as  they  are  actually  presented,  in  a  def¬ 
inite  form  and  in  their  real  connection.  The  Hin¬ 
dus  on  the  contrary  are  by  birth  given  over  to  an 
unyielding  destiny,  while  at  the  same  time  their 
spirit  is  exalted  to  ideality;  so  that  their  minds 
exhibit  the  contradictory  processes  of  a  dissolu¬ 
tion  of  fixed  rational  and  definite  conceptions  in 
their  ideality,  and  on  the  other  side,  a  degrada¬ 
tion  of  this  ideality  to  a  multiformity  of  sensu¬ 
ous  objects.  This  makes  them  incapable  of  writ¬ 
ing  history.  All  that  happens  is  dissipated  in  their 
minds  into  confused  dreams.  What  we  call  his¬ 
torical  truth  and  veracity — intelligent,  thought¬ 
ful  comprehension  of  events,  and  fidelity  in  rep¬ 
resenting  them — nothing  of  this  sort  can  be 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  231 


looked  for  among  the  Hindus.  We  may  explain 
this  deficiency  partly  from  that  excitement  and 
debility  of  the  nerves,  which  prevent  them  from 
retaining  an  object  in  their  minds,  and  firmly 
comprehending  it,  for  in  their  mode  of  appre¬ 
hension  a  sensitive  and  imaginative  tempera¬ 
ment  changes  it  into  a  feverish  dream;  partly 
from  the  fact,  that  veracity  is  the  direct  con¬ 
trary  to  their  nature.  They  even  lie  knowingly 
and  designedly  where  misapprehension  is  out  of 
the  question.  As  the  Hindu  spirit  is  a  state  of 
dreaming  and  mental  transiency,  a  self -oblivious 
dissolution,  objects  also  dissolve  for  it  into  un¬ 
real  images  and  indefinitude.  This  feature  is  ab¬ 
solutely  characteristic;  and  this  alone  would 
furnish  us  with  a  clear  idea  of  the  spirit  of  the 
Hindus,  from  which  all  that  has  been  said  might 
be  deduced. 

But  history  is  always  of  great  importance  for 
a  people;  since  by  means  of  that  it  becomes  con¬ 
scious  of  the  path  of  development  taken  by  its 
own  spirit,  which  expresses  itself  in  laws,  man¬ 
ners,  customs,  and  deeds.  Laws,  comprising  mor¬ 
als  and  judicial  institutions,  are  by  nature  the 
permanent  element  in  a  people’s  existence.  But 
history  presents  a  people  with  their  own  image 
in  a  condition  which  thereby  becomes  objective 
to  them.  Without  history  their  existence  in  time 
is  blindly  self -involved — the  recurring  play  of 
arbitrary  volition  in  manifold  forms.  History 
fixes  and  imparts  consistency  to  this  fortuitous 
current,  gives  it  the  form  of  universality,  and, 
by  so  doing,  posits  a  directive  and  restrictive 
rule  for  it.  It  is  an  essential  instrument  in  devel¬ 
oping  and  determining  the  constitution — that  is, 
a  rational  political  condition;  for  it  is  the  em¬ 
pirical  method  of  producing  the  universal,  inas¬ 
much  as  it  sets  up  a  permanent  object  for  the 
conceptive  powers.  It  is  because  the  Hindus 
have  no  history  in  the  form  of  annals  ( historia ) 
that  they  have  no  history  in  the  form  of  trans¬ 
actions  ( res  gestce ) ;  that  is,  no  growth  expand¬ 
ing  into  a  veritable  political  condition. 

Periods  of  time  are  mentioned  in  the  Hindu 
writings,  and  large  numbers  which  have  often 
an  astronomical  meaning,  but  which  have  still 
oftener  a  quite  arbitrary  origin.  Thus  it  is  re¬ 
lated  of  certain  kings  that  they  had  reigned 
70,000  years,  or  more.  Brahma,  the  first  figure 
in  the  cosmogony,  and  self -produced,  is  said  to 
have  lived  20,000  years,  etc.  Innumerable  names 
of  kings  are  cited — among  them  the  incarna¬ 
tions  of  Vishnu.  It  would  be  ridiculous  to  re¬ 
gard  passages  of  this  kind  as  anything  historical. 
In  their  poems  kings  are  often  talked  of:  these 
may  have  been  historical  personages,  but  they 


completely  vanish  in  fable;  e.g.,  they  retire 
from  the  world,  and  then  appear  again,  after 
they  have  passed  ten  thousand  years  in  solitude. 
The  numbers  in  question,  therefore,  have  not 
the  value  and  rational  meaning  which  we  attach 
to  them. 

Consequently  the  oldest  and  most  reliable 
sources  of  Indian  history  are  the  notices  of 
Greek  authors,  after  Alexander  the  Great  had 
opened  the  way  to  India.  From  them  we  learn 
that  their  institutions  were  the  same  at  that 
early  period  as  they  are  now:  Santaracottus 
(Chandragupta)  is  marked  out  as  a  distin¬ 
guished  ruler  in  the  northern  part  of  India,  to 
which  the  Bactrian  kingdom  extended.  The  Mo¬ 
hammedan  historians  supply  another  source  of 
information;  for  the  Mohammedans  began  their 
invasions  as  early  as  the  tenth  century.  A  Turk¬ 
ish  slave  was  the  ancestor  of  the  Ghiznian  race. 
His  son  Mahmoud  made  an  inroad  into  Hindo- 
stan  and  conquered  almost  the  whole  country. 
He  fixed  his  royal  residence  west  of  Kabul,  and 
at  his  court  lived  the  poet  Firdousi.  The  Ghiz¬ 
nian  dynasty  was  soon  entirely  exterminated  by 
the  sweeping  attacks  of  the  Afghans  and  Mo¬ 
guls.  In  later  times  nearly  the  whole  of  India 
has  been  subjected  to  the  Europeans.  What 
therefore  is  known  of  Indian  history,  has  for 
the  most  part  been  communicated  through  for¬ 
eign  channels:  the  native  literature  gives  only 
indistinct  data.  Europeans  assure  us  of  the  im¬ 
possibility  of  wading  through  the  morasses  of 
Indian  statements.  More  definite  information 
may  be  obtained  from  inscriptions  and  docu¬ 
ments,  especially  from  the  deeds  of  gifts  of 
land  to  pagodas  and  divinities;  but  this  kind  of 
evidence  supplies  names  only.  Another  source 
of  information  is  the  astronomical  literature, 
which  is  of  high  antiquity.  Colebrooke  thorough¬ 
ly  studied  these  writings;  though  it  is  very  dif¬ 
ficult  to  procure  manuscripts,  since  the  Brah¬ 
mans  keep  them  very  close;  they  are  more¬ 
over  disfigured  by  the  grossest  interpolations.  It 
is  found  that  the  statements  with  regard  to 
constellations  are  often  contradictory,  and  that 
the  Brahmans  interpolate  these  ancient  works 
with  events  belonging  to  their  own  time.  The 
Hindus  do  indeed  possess  lists  and  enumerations 
of  their  kings,  but  these  also  are  of  the  most 
capricious  character;  for  we  often  find  twenty 
kings  more  in  one  list  than  in  another;  and 
should  these  lists  even  be  correct,  they  could 
not  constitute  a  history.  The  Brahmans  have  no 
conscience  in  respect  to  truth.  Captain  Wilford 
had  procured  manuscripts  from  all  quarters  with 
great  trouble  and  expense ;  he  assembled  a  con- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


232 

siderable  number  of  Brahmans,  and  commis¬ 
sioned  them  to  make  extracts  from  these  works, 
and  to  institute  inquiries  respecting  certain  re¬ 
markable  events — about  Adam  and  Eve,  the 
Deluge,  etc.  The  Brahmans,  to  please  their  em¬ 
ployer,  produced  statements  of  the  kind  re¬ 
quired;  but  there  was  nothing  of  the  sort  in  the 
manuscripts.  Wilford  wrote  many  treatises  on 
the  subject,  till  at  last  he  detected  the  decep¬ 
tion,  and  saw  that  he  had  labored  in  vain.  The 
Hindus  have,  it  is  true,  a  fixed  era:  they  reckon 
from  Vicramaditya,  at  whose  splendid  court 
lived  Kalidasa,  the  author  of  the  Sakuntala.  The 
most  illustrious  poets  flourished  about  the  same 
time.  “There  were  nine  pearls  at  the  court  of 
Vicramaditya,”  say  the  Brahmans:  but  we  can¬ 
not  discover  the  date  of  this  brilliant  epoch. 
From  various  statements,  the  year  1491  b.c.  has 
been  contended  for;  others  adopt  the  year  50 
b.c.,  and  this  is  the  commonly  received  opinion. 
Bentley’s  researches  at  length  placed  Vicrama¬ 
ditya  in  the  twelfth  century  b.c.  But  still  more 
recently  it  has  been  discovered  that  there  were 
five,  or  even  eight  or  nine  kings  of  that  name  in 
India;  so  that  on  this  point  also  we  are  thrown 
back  into  utter  uncertainty. 

When  the  Europeans  became  acquainted  with 
India,  they  found  a  multitude  of  petty  king¬ 
doms,  at  whose  head  were  Mohammedan  and 
Indian  princes.  There  was  an  order  of  things 
very  nearly  approaching  feudal  organization; 
and  the  kingdoms  in  question  were  divided  into 
districts,  having  as  governors  Mohammedans, 
or  people  of  the  warrior  caste  of  Hindus.  The 
business  of  these  governors  consisted  in  collect¬ 
ing  taxes  and  carrying  on  wars;  and  they  thus 
formed  a  kind  of  aristocracy,  the  prince’s  coun¬ 
cil  of  state.  But  only  as  far  as  their  princes  are 
feared  and  excite  fear,  have  they  any  power; 
and  no  obedience  is  rendered  to  them  but  by 
force.  As  long  as  the  prince  does  not  want 
money,  he  has  troops ;  and  neighboring  princes, 
if  they  are  inferior  to  him  in  force,  are  often 
obliged  to  pay  taxes,  but  which  are  yielded  only 
on  compulsion.  The  whole  state  of  things,  there¬ 
fore,  is  not  that  of  repose,  but  of  continual 
struggle;  while  moreover  nothing  is  developed 
or  furthered.  It  is  the  struggle  of  an  energetic 
will  on  the  part  of  this  or  that  prince  against  a 
feebler  one;  the  history  of  reigning  dynasties, 
but  not  of  peoples;  a  series  of  perpetually  vary¬ 
ing  intrigues  and  revolts — not  indeed  of  sub¬ 
jects  against  their  rulers,  but  of  a  prince’s  son, 
for  instance,  against  his  father;  of  brothers,  un¬ 
cles  and  nephews  in  contest  with  each  other; 
and  of  functionaries  against  their  master.  It 


might  be  believed  that,  though  the  Europeans 
found  such  a  state  of  things,  this  was  the  result 
of  the  dissolution  of  earlier  superior  organiza¬ 
tions.  It  might,  for  instance,  be  supposed  that 
the  period  of  the  Mogul  supremacy  was  one  of 
prosperity  and  splendour,  and  of  a  political 
condition  in  which  India  was  not  distracted  re¬ 
ligiously  and  politically  by  foreign  conquerors. 
But  the  historical  traces  and  lineaments  that  ac¬ 
cidentally  present  themselves  in  poetical  de¬ 
scriptions  and  legends,  bearing  upon  the  period 
in  question,  always  point  to  the  same  divided 
condition — the  result  of  war  and  of  the  instabil¬ 
ity  of  political  relations;  while  contrary  repre¬ 
sentations  may  be  easily  recognized  as  a  dream, 
a  mere  fancy.  This  state  of  things  is  the  natural 
result  of  that  conception  of  Hindu  life  which 
has  been  exhibited,  and  the  conditions  which  it 
necessitates.  The  wars  of  the  sects  of  the  Brah¬ 
mans  and  Buddhists,  of  the  devotees  of  Vishnu 
and  of  Siva,  also  contributed  their  quota  to  this 
confusion.  There  is  indeed,  a  common  character 
pervading  the  whole  of  India;  but  its  several 
states  present  at  the  same  time  the  greatest 
variety;  so  that  in  one  Indian  state  we  meet 
with  the  greatest  effeminacy — in  another,  on  the 
contrary,  we  find  prodigious  vigour  and  savage 
barbarity. 

If  then,  in  conclusion,  we  once  more  take  a 
general  view  of  the  comparative  condition  of 
India  and  China,  we  shall  see  that  China  was 
characterized  by  a  thoroughly  unimaginative 
understanding;  a  prosaic  life  amid  firm  and  defi¬ 
nite  reality:  while  in  the  Indian  world  there  is, 
so  to  speak,  no  object  that  can  be  regarded  as 
real,  and  firmly  defined;  none  that  was  not  at 
its  first  apprehension  perverted  by  the  imagina¬ 
tion  to  the  very  opposite  of  what  it  presents  to 
an  intelligent  consciousness.  In  China  it  is  the 
moral  which  constitutes  the  substance  of  the 
laws,  and  which  is  embodied  in  external  strictly 
determinate  relations ;  while  over  all  hovers  the 
patriarchal  providence  of  the  emperor,  who 
like  a  father,  cares  impartially  for  the  interest 
of  his  subjects.  Among  the  Hindus,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  instead  of  this  unity,  diversity  is  the  fun¬ 
damental  characteristic.  Religion,  war,  handi¬ 
craft,  trade,  yes,  even  the  most  trivial  occupa¬ 
tions  are  parcelled  out  with  rigid  separation — 
constituting  as  they  do  the  import  of  the  one 
will  which  they  involve,  and  whose  various  re¬ 
quirements  they  exhaust.  With  this  is  bound  up 
a  monstrous,  irrational  imagination,  which  at¬ 
taches  the  moral  value  and  character  of  men  to 
an  infinity  of  outward  actions  as  empty  in  point 
of  intellect  as  of  feeling;  sets  aside  all  respect 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  233 


for  the  welfare  of  man,  and  even  makes  a  duty 
of  the  crudest  and  severest  contravention  of  it. 
Those  distinctions  being  rigidly  maintained, 
nothing  remains  for  the  one  universal  will  of 
the  state  but  pure  caprice,  against  whose  omnip¬ 
otence  only  the  fixed  caste-distinctions  avail  for 
protection.  The  Chinese  in  their  prosaic  ra¬ 
tionality,  reverence  as  the  highest,  only  the  ab¬ 
stract  supreme  lord;  and  they  exhibit  a  con¬ 
temptibly  superstitious  respect  for  the  fixed  and 
definite.  Among  the  Hindus  there  is  no  such 
superstition  so  far  as  it  presents  an  antithesis 
to  understanding;  rather  their  whole  life  and 
ideas  are  one  unbroken  superstition,  because 
among  them  all  is  revery  and  consequent  en¬ 
slavement.  Annihilation — the  abandonment  of 
all  reason,  morality  and  subjectivity — can  only 
come  to  a  positive  feeling  and  consciousness  of 
itself,  by  extravagating  in  a  boundlessly  wild 
imagination;  in  which,  like  a  desolate  spirit,  it 
finds  no  rest,  no  settled  composure,  though  it 
can  content  itself  in  no  other  way;  as  a  man 
who  is  quite  reduced  in  body  and  spirit  finds  his 
existence  altogether  stupid  and  intolerable,  and 
is  driven  to  the  creation  of  a  dream-world  and 
a  delirious  bliss  in  opium. 

Section  II  (Continued) 

INDIA,  Buddhism, 1 

It  is  time  to  quit  the  Dream-State  characteriz¬ 
ing  the  Hindu  spirit  revelling  in  the  most  ex¬ 
travagant  maze  through  all  natural  and  spiritual 
forms;  comprising  at  the  same  time  the  coars¬ 
est  sensuality  and  anticipations  of  the  prof  ound- 
est  thought,  and  on  that  very  account,  as  far  as 
free  and  rational  reality  is  concerned,  sunk  in 
the  most  self -abandoned,  helpless  slavery;  a 
slavery,  in  which  the  abstract  forms  into  which 
concrete  human  life  is  divided,  have  become 
stereotyped,  and  human  rights  and  culture  have 
been  made  absolutely  dependent  upon  these  dis¬ 
tinctions.  In  contrast  with  this  inebriate  dream- 
life,  which  in  the  sphere  of  reality  is  bound  fast 
in  chains, we  have  the  unconstrained  dream-life; 
which,  on  the  one  hand,  is  ruder  than  the  form¬ 
er — as  not  having  advanced  so  far  as  to  make 
this  distinction  of  modes  of  life — but  for  the 
same  reason, has  not  sunk  into  the  slavery  which 
this  entails.  It  keeps  itself  more  free,  more  in¬ 
dependently  firm  in  itself :  its  world  of  ideas  is 
*As  in  Hegel’s  original  plan  and  in  the  first  lecture 
the  transition  from  Indian  Brahminism  to  Buddhism  oc¬ 
cupies  the  place  assigned  it  here,  and  as  this  position  of 
the  chapter  on  Buddhism  agrees  better  with  recent  in¬ 
vestigations,  its  detachment  from  the  place  which  it 
previously  occupied  and  mention  here  will  appear  suf¬ 
ficiently  justified. — Ed. 


consequently  compressed  into  simpler  concep¬ 
tions. 

The  spirit  of  the  phase  just  indicated,  is  in¬ 
volved  in  the  same  fundamental  principle  as 
that  assigned  to  Hindu  conceptions:  but  it  is 
more  concentrated  in  itself ;  its  religion  is  sim¬ 
pler,  and  the  accompanying  political  condition 
more  calm  and  settled.  This  phase  compre¬ 
hends  peoples  and  countries  of  the  most  varied 
complexion.  We  regard  it  as  embracing  Ceylon, 
Farther  India  with  the  Burman  Empire,  Siam, 
Anam — north  of  that  Tibet,  and  further  on  the 
Chinese  upland  with  its  various  populations  of 
Mongols  and  Tartars.  We  shall  not  examine 
the  special  individualities  of  these  peoples,  but 
merely  characterize  their  religion,  which  consti¬ 
tutes  the  most  interesting  side  of  their  exist¬ 
ence.  The  religion  of  these  peoples  is  Buddhism , 
which  is  the  most  widely  extended  religion 
on  our  globe.  In  China,  Buddha  is  reverenced 
as  Fo;  in  Ceylon  as  Gautama;  in  Tibet  and  a- 
mong  the  Mongols  this  religion  has  assumed  the 
phase  of  Lamaism.  In  China — where  the  re¬ 
ligion  of  Fo  early  received  a  great  extension,  and 
introduced  a  monastic  life — it  occupies  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  an  integrant  element  of  the  Chinese  prin¬ 
ciple.  As  the  substantial  form  of  spirit  which 
characterizes  China,  develops  itself  only  to  a 
unity  of  secular  national  life,  which  degrades  in¬ 
dividuals  to  a  position  of  constant  dependence, 
religion  also  remains  in  a  state  of  dependence. 
The  element  of  freedom  is  wanting  to  it;  for  its 
object  is  the  principle  of  nature  in  general — 
heaven,  universal  matter.  But  the  truth  of  this 
alienated  form  of  spirit  is  ideal  unity;  the  eleva¬ 
tion  above  the  limitation  of  nature  and  of  ex¬ 
istence  at  large; — the  return  of  consciousness 
into  the  soul.  This  element,  which  is  contained 
in  Buddhism,  has  made  its  way  in  China,  to  that 
extent  to  which  the  Chinese  have  become  aware 
of  the  unspirituality  of  their  condition,  and  the 
limitation  that  hampers  their  consciousness.  In 
this  religion — which  may  be  generally  described 
as  the  religion  of  self-involvement2 — the  eleva¬ 
tion  of  that  unspiritual  condition  to  subjectiv¬ 
ity,  takes  place  in  two  ways ;  one  of  which  is  of 
a  negative,  the  other  of  an  affirmative  kind. 

The  negative  form  of  this  elevation  is  the 
concentration  of  spirit  to  the  infinite,  and  must 
first  present  itself  under  theological  conditions. 
It  is  contained  in  the  fundamental  dogma  that 
nothingness  is  the  principle  of  all  things — that 
all  proceeded  from  and  returns  to  nothingness. 
The  various  forms  found  in  the  world  are  only 

2  Compare  Hegel’s  Vorlesungen  iiber  die  Philosophic 
der  Religion ,  2d  Edition,  Pt.  I.  p.  384. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


234 

modifications  of  procession.  If  an  analysis  of 
these  various  forms  were  attempted,  they  would 
lose  their  quality ;  for  in  themselves  all  things  are 
one  and  the  same  inseparable  essence,  and  this 
essence  is  nothingness.  The  connection  of  this 
with  the  metempsychosis  can  be  thus  explained: 
all  is  but  a  change  of  form.  The  inherent  infinity 
of  spirit,  infinite  concrete  self-dependence, 
is  entirely  separate  from  this  universe  of  phe¬ 
nomena.  Abstract  nothingness  is  properly  that 
which  lies  beyond  finite  existence — what  we 
may  call  the  Supreme  Being.  This  real  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  universe  is,  it  is  said,  in  eternal  re¬ 
pose,  and  in  itself  unchangeable.  Its  essence  con¬ 
sists  in  the  absence  of  activity  and  volition.  For 
nothingness  is  abstract  unity  with  itself.  To  ob¬ 
tain  happiness,  therefore,  man  must  seek  to  as¬ 
similate  himself  to  this  principle  by  continual 
victories  over  himself;  and  for  the  sake  of  this, 
do  nothing,  wish  nothing,  desire  nothing.  In 
this  condition  of  happiness,  therefore,  vice  or 
virtue  is  out  of  the  question;  for  the  true  bless¬ 
edness  is  union  with  nothingness.  The  more  man 
frees  himself  from  all  speciality  of  existence, 
the  nearer  does  he  approach  perfection ;  and  in 
the  annihilation  of  all  activity,  in  pure  passivity, 
he  attains  complete  resemblance  to  Fo.  The  ab¬ 
stract  unity  in  question  is  not  a  mere  futurity — 
a  spiritual  sphere  existing  beyond  our  own;  it 
has  to  do  with  the  present;  it  is  truth  for  man, 
and  ought  to  be  realized  in  him.  In  Ceylon  and 
the  Burman  Empire — where  this  Buddhistic 
faith  has  its  roots — there  prevails  an  idea,  that 
man  can  attain  by  meditation,  to  exemption 
from  sickness,  old  age  and  death. 

But  while  this  is  the  negative  form  of  the 
elevation  of  spirit  from  immersion  in  the  objec¬ 
tive  to  a  subjective  realization  of  itself,  this  re¬ 
ligion  also  advances  to  the  consciousness  of  an 
affirmative  form.  Spirit  is  the  absolute.  Yet  in 
comprehending  spirit  it  is  a  point  of  essential 
importance  in  what  determinate  form  spirit  is 
conceived.  When  we  speak  of  spirit  as  universal, 
we  know  that  for  us  it  exists  only  in  an  inward 
conception ;  but  to  attain  this  point  of  view,  to 
appreciate  spirit  in  the  pure  subjectivity  of 
thought  and  conception,  is  the  result  of  a  longer 
process  of  culture.  At  that  point  in  history  at 
which  we  have  now  arrived,  the  form  of  spirit 
is  not  advanced  beyond  immediateness.  God  is 
conceived  in  an  immediate,  unreflected  form; 
not  in  the  form  of  thought — objectively.  But 
this  immediate  form  is  that  of  humanity.  The 
sun,  the  stars  do  not  come  up  to  the  idea  of 
spirit;  but  man  seems  to  realize  it;  and  he,  as 
Buddha,  Gautama ,  Fo — in  the  form  of  a  depart¬ 


ed  teacher,  and  in  the  living  form  of  the  Grand 
Lama — receives  divine  worship.  The  abstract 
understanding  generally  objects  to  this  idea  of 
a  god-man;  alleging  as  a  defect  that  the  form 
here  assigned  to  spirit  is  an  immediate  one — 
that  in  fact  it  is  none  other  than  man  in  the  con¬ 
crete.  Here  the  character  of  a  whole  people  is 
bound  up  with  the  theological  view  just  indi¬ 
cated.  The  Mongols — a  race  extending  through 
the  whole  of  central  Asia  as  far  as  Siberia,  where 
they  are  subject  to  the  Russians — worship  the 
Lama;  and  with  this  form  of  worship  a  simple 
political  condition,  a  patriarchal  life  is  closely 
united;  for  they  are  properly  a  nomad  people, 
and  only  occasionally  are  commotions  excited 
among  them,  when  they  seem  to  be  beside  them¬ 
selves,  and  eruptions  and  inundations  of  vast 
hordes  are  occasioned.  Of  the  lamas  there  are 
three:  the  best  known  is  the  Dalai  Lama,  who 
has  his  seat  at  Lhasa  in  the  kingdom  of  Tibet.  A 
second  is  the  Tashi  Lama,  who  under  the  title  of 
Pan-chen-rin-po-che  resides  at  Tashi  Lhunpo; 
there  is  also  a  third  in  southern  Siberia.  The 
first  two  lamas  preside  over  two  distinct  sects, 
of  which  the  priests  of  one  wear  yellow  caps, 
those  of  the  other,  red.  The  wearers  of  the  yel¬ 
low  caps — at  whose  head  is  the  Dalai  Lama,  and 
among  whose  adherents  is  the  Emperor  of  China 
— have  introduced  celibacy  among  the  priests, 
while  the  red  sect  allow  their  marriage.  The 
English  have  become  considerably  acquainted 
with  the  Tashi  Lama  and  have  given  us  descrip¬ 
tions  of  him. 

The  general  form  which  the  spirit  of  the  La- 
maistic  development  of  Buddhism  assumes,  is 
that  of  a  living  human  being;  while  in  the  origi¬ 
nal  Buddhism  it  is  a  deceased  person.  The 
two  hold  in  common  the  relationship  to  a  man. 
The  idea  of  a  man  being  worshipped  as  God, 
especially  a  living  man,  has  in  it  something 
paradoxical  and  revolting;  but  the  following 
considerations  must  be  examined  before  we  pro¬ 
nounce  judgment  respecting  it.  The  conception 
of  spirit  involves  its  being  regarded  as  inherent¬ 
ly,  intrinsically,  universal.  This  condition  must 
be  particularly  observed,  and  it  must  be  dis¬ 
covered  how  in  the  systems  adopted  by  various 
peoples  this  universality  is  kept  in  view.  It  is  not 
the  individuality  of  the  subject  that  is  revered, 
but  that  which  is  universal  in  him;  and  which 
among  the  Tibetans,  Hindus,  and  Asiatics  gen¬ 
erally,  is  regarded  as  the  essence  pervading  all 
things.  This  substantial  unity  of  spirit  is  realized 
in  the  lama,  who  is  nothing  but  the  form  in 
which  spirit  manifests  itself;  and  who  does  not 
hold  this  spiritual  essence  as  his  peculiar  prop- 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  235 


erty,  but  is  regarded  as  partaking  in  it  only  in 
order  to  exhibit  it  to  others,  that  they  may  at¬ 
tain  a  conception  of  spirituality  and  be  led  to 
piety  and  blessedness.  The  lama’s  personality 
as  such,  his  particular  individuality,  is  therefore 
subordinate  to  that  substantial  essence  which  it 
embodies.  The  second  point  which  constitutes 
an  essential  feature  in  the  conception  of  the 
lama  is  the  disconnection  from  nature.  The  im¬ 
perial  dignity  of  China  involved  a  supremacy 
over  the  powers  of  nature ;  while  here  spiritual 
power  is  directly  separated  from  the  vis  naturce. 
The  idea  never  crosses  the  minds  of  the  lama- 
worshippers  to  desire  of  the  lama  to  show  him¬ 
self  lord  of  nature — to  exercise  magical  and  mi¬ 
raculous  power;  for  from  the  being  they  call 
God,  they  look  only  for  spiritual  activity  and 
the  bestowal  of  spiritual  benefits.  Buddha  has 
moreover  the  express  names,  “Saviour  of  Souls,” 
“Sea  of  Virtue,”  “the  Great  Teacher.”  Those 
who  have  become  acquainted  with  the  Tashi 
Lama  depict  him  as  a  most  excellent  person,  of 
the  calmest  temper  and  most  devoted  to  medita¬ 
tion.  Thus  also  do  the  lama-worshippers  regard 
him.  They  see  in  him  a  man  constantly  occupied 
with  religion,  and  who  when  he  directs  his  at¬ 
tention  to  what  is  human,  does  so  only  to  im¬ 
part  consolation  and  encouragement  by  his 
blessing,  and  by  the  exercise  of  mercy  and  the 
bestowal  of  forgiveness.  These  lamas  lead  a 
thoroughly  isolated  life  and  have  a  feminine 
rather  than  masculine  training.  Early  torn  from 
the  arms  of  his  parents  the  lama  is  generally  a 
well-formed  and  beautiful  child.  He  is  brought 
up  amid  perfect  quiet  and  solitude,  in  a  kind  of 
prison :  he  is  well  catered  for,  and  remains  with¬ 
out  exercise  or  childish  play,  so  that  it  is  not  sur¬ 
prising  that  a  feminine  susceptible  tendency  pre¬ 
vails  in  his  character.  The  Grand  Lamas  have 
under  them  inferior  lamas  as  presidents  of  the 
great  fraternities.  In  Tibet  every  father  who  has 
four  sons  is  obliged  to  dedicate  one  to  a  con¬ 
ventual  life.  The  Mongols,  who  are  especially 
devoted  to  Lamaism,  this  modification  of  Bud¬ 
dhism,  have  great  respect  for  all  that  possesses 
life.  They  live  chiefly  on  vegetables,  and  revolt 
from  killing  any  animal,  even  a  louse.  This  wor¬ 
ship  of  the  lamas  has  supplanted  Shamanism, 
that  is,  the  religion  of  sorcery.  The  Shamans, 
priests  of  this  religion,  intoxicate  themselves 
with  strong  drinks  and  dancing,  and  while  in 
this  state  perform  their  incantations,  fall  ex¬ 
hausted  on  the  ground,  and  utter  words  which 
pass  for  oracular.  Since  Buddhism  and  Lamaism 
have  taken  the  place  of  the  Shaman  religion,  the 
life  of  the  Mongols  has  been  simple,  prescrip¬ 


tive,  and  patriarchal.  Where  they  take  any  part 
in  history,  we  find  them  occasioning  impulses 
that  have  only  been  the  groundwork  of  histor¬ 
ical  development.  There  is  therefore  little  to  be 
said  about  the  political  administration  of  the 
lamas.  A  vizier  has  charge  of  the  secular  do¬ 
minion  and  reports  everything  to  the  lama :  the 
government  is  simple  and  lenient ;  and  the  ven¬ 
eration  which  the  Mongols  pay  to  the  lama  ex¬ 
presses  itself  chiefly  in  their  asking  counsel  of 
him  in  political  affairs. 

Section  III 

PERSIA 

Asia  separates  itself  into  two  parts,  the  Near 
and  the  Far  East;  which  are  essentially  different 
from  each  other.  While  the  Chinese  and  Hin¬ 
dus — the  two  great  nations  of  the  Far  East,  al¬ 
ready  considered — belong  to  the  strictly  Asi¬ 
atic,  namely  the  Mongolian  race,  and  conse¬ 
quently  possess  a  quite  peculiar  character,  dis¬ 
crepant  from  ours;  the  nations  of  the  Near  East 
belong  to  the  Caucasian,  i.e.,  the  European 
stock.  They  are  related  to  the  West,  while  the 
Far  Eastern  peoples  are  perfectly  isolated.  The 
European  who  goes  from  Persia  to  India,  ob¬ 
serves,  therefore,  a  prodigious  contrast.  Where¬ 
as  in  the  former  country  he  finds  himself  still 
somewhat  at  home,  and  meets  with  European 
dispositions,  human  virtues  and  human  passions 
—as  soon  as  he  crosses  the  Indus  (i.e.,  in  the 
latter  region),  he  encounters  the  most  repellent 
characteristics,  pervading  every  single  feature 
of  society. 

With  the  Persian  Empire  we  first  enter  on 
continuous  history.  The  Persians  are  the  first 
historical  people;  Persia  was  the  first  empire 
that  passed  away.  While  China  and  India  re¬ 
mained  stationary,  and  perpetuate  a  natural 
vegetative  existence  even  to  the  present  time, 
this  land  has  been  subject  to  those  develop¬ 
ments  and  revolutions,  which  alone  manifest 
a  historical  condition.  The  Chinese  and  the 
Indian  Empires  assert  a  place  in  the  historical 
series  only  on  their  own  account  and  for  us.  But 
here  in  Persia  first  arises  that  light  which  shines 
itself,  and  illuminates  what  is  around;  for 
Zoroaster’s  “light”  belongs  to  the  world  of  con¬ 
sciousness — to  spirit  as  a  relation  to  something 
distinct  from  itself.  We  see  in  the  Persian  world 
a  pure  exalted  unity,  as  the  essence  which  leaves 
the  special  existences  that  inhere  in  it,  free;  as 
the  light,  which  only  manifests  what  bodies  are 
in  themselves;  a  unity  which  governs  individ¬ 
uals  only  to  excite  them  to  become  powerful  for 


236  PHILOSOPHY 

themselves — to  develop  and  assert  their  individ¬ 
uality.  Light  makes  no  distinctions:  the  sun 
shines  on  the  righteous  and  the  unrighteous,  on 
high  and  low,  and  confers  on  all  the  same 
benefit  and  prosperity.  Light  is  vitalizing  only 
in  so  far  as  it  is  brought  to  bear  on  something 
distinct  from  itself. operating  upon  and  develop¬ 
ing  that.  It  holds  a  position  of  antithesis  to  dark¬ 
ness,  and  this  antithetical  relation  opens  out  to 
us  the  principle  of  activity  and  life.  The  princi¬ 
ple  of  development  begins  with  the  history  of 
Persia.  This  therefore  constitutes  strictly  the 
beginning  of  world-history;  for  the  grand  inter¬ 
est  of  spirit  in  history,  is  to  attain  an  unlimited 
immanence  of  subjectivity — by  an  absolute  an¬ 
tithesis  to  attain  complete  harmony. 

Thus  the  transition  which  we  have  to  make,  is 
only  in  the  sphere  of  the  Idea,  not  in  the  exter¬ 
nal  historical  connection.  The  principle  of  this 
transition  is  that  the  universal  essence,  which 
we  recognized  in  Brahm,  now  becomes  percepti¬ 
ble  to  consciousness — becomes  an  object  and  ac¬ 
quires  a  positive  import  for  man.  Brahm  is  not 
worshipped  by  the  Hindus :  he  is  nothing  more 
than  a  condition  of  the  individual,  a  religious 
feeling,  a  non-objective  existence;  a  relation, 
which  for  concrete  vitalityis  that  of  annihilation. 
But  in  becoming  objective,  this  universal  essence 
acquires  a  positive  nature:  man  becomes  free, 
and  thus  occupies  a  position  face  to  face  as  it 
were  with  the  highest  being,  the  latter  being 
made  objective  for  him.  This  form  of  universal¬ 
ity  we  see  exhibited  in  Persia,  involving  a  sepa¬ 
ration  of  man  from  the  universal  essence;  while 
at  the  same  time  the  individual  recognizes  him¬ 
self  as  identical  with  that  essence.  In  the  Chi¬ 
nese  and  Indian  principle,  this  distinction  was 
not  made.  We  found  only  a  unit  of  the  spiritual 
and  the  natural.  But  spirit  still  involved  in  na¬ 
ture  has  to  solve  the  problem  of  freeing  itself 
from  the  latter.  Rights  and  duties  in  India  are 
intimately  connected  with  special  classes,  and 
are  therefore  only  peculiarities  attaching  to  man 
by  the  arrangement  of  nature.  In  China  this 
unity  presents  itself  under  the  conditions  of  pa¬ 
ternal  government.  Man  is  not  free  there;  he 
possesses  no  moral  element,  since  he  is  identical 
with  the  external  command.  In  the  Persian  prin¬ 
ciple,  unity  first  elevates  itself  to  the  distinc¬ 
tion  from  the  merely  natural;  we  have  the  nega¬ 
tion  of  that  unreflecting  relation  which  allowed 
no  exercise  of  mind  to  intervene  between  the 
mandate  and  its  adoption  by  the  will.  In  the 
Persian  principle  this  unity  is  manifested  as 
light,  which  in  this  case  is  not  simply  light  as 
such,  the  most  universal  physical  element,  but 


OF  HISTORY 

at  the  same  time  also  spiritual  purity — the  good. 
Speciality,  the  involvement  with  limited  nature, 
is  consequently  abolished.  Light,  in  a  physical 
and  spiritual  sense,  imports,  therefore,  eleva¬ 
tion — freedom  from  the  merely  natural.  Man 
sustains  a  relation  to  light,  to  the  abstract  good, 
as  to  something  objective,  which  is  acknowl¬ 
edged,  reverenced,  and  evoked  to  activity  by  his 
will.  If  we  look  back  once  more,  and  we  cannot 
do  so  too  frequently,  on  the  phases  which  we 
have  traversed  in  arriving  at  this  point,  we  per¬ 
ceive  in  China  the  totality  of  a  moral  whole,  but 
excluding  subjectivity; — this  totality  divided 
into  members,  but  without  independence  in  its 
various  portions.  We  found  only  an  external 
arrangement  of  this  political  unity.  In  India, 
on  the  contrary,  distinctions  made  themselves 
prominent;  but  the  principle  of  separation  was 
unspiritual.  We  found  incipient  subjectivity, 
but  hampered  with  the  condition,  that  the  sepa¬ 
ration  in  question  is  insurmountable;  and  that 
spirit  remains  involved  in  the  limitations  of  na¬ 
ture,  and  is  therefore  a  self-contradiction.  Above 
this  purity  of  castes  is  that  purity  of  light  which 
we  observe  in  Persia;  that  abstract  good,  to 
which  all  are  equally  able  to  approach,  and  in 
which  all  equally  may  be  hallowed.  The  unity 
recognized  therefore,  now  first  becomes  a  prin¬ 
ciple,  not  an  external  bond  of  soulless  order.  The 
fact  that  everyone  has  a  share  in  that  principle, 
secures  to  him  personal  dignity. 

First  as  to  geographical  position ,  we  see  China 
and  India,  exhibiting  as  it  were  the  dull  half¬ 
conscious  brooding  of  spirit,  in  fruitful  plains — 
distinct  from  which  is  the  lofty  girdle  of  moun¬ 
tains  with  the  wandering  hordes  that  occupy 
them.  The  inhabitants  of  the  heights,  in  their 
conquest,  did  not  change  the  spirit  of  the  plains, 
but  imbibed  it  themselves.  But  in  Persia  the  two 
principles,  retaining  their  diversity,  became 
united,  and  the  mountain  peoples  with  their 
principle  became  the  predominant  element.  The 
two  chief  divisions  which  we  have  to  mention 
are:  the  Persian  upland  itself,  and  the  valley 
plains,  which  are  reduced  under  the  dominion 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  uplands.  That  elevated 
territory  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Soliman 
mountains,  which  are  continued  in  a  northerly 
direction  by  the  Hindu  Kush  and  Belur  Tag. 
The  latter  separate  the  anterior  region — Bac- 
triana  and  Sogdiana,  occupying  the  plains  of  the 
Oxus — from  the  Chinese  Upland,  which  extends 
as  far  as  Kashgar.  That  plain  of  the  Oxus  itself 
lies  to  the  north  of  the  Persian  upland,  which 
declines  on  the  south  towards  the  Persian  Gulf. 
This  is  the  geographical  position  of  Iran.  On  its 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


western  declivity  lies  Persia  (Farsistan)  ;  higher 
to  the  north,  Kurdistan — beyond  this  Armenia. 
Thence  extend  in  a  southwesterly  direction  the 
river  districts  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates. 
The  elements  of  the  Persian  Empire  are  the 
Zend  race — the  old  Parsees;  next  the  Assyrian, 
Median  and  Babylonian  Empire  in  the  region 
mentioned;  but  the  Persian  Empire  also  includes 
Asia  Minor,  Egypt,  and  Syria,  with  its  line  of 
coast ;  and  thus  combines  the  upland,  the  valley 
plains  and  the  coast  region. 

Chapter  i.  The  Zend  People 
The  Zend  people  derived  their  name  from  the 
language  in  which  the  Zend  Books  are  written, 
i.e.,  the  canonical  books  on  which  the  religion 
of  the  ancient  Parsees  is  founded.  Of  this  re¬ 
ligion  of  the  Parsees  or  Fire-worshippers,  there 
are  still  traces  extant.  There  is  a  colony  of  them 
in  Bombay;  and  on  the  Caspian  Sea  there  are 
some  scattered  families  that  have  retained  this 
form  of  worship.  Their  national  existence  was 
put  an  end  to  by  the  Mohammedans.  The  great 
Zardusht,  called  Zoroaster  by  the  Greeks,  wrote 
his  religious  books  in  the  Zend  language.  Until 
nearly  the  last  third  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
this  language  and  all  the  writings  composed  in 
it,  were  entirely  unknown  to  Europeans;  when 
at  length  the  celebrated  Frenchman,  Anquetil- 
Duperron,  disclosed  to  us  these  rich  treasures. 
Filled  with  an  enthusiasm  for  the  Oriental  world, 
which  his  poverty  did  not  allow  him  to  gratify, 
he  enlisted  in  a  French  corps  that  was  about  to 
sail  for  India.  He  thus  reached  Bombay,  where 
he  met  with  the  Parsees,  and  entered  on  the 
study  of  their  religious  ideas.  With  indescribable 
difficulty  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  their  reli¬ 
gious  books;  making  his  way  into  their  litera¬ 
ture,  and  thus  opening  an  entirely  new  and  wide 
field  of  research,  but  which,  owing  to  his  imper¬ 
fect  acquaintance  with  the  language,  still  awaits 
thorough  investigation. 

Where  the  Zend  people,  mentioned  in  the  re¬ 
ligious  books  of  Zoroaster,  lived,  is  difficult  to 
determine.  In  Media  and  Persia  the  religion  of 
Zoroaster  prevailed,  and  Xenophon  relates  that 
Cyrus  adopted  it:  but  none  of  these  countries 
was  the  proper  habitat  of  the  Zend  people.  Zoro¬ 
aster  himself  calls  it  the  pure  Aryan :  we  find  a 
similar  name  in  Herodotus,  for  he  says  that  the 
Medes  were  formerly  called  Arii — a  name  with 
which  the  designation  Iran  is  connected.  South 
of  the  Oxus  runs  a  mountain  chain  in  the  an¬ 
cient  Bactriana — with  which  the  elevated  plains 
commence,  that  were  inhabited  by  the  Medes, 
the  Parthians,  and  the  Hyrcanians.  In  the  dis¬ 


237 

trict  watered  by  the  Oxus  at  the  commencement 
of  its  course,  Bactra,  probably  the  modern 
Balkh,  is  said  to  have  been  situated;  from  which 
Kabul  and  Kashmir  are  distant  only  about  eight 
days’  journey.  Here  in  Bactriana  appears  to  have 
been  the  seat  of  the  Zend  people.  In  the  time  of 
Cyrus  we  find  the  pure  and  original  faith,  and 
the  ancient  political  and  social  relations  such  as 
they  are  described  in  the  Zend  books,  no  longer 
perfect.  Thus  much  appears  certain,  that  the 
Zend  language,  which  is  connected  with  the  San¬ 
skrit,  was  the  language  of  the  Persians,  Medes, 
and  Bactrians.  The  laws  and  institutions  of  the 
people  bear  an  evident  stamp  of  great  simplicity. 
Four  classes  are  mentioned:  priests,  warriors, 
agriculturists,  and  craftsmen.  Trade  only  is  not 
noticed;  from  which  it  would  appear  that  the 
people  still  remained  in  an  isolated  condition. 
Governors  of  districts,  towns,  and  roads,  are 
mentioned;  so  that  all  points  to  the  social  phase 
of  society — the  political  not  beingyet  developed ; 
and  nothing  indicates  a  connection  with  other 
states.  It  is  essential  to  note,  that  we  find  here 
no  castes,  but  only  classes,  and  that  there  are  no 
restrictions  on  marriage  between  these  different 
classes ;  though  the  Zend  writings  announce  civil 
laws  and  penalties,  together  with  religious  en¬ 
actments. 

The  chief  point,  that  which  especially  con¬ 
cerns  us  here,  is  the  doctrine  of  Zoroaster.  In 
contrast  with  the  wretched  hebetude  of  spirit 
which  we  find  among  the  Hindus,  a  pure  ether — 
an  exhalation  of  spirit — meets  us  in  the  Persian 
conception.  In  it,  spirit  emerges  from  that  sub¬ 
stantial  unity  of  nature,  that  substantial  desti¬ 
tution  of  import,  in  which  a  separation  has  not 
yet  taken  place — in  which  spirit  has  not  yet  an 
independent  existence  in  contraposition  to  its  ob¬ 
ject.  This  people,  namely,  attained  to  the  con¬ 
sciousness,  that  absolute  truth  must  have  the 
form  of  universality — of  unity.  This  universal, 
eternal,  infinite  essence  is  not  recognized  at  first, 
as  conditioned  in  any  way;  it  is  unlimited  iden¬ 
tity.  This  is  properly  (and  we  have  already  fre¬ 
quently  repeated  it)  also  the  character  of  Brahm. 
But  this  Universal  Being  became  objective,  and 
their  spirit  became  the  consciousness  of  this  its 
essence;  while  on  the  contrary  among  the  Hindus 
this  objectivity  is  only  the  natural  one  of  the 
Brahmans,  and  is  recognized  as  pure  universality 
only  in  the  destruction  of  consciousness.  Among 
the  Persians  this  negative  assertion  has  become 
a  positive  one;  and  man  has  a  relation  to  Uni¬ 
versal  Being  of  such  a  kind  that  he  remains 
positive  in  sustaining  it.  This  One,  Universal 
Being,  is  indeed  not  yet  recognized  as  the  free 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


238 

unity  of  thought;  not  yet  “worshipped  in  spirit 
and  in  truth”;  but  is  still  clothed  with  a  form — 
that  of  light.  But  light  is  not  a  lama,  a  Brahman, 
a  mountain,  a  brute,  this  or  that  particular  ex¬ 
istence,  but  sensuous  universality  itself ;  simple 
manifestation.  The  Persian  religion  is  therefore 
no  idol-worship;  it  does  not  adore  individual 
natural  objects,  but  the  universal  itself.  Light 
admits,  moreover,  the  signification  of  the  spirit¬ 
ual;  it  is  the  form  of  the  good  and  true,  the  sub¬ 
stantiality  of  knowledge  and  volition  as  well  as 
of  all  natural  things.  Light  puts  man  in  a  position 
to  be  able  to  exercise  choice;  and  he  can  only 
choose  when  he  has  emerged  from  that  which 
had  absorbed  him.  But  light  directly  involves  an 
opposite,  namely,  darkness;  just  as  evil  is  the 
antithesis  of  good.  As  man  could  not  appreciate 
good,  if  evil  were  not;  and  as  he  can  be  really 
good  only  when  he  has  become  acquainted  with 
the  contrary,  so  the  light  does  not  exist  without 
darkness.  Among  the  Persians,  Ormazd  and  A hri- 
man  present  the  antithesis  in  question.  Ormazd 
is  the  lord  of  the  kingdom  of  light — of  good; 
Ahriman  that  of  darkness — of  evil.  But  there 
is  a  still  higher  being  from  whom  both  proceeded 
— a  Universal  Being  not  affected  by  this  anti¬ 
thesis,  called  Zrvana  Akarana — the  Unlimited 
All.  The  All,  i.e.,  is  something  abstract ;  it  does 
not  exist  for  itself,  and  Ormazd  and  Ahriman 
have  arisen  from  it.  This  dualism  is  commonly 
brought  as  a  reproach  against  oriental  thought ; 
and,  as  far  as  the  contradiction  is  regarded  as 
absolute,  that  is  certainly  an  irreligious  under¬ 
standing  which  remains  satisfied  with  it.  But 
the  very  nature  of  spirit  demands  antithesis ;  the 
principle  of  dualism  belongs  therefore  to  the 
idea  of  spirit,  which,  in  its  concrete  form,  essen¬ 
tially  involves  distinction.  Among  the  Persians, 
purity  and  impurity  have  both  become  subjects 
of  consciousness;  and  spirit,  in  order  to  compre¬ 
hend  itself,  must  of  necessity  place  the  special 
and  negative  existence  in  contrast  with  the  uni¬ 
versal  and  positive.  Only  by  overcoming  this 
antithesis  is  spirit  twice-born — regenerated.  The 
deficiency  in  the  Persian  principle  is  only  that 
the  unity  of  the  antithesis  is  not  completely  rec¬ 
ognized;  for  in  that  indefinite  conception  of  the 
Uncreated  All,  whence  Ormazd  and  Ahriman 
proceeded,  the  unity  is  only  the  absolutely 
primal  existence,  and  does  not  reduce  the  contra¬ 
dictory  elements  to  harmony  in  itself.  Ormazd 
creates  of  his  own  free  will;  but  also  according 
to  the  decree  of  Zrvana  Akarana  (the  represen¬ 
tation  wavers) ;  and  the  harmonizing  of  the  con¬ 
tradiction  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  contest 
which  Ormazd  carries  on  with  Ahriman,  and  in 


which  he  will  at  last  conquer.  Ormazd  is  the 
lord  of  light,  and  he  creates  all  that  is  beautiful 
and  noble  in  the  world,  which  is  a  kingdom  of 
the  sun.  He  is  the  excellent,  the  good,  the  posi¬ 
tive  in  all  natural  and  spiritual  existence.  Light 
is  the  body  of  Ormazd;  thence  the  worship  of 
fire,  because  Ormazd  is  present  in  all  light;  but 
he  is  not  the  sun  or  moon  itself.  In  these  the 
Persians  venerate  only  the  light,  which  is  Or¬ 
mazd.  Zoroaster  asks  Ormazd  who  he  is?  He 
answers:  “My  name  is  the  ground  and  centre 
of  all  existence;  highest  wisdom  and  science; 
destroyer  of  the  ills  of  the  world,  and  maintainer 
of  the  universe;  fulness  of  blessedness;  pure 
will,”  etc.  That  which  comes  from  Ormazd  is 
living,  independent,  and  lasting.  Language  testi¬ 
fies  to  his  power;  prayers  are  his  productions. 
Darkness  is  on  the  contrary  the  body  of  Ahri¬ 
man  ;  but  a  perpetual  fire  banishes  him  from  the 
temples.  The  chief  end  of  every  man’s  existence 
is  to  keep  himself  pure,  and  to  spread  this  purity 
around  him.  The  precepts  that  have  this  in  view 
are  very  diffuse;  the  moral  requirements  are 
however  characterized  by  mildness.  It  is  said:  if 
a  man  loads  you  with  revilings,  and  insults,  but 
subsequently  humbles  himself,  call  him  your 
friend.  We  read  in  the  Vendidad,  that  sacrifices 
consist  chiefly  of  the  flesh  of  clean  animals, 
flowers  and  fruits,  milk  and  perfumes.  It  is  said 
there,  “As  man  was  created  pure  and  worthy  of 
heaven,  he  becomes  pure  again  through  the 
law  of  the  servants  of  Ormazd,  which  is  purity 
itself;  if  he  purifies  himself  by  sanctity  of 
thought,  word,  and  deed.  What  is  ‘pure  thought’? 
That  which  ascends  to  the  beginning  of  things. 
What  is  ‘pure  word’?  The  word  of  Ormazd,  (the 
word  is  thus  personified  and  imports  the  living 
spirit  of  the  whole  revelation  of  Ormazd).  What 
is  ‘pure  deed’?  The  humble  adoration  of  the 
heavenly  hosts,  created  at  the  beginning  of 
things.”  It  is  implied  in  this  that  man  should  be 
virtuous:  his  own  will,  his  subjective  freedom 
is  presupposed.  Ormazd  is  not  limited  to  partic¬ 
ular  forms  of  existence.  Sun,  moon,  and  five 
other  stars,  which  seem  to  indicate  the  planets, 
those  illuminating  and  illuminated  bodies,  are 
the  primary  symbols  of  Ormazd;  the  Amsha- 
spands,  his  first  sons.  Among  these,  Mithra  is 
also  named:  but  we  are  at  a  loss  to  fix  upon  the 
star  which  this  name  denotes,  as  we  are  also  in 
reference  to  the  others.  The  Mithra  is  placed  in 
the  Zend  books  among  the  other  stars;  yet  in 
the  penal  code  moral  transgressions  are  called 
“Mithrasins,”  e.g.,  breach  of  promise,  entail¬ 
ing  300  lashes;  to  which  in  the  case  of  theft, 
300  years  of  punishment  in  hell  are  to  be  added. 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


Mithra  appears  here  as  the  presiding  genius  of 
man’s  inward  higher  life.  Later  on,  great  impor¬ 
tance  is  assigned  to  Mithra  as  the  mediator  be¬ 
tween  Ormazd  and  men.  Even  Herodotus  men¬ 
tions  the  adoration  of  Mithra.  In  Rome,  at  a 
later  date,  it  became  very  prevalent  as  a  secret 
worship;  and  we  find  traces  of  it  even  far  into 
the  Middle  Ages.  Besides  those  noticed  there 
are  other  protecting  genii,  which  rank  under  the 
Amshaspands,  their  superiors;  and  are  the  gov¬ 
ernors  and  preservers  of  the  world.  The  council 
of  the  seven  great  men  whom  the  Persian  mon¬ 
arch  had  about  him  was  likewise  instituted  in 
imitation  of  the  court  of  Ormazd.  The  fravashi 
— a  kind  of  spirit-world — are  distinguished  from 
the  creatures  of  the  mundane  sphere.  The  fra¬ 
vashi  are  not  spirits  according  to  our  idea,  for 
they  exist  in  every  natural  object,  whether  fire, 
water,  or  earth.  Their  existence  is  coeval  with 
the  origin  of  things;  they  are  in  all  places,  in 
highroads,  towns,  etc.,  and  are  prepared  to  give 
help  to  supplicants.  Their  abode  is  in  Garo-de- 
mana,  the  dwelling  of  the  “blessed,”  above  the 
solid  vault  of  heaven.  As  son  of  Ormazd  we  find 
the  name  Dshemshid:  apparently  the  same  as 
he  whom  the  Greeks  call  Achaemenes,  whose  de¬ 
scendants  are  called  Pishdadians — a  race  to 
which  Cyrus  was  reported  to  belong.  Even  at  a 
later  period  the  Persians  seem  to  have  had  the 
designation  Achaemenians  among  the  Romans. 
(Horace,  Odes  hi.  i.  44).  Dshemshid,  it  is  said, 
pierced  the  earth  with  a  golden  dagger;  which 
means  nothing  more  than  that  he  introduced 
agriculture.  He  is  said  then  to  have  traversed  the 
various  countries,  originated  springs  and  rivers, 
and  thereby  fertilized  certain  tracts  of  land,  and 
made  the  valleys  teem  with  living  beings,  etc. 
In  the  Zendavesta,  the  name  Gustasp  is  also  fre¬ 
quently  mentioned,  which  many  recent  investi¬ 
gators  have  been  inclined  to  connect  with  Darius 
Hystaspes ;  an  idea  however  that  cannot  be  en¬ 
tertained  for  a  moment,  for  this  Gustasp  doubt¬ 
less  belongs  to  the  ancient  Zend  race — to  a 
period  therefore  antecedent  to  Cyrus.  Mention 
is  made  in  the  Zend  books  of  the  Turanians  also, 
i.e.j  the  nomad  tribes  of  the  north ;  though  noth¬ 
ing  historical  can  be  thence  deduced. 

The  ritual  observances  of  the  religion  of  Or¬ 
mazd  import  that  men  should  conduct  them¬ 
selves  in  harmony  with  the  kingdom  of  light. 
The  great  general  commandment  is  therefore,  as 
already  said,  spiritual  and  corporeal  purity,  con¬ 
sisting  in  many  prayers  to  Ormazd.  It  was  made 
specially  obligatory  upon  the  Persians,  to  main¬ 
tain  living  existences,  to  plant  trees,  to  dig  wells, 
to  fertilize  deserts;  in  order  that  life,  the  posi¬ 


tive,  the  pure  might  be  furthered,  and  the  domin¬ 
ion  of  Ormazd  be  universally  extended.  External 
purity  is  contravened  by  touching  a  dead  animal, 
and  there  are  many  directions  for  being  purified 
from  such  pollution.  Herodotus  relates  of  Cyrus, 
that  when  he  went  against  Babylon,  and  the  river 
Gyndes  engulfed  one  of  the  horses  of  the  chariot 
of  the  sun,  he  was  occupied  for  a  year  in  punish¬ 
ing  it,  by  diverting  its  stream  into  small  canals, 
to  deprive  it  of  its  power.  Thus  Xerxes,  when 
the  sea  broke  in  pieces  his  bridges,  had  chains 
laid  upon  it  as  the  wicked  and  pernicious  being 
— Ahriman. 

Chapter  2.  The  Assyrians ,  Babylonians, 
Medes,  and  Persians 

As  the  Zend  race  was  the  higher  spiritual  ele¬ 
ment  of  the  Persian  Empire,  so  in  Assyria  and 
Babylonia  we  have  the  element  of  external 
wealth,  luxury,  and  commerce.  Traditions  re¬ 
specting  them  ascend  to  the  remotest  periods  of 
history;  but  in  themselves  they  are  obscure,  and 
partly  contradictory;  and  this  contradiction  is 
the  less  easy  to  be  cleared  up,  as  they  have  no 
canonical  books  or  indigenous  works.  The  Greek 
historian  Ctesias  is  said  to  have  had  direct  access 
to  the  archives  of  the  Persian  kings ;  yet  we  have 
only  a  few  fragments  remaining.  Herodotus  gives 
us  much  information;  the  accounts  in  the  Bible 
are  also  valuable  and  remarkable  in  the  highest 
degree,  for  the  Hebrews  were  immediately  con¬ 
nected  with  the  Babylonians.  In  regard  to  the 
Persians,  special  mention  must  be  made  of  the 
epic,  Shahnama ,  by  Firdousi — a  heroic  poem  in 
60,000  strophes,  from  which  Gorres  has  given  a 
copious  extract.  Firdousi  lived  at  the  beginning 
of  the  eleventh  century  a.d.  at  the  court  of 
Mahmoud  the  Great,  at  Ghazni,  east  of  Kabul 
and  Kandahar.  The  celebrated  epic  just  mention¬ 
ed  has  the  old  heroic  traditions  of  Iran  (that  is  of 
West  Persia  proper)  for  its  subject;  but  it  has 
not  the  value  of  a  historical  authority,  since  its 
contents  are  poetical  and  its  author  a  Moham¬ 
medan.  The  contest  of  Iran  and  Turan  is  de¬ 
scribed  in  this  heroic  poem.  Iran  is  Persia  proper 
— the  mountain  land  on  the  south  of  the  Oxus ; 
Turan  denotes  the  plains  of  the  Oxus  and  those 
lying  between  it  and  the  ancient  Jaxartes.  A 
hero,  Rustan,  plays  the  principal  part  in  the 
poem;  but  its  narrations  are  either  altogether 
fabulous,  or  quite  distorted.  Mention  is  made  of 
Alexander,  and  he  is  called  Ishkander  or  Skan- 
der  of  Roum.  Roum  means  the  Turkish  Empire 
(even  now  one  of  its  provinces  is  called  Rou- 
melia),  but  it  denotes  also  the  Roman;  and  in 
the  poem  Alexander’s  empire  has  equally  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


240 

appellation  Roum.  Confusions  of  this  kind  are 
quite  of  a  piece  with  the  Mohammedan  views.  It 
is  related  in  the  poem,  that  the  King  of  Iran 
made  war  on  Philip,  and  that  this  latter  was 
beaten.  The  King  then  demanded  Philip’s  daugh¬ 
ter  as  a  wife;  but  after  he  had  lived  a  long  time 
with  her,  he  sent  her  away  because  her  breath 
was  disagreeable.  On  returning  to  her  father,  she 
gave  birth  to  a  son,  Skander,  who  hastened  to 
Iran  to  take  possession  of  the  throne  after  the 
death  of  his  father.  Add  to  the  above  that  in  the 
whole  of  the  poem  no  personage  or  narrative 
occurs  that  can  be  connected  with  Cyrus,  and 
we  have  sufficient  data  for  estimating  its  his¬ 
torical  value.  It  has  a  value  for  us,  however,  so 
far  as  Firdousi  therein  exhibits  the  spirit  of  his 
time,  and  the  character  and  interest  of  modern 
Persian  views. 

As  regards  Assyria ,  we  must  observe,  that  it 
is  a  rather  indeterminate  designation.  Assyria 
proper  is  a  part  of  Mesopotamia,  to  the  north  of 
Babylon.  As  chief  towns  of  this  empire  are  men¬ 
tioned,  Atur  or  Assur  on  the  Tigris,  and  of  later 
origin  Nineveh,  said  to  have  been  founded  and 
built  by  Ninus,  the  founder  of  the  Assyrian  Em¬ 
pire.  In  those  times  one  city  constituted  the 
whole  empire — Nineveh  for  example:  so  also 
Ecbatana  in  Media,  which  is  said  to  have  had 
seven  walls,  between  whose  inclosures  agricul¬ 
ture  was  carried  on;  and  within  whose  inner¬ 
most  wall  was  the  palace  of  the  ruler.  Thus  too, 
Nineveh,  according  to  Diodorus,  was  480  stadia 
(about  12  German  miles — [55  English])  in  cir¬ 
cumference.  On  the  walls,  which  were  100  feet 
high,  were  fifteen  hundred  towers,  within  which 
a  vast  mass  of  people  resided.  Babylon  included 
an  equally  immense  population.  These  cities 
arose  in  consequence  of  a  twofold  necessity;  on 
the  one  hand,  that  of  giving  up  the  nomad  life 
and  pursuing  agriculture,  handicrafts,  and  trade 
in  a  fixed  abode ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  gain¬ 
ing  protection  against  the  roving  mountain  peo¬ 
ples,  and  the  predatory  Arabs.  Older  traditions 
indicate  that  this  entire  valley  district  was  trav¬ 
ersed  by  nomads,  and  that  this  mode  of  life 
gave  way  before  that  of  the  cities.  Thus  Abra¬ 
ham  wandered  forth  with  his  family  from  Meso¬ 
potamia  westwards,  into  mountainous  Palestine. 
Even  at  this  day  the  country  round  Baghdad  is 
thus  infested  by  roving  nomads.  Nineveh  is  said 
to  have  been  built  2050  years  before  Christ; 
consequently  the  founding  of  the  Assyrian  King¬ 
dom  is  of  no  later  date.  Ninus  reduced  under  his 
sway  also  Babylonia,  Media,  and  Bactriana;  the 
conquest  of  which  latter  country  is  particularly 
extolled  as  having  displayed  the  greatest  energy; 


for  Ctesias  reckons  the  number  of  troops  that 
accompanied  Ninus,  at  1,700,000  infantry  and 
a  proportionate  number  of  cavalry.  Bactra  was 
besieged  for  a  very  considerable  time,  and  its 
conquest  is  ascribed  to  Semiramis;  who  with  a 
valiant  host  is  said  to  have  ascended  the  steep 
acclivity  of  a  mountain.  The  personality  of 
Semiramis  wavers  between  mythological  and 
historical  representations.  To  her  is  ascribed  the 
building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel,  respecting  which 
we  have  in  the  Bible  one  of  the  oldest  of  tra¬ 
ditions. 

Babylon  lay  to  the  south,  on  the  Euphrates, 
in  a  plain  of  great  fertility  and  wrell  adapted  for 
agriculture.  On  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris 
there  was  considerable  navigation.  Vessels  came 
partly  from  Armenia,  partly  from  the  south,  to 
Babylon,  and  conveyed  thither  an  immense 
amount  of  material  wealth.  The  land  round 
Babylon  was  intersected  by  innumerable  canals; 
more  for  purposes  of  agriculture,  to  irrigate  the 
soil  and  to  obviate  inundations,  than  for  naviga¬ 
tion.  The  magnificent  buildings  of  Semiramis 
in  Babylon  itself  are  celebrated;  though  how 
much  of  the  city  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  more 
ancient  period,  is  undetermined  and  uncertain. 
It  is  said  that  Babylon  formed  a  square,  bisected 
by  the  Euphrates.  On  one  side  of  the  stream 
was  the  temple  of  Bel,  on  the  other  the  great 
palaces  of  the  monarchs.  The  city  is  reputed  to 
have  had  a  hundred  brazen  ( i.e .,  copper)  gates, 
its  walls  being  a  hundred  feet  high,  and  thick  in 
proportion,  defended  by  two  hundred  and  fifty 
towers.  The  thoroughfares  in  the  city  which  led 
towards  the  river  were  closed  every  night  by 
brazen  doors.  Ker  Porter,  an  Englishman,  about 
twelve  years  ago  (his  whole  tour  occupied  from 
1817  to  1820),  traversed  the  countries  where 
ancient  Babylon  lay:  on  an  elevation  he  thought 
he  could  discover  remains  still  existing  of  the 
old  Tower  of  Babel;  and  supposed  that  he  had 
found  traces  of  the  numerous  roads  that  wound 
around  the  tower,  and  in  whose  loftiest  story  the 
image  of  Bel  was  set  up.  There  are  besides  many 
hills  with  remains  of  ancient  structures.  The 
bricks  correspond  writh  the  description  in  the 
Biblical  record  of  the  building  of  the  towrer.  A 
vast  plain  is  covered  by  an  innumerable  multi¬ 
tude  of  such  bricks,  although  for  many  thou¬ 
sand  years  the  practice  of  removing  them  has 
been  continued;  and  the  entire  town  of  Hilla, 
which  lies  in  the  vicinity  of  the  ancient  Babylon, 
has  been  built  with  them.  Herodotus  relates  some 
remarkable  facts  in  the  customs  of  the  Babylo¬ 
nians,  which  appear  to  show  that  they  wrere  peo¬ 
ple  living  peaceably  and  neighbourly  with  each 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  241 


other.  When  anyone  in  Babylon  fell  ill,  he  was 
brought  to  some  open  place,  that  every  passerby 
might  have  the  opportunity  of  giving  him  his  ad¬ 
vice.  Marriageable  daughters  were  disposed  of 
by  auction,  and  the  high  price  offered  for  a  belle 
was  allotted  as  a  dowry  for  her  plainer  neighbor. 
Such  an  arrangement  was  not  deemed  incon¬ 
sistent  with  the  obligation  under  which  every 
woman  lay  of  prostituting  herself  once  in  her  life 
in  the  temple  of  Mylitta.  It  is  difficult  to  dis¬ 
cover  what  connection  this  had  with  their  reli¬ 
gious  ideas.  This  excepted,  according  to  Herodo¬ 
tus’s  account,  immorality  invaded  Babylon  only 
at  a  later  period,  when  the  people  became 
poorer.  The  fact  that  the  fairer  portion  of  the 
sex  furnished  dowries  for  their  less  attractive 
sisters,  seems  to  confirm  his  testimony  so  far 
as  it  shows  a  provident  care  for  all;  while  that 
bringing  of  the  sick  into  the  public  places  indi¬ 
cates  a  certain  neighbourly  feeling. 

We  must  here  mention  the  Medes  also.  They 
were,  like  the  Persians,  a  mountain-people,  whose 
habitations  were  south  and  southwest  of  the 
Caspian  Sea  and  stretched  as  far  as  Armenia. 
Among  these  Medes,  the  Magi  are  also  noticed 
as  one  of  the  six  tribes  that  formed  the  Median 
people,  whose  chief  characteristics  were  fierce¬ 
ness,  barbarism,  and  warlike  courage.  The  capi¬ 
tal,  Ecbatana,  was  built  by  Deioces,  not  earlier. 
He  is  said  to  have  united  under  his  kingly  rule 
the  tribes  of  the  Medes,  after  they  had  made 
themselves  free  a  second  time  from  Assyrian 
supremacy,  and  to  have  induced  them  to  build 
and  to  fortify  for  him  a  palace  befitting  his  dig¬ 
nity.  As  to  the  religion  of  the  Medes,  the  Greeks 
call  all  the  oriental  priests  Magi  which  is  there¬ 
fore  a  perfectly  indefinite  name.  But  all  the  data 
point  to  the  fact  that  among  the  Magi  we  may 
look  for  a  comparatively  close  connection  with 
the  Zend  religion;  but  that,  although  the  Magi 
preserved  and  extended  it,  it  experienced  great 
modifications  in  transmission  to  the  various  peo¬ 
ples  who  adopted  it.  Xenophon  says,  that  Cyrus 
was  the  first  that  sacrificed  to  God  according 
to  the  fashion  of  the  Magi.  The  Medes  therefore 
acted  as  a  medium  for  propagating  the  Zend  re¬ 
ligion. 

The  Assyrian-Babylonian  Empire,  which  held 
so  many  peoples  in  subjection,  is  said  to  have 
existed  for  one  thousand  or  fifteen  hundred 
years.  The  last  ruler  was  Sardanapalus — a  great 
voluptuary,  according  to  the  descriptions  we 
have  of  him.  Arbaces,  the  Satrap  of  Media,  ex¬ 
cited  the  other  satraps  against  him ;  and  in  com¬ 
bination  with  them,  led  the  troops  which  assem¬ 
bled  every  year  at  Nineveh  to  pay  the  tribute, 


against  Sardanapalus.  The  latter,  although  he 
had  gained  many  victories,  was  at  last  compelled 
to  yield  before  overwhelming  force,  and  to  shut 
himself  up  in  Nineveh;  and,  when  he  could  not 
longer  offer  resistance,  to  burn  himself  there 
with  all  his  treasure.  According  to  some  chro- 
nologists,  this  took  place  888  years  b.c.;  accord¬ 
ing  to  others,  at  the  end  of  the  seventh  century. 
After  this  catastrophe  the  empire  was  entirely 
broken  up:  it  was  divided  into  an  Assyrian,  a 
Median,  and  a  Babylonian  Empire,  to  which  also 
belonged  the  Chaldeans — a  mountain  people 
from  the  north  which  had  united  with  the  Baby¬ 
lonians.  These  several  empires  had  in  their  turn 
various  fortunes;  though  here  we  meet  with  a 
confusion  in  the  accounts  which  has  never  been 
cleared  up.  Within  this  period  of  their  existence 
begins  their  connection  with  the  Jews  and  Egyp¬ 
tians.  The  Jewish  people  succumbed  to  superior 
force;  the  Jews  were  carried  captive  to  Babylon, 
and  from  them  we  have  accurate  information  re¬ 
specting  the  condition  of  this  empire.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  Daniel’s  statements  there  existed  in 
Babylon  a  carefully  appointed  organization  for 
government  business.  He  speaks  of  Magians — 
from  whom  the  expounders  of  sacred  writings, 
the  soothsayers,  astrologers,  Wise  Men,  and 
Chaldeans  who  interpreted  dreams,  are  distin¬ 
guished.  The  Prophets  generally  say  much  of 
the  great  commerce  of  Babylon;  but  they  also 
draw  a  terrible  picture  of  the  prevailing  deprav¬ 
ity  of  manners. 

The  real  culmination  of  the  Persian  Empire 
is  to  be  looked  for  in  connection  with  the  Persian 
people  properly  so  called,  which,  embracing  in 
its  rule  all  the  Near  East,  came  into  contact 
with  the  Greeks.  The  Persians  are  found  in  ex¬ 
tremely  close  and  early  connection  with  the 
Medes;  and  the  transmission  of  the  sovereignty 
to  the  Persians  makes  no  essential  difference; 
for  Cyrus  was  himself  a  relation  of  the  Median 
king,  and  the  names  of  Persia  and  Media  melt 
into  one.  At  the  head  of  the  Persians  and  Medes, 
Cyrus  made  war  upon  Lydia  and  its  king,  Croe¬ 
sus.  Herodotus  relates  that  there  had  been  wars 
before  that  time  between  Lydia  and  Media,  but 
which  had  been  settled  by  the  intervention  of 
the  king  of  Babylon.  We  recognize  here  a  system 
of  states,  consisting  of  Lydia,  Media,  and  Bab¬ 
ylon.  The  latter  had  become  predominant  and 
had  extended  its  dominion  to  the  Mediterranean 
Sea.  Lydia  stretched  eastward  as  far  as  the 
Halys;  and  the  border  of  the  western  coast  of 
Asia  Minor,  the  fair  Greek  colonies,  were  sub¬ 
ject  to  it ;  a  high  degree  of  culture  was  thus  al¬ 
ready  present  in  the  Lydian  Empire.  Art  and 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


242 

poetry  were  blooming  there  as  cultivated  by  the 
Greeks.  These  colonies  also  were  subjected  to 
Persia.  Wise  men,  such  as  Bias,  and  still  earlier, 
Thales,  advised  them  to  unite  themselves  in  a 
firm  league,  or  to  quit  their  cities  and  posses¬ 
sions,  and  to  seek  out  for  themselves  other  habi¬ 
tations;  (Bias  meant  Sardinia).  But  such  a 
union  could  not  be  realized  among  cities  which 
were  animated  by  the  bitterest  jealousy  of  each 
other,  and  who  lived  in  continual  quarrel:  while 
in  the  intoxication  of  affluence  they  were  not 
capable  of  forming  the  heroic  resolve  to  leave 
their  homes  for  the  sake  of  freedom.  Only  when 
they  were  on  the  very  point  of  being  subjugated 
by  the  Persians,  did  some  cities  give  up  certain 
for  prospective  possessions,  in  their  aspiration 
after  the  highest  good — liberty.  Herodotus  says 
of  the  war  against  the  Lydians,  that  it  made  the 
Persians  who  were  previously  poor  and  barba¬ 
rous,  acquainted  for  the  first  time  with  the  luxu¬ 
ries  of  life  and  civilization.  After  the  Lydian  con¬ 
quest  Cyrus  subjugated  Babylon.  With  it  he 
came  into  possession  of  Syria  and  Palestine; 
freed  the  Jews  from  captivity,  and  allowed  them 
to  rebuild  their  temple.  Lastly,  he  led  an  expedi¬ 
tion  against  the  Massagetae ;  engaged  with  them 
in  the  steppes  between  the  Oxus  and  the  Jaxar- 
tes,  but  sustained  a  defeat,  and  died  the  death 
of  a  warrior  and  conqueror.  The  death  of  heroes 
who  have  formed  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the 
world,  is  stamped  with  the  character  of  their 
mission.  Cyrus  thus  died  in  his  mission,  which 
was  the  union  of  the  Near  East  into  one  sover¬ 
eignty  without  an  ulterior  object. 

Chapter  3.  The  Persian  Empire  and  its 
Constituent  Parts 

The  Persian  Empire  is  an  empire  in  the  mod¬ 
ern  sense — like  that  which  existed  in  Germany, 
and  the  great  imperial  realm  under  the  sway  of 
Napoleon;  for  we  find  it  consisting  of  a  number 
of  states,  which  are  indeed  dependent, but  which 
have  retained  their  own  individuality,  their 
manners,  and  laws.  The  general  enactments, 
binding  upon  all,  did  not  infringe  upon  their 
political  and  social  idiosyncrasies,  but  even  pro¬ 
tected  and  maintained  them;  so  that  each  of 
the  nations  that  constitute  the  whole,  had  its 
own  form  of  constitution.  As  light  illuminates 
everything,  imparting  to  each  object  a  peculiar 
vitality,  so  the  Persian  Empire  extends  over  a 
multitude  of  nations,  and  leaves  to  each  one  its 
particular  character.  Some  have  even  kings 
of  their  own;  each  one  its  distinct  language, 
arms,  way  of  life,  and  customs.  All  this  diversity 
coexists  harmoniously  under  the  impartial  do¬ 


minion  of  light.  The  Persian  Empire  compre¬ 
hends  all  the  three  geographical  elements,  which 
we  classified  as  distinct.  First,  the  uplands  of 
Persia  and  Media;  next,  the  valley-plains  of 
the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  whose  inhabitants 
are  found  united  in  a  developed  form  of  civili¬ 
zation,  with  Egypt — the  valley-plain  of  the  Nile 
— where  agriculture,  industrial  arts,  and  sciences 
flourished;  and  lastly  a  third  element,  viz.,  the 
nations  who  encounter  the  perils  of  the  sea — 
the  Syrians,  the  Phoenicians,  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Greek  colonies  and  Greek  maritime  states 
in  Asia  Minor.  Persia  thus  united  in  itself  the 
three  natural  principles,  while  China  and  India 
remained  foreign  to  the  sea.  We  find  here  neither 
that  consolidated  totality  which  China  presents, 
nor  that  Hindu  life,  in  which  an  anarchy  of  ca¬ 
price  is  prevalent  everywhere.  In  Persia,  the 
government,  though  joining  all  in  a  central  unity, 
is  but  a  combination  of  peoples — leaving  each 
of  them  free.  Thereby  a  stop  is  put  to  that  bar¬ 
barism  and  ferocity  with  which  the  nations  had 
been  wont  to  carry  on  their  destructive  feuds, 
and  which  the  Book  of  Kings  and  the  Book  of 
Samuel  sufficiently  attest.  The  lamentations  of 
the  Prophets  and  their  imprecations  upon  the 
state  of  things  before  the  conquest,  show  the 
misery,  wickedness  and  disorder  that  prevailed 
among  them,  and  the  happiness  which  Cyrus  dif¬ 
fused  over  the  region  of  the  Near  East.  It  was  not 
given  to  the  Asiatics  to  unite  self-dependence, 
freedom,  and  substantial  vigour  of  mind,  with 
culture,  i.e.,  and  interest  for  diverse  pursuits 
and  an  acquaintance  with  the  conveniences  of 
life.  Military  valour  among  them  is  consistent 
only  with  barbarity  of  manners.  It  is  not  the 
calm  courage  of  order;  and  when  their  mind 
opens  to  a  sympathy  with  various  interests,  it 
immediately  passes  into  effeminacy;  allows  its 
energies  to  sink,  and  makes  men  the  slaves  of  an 
enervated  sensuality. 

Persia 

The  Persians — a  free  mountain  and  nomad 
people — though  ruling  over  richer,  more  civi¬ 
lized,  and  fertile  lands,  retained,  on  the  whole, 
the  fundamental  characteristics  of  their  ancient 
mode  of  life.  They  stood  with  one  foot  on  their 
ancestral  territory,  with  the  other  on  their  for¬ 
eign  conquests.  In  his  ancestral  land  the  king 
was  a  friend  among  friends,  and  as  if  surrounded 
by  equals.  Outside  of  it,  he  was  the  lord  to  whom 
all  were  subject,  and  bound  to  acknowledge  their 
dependence  by  the  payment  of  tribute.  Faithful 
to  the  Zend  religion,  the  Persians  give  them¬ 
selves  to  the  pursuit  of  piety  and  the  pure  wor- 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  243 


ship  of  Ormazd.  The  tombs  of  the  kings  were  in 
Persia  proper;  and  there  the  king  sometimes 
visited  his  countrymen,  with  whom  he  lived  in 
relations  of  the  greatest  simplicity.  He  brought 
with  him  presents  for  them,  while  all  other  na¬ 
tions  were  obliged  to  make  presents  to  him.  At 
the  court  of  the  monarch  there  was  a  division 
of  Persian  cavalry  which  constituted  the  elite 
of  the  whole  army,  ate  at  a  common  table,  and 
were  subject  to  a  most  perfect  discipline  in 
every  respect.  They  made  themselves  illustrious 
by  their  bravery,  and  even  the  Greeks  awarded 
a  tribute  of  respect  to  their  valour  in  the  Median 
wars.  When  the  entire  Persian  host,  to  which 
this  division  belonged,  was  to  engage  in  an  ex¬ 
pedition,  a  summons  was  first  issued  to  all  the 
Asiatic  populations.  When  the  warriors  were  as¬ 
sembled,  the  expedition  was  undertaken  with 
that  character  of  restlessness,  that  nomadic  dis¬ 
position  which  formed  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the 
Persians.  Thus  they  invaded  Egypt,  Scythia, 
Thrace,  and  at  last  Greece;  where  their  vast 
power  was  destined  to  be  shattered.  A  march  of 
this  kind  looked  almost  like  an  emigration :  their 
families  accompanied  them.  Each  people  ex¬ 
hibited  its  national  features  and  warlike  accou¬ 
trements,  and  poured  forth  en  masse.  Each  had 
its  own  order  of  march  and  mode  of  warfare. 
Herodotus  sketches  for  us  a  brilliant  picture  of 
this  variety  of  aspect  as  it  presented  itself  in  the 
vast  march  of  nations  under  Xerxes  (two  mil¬ 
lions  of  human  beings  are  said  to  have  accom¬ 
panied  him).  Yet,  as  these  peoples  were  so  un¬ 
equally  disciplined,  so  diverse  in  strength  and 
bravery,  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  the  small 
but  well-trained  armies  of  the  Greeks,  animated 
by  the  same  spirit,  and  under  matchless  leader¬ 
ship,  could  withstand  those  innumerable  but  dis¬ 
orderly  hosts  of  the  Persians.  The  provinces  had 
to  provide  for  the  support  of  the  Persian  cavalry, 
which  were  quartered  in  the  centre  of  the  king¬ 
dom.  Babylon  had  to  contribute  the  third  part 
of  the  supplies  in  question,  and  consequently 
appears  to  have  been  by  far  the  richest  district. 
As  regards  other  branches  of  revenue,  each  peo¬ 
ple  was  obliged  to  supply  the  choicest  of  the 
peculiar  produce  which  the  district  afforded. 
Thus  Arabia  gave  frankincense,  Syria  purple, 
etc. 

The  education  of  the  princes — but  especially 
that  of  the  heir  to  the  throne — was  conducted 
with  extreme  care.  Till  their  seventh  year  the 
sons  of  the  king  remained  among  the  women, 
and  did  not  come  into  the  royal  presence.  From 
their  seventh  year  forward  they  were  instructed 
in  hunting,  riding,  shooting  with  the  bow,  and 


also  in  speaking  the  truth.  There  is  one  state¬ 
ment  to  the  effect  that  the  prince  received  in¬ 
struction  in  the  Magian  lore  of  Zoroaster.  Four 
of  the  noblest  Persians  conducted  the  prince’s 
education.  The  magnates  of  the  land,  at  large, 
constituted  a  kind  of  diet.  Among  them  Magi 
were  also  found.  They  are  depicted  as  free  men, 
animated  by  a  noble  fidelity  and  patriotism.  Of 
such  character  seem  the  seven  nobles — the  coun¬ 
terpart  of  the  Amshaspands  who  stand  around 
Ormazd — when  after  the  unmasking  of  the  false 
Smerdis,  who  on  the  death  of  King  Cambyses 
gave  himself  out  as  his  brother,  they  assembled 
to  deliberate  on  the  most  desirable  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment.  Quite  free  from  passion,  and  without 
exhibiting  any  ambition,  they  agreed  that  mon¬ 
archy  was  the  only  form  of  government  adapted 
to  the  Persian  Empire.  The  sun,  and  the  horse 
which  first  saluted  them  with  a  neigh,  decided 
the  succession  in  favor  of  Darius.  The  magni¬ 
tude  of  the  Persian  dominion  occasioned  the 
government  of  the  provinces  by  viceroys — sa¬ 
traps;  and  these  often  acted  very  arbitrarily  to 
the  provinces  subjected  to  their  rule,  and  dis¬ 
played  hatred  and  envy  towards  each  other;  a 
source  of  much  evil.  These  satraps  were  only 
superior  presidents  of  the  provinces,  and  gener¬ 
ally  left  the  subject  kings  of  the  countries  in 
possession  of  regal  privileges.  All  the  land  and 
all  the  water  belonged  to  the  great  king  of  the 
Persians.  “Land  and  water,”  were  the  demands 
of  Darius  Hystaspes  and  Xerxes  from  the  Greeks. 
But  the  king  was  only  the  abstract  sovereign: 
the  enjoyment  of  the  country  remained  to  the 
nations  themselves ;  whose  obligations  were  com¬ 
prised  in  the  maintenance  of  the  court  and  the 
satraps,  and  the  contribution  of  the  choicest 
part  of  their  property.  Uniform  taxes  first  make 
their  appearance  under  the  government  of  Da¬ 
rius  Hystaspes.  On  the  occasion  of  a  royal  prog¬ 
ress  the  districts  of  the  empire  visited  had  to 
give  presents  to  the  king;  and  from  the  amount 
of  these  gifts  we  may  infer  the  wealth  of  the  un¬ 
exhausted  provinces.  Thus  the  dominion  of  the 
Persians  was  by  no  means  oppressive,  either  in 
secular  or  religious  respects.  The  Persians,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Herodotus,  had  no  idols — in  fact 
ridiculed  anthropomorphic  representations  of  the 
gods;  but  they  tolerated  every  religion,  although 
there  may  be  found  expressions  of  wrath  against 
idolatry.  Greek  temples  were  destroyed,  and 
the  images  of  the  gods  broken  in  pieces. 

Syria  and  Semitic  Western  Asia 
One  element — the  coast  territory — which  also 
belonged  to  the  Persian  Empire,  is  especially 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


244 

represented  by  Syria.  It  was  peculiarly  impor¬ 
tant  to  the  Persian  Empire;  for  when  continen¬ 
tal  Persia  set  out  on  one  of  its  great  expeditions, 
it  was  accompanied  by  Phoenician  as  well  as  by 
Greek  navies.  The  Phoenician  coast  is  but  a  very 
narrow  border,  often  only  two  leagues  broad, 
which  has  the  high  mountains  of  Lebanon  on 
the  east.  On  the  seacoast  lay  a  series  of  noble 
and  rich  cities,  as  Tyre,  Sidon,  Byblus,  Berytus, 
carrying  on  great  trade  and  commerce;  which 
last,  however,  was  too  isolated  and  confined  to 
that  particular  country,  to  allow  it  to  affect  the 
whole  Persian  state.  Their  commerce  lay  chief¬ 
ly  in  the  direction  of  the  Mediterranean  sea, 
and  it  reached  thence  far  into  the  west.  Through 
its  intercourse  with  so  many  nations,  Syria  soon 
attained  a  high  degree  of  culture.  There  the 
most  beautiful  fabrications  in  metals  and  pre¬ 
cious  stones  were  prepared,  and  there  the  most 
important  discoveries,  e.g.,  of  glass  and  of  pur¬ 
ple,  were  made.  Written  language  there  received 
its  first  development,  for  in  their  intercourse 
with  various  nations,  the  need  of  it  was  soon  felt. 
(So,  to  quote  another  exapiple,  Lord  Macart¬ 
ney  observes  that  in  Canton  itself,  the  Chinese 
had  felt  and  expressed  the  need  of  a  more  pliable 
written  language.)  The  Phoenicians  discovered 
and  first  navigated  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  They 
had  settlements  in  Cyprus  and  Crete.  In  the  re¬ 
mote  island  of  Thasos,  they  worked  gold  mines. 
In  the  south  and  southwest  of  Spain  they  opened 
silver  mines.  In  Africa  they  founded  the  colo¬ 
nies  of  Utica  and  Carthage.  From  Gades  they 
sailed  far  down  the  African  coast,  and  according 
to  some,  even  circumnavigated  Africa.  From 
Britain  they  brought  tin,  and  from  the  Baltic, 
Prussian  amber.  This  opens  to  us  an  entirely 
new  principle.  Inactivity  ceases,  as  also  mere 
rude  valour;  in  their  place  appears  the  activity 
of  industry,  and  that  considerate  courage  which, 
while  it  dares  the  perils  of  the  deep,  rationally 
bethinks  itself  of  the  means  of  safety.  Here 
everything  depends  on  man’s  activity,  his  cour¬ 
age,  his  intelligence;  while  the  objects  aimed  at 
are  also  pursued  in  the  interest  of  man.  Human 
will  and  activity  here  occupy  the  foreground, 
not  nature  and  its  bounty.  Babylonia  had  its 
determinate  share  of  territory,  and  human  sub¬ 
sistence  was  there  dependent  on  the  course  of 
the  sun  and  the  process  of  nature  generally.  But 
the  sailor  relies  upon  himself  amid  the  fluctua¬ 
tions  of  the  waves,  and  eye  and  heart  must  be 
always  open.  In  like  manner  the  principle  of 
industry  involves  the  very  opposite  of  what  is 
received  from  nature;  for  natural  objects  are 
worked  up  for  use  and  ornament.  In  industry 


man  is  an  object  to  himself,  and  treats  nature  as 
something  subject  to  him,  on  which  he  impresses 
the  seal  of  his  activity.  Intelligence  is  the  valour 
needed  here,  and  ingenuity  is  better  than  mere 
natural  courage.  At  this  point  we  see  the  nations 
freed  from  the  fear  of  nature  and  its  slavish 
bondage. 

If  we  compare  their  religious  ideas  with  the 
above,  we  shall  see  in  Babylon ,  in  the  Syrian 
tribes,  and  in  Phrygia,  first  a  rude,  vulgar, 
sensual  idolatry — a  description  of  which,  in  its 
principal  features,  is  given  in  the  Prophets. 
Nothing  indeed  more  specific  than  idolatry  is 
mentioned;  and  this  is  an  indefinite  term.  The 
Chinese,  the  Hindus,  the  Greeks,  practise  idola¬ 
try;  the  Catholics,  too,  adore  the  images  of 
saints ;  but  in  the  sphere  of  thought  with  which 
we  are  at  present  occupied,  it  is  the  powers  of 
nature  and  of  production  generally  that  consti¬ 
tute  the  object  of  veneration ;  and  the  worship 
is  luxury  and  pleasure.  The  Prophets  give  the 
most  terrible  pictures  of  this,  though  their  re¬ 
pulsive  character  must  be  partly  laid  to  the  ac¬ 
count  of  the  hatred  of  Jews  against  neighbour¬ 
ing  peoples.  Such  representations  are  particularly 
ample  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom.  Not  only  was 
there  a  worship  of  natural  objects,  but  also  of 
the  universal  power  of  nature — Astarte,  Cybele, 
Diana  of  Ephesus.  The  worship  paid  was  a  sensu¬ 
ous  intoxication,  excess,  and  revelry:  sensuality 
and  cruelty  are  its  two  characteristic  traits. 
“When  they  keep  their  holy  days  they  act  as  if 
mad,”  [“they  are  mad  when  they  be  merry” — 
English  Version],  says  the  Book  of  Wisdom 
(14.  28).  With  a  merely  sensuous  life,  this  be¬ 
ing  a  form  of  consciousness  which  does  not  at¬ 
tain  to  general  conceptions,  cruelty  is  connected; 
because  nature  itself  is  the  highest,  so  that  man 
has  no  value,  or  only  the  most  trifling.  Moreover, 
the  genius  of  such  a  polytheism  involves  the  de¬ 
struction  of  its  consciousness  on  the  part  of 
spirit  in  striving  to  identify  itself  with  nature, 
and  the  annihilation  of  the  spiritual  generally. 
Thus  we  see  children  sacrificed,  priests  of  Cybele 
subjecting  themselves  to  mutilation,  men  mak¬ 
ing  themselves  eunuchs,  women  prostituting 
themselves  in  the  temple.  As  a  feature  of  the 
court  of  Babylon  it  deserves  to  be  remarked 
that,  when  Daniel  was  brought  up  there,  it  was 
not  required  of  him  to  take  part  in  the  religious 
observances;  and  moreover  that  food  cere¬ 
monially  pure  was  allowed  him ;  that  he  was  in 
requisition  especially  for  interpreting  the  dreams 
of  the  king,  because  he  had  “the  spirit  of  the 
holy  gods.”  The  king  proposes  to  elevate  him¬ 
self  above  sensuous  life  by  dreams,  as  indica- 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  245 


tions  from  a  superior  power.  It  is  thus  generally 
evident,  that  the  bond  of  religion  was  lax,  and 
that  here  no  unity  is  to  be  found.  For  we  observe 
also  adorations  offered  to  images  of  kings;  the 
power  of  nature  and  the  king  as  a  spiritual  power, 
are  the  highest;  so  that  in  this  form  of  idolatry 
there  is  manifested  a  perfect  contrast  to  the 
Persian  purity. 

We  find  on  the  other  hand  something  quite 
different  among  the  Phoenicians ,  that  bold  sea¬ 
faring  people.  Herodotus  tells  us  that  at  Tyre, 
Hercules  was  worshipped.  If  the  divinity  in  ques¬ 
tion  is  not  absolutely  identical  with  the  Greek 
demigod,  there  must  be  understood  by  that 
name  one  whose  attributes  nearly  agree  with  his. 
This  worship  is  particularly  indicative  of  the 
character  of  the  people;  for  it  is  Hercules  of 
whom  the  Greeks  say,  that  he  raised  himself  to 
Olympus  by  dint  of  human  courage  and  daring. 
The  idea  of  the  sun  perhaps  originated  that  of 
Hercules  as  engaged  in  his  twelve  labors;  but 
this  basis  does  not  give  us  the  chief  feature  of 
the  myth,  which  is,  that  Hercules  is  that  scion 
of  the  gods  who,  by  his  virtue  and  exertion, 
made  himself  a  god  by  human  spirit  and  valour; 
and  who,  instead  of  passing  his  life  in  idleness, 
spends  it  in  hardship  and  toil.  A  second  religious 
element  is  the  worship  of  Adonis ,  which  takes 
place  in  the  towns  of  the  coast  (it  was  celebrated 
in  Egypt  also  by  the  Ptolemies)  ;  and  respecting 
which  we  find  a  notable  passage  in  the  Book  of 
Wisdom  (14.  13,  etc.),  where  it  is  said:  “The 
idols  were  not  from  the  beginning — but  were 
invented  through  the  vain  ambition  of  men,  be¬ 
cause  the  latter  are  short-lived.  For  a  father 
afflicted  with  untimely  mourning,  when  he  had 
made  an  image  of  his  child  (Adonis)  early 
taken  away,  honored  him  as  a  god,  who  was  a 
dead  man,  and  delivered  to  those  that  were  un¬ 
der  him  ceremonies  and  sacrifices”  (E.  V. 
nearly).  The  feast  of  Adonis  was  very  similar  to 
the  worship  of  Osiris,  the  commemoration  of 
his  death,  a  funeral  festival,  at  which  the  women 
broke  out  into  the  most  extravagant  lamenta¬ 
tions  over  the  departed  god.  In  India  lamenta¬ 
tion  is  suppressed  in  the  heroism  of  insensibil¬ 
ity;  uncomplaining,  the  women  there  plunge  in¬ 
to  the  river,  and  the  men,  ingenious  in  inventing 
penances,  impose  upon  themselves  the  direst 
tortures ;  for  they  give  themselves  up  to  the  loss 
of  vitality,  in  order  to  destroy  consciousness  in 
empty  abstract  contemplation.  Here,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  human  pain  becomes  an  element  of  wor¬ 
ship;  in  pain  man  realizes  his  subjectivity:  it 
is  expected  of  him — he  may  here  indulge  self- 
consciousness  and  the  feeling  of  actual  existence. 


Life  here  regains  its  value.  A  universality  of 
pain  is  established:  for  death  becomes  immanent 
in  the  Divine,  and  the  deity  dies.  Among  the 
Persians  we  saw  light  and  darkness  struggling 
with  each  other,  but  here  both  principles  are 
united  in  one — the  absolute.  The  negative  is 
here,  too,  the  merely  natural;  but  as  the  death 
of  a  god ,  it  is  not  a  limitation  attaching  to  an 
individual  object,  but  is  pure  negativity  itself. 
And  this  point  is  important,  because  the  generic 
conception  that  has  to  be  formed  of  deity  is 
spirit;  which  involves  its  being  concrete,  and 
having  in  it  the  element  of  negativity.  The  qual¬ 
ities  of  wisdom  and  power  are  also  concrete 
qualities,  but  only  as  predicates;  so  that  God 
remains  abstract  substantial  unity,  in  which 
differences  themselves  vanish,  and  do  not  be¬ 
come  organic  elements  ( Moment e )  of  this  unity. 
But  here  the  negative  itself  is  a  phase  of  deity 
— the  natural — death;  the  worship  appropriate 
to  which  is  grief.  It  is  in  the  celebration  of  the 
death  of  Adonis,  and  of  his  resurrection,  that 
the  concrete  is  made  conscious.  Adonis  is  a 
youth,  who  is  torn  from  his  parents  by  a  too 
early  death.  In  China,  in  the  worship  of  ances¬ 
tors,  these  latter  enjoy  divine  honour.  But  par¬ 
ents  in  their  decease  only  pay  the  debt  of  nature. 
When  a  youth  is  snatched  away  by  death,  the 
occurrence  is  regarded  as  contrary  to  the  proper 
order  of  things ;  and  while  affliction  at  the  death 
of  parents  is  no  just  affliction,  in  the  case  of 
youth  death  is  a  paradox.  And  this  is  the  deeper 
element  in  the  conception  that  in  the  divinity, 
negativity — antithesis — is  manifested;  and  that 
the  worship  rendered  to  him  involves  both  ele¬ 
ments — the  pain  felt  for  the  divinity  snatched 
away,  and  the  joy  occasioned  by  his  being  found 
again. 

Judcea 

The  next  people  belonging  to  the  Persian  Em¬ 
pire,  in  that  wide  circle  of  nationalities  which  it 
comprises,  is  the  Jewish.  We  find  here,  too,  a 
canonical  book — the  Old  Testament;  in  which 
the  views  of  this  people,  whose  principle  is  the 
exact  opposite  of  the  one  just  described,  are 
exhibited.  While  among  the  Phoenician  people 
the  spiritual  was  still  limited  by  nature,  in  the 
case  of  the  Jews  we  find  it  entirely  purified;  the 
pure  product  of  thought.  Self-conception  ap¬ 
pears  in  the  field  of  consciousness,  and  the  spirit¬ 
ual  develops  itself  in  sharp  contrast  to  nature 
and  to  union  with  it.  It  is  true  that  we  observed 
at  an  earlier  stage  the  pure  conception  “Brahm”; 
but  only  as  the  universal  being  of  nature;  and 
with  this  limitation,  that  Brahm  is  not  himself 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


246 

an  object  of  consciousness.  Among  the  Persians 
we  saw  this  abstract  being  become  an  object  for 
consciousness,  but  it  was  that  of  sensuous  in¬ 
tuition — as  light.  But  the  idea  of  light  has  at  this 
stage  advanced  to  that  of  “Jehovah” — the  pure¬ 
ly  One.  This  forms  the  point  of  separation  be¬ 
tween  the  East  and  the  West;  spirit  descends 
into  the  depths  of  its  own  being,  and  recognizes 
the  abstract  fundamental  principle  as  the  spirit¬ 
ual.  Nature,  which  in  the  East  is  the  primary 
and  fundamental  existence,  is  now  depressed 
to  the  condition  of  a  mere  creature;  and  spirit 
now  occupies  the  first  place.  God  is  known  as 
the  creator  of  all  men,  as  he  is  of  all  nature,  and 
as  absolute  causality  generally.  But  this  great 
principle,  as  further  conditioned,  is  exclusive 
unity.  This  religion  must  necessarily  possess  the 
element  of  exclusiveness,  which  consists  essen¬ 
tially  in  this — that  only  the  one  people  which 
adopts  it,  recognizes  the  one  God,  and  is  ac¬ 
knowledged  by  Him.  The  God  of  the  Jewish  peo¬ 
ple  is  the  God  only  of  Abraham  and  of  his  seed: 
national  individuality  and  a  special  local  wor¬ 
ship  are  involved  in  such  a  conception  of  deity. 
Before  him  all  other  gods  are  false:  moreover 
the  distinction  between  “true”  and  “false”  is 
quite  abstract;  for  as  regards  the  false  gods,  not 
a  ray  of  the  divine  is  supposed  to  shine  into 
them.  But  every  form  of  spiritual  force,  and 
a  fortiori  every  religion  is  of  such  a  nature,  that 
whatever  be  its  peculiar  character,  an  affirma¬ 
tive  element  is  necessarily  contained  in  it.  How¬ 
ever  erroneous  a  religion  may  be,  it  possesses 
truth,  although  in  a  mutilated  phase.  In  every 
religion  there  is  a  divine  presence,  a  divine  re¬ 
lation  ;  and  a  philosophy  of  history  has  to  seek 
out  the  spiritual  element  even  in  the  most  im¬ 
perfect  forms.  But  it  doesnot  follow  that  because 
it  is  a  religion,  it  is  therefore  good.  We  must  not 
fall  into  the  lax  conception  that  the  content  is 
of  no  importance  but  only  the  form.  This  latitu- 
dinarian  tolerance  the  Jewish  religion  does  not 
admit,  being  absolutely  exclusive. 

The  spiritual  speaks  itself  here  absolutely 
free  of  the  sensuous,  and  nature  is  reduced  to 
something  merely  external  and  undivine.  This  is 
the  true  and  proper  estimate  of  nature  at  this 
stage;  for  only  at  a  more  advanced  phase  can 
the  idea  attain  a  reconciliation  in  this  its  alien 
form.  Its  first  utterances  will  be  in  opposition  to 
nature;  for  spirit,  which  had  been  hitherto  dis¬ 
honoured,  now  first  attains  its  due  dignity,  while 
nature  resumes  its  proper  position.  Nature  is 
conceived  as  having  the  ground  of  its  existence 
in  another — as  something  posited,  created;  and 
this  idea,  that  God  is  the  lord  and  creator  of  na¬ 


ture,  leads  men  to  regard  God  as  the  exalted 
One,  while  the  whole  of  nature  is  only  his  robe 
of  glory,  and  is  expended  in  his  service.  In  con¬ 
trast  with  this  kind  of  exaltation,  that  which  the 
Hindu  religion  presents  is  only  that  of  indefini- 
tude.  In  virtue  of  the  prevailing  spirituality  the 
sensuous  and  immoral  are  no  longer  privileged, 
but  disparaged  as  ungodliness.  Only  the  One — 
Spirit — the  nonsensuous  is  the  truth;  Thought 
exists  free  for  itself,  and  true  morality  and 
righteousness  can  now  make  their  appearance; 
for  God  is  honoured  by  righteousness,  and  right¬ 
doing  is  “walking  in  the  way  of  the  Lord.”  With 
this  is  conjoined  happiness,  life  and  temporal 
prosperity  as  its  reward;  for  it  is  said:  “that 
thou  mayest  live  long  in  the  land.”  Here  too 
also  we  have  the  possibility  of  a  historical  view; 
for  the  understanding  has  become  prosaic ;  put¬ 
ting  the  limited  and  circumscribed  in  its  proper 
place,  and  comprehending  it  as  the  form  proper 
to  finite  existence:  Men  are  regarded  as  individ¬ 
uals,  not  as  incarnations  of  God;  sun  as  sun, 
mountains  as  mountains — not  as  possessing  spirit 
and  will. 

We  observe  among  this  people  a  severe  reli¬ 
gious  ceremonial,  expressing  a  relation  to  pure 
thought.  The  individual  as  concrete  does  not  be¬ 
come  free,  because  the  absolute  itself  is  not 
comprehended  as  concrete  spirit;  since  spirit 
still  appears  posited  as  non-spiritual — destitute 
of  its  proper  characteristics.  It  is  true  that  sub¬ 
jective  feeling  is  manifest — the  pure  heart,  re¬ 
pentance,  devotion ;  but  the  particular  concrete 
individuality  has  not  become  objective  to  itself 
in  the  absolute.  It  therefore  remains  closely 
bound  to  the  observance  of  ceremonies  and  of 
the  law,  the  basis  of  which  latteris  pure  freedom 
in  its  abstract  form.  The  Jews  possess  that 
which  makes  them  what  they  are,  through  the 
One:  consequently  the  individual  has  no  free¬ 
dom  for  itself.  Spinoza  regards  the  code  of 
Moses  as  having  been  given  by  God  to  the  Jews 
for  a  punishment — a  rod  of  correction.  The  in¬ 
dividual  never  comes  to  the  consciousness  of  in¬ 
dependence;  on  that  account  we  do  not  find 
among  the  Jews  any  belief  in  the  immortality 
of  the  soul;  for  individuality  does  not  exist  in 
and  for  itself.  But  though  in  Judaism  the  in¬ 
dividual  is  not  respected,  the  family  has  inher¬ 
ent  value;  for  the  worship  of  Jehovah  is  attached 
to  the  family,  and  it  is  consequently  viewed  as  a 
substantial  existence.  But  the  state  is  an  institu¬ 
tion  not  consonant  with  the  Judaistic  principle, 
and  it  is  alien  to  the  legislation  of  Moses.  In  the 
idea  of  the  Jews,  Jehovah  is  the  God  of  Abra¬ 
ham,  of  Isaac,  and  Jacob;  who  commanded 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  247 


them  to  depart  out  of  Egypt,  and  gave  them  the 
land  of  Canaan.  The  accounts  of  the  patriarchs 
attract  our  interest.  We  see  in  this  history  the 
transition  from  the  patriarchal  nomad  condi¬ 
tion  to  agriculture.  On  the  whole  the  Jewish  his¬ 
tory  exhibits  grand  features  of  character;  but 
it  is  disfigured  by  an  exclusive  bearing  (sanc¬ 
tioned  in  its  religion),  towards  the  genius  of 
other  nations  (the  destruction  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Canaan  being  even  commanded),  by  want  of 
culture  generally,  and  by  the  superstition  arising 
from  the  idea  of  the  high  value  of  their  peculiar 
nationality.  Miracles,  too,  form  a  disturbing 
feature  in  this  history — as  history;  for  as  far  as 
concrete  consciousness  is  not  free,  concrete  per¬ 
ception  is  also  not  free ;  nature  is  undeified,  but 
not  yet  understood. 

The  family  became  a  great  nation;  through 
the  conquest  of  Canaan,  it  took  a  whole  country 
into  possession;  and  erected  a  temple  for  the 
entire  people,  in  Jerusalem.  But  properly  speak¬ 
ing  no  political  union  existed.  In  case  of  national 
danger  heroes  arose,  who  placed  themselves  at 
the  head  of  the  armies ;  though  the  nation  dur¬ 
ing  this  period  was  for  the  most  part  in  subjec¬ 
tion.  Later  on,  kings  were  chosen,  and  it  was 
they  who  first  rendered  the  Jews  independent. 
David  even  made  conquests. Originally  the  legis¬ 
lation  is  adapted  to  a  family  only;  yet  in  the 
books  of  Moses  the  wish  for  a  king  is  antici¬ 
pated.  The  priests  are  to  choose  him :  he  is  not 
to  be  a  foreigner,  not  to  have  horsemen  in  large 
numbers,  and  he  is  to  have  few  wives.  After  a 
short  period  of  glory  the  kingdom  suffered  in¬ 
ternal  disruption  and  was  divided.  As  there  was 
only  one  tribe  of  Levites  and  one  temple,  i.e.,  in 
Jerusalem,  idolatry  was  immediately  introduced. 
The  one  God  could  not  be  honored  in  different 
temples,  and  there  could  not  be  two  kingdoms 
attached  to  one  religion.  However  spiritual  may 
be  the  conception  of  God  as  objective,  the  sub¬ 
jective  side,  the  honour  rendered  to  him,  is  still 
very  limited  and  unspiritual  in  character.  The 
two  kingdoms,  equally  infelicitous  in  foreign 
and  domestic  warfare,  were  at  last  subjected 
to  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians ;  through  Cy¬ 
rus  the  Israelites  obtained  permission  to  return 
home  and  live  according  to  their  own  laws. 

Egypt 

The  Persian  Empire  is  one  that  has  passed 
away,  and  we  have  nothing  but  melancholy  relics 
of  its  glory.  Its  fairest  and  richest  towns — such 
as  Babylon,  Susa,  Persepolis — are  razed  to  the 
ground ;  and  only  a  few  ruins  mark  their  ancient 
site  EveD  in  the  more  modern  great  cities  of 


Persia,  Ispahan  and  Shiraz,  half  of  them  has 
become  a  ruin;  and  they  have  not,  as  is  the  case 
with  ancient  Rome,  developed  a  new  life,  but 
have  lost  their  place  almost  entirely  in  the  re¬ 
membrance  of  the  surrounding  nations.  Besides 
the  other  lands  already  enumerated  as  belonging 
to  the  Persian  Empire,  Egypt  claims  notice, 
characteristically  the  land  of  ruins;  a  land 
which  from  hoar  antiquity  has  been  regarded 
with  wonder,  and  which  in  recent  times  also  has 
attracted  the  greatest  interest.  Its  ruins,  the  final 
result  of  immense  labour,  surpass  in  the  gigantic 
and  monstrous,  all  that  antiquity  has  left  us. 

In  Egypt  we  see  united  the  elements  which  in 
the  Persian  monarchy  appeared  singly.  We 
found  among  the  Persians  the  adoration  of  light, 
regarded  as  the  essence  of  universal  nature.  This 
principle  then  develops  itself  in  phases  which 
hold  a  position  of  indifference  towards  each 
other.  The  one  is  the  immersion  in  the  sensuous 
— among  the  Babylonians  and  Syrians;  the  other 
is  the  spiritual  phase,  which  is  twofold:  first 
as  the  incipient  consciousness  of  the  concrete 
spirit  in  the  worship  of  Adonis,  and  then  as  pure 
and  abstract  thought  among  the  Jews.  In  the 
former  the  concrete  is  deficient  in  unity;  in  the 
latter  the  concrete  is  altogether  wanting.  The 
next  problem  is  then,  to  harmonize  these  contra¬ 
dictory  elements ;  and  this  problem  presents  it¬ 
self  in  Egypt.  Of  the  representations  which 
Egyptian  antiquity  presents  us  with,  one  figure 
must  be  especially  noticed,  viz.,  the  Sphinx,  in 
itself  a  riddle,  an  ambiguous  form,  half  brute, 
half  human.  The  Sphinx  may  be  regarded  as  a 
symbol  of  the  Egyptian  spirit.  The  human  head 
looking  out  from  the  brute  body,  exhibits  spirit 
as  it  begins  to  emerge  from  the  merely  natural 
— to  tear  itself  loose  therefrom  and  already  to 
look  more  freely  around  it;  without,  however, 
entirely  freeing  itself  from  the  fetters  nature 
had  imposed.  The  innumerable  edifices  of  the 
Egyptians  are  half  below  the  ground,  and  half 
rise  above  it  into  the  air.  The  whole  land  is  di¬ 
vided  into  a  kingdom  of  life  and  a  kingdom  of 
death.  The  colossal  statue  of  Memnon  resounds 
at  the  first  glance  of  the  young  morning  sun; 
though  it  is  not  yet  the  free  light  of  spirit  with 
which  it  vibrates.  Written  language  is  still  a 
hieroglyphic ;  and  its  basis  is  only  the  sensuous 
image,  not  the  letter  itself. 

Thus  the  memorials  of  Egypt  themselves  give 
us  a  multitude  of  forms  and  images  that  express 
its  character;  we  recognize  a  spirit  in  them  which 
feels  itself  compressed;  which  utters  itself,  but 
only  in  a  sensuous  mode. 

Egypt  was  always  the  land  of  marvels,  and 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


has  remained  so  to  the  present  day.  It  is  from 
the  Greeks  especially  that  we  get  information 
respecting  it,  and  chiefly  from  Herodotus.  This 
intelligent  historiographer  himself  visited  the 
country  of  which  he  wished  to  give  an  account, 
and  at  its  chief  towns  made  acquaintance  with 
the  Egyptian  priests.  Of  all  that  he  saw  and 
heard,  he  gives  an  accurate  record;  but  the 
deeper  symbolism  of  the  Egyptian  mythology 
he  has  refrained  from  unfolding.  This  he  regards 
as  something  sacred,  and  respecting  which  he 
cannot  so  freely  speak  as  of  merely  external  ob¬ 
jects.  Besideshim  Diodorus  Siculusis  an  author¬ 
ity  of  great  importance;  and,  among  the  Jewish 
historians,  Josephus. 

In  their  architecture  and  hieroglyphics,  the 
thoughts  and  conceptions  of  the  Egyptians  are 
expressed.  A  national  work  in  the  department  of 
language  is  wanting:  and  that  not  only  to  us,  but 
to  the  Egyptians  themselves;  they  could  not 
have  any,  because  they  had  not  advanced  to  an 
understanding  of  themselves.  Nor  was  there  any 
Egyptian  history,  until  at  last  Ptolemy  Philadel- 
phus,  he  who  had  the  sacred  books  of  the  Jews 
translated  into  Greek,  prompted  the  high-priest 
Manetho  to  write  an  Egyptian  history.  Of  this 
we  have  only  extracts,  list  of  kings,  which  how¬ 
ever  have  occasioned  the  greatest  perplexities 
and  contradictory  views.  To  become  acquainted 
with  Egypt,  we  must  for  the  most  part  have  re¬ 
course  to  the  notices  of  the  ancients,  and  the 
immense  monuments  that  are  left  us.  We  find  a 
number  of  granite  walls  on  which  hieroglyphics 
are  graved,  and  the  ancients  have  given  us  ex¬ 
planations  of  some  of  them,  but  which  are  quite 
insufficient.  In  recent  times  attention  has  espe¬ 
cially  been  recalled  to  them,  and  after  many 
efforts  something  at  least  of  the  hieroglyphic 
writing  has  been  deciphered.  The  celebrated 
Englishman,  Thomas  Young,  first  suggested  a 
method  of  discovery,  and  called  attention  to  the 
fact,  that  there  are  small  surfaces  separated 
from  the  other  hieroglyphics,  and  in  which  a 
Greek  translation  is  perceptible.  By  comparison 
Young  made  out  three  names — Berenice,  Cleo¬ 
patra,  and  Ptolemy,  and  this  was  the  first  step 
is  deciphering  them.  It  was  found  at  a  later 
date,  that  a  great  part  of  the  hieroglyphics  are 
phonetic,  that  is,  express  sounds.  Thus  the  figure 
of  an  eye  denotes  first  the  eye  itself,  but  second¬ 
ly  the  first  letter  of  the  Egyptian  word  that 
means  “eye,”  (as  in  Hebrew  the  figure  of  a 
house,  a,  denotes  the  letter  b,  with  which  the 
word  n-i3,  house,  begins).  The  celebrated 
Champollion  (the  younger),  first  called  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  fact  that  the  phonetic  hieroglyphs 


are  intermingled  with  those  which  mark  concep¬ 
tions;  and  thus  classified  the  hieroglyphs  and 
established  settled  principles  for  deciphering 
them. 

The  history  of  Egypt,  as  we  have  it,  is  full  of 
the  greatest  contradictions.  The  mythical  is 
blended  with  the  historical,  and  the  statements 
are  as  diverse  as  can  be  imagined.  European 
literati  have  eagerly  investigated  the  lists  given 
by  Manetho  and  have  relied  upon  them,  and 
several  names  of  kings  have  been  confirmed  by 
the  recent  discoveries.  Herodotus  says  that  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  statements  of  the  priests,  gods 
had  formerly  reigned  over  Egypt,  and  that  from 
the  first  human  king  down  to  the  King  Sethos 
341  generations,  or  11,340  years,  had  passed 
away;  but  that  the  first  human  ruler  was  Menes 
(the  resemblance  of  the  name  to  the  Greek 
Minos  and  the  Hindu  Manu  is  striking).  With 
the  exception  of  the  Thebaid,  its  most  southern 
part,  Egypt  was  said  by  them  to  have  formed 
a  lake;  the  delta  presents  reliable  evidence  of 
having  been  produced  by  the  silt  of  the  Nile. 
As  the  Dutch  have  gained  their  territory  from 
the  sea,  and  have  found  means  to  sustain  them¬ 
selves  upon  it;  so  the  Egyptians  first  acquired 
their  country,  and  maintained  its  fertility  by 
canals  and  lakes.  An  important  feature  in  the 
history  of  Egypt  is  its  descent  from  Upper  to 
Lower  Egypt,  from  the  south  to  the  north.  With 
this  is  connected  the  consideration  that  Egypt 
probably  received  its  culture  from  Ethiopia; 
principally  from  the  island  Meroe,  which,  ac¬ 
cording  to  recent  hypotheses,  was  occupied  by 
a  sacerdotal  people.  Thebes  in  Upper  Egypt  was 
the  most  ancient  residence  of  the  Egyptian 
kings.  Even  in  Herodotus’s  time  it  was  in  a  state 
of  dilapidation.  The  ruins  of  this  city  present 
the  most  enormous  specimens  of  Egyptian 
architecture  that  we  are  acquainted  with.  Con¬ 
sidering  their  antiquity  they  are  remarkably  well 
preserved:  which  is  partly  owing  to  the  perpet¬ 
ually  cloudless  sky.  The  centre  of  the  kingdom 
was  then  transferred  to  Memphis,  not  far  from 
the  modern  Cairo;  and  lastly  to  Sais,  in  the 
delta  itself.  The  structures  that  occur  in  the 
locality  of  this  city  are  of  very  late  date  and 
imperfectly  preserved.  Herodotus  tells  us  that 
Memphis  was  referred  to  so  remote  a  founder  as 
Menes.  Among  the  later  kings  must  be  especial¬ 
ly  noticed  Sesostris,  who,  according  to  Cham¬ 
pollion,  is  Ramses  the  Great.  To  him  in  particu¬ 
lar  are  referred  a  number  of  monuments  and 
pictures  in  which  are  depicted  his  triumphal 
processions,  and  the  captives  taken  in  battle. 
Herodotus  speaks  of  his  conquests  in  Syria,  ex- 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  249 


tending  even  to  Colchis;  and  illustrates  his 
statement  by  the  great  similarity  between  the 
manners  of  the  Colchians  and  those  of  the  Egyp¬ 
tians;  these  two  nations  and  the  Ethiopians 
were  the  only  ones  that  had  always  practised 
circumcision.  Herodotus  says,  moreover,  that 
Sesostris  had  vast  canals  dug  through  the  whole 
of  Egypt,  which  served  to  convey  the  water  of 
the  Nile  to  every  part.  It  may  be  generally  re¬ 
marked  that  the  more  provident  the  govern¬ 
ment  in  Egypt  was,  so  much  the  more  regard 
did  it  pay  to  the  maintenance  of  the  canals, 
while  under  negligent  governments  the  desert 
got  the  upper  hand;  for  Egypt  was  engaged  in  a 
constant  struggle  with  the  fierceness  of  the  heat 
and  with  the  water  of  the  Nile.  It  appears  from 
Herodotus,  that  the  country  had  become  im¬ 
passable  for  cavalry  in  consequence  of  the 
canals ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  we  see  from  the 
books  of  Moses,  how  celebrated  Egypt  once  was 
in  this  respect.  Moses  says  that  if  the  Jews  de¬ 
sired  a  king,  he  must  not  marry  too  many  wives, 
nor  send  for  horses  from  Egypt. 

Next  to  Sesostris  the  Kings  Cheops  and  Che- 
phren  deserve  special  mention.  They  are  said  to 
have  built  enormous  pyramids  and  closed  the 
temples  of  the  priests.  A  son  of  Cheops,  Myceri- 
nus,  is  said  to  have  reopened  them;  after  him 
the  Ethiopians  invaded  the  country,  and  their 
king,  Sabaco,  made  himself  sovereign  of  Egypt. 
But  Anysis,  the  successor  of  Mycerinus,  fled 
into  the  marshes — to  the  mouth  of  the  Nile; 
only  after  the  departure  of  the  Ethiopians  did 
he  make  his  appearance  again.  He  was  succeed¬ 
ed  by  Setho,  who  had  been  a  priest  of  Phtha 
(supposed  to  be  the  same  as  Hephaestus) :  un¬ 
der  his  government,  Sennacherib,  King  of  the 
Assyrians,  invaded  the  country.  Setho  had  al¬ 
ways  treated  the  warrior-caste  with  great  dis¬ 
respect,  and  even  robbed  them  of  their  lands; 
and  when  he  invoked  their  assistance,  they  re¬ 
fused  it.  He  was  obliged  therefore  to  issue  a 
general  summons  to  the  Egyptians,  and  assem¬ 
bled  a  host  composed  of  hucksters,  artisans,  and 
market  people.  In  the  Bible  we  are  told  that  the 
enemies  fled,  and  that  it  was  the  angels  who 
routed  them;  but  Herodotus  relates  that  field- 
mice  came  in  the  night  and  knawed  the  quivers 
and  bows  of  the  enemy,  so  that  the  latter,  de¬ 
prived  of  their  weapons,  were  compelled  to  flee. 
After  the  death  of  Setho,  the  Egyptians  (He¬ 
rodotus  tells  us),  regarded  themselves  as  free, 
and  chose  themselves  twelve  kings,  who  formed 
a  federal  union — as  a  symbol  of  which  they 
built  the  Labyrinth,  consisting  of  an  immense 
number  of  rooms  and  halls  above  and  below 


ground.  In  the  year  650  b.c.  one  of  these  kings, 
Psammetichus,  with  the  help  of  the  Ionians  and 
Carians  (to  whom  he  promised  land  in  Lower 
Egypt),  expelled  the  eleven  other  kings.  Till 
that  time  Egypt  had  remained  secluded  from 
the  rest  of  the  world,  and  at  sea  it  had  estab¬ 
lished  no  connection  with  other  nations.  Psam¬ 
metichus  commenced  such  a  connection,  and 
thereby  led  the  way  to  the  ruin  of  Egypt.  From 
this  point  the  history  becomes  clearer,  because 
it  is  based  on  Greek  accounts.  Psammetichus 
was  followed  by  Necho,  who  began  to  dig  a 
canal,  which  was  to  unite  the  Nile  with  the  Red 
Sea,  but  which  was  not  completed  until  the 
reign  of  Darius  Nothus.  The  plan  of  uniting 
the  Mediterranean  Sea  with  the  Arabian  Gulf, 
and  the  wide  ocean,  is  not  so  advantageous  as 
might  be  supposed;  since  in  the  Red  Sea,  which 
on  other  accounts  is  very  difficult  to  navigate, 
there  prevails  for  about  nine  months  in  the  year 
a  constant  north  wind,  so  that  it  is  only  during 
three  months  that  the  passage  from  south  to 
north  is  feasible.  Necho  was  followed  by  Psam- 
mis,  and  the  latter  by  Apries,  who  led  an  army 
against  Sidon,  and  engaged  with  the  Tyrians  by 
sea:  against  Cyrene  also  he  sent  an  army,  which 
was  almost  annihilated  by  the  Cyrenians.  The 
Egyptians  rebelled  against  him,  accusing  him  of 
wishing  to  lead  them  to  destruction;  but  this 
revolt  was  probably  caused  by  the  favor  shown 
by  him  to  the  Carians  and  Ionians.  Amasis 
placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  rebels,  con¬ 
quered  the  king,  and  possessed  himself  of  the 
throne.  By  Herodotus  he  is  depicted  as  a  hu¬ 
morous  monarch,  who,  however,  did  not  always 
maintain  the  dignity  of  the  throne.  From  a  very 
humble  station  he  had  raised  himself  to  royalty 
by  ability,  astuteness,  and  intelligence,  and  he 
exhibited  in  all  other  relations  the  same  keen 
understanding.  In  the  morning  he  held  his  court 
of  judicature,  and  listened  to  the  complaints 
of  the  people;  but  in  the  afternoon,  feasted  and 
surrendered  himself  to  pleasure.  To  his  friends, 
who  blamed  him  on  this  account,  and  told  him 
that  he  ought  to  give  the  whole  day  to  business, 
he  made  answer:  “If  the  bow  is  constantly  on 
the  stretch,  it  becomes  useless  or  breaks.”  As 
the  Egyptians  thought  less  of  him  on  account 
of  his  mean  descent,  he  had  a  golden  basin,  used 
for  washing  the  feet,  made  into  the  image  of  a 
god  in  high  honour  among  the  Egyptians ;  this  he 
meant  as  a  symbol  of  his  own  elevation.  He¬ 
rodotus  relates,  moreover,  that  he  indulged  in 
excesses  as  a  private  man,  dissipated  the  whole 
of  his  property,  and  then  betook  himself  to 
stealing.  This  contrast  of  a  vulgar  soul  and  a 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


250 

keen  intellect  is  characteristic  in  an  Egyptian 
king. 

Amasis  drew  down  upon  him  the  ill-will  of 
King  Cambyses.  Cyrus  desired  an  oculist  from 
the  Egyptians;  for  at  that  time  the  Egyptian 
oculists  were  very  famous,  their  skill  having 
been  called  out  by  the  numerous  eye-diseases 
prevalent  in  Egypt.  This  oculist,  to  revenge 
himself  for  having  been  sent  out  of  the  country, 
advised  Cambyses  to  ask  for  the  daughter  of 
Amasis  in  marriage ;  knowing  well  that  Amasis 
would  either  be  rendered  unhappy  by  giving  her 
to  him,  or  on  the  other  hand,  incur  the  wrath  of 
Cambyses  by  refusing.  Amasis  would  not  give 
his  daughter  to  Cambyses,  because  the  latter 
desired  her  as  an  inferior  wife  (for  his  lawful 
spouse  must  be  a  Persian) ;  but  sent  him,  under 
the  name  of  his  own  daughter,  that  of  Apries, 
who  afterwards  discovered  her  real  name  to 
Cambyses.  The  latter  was  so  incensed  at  the  de¬ 
ception,  that  he  led  an  expedition  against  Egypt, 
conquered  that  country,  and  united  it  with  the 
Persian  Empire. 

As  to  the  Egyptian  spirit,  it  deserves  mention 
here,  that  the  Elians  in  Herodotus’s  narrative 
call  the  Egyptians  the  wisest  of  mankind.  It 
also  surprises  us  to  find  among  them,  in  the 
vicinity  of  African  stupidity,  reflective  intelli¬ 
gence,  a  thoroughly  rational  organization  char¬ 
acterizing  all  institutions,  and  most  astonishing 
works  of  art.  The  Egyptians  were,  like  the  Hin¬ 
dus,  divided  into  castes,  and  the  children  always 
continued  the  trade  and  business  of  their  par¬ 
ents.  On  this  account,  also,  the  mechanical  and 
technical  in  the  arts  was  so  much  developed 
here;  while  the  hereditary  transmission  of  oc¬ 
cupations  did  not  produce  the  same  disadvan¬ 
tageous  results  in  the  character  of  the  Egyptians 
as  in  India.  Herodotus  mentions  the  seven  fol¬ 
lowing  castes:  the  priests,  the  warriors,  the 
neatherds,  the  swineherds,  the  merchants  (or 
trading  population  generally),  the  interpreters 
— who  seem  only  at  a  later  date  to  have  consti¬ 
tuted  a  separate  class — and,  lastly,  the  seafar¬ 
ing  class.  Agriculturists  are  not  named  here, 
probably  because  agriculture  was  the  occupa¬ 
tion  of  several  castes,  as,  e.g.,  the  warriors,  to 
whom  a  portion  of  the  land  was  given.  Diodo¬ 
rus  and  Strabo  give  a  different  account  of  these 
caste-divisions.  Only  priests,  warriors,  herds¬ 
men,  agriculturists,  and  artificers  are  mentioned, 
to  which  latter,  perhaps,  tradesmen  also  belong. 
Herodotus  says  of  the  priests,  that  they  in  par¬ 
ticular  received  arable  land,  and  had  it  culti¬ 
vated  for  rent;  for  the  land  generally  was  in  the 
possession  of  the  priests,  warriors,  and  kings. 


Joseph  was  a  minister  of  the  king,  according  to 
Holy  Scripture,  and  contrived  to  make  him 
master  of  all  landed  property.  But  the  several 
occupations  did  not  remain  so  stereotyped  as 
among  the  Hindus;  for  we  find  the  Israelites, 
who  were  originally  herdsmen,  employed  also 
as  manual  labourers:  and  there  was  a  king,  as 
stated  above,  who  formed  an  army  of  manual 
labourers  alone.  The  castes  are  not  rigidly  fixed, 
but  struggle  with  and  come  into  contact  with  one 
another:  we  often  find  cases  of  their  being  brok¬ 
en  up  and  in  a  state  of  rebellion.  The  warrior- 
caste,  at  one  time  discontented  on  account 
of  their  not  being  released  from  their  abodes  in 
the  direction  of  Nubia,  and  desperate  at  not  be¬ 
ing  able  to  make  use  of  their  lands,  betake  them¬ 
selves  to  Meroe,  and  foreign  mercenaries  are 
introduced  into  the  country. 

Of  the  mode  of  life  among  the  Egyptians, 
Herodotus  supplies  a  very  detailed  account,  giv¬ 
ing  prominence  to  everything  which  appears  to 
him  to  deviate  from  Greek  manners.  Thus  the 
Egyptians  had  physicians  specially  devoted  to 
particular  diseases ;  the  women  were  engaged  in 
outdoor  occupations,  while  the  men  remained 
at  home  to  weave.  In  one  part  of  Egypt  polyg¬ 
amy  prevailed;  in  another,  monogamy;  the 
women  had  but  one  garment,  the  men  two ;  they 
wash  and  bathe  much,  and  undergo  purification 
every  month.  All  this  points  to  a  condition  of 
settled  peace.  As  to  arrangements  of  police,  the 
law  required  that  every  Egyptian  should  present 
himself,  at  a  time  appointed,  before  the  super¬ 
intendent  under  whom  he  lived,  and  state  from 
what  resources  he  obtained  his  livelihood.  If  he 
could  not  refer  to  any,  he  was  punished  with 
death.  This  law,  however,  was  of  no  earlier  date 
than  Amasis.  The  greatest  care,  moreover,  was 
observed  in  the  division  of  the  arable  land,  as 
also  in  planning  canals  and  dikes;  under  Sha- 
bako,  the  Ethiopian  king,  says  Herodotus,  many 
cities  were  elevated  by  dikes. 

The  business  of  courts  of  justice  was  admin¬ 
istered  with  very  great  care.  They  consisted  of 
thirty  judges  nominated  by  the  district,  and  who 
chose  their  own  president.  Pleadings  were  con¬ 
ducted  in  writing,  and  proceeded  as  far  as  the 
“rejoinder.”  Diodorus  thinks  this  plan  very  ef¬ 
fectual,  in  obviating  the  perverting  influence  of 
forensic  oratory,  and  of  the  sympathy  of  the 
judges.  The  latter  pronounced  sentence  silently, 
and  in  a  hieroglyphical  manner.  Herodotus  says, 
that  they  had  a  symbol  of  truth  on  their  breasts, 
and  turned  it  towards  that  side  in  whose  favor 
the  cause  was  decided,  or  adorned  the  victorious 
party  with  it.  The  king  himself  had  to  take  part 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  251 


in  judicial  business  every  day.  Theft,  we  are 
told,  was  forbidden;  but  the  law  commanded 
that  thieves  should  inform  against  themselves. 
If  they  did  so,  they  were  not  punished,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  were  allowed  to  keep  a  fourth  part 
of  what  they  had  stolen.  This  perhaps  was  de¬ 
signed  to  excite  and  keep  in  exercise  that  cun¬ 
ning  for  which  the  Egyptians  were  so  celebrated. 

The  intelligence  displayed  in  their  legislative 
economy,  appears  characteristic  of  the  Egyp¬ 
tians.  This  intelligence,  which  manifests  itself 
in  the  practical,  we  also  recognize  in  the  pro¬ 
ductions  of  art  and  science.  The  Egyptians  are 
reported  to  have  divided  the  year  into  twelve 
months,  and  each  month  into  thirty  days.  At  the 
end  of  the  year  they  intercalated  five  additional 
days,  and  Herodotus  says  that  their  arrange¬ 
ment  was  better  than  that  of  the  Greeks.  The 
intelligence  of  the  Egyptians  especially  strikes 
us  in  the  department  of  mechanics.  Their  vast 
edifices — such  as  no  other  nation  has  to  exhibit, 
and  which  excel  all  others  in  solidity  and  size — 
sufficiently  prove  their  artistic  skill;  to  whose 
cultivation  they  could  largely  devote  them¬ 
selves,  because  the  inferior  castes  did  not  trou¬ 
ble  themselves  with  political  matters.  Diodorus 
Siculus  says,  that  Egypt  was  the  only  country  in 
which  the  citizens  did  not  trouble  themselves 
about  the  state,  but  gave  their  whole  attention 
to  their  private  business.  Greeks  and  Romans 
must  have  been  especially  astonished  at  such  a 
state  of  things. 

On  account  of  its  judicious  economy,  Egypt 
was  regarded  by  the  ancients  as  the  pattern  of 
a  morally  regulated  condition  of  things — as  an 
ideal  such  as  Pythagoras  realized  in  a  limited 
select  society,  and  Plato  sketched  on  a  larger 
scale.  But  in  such  ideals  no  account  is  taken  of 
passion.  A  plan  of  society  that  is  to  be  adopted 
and  acted  upon,  as  an  absolutely  complete  one 
— in  which  everything  has  been  considered,  and 
especially  the  education  and  habituation  to  it, 
necessary  to  its  becoming  a  second  nature — is 
altogether  opposed  to  the  nature  of  spirit,  which 
makes  contemporary  life  the  object  on  which  it 
acts ;  itself  being  the  infinite  impulse  of  activity 
to  alter  its  forms.  This  impulse  also  expressed 
itself  in  Egypt  in  a  peculiar  way.  It  would  ap¬ 
pear  at  first  as  if  a  condition  of  things  so  regu¬ 
lar,  so  determinate  in  every  particular,  contained 
nothing  that  had  a  peculiarity  entirely  its  own. 
The  introduction  of  a  religious  element  would 
seem  to  be  an  affair  of  no  critical  moment,  pro¬ 
vided  the  higher  necessities  of  men  were  satis¬ 
fied;  we  should  in  fact  rather  expect  that  it 
would  be  introduced  in  a  peaceful  way  and  in  ac¬ 


cordance  with  the  moral  arrangement  of  things 
already  mentioned.  But  in  contemplating  the  re¬ 
ligion  of  the  Egyptians,  we  are  surprised  by  the 
strangest  and  most  wonderful  phenomena,  and 
perceive  that  this  calm  order  of  things,  bound 
fast  by  legislative  enactment,  is  not  like  that 
of  the  Chinese,  but  that  we  have  here  to  do  with 
a  spirit  entirely  different — one  full  of  stirring 
and  urgent  impulses.  We  have  here  the  African 
element,  in  combination  with  Oriental  massive¬ 
ness,  transplanted  to  the  Mediterranean  Sea, 
that  grand  locale  of  the  display  of  nationalities ; 
but  in  such  a  manner,  that  here  there  is  no  con¬ 
nection  with  foreign  nations — this  mode  of  stim¬ 
ulating  intellect  appearing  superfluous;  for  we 
have  here  a  prodigious  urgent  striving  within 
the  nationality  itself,  and  which  within  its  own 
circle  shoots  out  into  an  objective  realization  of 
itself  in  the  most  monstrous  productions.  It  is 
that  African  imprisonment  of  ideas  combined 
with  the  infinite  impulse  of  the  spirit  to  realize 
itself  objectively,  which  we  find  here.  But  spirit 
has  still,  as  it  were,  an  iron  band  around  its 
forehead;  so  that  it  cannot  attain  to  the  free 
consciousness  of  its  existence,  but  produces  this 
only  as  the  problem,  the  enigma  of  its  being. 

The  fundamental  conception  of  that  which 
the  Egyptians  regard  as  the  essence  of  being, 
rests  on  the  determinate  character  of  the  natural 
world,  in  which  they  live ;  and  more  particularly 
on  the  determinate  physical  circle  which  the 
Nile  and  the  sun  mark  out.  These  two  are  strict¬ 
ly  connected — the  position  of  the  sun  and  that 
of  the  Nile ;  and  to  the  Egyptian  this  is  all  in  all. 
The  Nile  is  that  which  essentially  determines 
the  boundaries  of  the  country ;  beyond  the  Nile- 
valley  begins  the  desert ;  on  the  north,  Egypt  is 
shut  in  by  the  sea,  and  on  the  south  by  torrid 
heat.  The  first  Arab  leader  that  conquered 
Egypt,  writes  to  the  Caliph  Omar:  “Egypt  is  first 
a  vast  sea  of  dust;  then  a  sea  of  fresh  water; 
lastly,  it  is  a  great  sea  of  flowers.  It  never  rains 
there;  towards  the  end  of  July  dew  falls,  and 
then  the  Nile  begins  to  overflow  its  banks,  and 
Egypt  resembles  a  sea  of  islands.”  (Herodotus 
compares  Egypt,  during  this  period,  with  the  is¬ 
lands  in  the  ^Egean.)  The  Nile  leaves  behind  it 
prodigious  multitudes  of  living  creatures:  then 
appear  moving  and  creeping  things  innumer¬ 
able;  soon  after,  man  begins  to  sow  the  ground, 
and  the  harvest  is  very  abundant.  Thus  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  Egyptian  does  not  depend  on  the 
brightness  of  the  sun,  or  the  quantity  of  rain. 
For  him,  on  the  contrary,  there  exist  only  those 
perfectly  simple  conditions,  which  form  the 
basis  of  his  mode  of  life  and  its  occupations. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


25* 

There  is  a  definite  physical  cycle,  which  the  Nile 
pursues,  and  which  is  connected  with  the  course 
of  the  sun;  the  latter  advances,  reaches  its  cul¬ 
mination,  and  then  retrogrades.  So  also  does  the 
Nile. 

This  basis  of  the  life  of  the  Egyptians  deter¬ 
mines  moreover  the  particular  tenor  of  their  re¬ 
ligious  views.  A  controversy  has  long  been  waged 
respecting  the  sense  of  meaning  of  the  Egyptian 
religion.  As  early  as  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  the 
Stoic  Chaeremon,  who  had  been  in  Egypt,  ex¬ 
plains  it  in  a  purely  materialistic  sense.  The 
new  Platonists  take  a  directly  opposite  view,  re¬ 
garding  all  as  symbols  of  a  spiritual  meaning, 
and  thus  making  this  religion  a  pure  idealism. 
Each  of  these  representations  is  one-sided.  Nat¬ 
ural  and  spiritual  powers  are  regarded  as  most 
intimately  united — (the  free  spiritual  import, 
however,  has  not  been  developed  at  this  stage  of 
thought) — but  in  such  a  way,  that  the  extremes 
of  the  antithesis  were  united  in  the  harshest  con¬ 
trast.  We  have  spoken  of  the  Nile,  of  the  sun, 
and  of  the  vegetation  depending  upon  them.  This 
limited  view  of  nature  gives  the  principle  of 
the  religion,  and  its  subject-matter  is  primarily 
a  history.  The  Nile  and  the  sun  constitute  the 
divinities,  conceived  under  human  forms;  and 
the  course  of  nature  and  the  mythological  his¬ 
tory  is  the  same.  In  the  winter  solstice  the  power 
of  the  sun  has  reached  its  minimum,  and  must 
be  born  anew.  Thus  also  Osiris  appears  as  born ; 
but  he  is  killed  by  Typhon,  his  brother  and 
enemy,  the  burning  wind  of  the  desert.  Isis,  the 
earth,  from  whom  the  aid  of  the  sun  and  of  the 
Nile  has  been  withdrawn,  yearns  after  him:  she 
gathers  the  scattered  bones  of  Osiris,  and  raises 
her  lamentation  for  him,  and  all  Egypt  bewails 
with  her  the  death  of  Osiris,  in  a  song  which 
Herodotus  calls  Maneros.  Maneros  he  reports 
to  have  been  the  only  son  of  the  first  king  of  the 
Egyptians,  and  to  have  died  prematurely;  this 
song  being  also  the  Linus-Song  of  the  Greeks, 
and  the  only  song  which  the  Egyptians  have. 
Here  again  pain  is  regarded  as  something  divine, 
and  the  same  honour  is  assigned  to  it  here  as 
among  the  Phoenicians.  Hermes  then  embalms 
Osiris;  and  his  grave  is  shown  in  various  places. 
Osiris  is  now  judge  of  the  dead,  and  lord  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  shades.  These  are  the  leading 
ideas.  Osiris,  the  sun,  the  Nile;  this  triplicity 
of  being  is  united  in  one  knot.  The  sun  is  the 
symbol,  in  which  Osiris  and  the  history  of  that 
god  are  recognized,  and  the  Nile  is  likewise  such 
a  symbol.  The  concrete  Egyptian  imagination 
also  ascribes  to  Osiris  and  Isis  the  introduction 
of  agriculture,  the  invention  of  the  plough,  the 


hoe,  etc.;  for  Osiris  gives  not  only  the  useful 
itself — the  fertility  of  the  earth — but,  more¬ 
over,  the  means  of  making  use  of  it.  He  also 
gives  men  laws,  a  civil  order  and  a  religious  rit¬ 
ual;  he  thus  places  in  men’s  hands  the  means  of 
labour,  and  secures  its  result.  Osiris  is  also  the 
symbol  of  the  seed  w7hich  is  placed  in  the  earth, 
and  then  springs  up — as  also  of  the  course  of 
life.  Thus  we  find  this  heterogeneous  duality, 
the  phenomena  of  nature  and  the  spiritual,  wov¬ 
en  together  into  one  knot. 

The  parallelism  of  the  course  of  human  life 
with  the  Nile,  the  sun,  and  Osiris,  is  not  to  be 
regarded  as  a  mere  allegory — as  if  the  principle 
of  birth,  of  increase  in  strength,  of  the  culmina¬ 
tion  of  vigour  and  fertility,  of  decline  and  weak¬ 
ness,  exhibited  itself  in  these  different  phenom¬ 
ena,  in  an  equal  or  similar  way;  but  in  this  va¬ 
riety  imagination  conceived  only  one  subject, 
one  vitality.  This  unity  is,  however,  quite  ab¬ 
stract:  the  heterogeneous  element  shows  itself 
therein  as  pressing  and  urging,  and  in  a  con¬ 
fusion  which  sharply  contrasts  with  Greek  per¬ 
spicuity.  Osiris  represents  the  Nile  and  the  sun: 
sun  and  Nile  are,  on  the  other  hand,  symbols  of 
human  life — each  one  is  signification  and  sym¬ 
bol  at  the  same  time ;  the  symbol  is  changed  into 
signification,  and  this  latter  becomes  symbol  of 
that  symbol,  which  itself  then  becomes  significa¬ 
tion.  None  of  these  phases  of  existence  is  a  type 
without  being  at  the  same  time  a  signification ; 
each  is  both;  the  one  is  explained  by  the  other. 
Thus  there  arises  one  pregnant  conception,  com¬ 
posed  of  many  conceptions,  in  which  each  fun¬ 
damental  nodus  retains  its  individuality,  so  that 
they  are  not  resolved  into  a  general  idea.  The 
general  idea — the  thought  itself,  which  forms 
the  bond  of  analogy — does  not  present  itself 
to  the  consciousness  purely  and  freely  as  such, 
but  remains  concealed  as  an  internal  connection. 
We  have  a  consolidated  individuality,  combin¬ 
ing  various  phenomenal  aspects;  and  which  on 
the  one  hand  is  fanciful,  on  account  of  the  com¬ 
bination  of  apparently  disparate  material,  but 
on  the  other  hand  internally  and  essentially  con¬ 
nected,  because  these  various  appearances  are  a 
particular  prosaic  matter  of  fact. 

Besides  this  fundamental  conception,  we  ob¬ 
serve  several  special  divinities,  of  whom  He¬ 
rodotus  reckons  three  classes.  Of  the  first  he 
mentions  eight  gods;  of  the  second  twelve;  of 
the  third  an  indefinite  number,  who  occupy  the 
position  towards  the  unity  of  Osiris  of  specific 
manifestations.  In  the  first  class,  fire  and  its  use 
appears  as  Phtha,  also  as  Knef,  who  is  besides 
represented  as  the  Good  Genius;  but  the  Nile 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  253 


itself  is  held  to  be  that  Genius,  and  thus  abstrac¬ 
tions  are  changed  into  concrete  conceptions. 
Ammon  is  regarded  as  a  great  divinity,  with 
whom  is  associated  the  determination  of  the 
equinox:  it  is  he,  moreover,  who  gives  oracles. 
But  Osiris  is  similarly  represented  as  the  found¬ 
er  of  oracular  manifestations.  So  the  procreative 
power,  banished  by  Osiris,  is  represented  as  a 
particular  divinity.  But  Osiris  is  himself  this 
procreative  power.  Isis  is  the  earth,  the  moon, 
the  receptive  fertility  of  nature.  As  an  impor¬ 
tant  element  in  the  conception  Osiris,  Anubis 
( Thoth ) — the  Egyptian  Hermes — must  be  spe¬ 
cially  noticed.  In  human  activity  and  invention, 
and  in  the  economy  of  legislation,  the  spiritual, 
as  such,  is  embodied;  and  becomes  in  this  form, 
which  is  itself  determinate  and  limited,  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  consciousness.  Here  we  have  the  spirit¬ 
ual,  not  as  one  infinite,  independent  sovereignty 
over  nature,  but  as  a  particular  existence,  side 
by  side  with  the  powers  of  nature — characterized 
also  by  intrinsic  particularity.  And  thus  the 
Egyptians  had  also  specific  divinities,  conceived 
as  spiritual  activities  and  forces;  but  partly  in¬ 
trinsically  limited — partly  contemplated  under 
natural  symbols. 

The  Egyptian  Hermes  is  celebrated  as  exhib¬ 
iting  the  spiritual  side  of  their  theism.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  Iamblichus,  the  Egyptian  priests  imme- 
morially  prefixed  to  all  their  inventions  the 
name  Hermes:  Eratosthenes,  therefore,  called 
his  book,  which  treated  of  the  entire  science  of 
Egypt,  Hermes.  Anubis  is  called  the  friend  and 
companion  of  Osiris.  To  him  is  ascribed  the 
invention  of  writing,  and  of  science  generally 
— of  grammar,  astronomy,  mensuration,  music, 
and  medicine.  It  was  he  who  first  divided  the 
day  into  twelve  hours:  he  was  moreover  the 
first  lawgiver,  the  first  instructor  in  religious  ob¬ 
servances  and  objects,  and  in  gymnastics  and 
orchestics;  and  it  was  he  who  discovered  the 
olive.  But,  notwithstanding  all  these  spiritual 
attributes,  this  divinity  is  something  quite  other 
than  the  god  of  thought.  Only  particular  human 
arts  and  inventions  are  associated  with  him. 
Not  only  so;  but  he  entirely  falls  back  into 
involvement  in  existence,  and  is  degraded  under 
physical  symbols.  He  is  represented  with  a  dog’s 
head,  as  animbruted  god;  and  besides  this  mask, 
a  particular  natural  object  is  bound  up  with 
the  conception  of  this  divinity;  for  he  is  at  the 
same  time  Sirius,  the  dog-star.  He  is  thus  as 
limited  in  respect  of  what  he  embodies,  as  sensu¬ 
ous  in  the  positive  existence  ascribed  to  him.  It 
may  be  incidentally  remarked,  that  as  ideas  and 
nature  are  not  distinguished  from  each  other,  in 


the  same  way  the  arts  and  appliances  of  human 
life  are  not  developed  and  arranged  so  as  to 
form  a  rational  circle  of  aims  and  means.  Thus 
medicine,  deliberation  respecting  corporeal  dis¬ 
ease,  as  also  the  whole  range  of  deliberation  and 
resolve  with  regard  to  undertakings  in  life,  was 
subjected  to  the  most  multifarious  superstition 
in  the  way  of  reliance  on  oracles  and  magic  arts. 
Astronomy  was  also  essentially  astrology,  and 
medicine  an  affair  of  magic,  but  more  particu¬ 
larly  of  astrology.  All  astrological  and  sympa¬ 
thetic  superstition  may  be  traced  to  Egypt. 

Egyptian  worship  is  chiefly  zoolatry.  We  have 
observed  the  union  here  presented  between  the 
spiritual  and  the  natural:  the  more  advanced 
and  elevated  side  of  this  conception  is  the  fact 
that  the  Egyptians,  while  they  observed  the 
spiritual  as  manifested  in  the  Nile,  the  sun,  and 
the  sowing  of  seed,  took  the  same  view  of  the 
life  of  animals.  To  us  zoolatry  is  repulsive.  We 
may  reconcile  ourselves  to  the  adoration  of  the 
material  heaven,  but  the  worship  of  brutes  is 
alien  to  us;  for  the  abstract  natural  element 
seems  to  us  more  generic,  and  therefore  more 
worthy  of  veneration.  Yet  it  is  certain  that  the 
nations  who  worshipped  the  sun  and  the  stars 
by  no  means  occupy  a  higher  grade  than  those 
who  adore  brutes,  but  contrariwise;  for  in  the 
brute  world  the  Egyptians  contemplate  a  hidden 
and  incomprehensible  principle.  We  also,  when 
we  contemplate  the  life  and  action  of  brutes, 
are  astonished  at  their  instinct,  the  adaptation 
of  their  movements  to  the  object  intended,  their 
restlessness,  excitability,  and  liveliness ;  for  they 
are  exceedingly  quick  and  discerning  in  pursuing 
the  ends  of  their  existence,  while  they  are  at 
the  same  time  silent  and  shut  up  within  them¬ 
selves.  We  cannot  make  out  what  it  is  that  “pos¬ 
sesses”  these  creatures,  and  cannot  rely  on  them. 
A  black  tom-cat,  with  its  glowing  eyes  and  its 
now  gliding,  now  quick  and  darting  movement, 
has  been  deemed  the  presence  of  a  malignant 
being — a  mysterious  reserved  spectre :  the  dog, 
the  canary-bird,  on  the  contrary,  appear  friendly 
and  sympathizing.  The  lower  animals  are  the 
truly  incomprehensible.  A  man  cannot  by  imag¬ 
ination  or  conception  enter  into  the  nature  of 
a  dog ,  whatever  resemblance  he  himself  might 
have  to  it;  it  remains  something  altogether 
alien  to  him.  It  is  in  two  departments  that  the 
so-called  incomprehensible  meets  us — in  living 
nature  and  in  spirit.  But  in  very  deed  it  is  only  in 
nature  that  we  have  to  encounter  the  incompre¬ 
hensible;  for  the  being  manifest  to  itself  is  the 
essence,  spirit:  spirit  understands  and  compre¬ 
hends  spirit.  The  obtuse  self-consciousness  of 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


*54 

the  Egyptians,  therefore,  to  which  the  thought 
of  human  freedom  is  not  yet  revealed,  worships 
the  soul  as  still  shut  up  within  and  dulled 
by  the  physical  organization,  and  sympathizes 
with  brute  life.  We  find  a  veneration  of  mere 
vitality  among  other  nations  also:  sometimes 
expressly,  as  among  the  Hindus  and  all  the 
Mongolians;  sometimes  in  mere  traces,  as  among 
the  Jews:  “Thou  shalt  not  eat  the  blood  of  ani¬ 
mals,  for  in  it  is  the  life  of  the  animal.”  The 
Greeks  and  Romans  also  regarded  birds  as  spe¬ 
cially  intelligent,  believing  that  what  in  the  hu¬ 
man  spirit  was  not  revealed,  the  incomprehensi¬ 
ble  and  higher,  was  to  be  found  in  them.  But 
among  the  Egyptians  this  worship  of  beasts  was 
carried  to  excess  under  the  forms  of  a  most 
stupid  and  non-human  superstition.  The  wor¬ 
ship  of  brutes  was  among  them  a  matter  of  par¬ 
ticular  and  detailed  arrangement:  each  district 
had  a  brute  deity  of  its  own — a  cat,  an  ibis,  a 
crocodile,  etc.  Great  establishments  were  pro¬ 
vided  for  them;  beautiful  mates  were  assigned 
them;  and,  like  human  beings,  they  were  em¬ 
balmed  after  death.  The  bulls  were  buried,  but 
with  their  horns  protruding  above  their  graves; 
the  bulls  embodying  Apis  had  splendid  monu¬ 
ments,  and  some  of  the  pyramids  must  be  looked 
upon  as  such.  In  one  of  those  that  have  been 
opened,  there  was  found  in  the  most  central 
apartment  a  beautiful  alabaster  coffin;  and  on 
closer  examination  it  was  found  that  the  bones 
inclosed  were  those  of  the  ox.  This  reverence 
for  brutes  was  often  carried  to  the  most  absurd 
excess  of  severity.  If  a  man  killed  one  designed¬ 
ly,  he  was  punished  with  death ;  but  even  the  un¬ 
designed  killing  of  some  animals  might  entail 
death.  It  is  related,  that  once  when  a  Roman  in 
Alexandria  killed  a  cat,  an  insurrection  ensued, 
in  which  the  Egyptians  murdered  the  aggressor. 
They  would  let  human  beings  perish  by  famine, 
rather  than  allow  the  sacredanimals  to  be  killed, 
or  the  provision  made  for  them  trenched  upon. 
Still  more  than  mere  vitality,  the  universal  vis 
vitce  of  productive  nature  was  venerated  in  a 
phallus-worship ;  which  the  Greeks  also  adopted 
into  the  rites  paid  by  them  to  Dionysus.  With 
this  worship  the  greatest  excesses  were  con¬ 
nected. 

The  brute  form  is,  on  the  other  hand,  turned 
into  a  symbol:  it  is  also  partly  degraded  to  a 
mere  hieroglyphical  sign.  I  refer  here  to  the  in¬ 
numerable  figures  on  the  Egyptian  monuments, 
of  sparrow-hawks  or  falcons,  dung-beetles,  scar- 
abaei,etc.  It  is  not  known  what  ideas  such  figures 
symbolized,  and  we  can  scarcely  think  that  a 
satisfactory  view  of  this  very  obscure  subject 


is  attainable.  The  dung-beetle  is  said  to  be  the 
symbol  of  generation,  of  the  sun  and  its  course; 
the  Ibis,  that  of  the  Nile’s  overflowing;  birds  of 
the  hawk  tribe,  of  prophecy,  of  the  year,  of  pity. 
The  strangeness  of  these  combinations  results 
from  the  circumstance  that  we  have  not,  as  in 
our  idea  of  poetical  invention,  a  general  concep¬ 
tion  embodied  in  an  image;  but,  conversely,  we 
begin  with  a  concept  in  the  sphere  of  sense,  and 
imagination  conducts  us  into  the  same  sphere 
again.  But  we  observe  the  conception  liberating 
itself  from  the  direct  animal  form,  and  the  con¬ 
tinued  contemplation  of  it;  and  that  which  was 
only  surmised  and  aimed  at  in  that  form,  ad¬ 
vancing  to  comprehensibility  and  conceivable¬ 
ness.  The  hidden  meaning,  the  spiritual,  emerges 
as  a  human  face  from  the  brute.  The  multiform 
sphinxes,  with  lions’  bodies  and  virgins’  heads 
— or  as  male  sphinxes  (dv8po<r<£iyye<?)  with 
beards — are  evidence  supporting  the  view,  that 
the  meaning  of  the  spiritual  is  the  problem  which 
the  Egyptians  proposed  to  themselves;  as  the 
enigma  generally  is  not  the  utterance  of  some¬ 
thing  unknown,  but  is  the  challenge  to  discover 
it — implying  a  wish  to  be  revealed.  But  con¬ 
versely,  the  human  form  is  also  disfigured  by  a 
brute  face,  with  the  view  of  giving  it  a  specific 
and  definite  expression.  The  refined  art  of  Greece 
is  able  to  attain  a  specific  expression  through  the 
spiritual  character  given  to  an  image  in  the  form 
of  beauty,  and  does  not  need  to  deform  the  hu¬ 
man  face  in  order  to  be  understood.  The  Egyp¬ 
tians  appended  an  explanation  to  the  human 
forms,  even  of  the  gods,  by  means  of  heads  and 
masks  of  brutes;  Anubis,  e.g.,  has  a  dog’s  head, 
Isis,  a  lion’s  head  with  bull’s  horns,  etc.  The 
priests,  also,  in  performing  their  functions,  are 
masked  as  falcons,  jackals,  bulls,  etc.;  in  the 
same  way  the  surgeon,  who  has  taken  out  the 
bowels  of  the  dead  (represented  as  fleeing,  for 
he  has  laid  sacrilegious  hands  on  an  object  once 
hallowed  by  life) ;  so  also  the  embalmers  and 
the  scribes.  The  sparrow-hawk,  with  a  human 
head  and  outspread  wings,  denotes  the  soul  fly¬ 
ing  through  material  space,  in  order  to  animate 
a  new  body.  The  Egyptian  imagination  also 
created  new  forms — combinations  of  different 
animals:  serpents  with  bulls’  and  rams’  heads, 
bodies  of  lions  with  rams’  heads,  etc. 

We  thus  see  Egypt  intellectually  confined  by 
a  narrow,  involved,  close  view  of  nature,  but 
breaking  through  this;  impelling  it  to  self- 
contradiction,  and  proposing  to  itself  the  prob¬ 
lem  which  that  contradiction  implies.  The  prin¬ 
ciple  does  not  remain  satisfied  with  its  primary 
conditions,  but  points  to  that  other  meaning  and 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD  255 


spirit  which  lies  concealed  beneath  the  surface. 

In  the  view  just  given,  we  saw  the  Egyptian 
spirit  working  itself  free  from  natural  forms. 
This  urging,  powerful  spirit,  however,  was  not 
able  to  rest  in  the  subjective  conception  of  that 
view  of  things  which  we  have  now  been  consid¬ 
ering,  but  was  impelled  to  present  it  to  external 
consciousness  and  outward  vision  by  means  of 
art.  For  the  religion  of  the  Eternal  One — the 
formless — art  is  not  only  unsatisfying,  but, 
since  its  object  essentially  and  exclusively  oc¬ 
cupies  the  thought,  something  sinful.  But  spirit, 
occupied  with  the  contemplation  of  particular 
natural  forms — being  at  the  same  time  a  striving 
and  plastic  Spirit — changes  the  direct,  natural 
view,  e.g.,  of  the  Nile,  the  sun,  etc.,  to  images, 
in  which  spirit  has  a  share.  It  is,  as  we  have 
seen,  symbolizing  spirit;  and  as  such,  it  endeav¬ 
ors  to  master  these  symbolizations,  and  to  pre¬ 
sent  them  clearly  before  the  mind.  The  more 
enigmatical  and  obscure  it  is  to  itself,  so  much 
the  more  does  it  feel  the  impulse  to  labour  to  de¬ 
liver  itself  from  its  imprisonment,  and  to  gain  a 
clear  objective  view  of  itself. 

It  is  the  distinguishing  feature  of  the  Egyp¬ 
tian  spirit,  that  it  stands  before  us  as  this  mighty 
taskmaster.  It  is  not  splendour,  amusement,  pleas¬ 
ure,  or  the  like  that  it  seeks.  The  force  which 
urges  it  is  the  impulse  of  self-comprehension; 
and  it  has  no  other  material  or  ground  to 
work  on,  in  order  to  teach  itself  what  it  is,  to 
realize  itself  for  itself,  than  this  working  out  its 
thoughts  in  stone;  and  what  it  engraves  on  the 
stone  are  its  enigmas — these  hieroglyphs.  They 
are  of  two  kinds :  hieroglyphs  proper ,  designed 
rather  to  express  language,  and  having  reference 
to  subjective  conception;  and  a  class  of  hiero¬ 
glyphs  of  a  different  kind,  viz.,  those  enormous 
masses  of  architecture  and  sculpture,  with  which 
Egypt  is  covered.  While  among  other  nations 
history  consists  of  a  series  of  events — as,  e.g., 
that  of  the  Romans,  who  century  after  century, 
lived  only  with  a  view  to  conquest,  and  accom¬ 
plished  the  subjugation  of  the  world — the  Egyp¬ 
tians  raised  an  empire  equally  mighty — of 
achievements  in  works  of  art,  whose  ruins  prove 
their  indestructibility,  and  which  are  greater  and 
more  worthy  of  astonishment  than  all  other 
works  of  ancient  or  modern  time. 

Of  these  works  I  will  mention  no  others  than 
those  devoted  to  the  dead,  and  which  especially 
attract  our  attention.  These  are,  the  enormous 
excavations  in  the  hills  along  the  Nile  at  Thebes, 
whose  passages  and  chambers  are  entirely  filled 
with  mummies — subterranean  abodes  as  large  as 
the  largest  mining  works  of  our  time:  next,  the 


great  field  of  the  dead  in  the  plain  of  Sais,  with 
its  walls  and  vaults:  thirdly,  those  wonders  of 
the  world,  the  Pyramids,  whose  destination, 
though  stated  long  ago  by  Herodotus  and  Dio¬ 
dorus,  has  been  only  recently  expressly  con¬ 
firmed — to  the  effect,  viz.,  that  these  prodigious 
crystals,  with  their  geometrical  regularity,  con¬ 
tain  dead  bodies:  and  lastly,  that  most  aston¬ 
ishing  work,  the  tombs  of  the  kings,  of  which  one 
has  been  opened  by  Belzoni  in  modern  times. 

It  is  of  essential  moment  to  observe,  what  im¬ 
portance  this  realm  of  the  dead  had  for  the 
Egyptian:  we  may  thence  gather  what  idea  he 
had  of  man.  For  in  the  dead,  man  conceives  of 
man  as  stripped  of  all  adventitious  wrappages — 
as  reduced  to  his  essential  nature. But  that  which 
a  people  regards  as  man  in  his  essential  char¬ 
acteristics,  that  it  is  itself — such  is  its  character. 

In  the  first  place,  we  must  here  cite  the  re¬ 
markable  fact  which  Herodotus  tells  us,  viz., 
that  the  Egyptians  were  the  first  to  express  the 
thought  that  the  soul  of  man  is  immortal.  But 
this  proposition  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  is  in¬ 
tended  to  mean  that  it  is  something  other  than 
nature — that  Spirit  is  inherently  independent. 
The  ne  plus  ultra  of  blessedness  among  the  Hin¬ 
dus,  was  the  passing  over  into  abstract  unity, 
into  nothingness.  On  the  other  hand,  subjectiv¬ 
ity,  when  free,  is  inherently  infinite:  the  king¬ 
dom  of  free  spirit  is  therefore  the  kingdom  of 
the  invisible — such  as  Hades  was  conceived  by 
the  Greeks.  This  presents  itself  to  men  first  as 
the  empire  of  death,  to  the  Egyptians  as  the 
realm  of  the  dead. 

The  idea  that  spirit  is  immortal,  involves  this 
— that  the  human  individual  inherently  pos¬ 
sesses  infinite  value.  The  merely  Natural  ap¬ 
pears  limited,  absolutely  dependent  upon  some¬ 
thing  other  than  itself,  and  has  its  existence  in 
that  other;  but  immortality  involves  the  inher¬ 
ent  infinitude  of  spirit.  This  idea  is  first  found 
among  the  Egyptians.  But  itmust  be  added,  that 
the  soul  was  known  to  the  Egyptians  previously 
only  as  an  atom,  that  is,  as  something  concrete 
and  particular.  For  with  that  view  is  immediate¬ 
ly  connected  the  notion  of  metempsychosis, 
the  idea  that  the  soul  of  man  may  also  become 
the  tenant  of  the  body  of  a  brute.  Aristotle  too 
speaks  of  this  idea,  and  despatches  it  in  few 
words.  Every  subject,  he  says,  has  its  particular 
organs,  for  its  peculiar  mode  of  action:  so  the 
smith,  the  carpenter,  each  for  his  own  craft.  In 
like  manner  the  human  soul  has  its  peculiar 
organs,  and  the  body  of  a  brute  cannot  be  its 
domicile.  Pythagoras  adopted  the  doctrine  of 
metempsychosis;  but  it  could  not  find  much 


256  PHILOSOPHY 

support  among  the  Greeks,  who  held  rather  to 
the  concrete.  The  Hindus  have  also  an  indistinct 
conception  of  this  doctrine,  inasmuch  as  with 
them  the  final  attainment  is  absorption  in  the 
universal  substance.  But  with  the  Egyptians  the 
soul — the  spirit — is,  at  any  rate,  an  affirmative 
being,  although  only  abstractedlv  affirmative. 
The  period  occupied  by  the  soul’s  migrations 
was  fixed  at  three  thousand  years ;  they  affirmed, 
however,  that  a  soul  which  had  remained  faith¬ 
ful  to  Osiris,  was  not  subject  to  such  a  degrada¬ 
tion — for  such  they  deem  it. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  Egyptians  embalmed 
their  dead;  and  thus  imparted  such  a  degree  of 
permanence  that  they  have  been  preserved  even 
to  the  present  day,  and  may  continue  as  they 
are  for  many  centuries  to  come.  This  indeed 
seems  inconsistent  with  their  idea  of  immortal¬ 
ity;  for  if  the  soul  has  an  independent  existence, 
the  permanence  of  the  body  seems  a  matter  of 
indifference.  But  on  the  other  hand  it  may  be 
said,  that  if  the  soul  is  recognized  as  a  perma¬ 
nent  existence,  honour  should  be  shown  to  the 
body,  as  its  former  abode.  The  Parsees  lay  the 
bodies  of  the  dead  in  exposed  places  to  be  de¬ 
voured  by  birds ;  but  among  them  the  soul  is  re¬ 
garded  as  passing  forth  into  universal  existence. 
Where  the  soul  is  supposed  to  enjoy  continued 
existence,  the  body  must  also  be  considered  to 
have  some  kind  of  connection  with  this  continu¬ 
ance.  Among  us,  indeed,  the  doctrine  of  the  im¬ 
mortality  of  the  soul  assumes  the  higher  form: 
spirit  is  in  and  for  itself  eternal:  its  destiny  is 
eternal  blessedness.  The  Egyptians  made  their 
dead  into  mummies;  and  did  not  occupy  them¬ 
selves  further  with  them;  no  honour  was  paid 
them  beyond  this.  Herodotus  relates  of  the 
Egyptians,  that  when  any  person  died,  the  wom¬ 
en  went  about  loudly  lamenting;  but  the  idea  of 
immortality  is  not  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  con¬ 
solation,  among  us. 

From  what  was  said  above,  respecting  the 
works  for  the  dead,  it  is  evident  that  the  Egyp¬ 
tians,  and  especially  their  kings,  made  it  the 
business  of  their  life  to  build  their  sepulchre, 
and  to  give  their  bodies  a  permanent  abode.  It 
is  remarkable  that  what  had  been  needed  for  the 
business  of  life,  was  buried  with  the  dead.  Thus 
the  craftsman  had  his  tools:  designs  on  the 
coffin  show  the  occupation  to  which  the  deceased 
had  devoted  himself ;  so  that  we  are  able  to  be¬ 
come  acquainted  with  him  in  all  the  minutia  of 
his  condition  and  employment.  Many  mummies 
have  been  found  with  a  roll  of  papyrus  under 
their  arm,  and  this  was  formerly  regarded  as  a 
remarkable  treasure.  But  these  rolls  contain  only 


OF  HISTORY 

various  representations  of  the  pursuits  of  life, 
together  with  writings  in  the  demotic  character. 
They  have  been  deciphered,  and  the  discovery 
has  been  made,  that  they  are  all  deeds  of  pur¬ 
chase,  relating  to  pieces  of  ground  and  the  like; 
in  which  everything  is  most  minutely  recorded, 
even  the  duties  that  had  to  be  paid  to  the 
royal  chancery  on  the  occasion.  What,  there¬ 
fore,  a  person  bought  during  his  life,  is  made  to 
accompany  him,  in  the  shape  of  a  legal  docu¬ 
ment,  in  death.  In  this  monumental  way  we  are 
made  acquainted  with  the  private  life  of  the 
Egyptians,  as  with  that  of  the  Romans  through 
the  ruins  of  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum. 

After  the  death  of  an  Egyptian,  judgment  was 
passed  upon  him.  One  of  the  principal  represen¬ 
tations  on  the  sarcophagi  is  this  judicial  process 
in  the  realm  of  the  dead.  Osiris,  with  Isis  behind 
him  appears,  holding  a  balance,  while  before 
him  stands  the  soul  of  the  deceased.  But  judg¬ 
ment  was  passed  on  the  dead  by  the  living  them¬ 
selves;  and  that  not  merely  in  the  case  of  private 
persons,  but  even  of  kings.  The  tomb  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  king  has  been  discovered — very  large,  and 
elaborate  in  its  architecture — in  whose  hiero¬ 
glyphs  the  name  of  the  principal  person  is 
obliterated,  while  in  the  bas-reliefs  and  pictorial 
designs  the  chief  figure  is  erased.  This  has  been 
explained  to  import  that  the  honour  of  being 
thus  immortalized  was  refused  this  king  by  the 
sentence  of  the  court  of  the  dead. 

If  death  thus  haunted  the  minds  of  the  Egyp¬ 
tians  during  life,  it  might  be  supposed  that  their 
disposition  was  melancholy.  But  the  thought  of 
death  by  no  means  occasioned  depression.  At 
banquets  they  had  representations  of  the  dead 
(as  Herodotus  relates),  with  the  admonition: 
“Eat  and  drink — such  a  one  wilt  thou  become, 
when  thou  art  dead.”  Death  was  thus  to  them 
rather  a  call  to  enjoy  life.  Osiris  himself  dies, 
and  goes  down  into  the  realm  of  death,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  above-mentioned  Egyptian  myth.  In 
many  places  in  Egypt,  the  sacred  grave  of  Osiris 
was  exhibited.  But  he  was  also  represented  as 
president  of  the  kingdom  of  the  invisible  sphere, 
and  as  judge  of  the  dead  in  it;  later  on,  Serapis 
exercised  this  function  in  his  place.  Of  Anubis- 
Hermes  the  myth  says,  that  he  embalmed  the 
body  of  Osiris:  this  Anubis  sustained  also  the 
office  of  leader  of  the  souls  of  the  dead;  and 
in  the  pictorial  representations  he  stands,  with 
a  writing  tablet  in  his  hand,  by  the  side  of  Osiris. 
The  reception  of  the  dead  into  the  kingdom  of 
Osiris  had  also  a  profounder  import,  viz.,  that 
the  individual  was  united  with  Osiris.  On  the 
lids  of  the  sarcophagi,  therefore,  the  defunct  is 


257 


THE  ORIENTAL  WORLD 


represented  as  having  himself  become  Osiris; 
and  in  deciphering  the  hieroglyphs,  the  idea  has 
been  suggested  that  the  kings  are  called  gods.  The 
human  and  the  divine  are  thus  exhibited  as 
united. 

If,  in  conclusion,  we  combine  what  has  been 
said  here  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Egyptian 
spirit  in  all  its  aspects,  its  pervading  principle 
is  found  to  be,  that  the  two  elements  of  reality 
— spirit  sunk  in  nature,  and  the  impulse  to  liber¬ 
ate  it — are  here  held  together  inharmoniously  as 
contending  elements.  We  behold  the  antithesis 
of  nature  and  spirit — not  the  primary  immedi¬ 
ate  unity,  nor  the  concrete  unity,  where  nature 
is  posited  only  as  a  basis  for  the  manifestation 
of  spirit;  in  contrast  with  the  first  and  second  of 
these  unities,  the  Egyptian  unity,  combining 
contradictory  elements,  occupies  a  middle  place. 
The  two  sides  of  this  unity  are  held  in  abstract 
independence  of  each  other,  and  their  veritable 
union  presented  only  as  a  problem.  We  have, 
therefore,  on  the  one  side,  prodigious  confusion 
and  limitation  to  the  particular;  barbarous  sen¬ 
suality  with  African  hardness,  zoolatry,  and 
sensual  enjoyment.  It  is  stated  that,  in  a  public 
market-place,  sodomy  was  committed  by  a 
woman  with  a  goat.  Juvenal  relates  that  hu¬ 
man  flesh  was  eaten  and  human  blood  drunk 
out  of  revenge.  The  other  side  is  the  struggle  of 
spirit  for  liberation;  fancy  displayed  in  the 
forms  created  by  art,  together  with  the  abstract 
understanding  shown  in  the  mechanical  labors 
connected  with  their  production.  The  same  in¬ 
telligence — the  power  of  altering  the  form  of  in¬ 
dividual  existences,  and  that  steadfast  thought¬ 
fulness  which  can  rise  above  mere  phenomena 
— shows  itself  in  their  police  and  the  mechanism 
of  the  state,  in  agricultural  economy,  etc. ;  and 
the  contrast  to  this  is  the  severity  with  which 
their  customs  bind  them,  and  the  superstition 
to  which  humanity  among  them  is  inexorably 
subject.  With  a  clear  understanding  of  the  pres¬ 
ent,  is  connected  the  highest  degree  of  impul¬ 
siveness,  daring,  and  turbulence.  These  features 
are  combined  in  the  stories  which  Herodotus  re¬ 
lates  to  us  of  the  Egyptians.  They  much  resem¬ 
ble  the  tales  of  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights; 
and  although  these  have  Baghdad  as  the  locality 
of  their  narration,  their  origin  is  no  more  limited 
to  this  luxurious  court,  than  to  the  Arabian 
people,  but  must  be  partly  traced  to  Egypt — as 
Von  Hammer  also  thinks.  The  Arabian  world  is 
quite  other  than  the  fanciful  and  enchanted  re¬ 
gion  there  described;  it  has  much  more  simple 
passions  and  interests.  Love,  martial  daring,  the 
horse,  the  sword,  are  the  darling  subjects  of  the 


poetry  peculiar  to  the  Arabians. 

Transition  to  the  Greek  World 

The  Egyptian  spirit  has  shown  itself  to  us  as 
in  all  respects  shut  up  within  the  limits  of  par¬ 
ticular  conceptions,  and,  as  it  were,  imbruted  in 
them;  but  likewise  stirring  itself  within  these 
limits;  passing  restlessly  from  one  particular 
form  into  another.  This  spirit  never  rises  to  the 
universal  and  higher,  for  it  seems  to  be  blind  to 
that ;  nor  does  it  ever  withdraw  into  itself :  yet  it 
symbolizes  freely  and  boldly  with  particular  ex¬ 
istence,  and  has  already  mastered  it.  All  that  is 
now  required  is  to  posit  that  particular  existence 
— which  contains  the  germ  of  ideality — as  ideal , 
and  to  comprehend  universality  itself,  which  is 
already  potentially  liberated  from  the  particu¬ 
lars  involving  it.  It  is  the  free,  joyful  spirit  of 
Greece  that  accomplishes  this,  and  makes  this 
its  starting-point.  An  Egyptian  priest  is  reported 
to  have  said  that  the  Greeks  remain  eternally 
children.  We  may  say,  on  the  contrary,  that  the 
Egyptians  are  vigorous  boys,  eager  for  self- 
comprehension,who  require  nothing  but  clear  un¬ 
derstanding  of  themselves  in  an  ideal  form,  in  or¬ 
der  to  become  young  men.  In  the  Oriental  spirit 
there  remains  as  a  basis  the  massive  substantial¬ 
ity  of  spirit  immersed  in  nature.  To  the  Egyptian 
spirit  it  has  become  impossible,  though  it  is  still 
involved  in  infinite  embarrassment,  to  remain 
contented  with  that.  The  rugged  African  nature 
disintegrated  that  primitive  unity,  and  lighted 
upon  the  problem  whose  solution  is  free  spirit. 

That  the  spirit  of  the  Egyptians  presented  it¬ 
self  to  their  consciousness  in  the  form  of  a 
problem,  is  evident  from  the  celebrated  inscrip¬ 
tion  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  goddess  Neith  at 
Sais:  “I  am  that  which  is,  that  which  was,  and 
that  which  will  be;  no  one  has  lifted  my  veil” 
This  inscription  indicates  the  principle  of  the 
Egyptian  spirit;  though  the  opinion  has  often 
been  entertained,  that  its  purport  applies  to  all 
times.  Proclus  supplies  the  addition:  (iThe  fruit 
which  I  have  produced  is  Helios”  That  which  is 
clear  to  itself  is,  therefore,  the  result  of,  and  the 
solution  of,  the  problem  in  question.  This  lucidity 
is  spirit — the  son  of  Neith  the  concealed  night- 
loving  divinity.  In  the  Egyptian  Neith,  truth  is 
still  a  problem.  The  Greek  Apollo  is  its  solution ; 
his  utterance  is:  “Man,  know  thyself.”  In  this 
dictum  is  not  intended  a  self -recognition  that 
regards  the  specialities  of  one’s  own  weaknesses 
and  defects:  it  is  not  the  individual  that  is  ad¬ 
monished  to  become  acquainted  with  his  idiosyn¬ 
crasy,  but  humanity  in  general  is  summoned 
to  self-knowledge.  This  mandate  was  given  for 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


258 

the  Greeks,  and  in  the  Greek  spirit  humanity  ex¬ 
hibits  itself  in  its  clear  and  developed  condi¬ 
tion.  Wonderfully,  then,  must  the  Greek  legend 
surprise  us,  which  relates,  that  the  Sphinx — the 
great  Egyptian  symbol — appeared  in  Thebes, 
uttering  the  words:  “What  is  that  which  in  the 
morning  goes  on  four  legs,  at  midday  on  two, 
and  in  the  evening  on  three?”  (Edipus,  giving 
the  solution,  man ,  precipitated  the  Sphinx  from 
the  rock.  The  solution  and  liberation  of  that 
Oriental  spirit,  which  in  Egypt  had  advanced 
so  far  as  to  propose  the  problem,  is  certainly 
this:  that  the  inner  being  of  nature  is  thought, 
which  has  its  existence  only  in  the  human  con¬ 
sciousness.  But  that  time-honoured  antique  solu¬ 
tion  given  by  (Edipus,  who  thus  shows  himself 
possessed  of  knowledge,  is  connected  with  a  dire 
ignorance  of  the  character  of  his  own  actions. 
The  rise  of  spiritual  illumination  in  the  old 
royal  house  is  disparaged  by  connection  with 
abominations,  the  result  of  ignorance;  and  that 
primeval  royalty  must,  in  order  to  attain  true 
knowledge  and  moral  clearness,  first  be  brought 
into  shapely  form,  and  be  harmonized  with  the 
spirit  of  the  beautiful,  by  civil  laws  and  political 
freedom. 

The  inward  or  ideal  transition,  from  Egypt  to 
Greece  is  as  just  exhibited.  But  Egypt  became  a 
province  of  the  great  Persian  Kingdom,  and  the 
historical  transition  takes  place  when  the  Per¬ 
sian  world  comes  in  contact  with  the  Greek. 
Here,  for  the  first  time,  an  historical  transition 
meets  us,  viz.,  in  the  fall  of  an  empire.  China 
and  India,  as  already  mentioned,  have  remained 
— Persia  has  not.  The  transition  to  Greece  is,  in¬ 
deed,  internal;  but  here  it  shows  itself  also  ex¬ 
ternally,  as  a  transmission  of  sovereignty — an 
occurrence  which  from  this  time  forward  is 
ever  and  anon  repeated.  For  the  Greeks  sur¬ 
render  the  sceptre  of  dominion  and  of  civiliza¬ 
tion  to  the  Romans,  and  the  Romans  are  sub¬ 
dued  by  the  Germans.  If  we  examine  this  fact 
of  transition  more  closely,  the  question  suggests 
itself — for  example,  in  this  first  case  of  the 
kind,  viz.,  Persia — why  it  sank,  while  China  and 
India  remain.  In  the  first  place  we  must  here 
banish  from  our  minds  the  prejudice  in  favour 
of  duration,  as  if  it  had  any  advantage  as  com¬ 
pared  with  transience:  the  imperishable  moun¬ 
tains  are  not  superior  to  the  quickly  dismantled 
rose  exhaling  its  life  in  fragrance.  In  Persia  be¬ 
gins  the  principle  of  free  spirit  as  contrasted  with 
imprisonment  in  nature ;  mere  natural  existence, 
therefore,  loses  its  bloom,  and  fades  away.  The 
principle  of  separation  from  nature  is  found  in 
the  Persian  Empire,  which,  therefore,  occupies 


a  higher  grade  than  those  worlds  immersed  in 
the  natural.  The  necessity  of  advance  has  been 
thereby  proclaimed.  Spirit  has  disclosed  its  ex¬ 
istence,  and  must  complete  its  development.  It 
is  only  when  dead  that  the  Chinese  is  held  in 
reverence.  The  Hindu  kills  himself,  becomes  ab¬ 
sorbed  in  Brahm,  undergoes  a  living  death  in  the 
condition  of  perfect  unconsciousness,  or  is  a 
present  god  in  virtue  of  his  birth.  Here  we  have 
no  change ;  no  advance  is  admissible,  for  progress 
is  only  possible  through  the  recognition  of  the 
independence  of  spirit.  With  the  “light”  of  the 
Persians  begins  a  spiritual  view  of  things,  and 
here  spirit  bids  adieu  to  nature.  It  is  here,  then, 
that  we  first  find  (as  occasion  called  us  to  notice 
above)  that  the  objective  world  remains  free — 
that  the  nations  are  not  enslaved,  but  are  left  in 
possession  of  their  wealth,  their  political  con¬ 
stitution,  and  their  religion.  And,  indeed,  this 
is  the  side  on  which  Persia  itself  shows  weakness 
as  compared  with  Greece.  For  we  see  that  the 
Persians  could  erect  no  empire  possessing  com¬ 
plete  organization;  that  they  could  not  “in¬ 
form”  the  conquered  lands  with  their  principle, 
and  were  unable  to  make  them  into  a  harmoni¬ 
ous  whole,  but  were  obliged  to  be  content  with 
an  aggregate  of  the  most  diverse  individualities. 
Among  these  nations  the  Persians  secured  no 
inward  recognition  of  the  legitimacy  of  their 
rule;  they  could  not  establish  their  legal  princi¬ 
ples  of  enactments,  and  in  organizing  their  do¬ 
minion,  they  only  considered  themselves,  not 
the  whole  extent  of  their  empire.  Thus,  as  Per¬ 
sia  did  not  constitute,  politically,  one  spirit,  it 
appeared  weak  in  contrast  with  Greece.  It  was 
not  the  effeminacy  of  the  Persians  (although, 
perhaps,  Babylon  infused  an  enervating  ele¬ 
ment)  that  ruined  them,  but  the  unwieldy,  un¬ 
organized  character  of  their  host,  as  matched 
against  Greek  organization;  i.e.,  the  superior 
principle  overcame  the  inferior.  The  abstract 
principle  of  the  Persians  displayed  its  defective¬ 
ness  as  an  unorganized,  incompacted  union  of 
disparate  contradictories;  in  which  the  Persian 
doctrine  of  light  stood  side  by  side  with  Syrian 
voluptuousness  and  luxury,  with  the  activity  and 
courage  of  the  sea-braving  Phoenicians,  the  ab¬ 
straction  of  pure  thought  in  the  Jewish  Religion, 
and  the  mental  unrest  of  Egypt;  an  aggregate 
of  elements,  which  awaited  their  idealization, 
and  could  receive  it  only  in  jree  individuality. 
The  Greeks  must  be  looked  upon  as  the  people 
in  whom  these  elements  interpenetrated  each 
other:  spirit  became  introspective,  triumphed 
over  particularity,  and  thereby  emancipated 
itself. 


SECOND  PART 


THE  GREEK  WORLD 


Among  the  Greeks  we  feel  ourselves  immedi¬ 
ately  at  home,  for  we  are  in  the  region  of  spirit; 
and  though  the  origin  of  the  nation,  as  also  its 
philological  peculiarities,  may  be  traced  farther 
— even  to  India — theproper  emergence,  the  true 
palingenesis  of  spirit  must  be  looked  for  in  Greece 
first.  At  an  earlier  stage  I  compared  the  Greek 
world  with  the  period  of  adolescence;  not,  in¬ 
deed,  in  that  sense,  that  youth  bears  within  it  a 
serious,  anticipative  destiny,  and  consequently 
by  the  very  conditions  of  its  culture  urges  to¬ 
wards  an  ulterior  aim — presenting  thus  an  in¬ 
herently  incomplete  and  immature  form,  and 
being  then  most  defective  when  it  would  deem 
itself  perfect — but  in  that  sense,  that  youth 
does  not  yet  present  the  activity  of  work,  does 
not  yet  exert  itself  for  a  definite  intelligent  aim, 
but  rather  exhibits  a  concrete  freshness  of  the 
soul’s  life.  It  appears  in  the  sensuous,  actual 
world,  as  incarnate  spirit  and  spiritualized  sense 
— in  a  unity  which  owed  its  origin  to  spirit. 
Greece  presents  to  us  the  cheerful  aspect  of 
youthful  freshness,  of  spiritual  vitality.  It  is 
here  first  that  advancing  spirit  makes  itself  the 
content  of  its  volition  and  its  knowledge;  but 
in  such  a  way  that  state,  family,  law,  religion, 
are  at  the  same  time  objects  aimed  at  by  indi¬ 
viduality,  while  the  latter  is  individuality  only 
in  virtue  of  those  aims.  The  man,  on  the  other 
hand,  devotes  his  life  to  labor  for  an  objective 
aim ;  which  he  pursues  consistently,  even  at  the 
cost  of  his  individuality. 

The  highest  form  that  floated  before  Greek 
imagination  was  Achilles,  the  son  of  the  poet, 
the  Homeric  youth  of  the  Trojan  War.  Homer  is 
the  element  in  which  the  Greek  world  lives,  as 
man  does  in  the  air.  The  Greek  life  is  a  truly 
youthful  achievement.  Achilles,  the  ideal  youth, 
of  poetry ,  commenced  it:  Alexander  the  Great, 
the  ideal  youth  of  reality ,  concluded  it.  Both 
appear  in  contest  with  Asia.  Achilles,  as  the 
principal  figure  in  the  national  expedition  of 
the  Greeks  against  Troy,  does  not  stand  at  its 
head,  but  is  subject  to  the  chief  of  chiefs;  he 
cannot  be  made  the  leader  without  becoming  a 


fantastic  untenable  conception.  On  the  contrary, 
the  second  youth,  Alexander,  the  freest  and 
finest  individuality  that  the  real  world  has  ever 
produced,  advances  to  the  head  of  this  youth¬ 
ful  life  that  has  now  perfected  itself,  and  accom¬ 
plishes  the  revenge  against  Asia. 

We  have,  then,  to  distinguish  three  periods 
in  Greek  history:  the  first,  that  of  the  growth 
of  real  individuality;  the  second,  that  of  its  in¬ 
dependence  and  prosperity  in  external  conquest 
(through  contact  with  the  previous  world- 
historical  people) ;  and  the  third,  the  period  of 
its  decline  and  fall,  in  its  encounter  with  the 
succeeding  organ  of  world-history.  The  period 
from  its  origin  to  its  internal  completeness  (that 
which  enables  a  people  to  make  head  against  its 
predecessor)  includes  its  primary  culture.  If  the 
nation  has  a  basis — such  as  the  Greek  world  has 
in  the  Oriental — a  foreign  culture  enters  as  an 
element  into  its  primary  condition,  and  it  has  a 
double  culture,  one  original,  the  other  of  foreign 
suggestion.  The  uniting  of  these  two  elements 
constitutes  its  training ;  and  the  first  period  ends 
with  the  combination  of  its  forces  to  produce  its 
real  and  proper  vigour,  which  then  turns  against 
the  very  element  that  had  been  its  basis.  The 
second  period  is  that  of  victory  and  prosperity. 
But  while  the  nation  directs  its  energies  out¬ 
wards,  it  becomes  unfaithful  to  its  principles  at 
home,  and  internal  dissension  follows  upon  the 
ceasing  of  the  external  excitement.  In  art  and 
science,  too,  this  shows  itself  in  the  separation 
of  the  ideal  from  the  real.  Here  is  the  point  of 
decline.  The  third  period  is  that  of  ruin,  through 
contact  with  the  nation  that  embodies  a  higher 
spirit.  The  same  process,  it  may  be  stated  once 
for  all,  will  meet  us  in  the  life  of  every  world- 
historical  people. 

Section  I 

THE  ELEMENTS  OF  THE 
GREEK  SPIRIT 

Greece  is  the  substantial,  which  is  at  the  same 
time  individual.  The  universal,  as  such,  is  over- 


259 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


260 

come;  the  submersion  in  nature  no  longer  exists, 
and  consentaneously  the  unwieldy  character  of 
geographical  relations  has  also  vanished.  The 
country  now  under  consideration  is  a  section 
of  territory  spreading  itself  in  various  forms 
through  the  sea — a  multitude  of  islands,  and  a 
continent  which  itself  exhibits  insular  features. 
The  Peloponnesus  is  connected  with  the  conti¬ 
nent  only  by  a  narrow  isthmus:  the  whole  of 
Greece  is  indentedby  bays  in  numberless  shapes. 
The  partition  into  small  divisions  of  territory  is 
the  universal  characteristic,  while  at  the  same 
time,  the  relationship  and  connection  between 
them  is  facilitated  by  the  sea.  We  find  here 
mountains,  plains,  valleys,  and  streams  of  lim¬ 
ited  extent :  no  great  river,  no  absolute  valley- 
plain  presents  itself ;  but  the  ground  is  diversi¬ 
fied  by  mountains  and  rivers  in  such  a  way  as 
to  allow  no  prominence  to  a  single  massive  fea¬ 
ture.  We  see  no  such  display  of  physical  gran¬ 
deur  as  is  exhibited  in  the  East,  no  stream  such 
as  the  Ganges,  the  Indus,  etc.,  on  whose  plains 
a  race  delivered  over  to  monotony  is  stimulated 
to  no  change,  because  its  horizon  always  ex¬ 
hibits  one  unvarying  form.  On  the  contrary,  that 
divided  and  multiform  character  everywhere 
prevails  which  perfectly  corresponds  with  the 
varied  life  of  Greek  races  and  the  versatility  of 
the  Greek  spirit. 

This  is  the  elementary  character  of  the  spirit 
of  the  Greeks,  implying  the  origination  of  their 
culture  from  independent  individualities;  a  con¬ 
dition  in  which  individuals  take  their  own 
ground,  and  are  not,  from  the  very  beginning, 
patriarchally  united  by  a  bond  of  nature ,  but 
realize  a  union  through  some  other  medium — 
through  law  and  custom  having  the  sanction  of 
spirit.  For  beyond  all  other  nations  that  of 
Greece  attained  its  form  by  growth.  At  the  ori¬ 
gin  of  their  national  unity,  separation  as  a  generic 
feature — inherent  distinctness  of  character — is 
the  chief  point  that  has  to  be  considered.  The  first 
phase  in  the  subjugation  of  this,  constitutes  the 
primary  period  of  Greek  culture;  and  only 
through  such  distinctness  of  character,  and  such 
a  subjugation  of  it,  was  the  beautiful  free  Greek 
spirit  produced.  Of  this  principle  we  must  have 
a  clear  conception.  It  is  a  superficial  and  absurd 
idea  that  such  a  beautiful  and  truly  free  life  can 
be  produced  by  a  process  so  incomplex  as  the 
development  of  a  race  keeping  within  the  limits 
of  blood-relationship  and  friendship.  Even  the 
plant,  which  supplies  the  nearest  analogy  to  such 
a  calm,  homogeneous  unfolding,  lives  and  grows 
only  by  means  of  the  antithetic  activities  of 
light,  air,  and  water.  The  only  real  antithesis 


that  spirit  can  have,  is  itself  spiritual:  viz.,  its 
inherent  heterogeneity,  through  which  alone  it 
acquires  the  power  of  realizing  itself  as  spirit. 
The  history  of  Greece  exhibits  at  its  commence¬ 
ment  this  interchange  and  mixture  of  partly 
homesprung,  partly  quite  foreign  stocks;  and  it 
was  Attica  itself,  whose  people  was  destined  to 
attain  the  acme  of  Hellenic  bloom,  that  was  the 
asylum  of  the  most  various  stocks  and  families. 
Every  world-historical  people,  except  the  Asi¬ 
atic  kingdoms,  which  stands  detached  from  the 
grand  historical  catena,  has  been  formed  in  this 
way.  Thus  the  Greeks,  like  the  Romans,  de¬ 
veloped  themselves  from  a  colluvies — a  conflux 
of  the  most  various  nations.  Of  the  multitude  of 
tribes  which  we  meet  in  Greece,  we  cannot  say 
which  was  the  original  Greek  people,  and  which 
immigrated  from  foreign  lands  and  distant  parts 
of  the  globe;  for  the  period  of  which  we  speak 
belongs  entirely  to  the  unhistorical  and  obscure. 
The  Pelasgi  were  at  that  time  a  principal  race 
in  Greece.  The  most  various  attempts  have  been 
made  by  the  learned  to  harmonize  the  confused 
and  contradictory  account  which  we  have  re¬ 
specting  them,  a  hazy  and  obscure  period  being 
a  special  object  and  stimulus  to  erudition.  Re¬ 
markable  as  the  earliest  centres  of  incipient  cul¬ 
ture  are  Thrace,  the  native  land  of  Orpheus,  and 
Thessaly;  countries  which  at  a  later  date  re¬ 
treated  more  or  less  into  the  background.  From 
Phthiotis,  the  country  of  Achilles,  proceeds  the 
common  name  Hellenes — a  name  which,  as 
Thucydides  remarks,  presents  itself  as  little  in 
Homer  in  this  comprehensive  sense,  as  the  term 
Barbarians,  from  whom  the  Greeks  were  not  yet 
clearly  distinguished.  It  must  be  left  to  special 
history  to  trace  the  several  tribes,  and  their 
transformations.  In  general  we  may  assume, 
that  the  tribes  and  individuals  were  prone  to 
leave  their  country  when  too  great  a  population 
occupied  it,  and  that  consequently  these  tribes 
were  in  a  migratory  condition,  and  practised 
mutual  depredation.  “Even  now,”  says  the  dis¬ 
cerning  Thucydides,  “the  Ozolian  Locrians,  the 
^tolians,  and  Acarnanians  retain  their  ancient 
mode  of  life;  the  custom  of  carrying  weapons, 
too,  has  maintained  itself  among  them  as  a  relic 
of  their  ancient  predatory  habits.”  Respecting 
the  Athenians,  he  says  that  they  were  the  first 
who  laid  aside  arms  in  time  of  peace.  In  such  a 
state  of  things  agriculture  was  not  pursued;  the 
inhabitants  had  not  only  to  defend  themselves 
against  freebooters,  but  also  to  contend  with 
wild  beasts  (even  in  Herodotus’s  time  many  lions 
infested  the  banks  of  the  Nestus  and  Ache- 
lous) ;  at  a  later  time  tame  cattle  became  es- 


THE  GREEK  WORLD 


pecially  an  object  of  plunder,  and  even  after 
agriculture  had  become  more  general,  men  were 
still  entrapped  and  sold  for  slaves.  In  depicting 
this  original  condition  of  Greece,  Thucydides 
goes  still  further  into  detail. 

Greece,  then,  was  in  this  state  of  turbulence, 
insecurity,  and  rapine,  and  its  tribes  were  con¬ 
tinually  migrating. 

The  other  element  in  which  the  national  life 
of  the  Hellenes  was  versed,  was  the  sea.  The 
physique  of  their  country  led  them  to  this  am¬ 
phibious  existence,  and  allowed  them  to  skim 
freely  over  the  waves,  as  they  spread  themselves 
freely  over  the  land — not  roving  about  like  the 
nomad  populations,  nor  torpidly  vegetating  like 
those  of  the  river  districts.  Piracy, not  trade, was 
the  chief  object  of  maritime  occupations;  and, 
as  we  gather  from  Homer,  it  was  not  yet  reck¬ 
oned  discreditable.  The  suppression  of  piracy  is 
ascribed  to  Minos,  and  Crete  is  renowned  as  the 
land  where  security  was  first  enjoyed;  for  there 
the  state  of  things  which  we  meet  with  again  in 
Sparta  was  early  realized,  viz.,  the  establishment 
in  power  of  one  party,  and  the  subjugation  of 
the  other,  which  was  compelled  to  obey  and 
work  for  the  former. 

We  have  just  spoken  of  heterogeneity  as  an 
element  of  the  Greek  spirit,  and  it  is  well  known 
that  the  rudiments  of  Greek  civilization  are  con¬ 
nected  with  the  advent  of  foreigners.  This  ori¬ 
gin  of  their  moral  life  the  Greeks  have  pre¬ 
served,  with  grateful  recollection,  in  a  form  of 
recognition  which  we  may  call  mythological.  In 
their  mythology  we  have  a  definite  record  of  the 
introduction  of  agriculture  by  Triptolemus,  who 
was  instructed  by  Ceres,  and  of  the  institution 
of  marriage,  etc.  Prometheus,  whose  origin  is 
referred  to  the  distant  Caucasus,  is  celebrated 
as  having  first  taught  men  the  production  and 
the  use  of  fire.  The  introduction  of  iron  was 
likewise  of  great  importance  to  the  Greeks;  and 
while  Homer  speaks  only  of  bronze,  ^Eschylus 
calls  iron  “Scythian.”  The  introduction  of  the 
olive,  of  the  art  of  spinning  and  weaving,  and 
the  creation  of  the  horse  by  Poseidon,  belong 
to  the  same  category. 

More  historical  than  these  rudiments  of  cul¬ 
ture  is  the  alleged  arrival  of  foreigners;  tradi¬ 
tion  tells  us  how  the  various  states  were  founded 
by  such  foreigners.  Thus,  Athens  owes  its  origin 
to  Cecrops,  an  Egyptian,  whose  history,  how¬ 
ever,  is  involved  in  obscurity.  The  race  of  Deu¬ 
calion,  the  son  of  Prometheus,  is  brought  into 
connection  with  the  various  Greek  tribes.  Pelops 
of  Phrygia,  the  son  of  Tantalus,  is  also  men¬ 
tioned;  next,  Danaus,  from  Egypt:  from  him 


261 

descend  Acrisius,  Danae,  and  Perseus.  Pelops  is 
said  to  have  brought  great  wealth  with  him  to 
the  Peloponnesus,  and  to  have  acquired  great 
respect  and  power  there.  Danaus  settled  in  Ar¬ 
gos.  Especially  important  is  the  arrival  of  Cad¬ 
mus,  of  Phoenician  origin,  with  whom  phonetic 
writing  is  said  to  have  been  introduced  into 
Greece;  Herodotus  refers  it  to  Phoenicia,  and 
ancient  inscriptions  then  extant  are  cited  to  sup¬ 
port  the  assertion.  Cadmus,  according  to  the 
legend,  founded  Thebes. 

We  thus  observe  a  colonization  by  civilized 
peoples,  who  were  in  advance  of  the  Greeks  in 
point  of  culture :  though  we  cannot  compare  this 
colonization  with  that  of  the  English  in  North 
America,  for  the  latter  have  not  been  blended 
with  the  aborigines, but  have  dispossessed  them ; 
whereas  in  the  case  of  the  settlers  in  Greece  the 
adventitious  and  autochthonic  elements  were 
mixed  together.  The  date  assigned  to  the  arrival 
of  these  colonists  is  very  remote — the  four¬ 
teenth  and  fifteenth  century  before  Christ.  Cad¬ 
mus  is  said  to  have  founded  Thebes  about  1490 
b.c.,  a  date  with  which  the  Exodus  of  Moses 
from  Egypt  (1500  b.c.)  nearly  coincides.  Am- 
phictyon  is  also  mentioned  among  the  founders 
of  Greek  institutions;  he  is  said  to  have  estab¬ 
lished  at  Thermopylae  a  union  between  many 
small  tribes  of  Hellas  proper  and  Thessaly — a 
combination  with  which  the  great  Amphictyonic 
league  is  said  to  have  originated. 

These  foreigners,  then,  are  reputed  to  have 
established  fixed  centres  in  Greece  by  the  erec¬ 
tion  of  fortresses  and  the  founding  of  royal 
houses.  In  Argolis,  the  walls  of  which  the  ancient 
fortresses  consisted,  were  called  Cyclopian; 
some  of  them  have  been  discovered  even  in  re¬ 
cent  times,  since,  on  account  of  their  solidity, 
they  are  indestructible. 

These  walls  consist  partly  of  irregular  blocks, 
whose  interstices  are  filled  up  with  small  stones 
— partly  of  masses  of  stones  carefully  fitted  into 
each  other.  Such  walls  are  those  of  Tiryns  and 
Mycenae.  Even  now  the  gate  with  the  lions,  at 
Mycenae,  can  be  recognized  by  the  description 
of  Pausanias.  It  is  stated  of  Proetus,  who  ruled 
in  Argos,  that  he  brought  with  him  from  Lycia 
the  Cyclopes  who  built  these  walls.  It  is,  how¬ 
ever,  supposed  that  they  were  erected  by  the 
ancient  Pelasgi.  To  the  fortresses  protected  by 
such  walls  the  princes  of  the  heroic  times  gen¬ 
erally  attached  their  dwellings.  Especially  re¬ 
markable  are  the  treasure-houses  built  by  them, 
such  as  the  Treasure-house  of  Minyas  at  Orcho- 
menus,  and  that  of  Atreus  at  Mycenae.  These 
fortresses,  then,  were  the  nuclei  of  small  states; 


262  PHILOSOPHY 

they  gave  a  greater  security  to  agriculture;  they 
protected  commercial  intercourse  against  rob¬ 
bery.  They  were,  however,  as  Thucydides  in¬ 
forms  us,  not  placed  in  the  immediate  vicinity 
of  the  sea,  on  account  of  piracy;  maritime  towns 
being  of  later  date.  Thus  with  those  royal  abodes 
originated  the  firm  establishment  of  society.  The 
relation  of  princes  to  subjects, and  to  each  other, 
we  learn  best  from  Homer.  It  did  not  depend  on 
a  state  of  things  established  by  law,  but  on 
superiority  in  riches,  possessions,  martial  ac¬ 
coutrements,  personal  bravery,  pre-eminence  in 
insight  and  wisdom,  and  lastly,  on  descent  and 
ancestry;  for  the  princes,  as  heroes,  were  re¬ 
garded  as  of  a  higher  race.  Their  subjects  obeyed 
them,  not  as  distinguished  from  them  by  con¬ 
ditions  of  caste,  nor  as  in  a  state  of  serfdom,  nor 
in  the  patriarchal  relation — according  to  which 
the  chief  is  only  the  head  of  the  tribe  or  family 
to  which  all  belong — nor  yet  as  the  result  of  the 
express  necessity  for  a  constitutional  govern¬ 
ment;  but  only  from  the  need,  universally  felt, 
of  being  held  together,  and  of  obeying  a  ruler 
accustomed  to  command — without  envy  and  ill- 
will  towards  him.  The  prince  has  just  so  much 
personal  authority  as  he  possesses  the  ability  to 
acquire  and  to  assert;  but  as  this  superiority  is 
only  the  individually  heroic,  resting  on  personal 
merit,  it  does  not  continue  long.  Thus  in  Homer 
we  see  the  suitors  of  Penelope  taking  possession 
of  the  property  of  the  absent  Ulysses,  without 
showing  the  slightest  respect  to  his  son.  Achilles, 
in  his  inquiries  about  his  father,  when  Ulysses 
descends  to  Hades,  indicates  the  supposition 
that,  as  he  is  old,  he  will  be  no  longer  honoured. 
Manners  are  still  very  simple:  princes  prepare 
their  own  repasts ;  and  Ulysses  labours  at  the  con¬ 
struction  of  his  own  house.  In  Homer’s  Iliad , 
we  find  a  king  of  kings,  a  generalissimo  in  the 
great  national  undertaking,  but  the  other  mag¬ 
nates  environ  him  as  a  freely  deliberating  coun¬ 
cil;  the  prince  is  honoured,  but  he  is  obliged  to 
arrange  everything  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
others;  he  indulges  in  violent  conduct  towards 
Achilles,  but,  in  revenge,  the  latter  withdraws 
from  the  struggle.  Equally  lax  is  the  relation  of 
the  several  chiefs  to  the  people  at  large,  among 
whom  there  are  always  individuals  who  claim 
attention  and  respect.  The  various  peoples  do 
not  fight  as  mercenaries  of  the  prince  in  his  bat¬ 
tles,  nor  as  a  stupid  serf-like  herd  driven  to  the 
contest,  nor  yet  in  their  own  interest;  but  as  the 
companions  of  their  honored  chieftain,  as  wit¬ 
nesses  of  his  exploits,  and  his  defenders  in  per¬ 
il.  A  perfect  resemblance  to  these  relations  is 
also  presented  in  the  Greek  Pantheon.  Zeus  is 


OF  HISTORY 

the  father  of  the  gods,  but  each  one  of  them  has 
his  own  will ;  Zeus  respects  them,  and  they  him : 
he  may  sometimes  scold  and  threaten  them, 
and  they  then  allow  his  will  to  prevail  or  retreat 
grumbling;  but  they  do  not  permit  matters  to 
come  to  an  extremity,  and  Zeus  so  arranges  mat¬ 
ters  on  the  whole — by  making  this  concession 
to  one,  that  to  another — as  to  produce  satisfac¬ 
tion.  In  the  terrestrial,  as  well  as  in  the  Olym¬ 
pian  world,  there  is,  therefore,  only  a  lax  bond 
of  unity  maintained;  royalty  has  not  yet  become 
monarchy,  for  it  is  only  in  a  more  extensive  so¬ 
ciety  that  the  need  of  the  latter  is  felt. 

While  this  state  of  things  prevailed,  and  so¬ 
cial  relations  were  such  as  have  been  described, 
that  striking  and  great  event  took  place — the 
union  of  the  whole  of  Greece  in  a  national  un¬ 
dertaking,  viz.,  the  Trojan  War;  with  which 
began  that  more  extensive  connection  with  Asia 
which  had  very  important  results  for  the  Greeks. 
(The  expedition  of  Jason  to  Colchis,  also  men¬ 
tioned  by  the  poets,  and  which  bears  an  earlier 
date,  was,  as  compared  with  the  war  of  Troy,  a 
very’  limited  and  isolated  undertaking.)  The  oc¬ 
casion  of  that  united  expedition  is  said  to  have 
been  the  violation  of  the  laws  of  hospitality  by 
the  son  of  an  Asiatic  prince,  in  carrying  off  the 
wife  of  his  host.  Agamemnon  assembles  the 
princes  of  Greece  through  the  power  and  influ¬ 
ence  which  he  possesses.  Thucydides  ascribes 
his  authority  to  his  hereditary  sovereignty,  com¬ 
bined  with  naval  power  {Iliad,  ii.  108),  in 
which  he  was  far  superior  to  the  rest.  It  appears, 
however,  that  the  combination  was  effected 
without  external  compulsion,  and  that  the  whole 
armament  was  convened  simply  on  the  strength 
of  individual  consent.  The  Hellenes  were  then 
brought  to  act  unitedly,  to  an  extent  of  which 
there  is  no  subsequent  example.  The  result  of 
their  exertions  was  the  conquest  and  destruc¬ 
tion  of  Troy,  though  they  had  no  design  of  mak¬ 
ing  it  a  permanent  possession.  No  external  re¬ 
sult,  therefore,  in  the  way  of  settlement  ensued, 
any  more  than  an  enduring  political  union,  as 
the  effect  of  the  uniting  of  the  nation  in  the  ac¬ 
complishment  of  this  single  achievement.  But 
the  poet  supplied  an  imperishable  portraiture 
of  their  youth  and  of  their  national  spirit,  to 
the  imagination  of  the  Greek  people;  and  the 
picture  of  this  beautiful  human  heroism  hov¬ 
ered  as  a  directing  ideal  before  their  whole  de¬ 
velopment  and  culture.  So  likewise,  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  ages,  we  see  the  whole  of  Christendom  united 
to  attain  one  object — the  conquest  of  the  Holy 
Sepulchre;  but,  in  spite  of  all  the  victories 
achieved,  with  just  as  little  permanent  result. 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  263 


The  Crusades  are  the  Trojan  War  of  newly 
awakened  Christendom,  waged  against  the  sim¬ 
ple,  homogeneous  clearness  of  Mohammedan¬ 
ism. 

The  royal  houses  perished,  partly  as  the  con¬ 
sequence  of  particular  atrocities,  partly  through 
gradual  extinction.  There  was  no  strictly  moral 
bond  connecting  them  with  the  tribes  which 
they  governed.  The  same  relative  position  is  oc¬ 
cupied  by  the  people  and  the  royal  houses  in  the 
Greek  tragedy  also.  The  people  is  the  chorus — 
passive,  deedless:  the  heroes  perform  the  deeds, 
and  incur  the  consequent  responsibility.  There 
is  nothing  in  common  between  them;  the  peo¬ 
ple  have  no  directing  power,  but  only  appeal  to 
the  gods.  Such  heroic  personalities  as  those  of 
the  princes  in  question  are  so  remarkably  suited 
for  subjects  of  dramatic  art  on  this  very  account 
that  they  form  their  resolutions  independently, 
and  individually,  and  are  not  guided  by  univer¬ 
sal  laws  binding  on  every  citizen ;  their  conduct 
and  their  ruin  are  individual.  The  people  ap¬ 
pears  separated  from  the  royal  houses,  and  these 
are  regarded  as  an  alien  body,  a  higher  race, 
fighting  out  the  battles  and  undergoing  the  pen¬ 
alties  of  their  fate,  for  themselves  alone.  Roy¬ 
alty  having  performed  that  which  it  had  to  per¬ 
form,  thereby  rendered  itself  superfluous.  The 
several  dynasties  are  the  agents  of  their  own  de¬ 
struction,  or  perish  not  as  the  result  of  animos¬ 
ity,  or  of  struggles  on  the  side  of  the  people: 
rather  the  families  of  the  sovereigns  are  left  in 
calm  enjoyment  of  their  power — a  proof  that 
the  democratic  government  which  followed  is 
not  regarded  as  something  absolutely  diverse. 
How  sharply  do  the  annals  of  other  times  con¬ 
trast  with  this ! 

This  fall  of  the  royal  houses  occurs  after  the 
Trojan  War,  and  many  changes  now  present 
themselves.  The  Peloponnesus  was  conquered 
by  the  Heraclidae,  who  introduced  a  calmer  state 
of  things,  which  was  not  again  interrupted  by 
the  incessant  migrations  of  races.  The  history 
now  becomes  more  obscure;  and  though  the  sev¬ 
eral  occurrences  of  the  Trojan  War  are  very  cir¬ 
cumstantially  described  to  us,  we  are  uncertain 
respecting  the  important  transactions  of  the 
time  immediately  following,  for  a  space  of  many 
centuries.  No  united  undertaking  distinguishes 
them,  unless  we  regard  as  such  that  of  which 
Thucydides  speaks,  viz.,  the  war  between  the 
Chalcidians  and  Eretrians  in  Euboea,  in  which 
many  nations  took  part.  The  towns  vegetate  in 
isolation,  or  at  most  distinguish  themselves  by 
war  with  their  neighbors.  Yet,  they  enjoy  pros¬ 
perity  in  this  isolated  condition,  by  means  of 


trade;  a  kind  of  progress  to  which  their  being 
rent  by  many  party-struggles  offers  no  opposi¬ 
tion.  In  the  same  way,  we  observe  in  the  middle 
ages  the  towns  of  Italy — which,  both  internally 
and  externally,  were  engaged  in  continual  strug¬ 
gle — attaining  so  high  a  degree  of  prosperity. 
The  flourishing  state  of  the  Greek  towns  at  that 
time  is  proved,  according  to  Thucydides,  also  by 
the  colonies  sent  out  in  every  direction.  Thus, 
Athens  colonized  Ionia  and  several  islands ;  and 
colonies  from  the  Peloponnesus  settled  in  Italy 
and  Sicily.  Colonies,  on  the  other  hand,  became 
relatively  mother  states;  e.g.,  Miletus,  which 
founded  many  cities  on  the  Propontis  and  the 
Black  Sea.  This  sending  out  of  colonies,  espe¬ 
cially  during  the  period  between  the  Trojan 
War  and  Cyrus,  presents  us  with  a  remarkable 
phenomenon.  It  can  be  thus  explained.  In  the 
several  towns  the  people  had  the  governmental 
power  in  their  hands,  since  they  gave  the  final 
decision  in  political  affairs.  In  consequence  of 
the  long  repose  enjoyed  by  them,  the  popula¬ 
tion  and  the  development  of  the  community  ad¬ 
vanced  rapidly;  and  the  immediate  result  was 
the  amassing  of  great  riches,  contemporaneously 
with  which  fact  great  want  and  poverty  make 
their  appearance.  Industry,  in  our  sense,  did  not 
exist;  and  the  lands  were  soon  occupied.  Never¬ 
theless  a  part  of  the  poorer  classes  would  not 
submit  to  the  degradations  of  poverty,  for 
everyone  felt  himself  a  free  citizen.  The  only 
expedient,  therefore,  that  remained,  was  coloni¬ 
zation.  In  another  country,  those  who  suffered 
distress  in  their  own  might  seek  a  free  soil  and 
gain  a  living  as  free  citizens  by  its  cultivation. 
Colonization  thus  became  a  means  of  maintain¬ 
ing  some  degree  of  equality  among  the  citizens ; 
but  this  means  is  only  a  palliative,  and  the  origi¬ 
nal  inequality,  founded  on  the  difference  of 
property,  immediately  reappears.  The  old  pas¬ 
sions  were  rekindled  with  fresh  violence,  and 
riches  were  soon  made  use  of  for  securing 
power :  thus  “tyrants”  gained  ascendancy  in  the 
cities  of  Greece. Thucydides  says,  “When  Greece 
increased  in  riches,  tyrants  arose  in  the  cities, 
and  the  Greeks  devoted  themselves  more  zeal¬ 
ously  to  the  sea.”  At  the  time  of  Cyrus,  the  his¬ 
tory  of  Greece  acquires  its  peculiar  interest ;  we 
see  the  various  states  now  displaying  their  par¬ 
ticular  character.  This  is  the  date,  too,  of  the 
formation  of  the  distinct  Greek  spirit.  Religion 
and  political  institutions  are  developed  with  it, 
and  it  is  these  important  phases  of  national  life 
which  must  now  occupy  our  attention. 

In  tracing  up  the  rudiments  of  Greek  culture , 
we  first  recall  attention  to  the  fact,  that  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


264 

physical  condition  of  the  country  does  not  ex¬ 
hibit  such  a  characteristic  unity,  such  a  uniform 
mass,  as  to  exercise  a  powerful  influence  over 
the  inhabitants.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  diversi¬ 
fied,  and  produces  no  decided  impression.  Nor 
have  we  here  the  unwieldy  unity  of  a  family  or 
national  combination;  but,  in  the  presence  of 
scenery  and  displays  of  elemental  power  broken 
up  into  fragmentary  forms,  men’s  attention  is 
more  largely  directed  to  themselves,  and  to  the 
extension  of  their  immature  capabilities.  Thus 
we  see  the  Greeks,  divided  and  separated  from 
each  other,  thrown  back  upon  their  inner  spirit 
and  personal  energy,  yet  at  the  same  time  most 
variously  excited  and  cautiously  circumspect. 
We  behold  them  quite  undetermined  and  ir¬ 
resolute  in  the  presence  of  nature,  dependent  on 
its  contingencies,  and  listening  anxiously  to  each 
signal  from  the  external  world;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  intelligently  taking  cognizance  of  and  ap¬ 
propriating  that  outward  existence,  and  showing 
boldness  and  independent  vigour  in  contending 
with  it.  These  are  the  simple  elements  of  their 
culture  and  religion.  In  tracing  up  their  mytho¬ 
logical  conceptions,  we  find  natural  objects 
forming  the  basis — not  en  masse,  however; 
only  in  dissevered  forms.  The  Diana  of  Ephesus 
(that  is,  nature  as  the  universal  mother),  the 
Cybele  and  Astarte  of  Syria — such  comprehen¬ 
sive  conceptions  remained  Asiatic,  and  were 
not  transmitted  to  Greece.  For  the  Greeks  only 
watch  the  objects  of  nature,  and  form  surmises 
respecting  them ;  inquiring,  in  the  depth  of  their 
souls,  for  the  hidden  meaning.  According  to 
Aristotle’s  dictum,  that  philosophy  proceeds 
from  wonder,  the  Greek  view  of  nature  also  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  wonder  of  this  kind.  Not  that  in 
their  experience,  spirit  meets  something  extra¬ 
ordinary,  which  it  compares  with  the  common 
order  of  things;  for  the  intelligent  view  of  a 
regular  course  of  nature,  and  the  reference  of 
phenomena  to  that  standard,  do  not  yet  present 
themselves ;  but  the  Greek  spirit  was  excited  to 
wonder  at  the  natural  in  nature.  It  does  not 
maintain  the  position  of  stupid  indifference  to 
it  as  something  existing,  and  there  an  end  of  it ; 
but  regards  it  as  something  in  the  first  instance 
foreign,  in  which,  however,  it  has  a  presentiment 
of  confidence,  and  the  belief  that  it  bears  some¬ 
thing  within  it  which  is  friendly  to  the  human 
spirit,  and  to  which  it  may  be  permitted  to  sus¬ 
tain  a  positive  relation.  This  wonder,  and  this 
presentiment,  are  here  the  fundamental  cate¬ 
gories;  though  the  Hellenes  did  not  content 
themselves  with  these  moods  of  feelings  but 
projected  the  hidden  meaning,  which  was  the 


subject  of  the  surmise,  into  a  distinct  concep¬ 
tion  as  an  object  of  consciousness.  The  natural 
holds  its  place  in  their  minds  only  after  under¬ 
going  some  transformation  by  spirit — not  im¬ 
mediately.  Man  regards  nature  only  as  an  ex¬ 
citement  to  his  faculties,  and  only  the  spiritual 
which  he  has  evolved  from  it  can  have  any  in¬ 
fluence  over  him.  Nor  is  this  commencement  of 
the  spiritual  apprehension  of  nature  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  an  explanation  suggested  by  us;  it 
meets  us  in  a  multitude  of  conceptions  formed 
by  the  Greeks  themselves.  The  position  of  curi¬ 
ous  surmise,  of  attentive  eagerness  to  catch  the 
meaning  of  nature,  is  indicated  to  us  in  the  com¬ 
prehensive  idea  of  Pan.  To  the  Greeks,  Pan  did 
not  represent  the  objective  whole,  but  that  in¬ 
definite  neutral  ground  which  involves  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  the  subjective;  he  embodies  that  thrill 
which  pervades  us  in  the  silence  of  the  forests; 
he  was,  therefore,  especially  worshipped  in  syl¬ 
van  Arcadia:  (a  “panic  terror”  is  the  common 
expression  for  a  groundless  fright).  Pan,  this 
thrill-exciting  being,  is  also  represented  as  play¬ 
ing  on  the  flute;  we  have  not  the  bare  internal 
presentiment,  for  Pan  makes  himself  audible  on 
the  seven-reeded  pipe.  In  what  has  been  stated 
we  have,  on  the  one  hand,  the  indefinite,  which, 
however,  holds  communication  with  man;  on 
the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  such  communica¬ 
tion  is  only  a  subjective  imagining,  an  explana¬ 
tion  furnished  by  the  percipient  himself.  On 
the  same  principle  the  Greeks  listened  to  the 
murmuring  of  the  fountains,  and  asked  what 
might  be  thereby  signified ;  but  the  signification 
which  they  were  led  to  attach  to  it  was  not  the 
objective  meaning  of  the  fountain,  but  the  sub¬ 
jective — that  of  the  subject  itself,  which  fur¬ 
ther  exalts  the  Naiad  to  a  Muse.  The  naiads,  or 
fountains,  are  the  external,  objective  origin  of 
the  Muses.  Yet  the  immortal  songs  of  the  Muses 
are  not  that  which  is  heard  in  the  murmuring  of 
the  fountains;  they  are  the  productions  of  the 
thoughtfully  listening  spirit,  creative  while  ob¬ 
servant.  The  interpretation  and  explanation  of 
nature  and  its  transformations,  the  indication  of 
their  sense  and  import,  is  the  act  of  the  subjec¬ 
tive  spirit;  and  to  this  the  Greeks  attached  the 
name  fiavrela.  The  general  idea  which  this  em¬ 
bodies,  is  the  form  in  which  man  realizes  his  re¬ 
lationship  to  nature.  Mavra  a  has  reference  both 
to  the  matter  of  the  exposition  and  to  the  ex¬ 
pounder  who  divines  the  weighty  import  in 
question.  Plato  speaks  of  it  in  reference  to 
dreams,  and  to  that  delirium  into  which  men 
fall  during  sickness;  an  interpreter,  ^avrt?,  is 
wanted  to  explain  these  dreams  and  this  delir- 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  265 


ium.  That  nature  answered  the  questions  which 
the  Greek  put  to  her,  is  in  this  converse  sense 
true,  that  he  obtained  an  answer  to  the  ques¬ 
tions  of  nature  from  his  own  spirit.  The  insight 
of  the  seer  becomes  thereby  purely  poetical; 
spirit  supplies  the  signification  which  the  nat¬ 
ural  image  expresses.  Everywhere  the  Greeks 
desired  a  clear  presentation  and  interpretation 
of  the  natural.  Homer  tells  us,  in  the  last  book 
of  the  Odyssey ,  that  while  the  Greeks  were  over¬ 
whelmed  with  sorrow  for  Achilles,  a  violent  agi¬ 
tation  came  over  the  sea:  the  Greeks  were  on 
the  point  of  dispersing  in  terror,  when  the  ex¬ 
perienced  Nestor  arose  and  interpreted  the  phe¬ 
nomenon  to  them.  Thetis,  he  said,  was  coming, 
with  her  nymphs,  to  lament  for  the  death  of 
her  son.  When  a  pestilence  broke  out  in  the 
camp  of  the  Greeks,  the  priest,  Calchas,  ex¬ 
plained  that  Apollo  was  incensed  at  their  not 
having  restored  the  daughter  of  his  priest  Chry- 
ses  when  a  ransom  had  been  offered.  The  oracle 
was  originally  interpreted  exactly  in  this  way. 
The  oldest  oracle  was  at  Dodona,  (in  the  dis¬ 
trict  of  the  modern  Janina).  Herodotus  says 
that  the  first  priestesses  of  the  temple  there, 
were  from  Egypt;  yet  this  temple  is  stated  to 
be  an  ancient  Greek  one.  The  rustling  of  the 
leaves  of  the  sacred  oaks  was  the  form  of  prog¬ 
nostication  there.  Bowls  of  metal  were  also  sus¬ 
pended  in  the  grove.  But  the  sounds  of  the  bowls 
dashing  against  each  other  were  quite  indefinite, 
and  had  no  objective  sense;  the  sense,  the  sig¬ 
nification,  was  imparted  to  the  sounds  only  by 
the  human  beings  who  heard  them.  Thus  also 
the  Delphic  priestesses,  in  a  senseless,  distracted 
state,  in  the  intoxication  of  enthusiasm  (pavla), 
uttered  unintelligible  sounds;  and  it  was  the 
fjLoivTis  who  gave  to  these  utterances  a  definite 
meaning.  In  the  cave  of  Trophonius  the  noise 
of  subterranean  waters  was  heard,  and  appari¬ 
tions  were  seen :  but  these  indefinite  phenomena 
acquired  a  meaning  only  through  the  interpret¬ 
ing,  comprehending  spirit.  It  must  also  be  ob¬ 
served,  that  these  excitements  of  spirit  are  in 
the  first  instance  external,  natural  impulses.  Suc¬ 
ceeding  them  are  internal  changes  taking  place 
in  the  human  being  himself — such  as  dreams,  or 
the  delirium  of  the  Delphic  priestess — which  re¬ 
quire  to  be  made  intelligible  by  the  /Wri?.  At 
the  commencement  of  the  Iliad ,  Achilles  is  ex¬ 
cited  against  Agamemnon,  and  is  on  the  point 
of  drawing  his  sword ;  but  on  a  sudden  he  checks 
the  movement  of  his  arm,  and  recollects  himself 
in  his  wrath,  reflecting  on  his  relation  to  Aga¬ 
memnon.  The  poet  explains  this  by  saying  that 
it  was  Pallas-Athene  (wisdom  or  consideration) 


that  restrained  him.  When  Ulysses  among  the 
Phaeacians,  has  thrown  his  discus  farther  than 
the  rest,  and  one  of  the  Phaeacians  shows  a 
friendly  disposition  towards  him,  the  poet  rec¬ 
ognizes  in  him  Pallas-Athene.  Such  an  explana¬ 
tion  denotes  the  perception  of  the  inner  mean¬ 
ing,  the  sense,  the  underlying  truth;  and  the 
poets  were  in  this  way  the  teachers  of  the  Greeks 
— especially  Homer.  Mavrda  in  fact  is  poesy, 
not  a  capricious  indulgence  of  fancy,  but  an 
imagination  which  introduces  the  spiritual  into 
the  natural — in  short,  a  richly  intelligent  per¬ 
ception.  The  Greek  spirit,  on  the  whole,  there¬ 
fore,  is  free  from  superstition,  since  it  changes 
the  sensuous  into  the  sensible — the  intellectual, 
so  that  decisions  are  derived  from  spirit;  al¬ 
though  superstition  comes  in  again  from  another 
quarter,  as  will  be  observed  when  impulsions 
from  another  source  than  the  spiritual,  are  al¬ 
lowed  to  tell  upon  opinion  and  action. 

But  the  stimuli  that  operated  on  the  spirit 
of  the  Greeks  are  not  to  be  limited  to  these  ob¬ 
jective  and  subjective  excitements.  The  tradi¬ 
tional  element  derived  from  foreign  countries, 
the  culture,  the  divinities  and  ritual  observances 
transmitted  to  them  ab  extra  must  also  be  in¬ 
cluded.  It  has  been  long  a  much  vexed  ques¬ 
tion  whether  the  arts  and  the  religion  of  the 
Greeks  were  developed  independently  or  through 
foreign  suggestion.  Under  the  conduct  of  a  one¬ 
sided  understanding  the  controversy  is  inter¬ 
minable;  for  it  is  no  less  a  fact  of  history  that 
the  Greeks  derived  conceptions  from  India, 
Syria,  and  Egypt,  than  that  the  Greek  concep¬ 
tions  are  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  those  others 
alien.  Herodotus  (II.  53)  asserts,  with  equal  de¬ 
cision,  that  “Homer  and  Hesiod  invented  a  the- 
ogony  for  the  Greeks,  and  assigned  to  the  gods 
their  appropriate  epithets”  (a  most  weighty  sen¬ 
tence,  which  has  been  the  subject  of  deep  inves¬ 
tigation,  especially  by  Creuzer),  and  in  another 
place,  that  Greece  took  the  names  of  its  divinities 
from  Egypt,  and  that  the  Greeks  made  inquiry 
at  Dodona,  whether  they  ought  to  adopt  these 
names  or  not.  This  appears  self-contradictory: 
it  is,  however,  quite  consistent;  for  the  fact 
is  that  the  Greeks  evolved  the  spiritual  from 
the  materials  which  they  had  received.  The 
natural,  as  explained  by  man — i.e .,  its  internal 
essential  element — is,  as  a  universal  principle, 
the  beginning  of  the  divine.  Just  as  in  art  the 
Greeks  may  have  acquired  a  mastery  of  techni¬ 
cal  matters  from  others,  from  the  Egyptians 
especially,  so  in  their  religion  the  commence¬ 
ment  might  have  been  from  without;  but  by 
their  independent  spirit  they  transformed  the 


266  PHILOSOPHY 

one  as  well  as  the  other. 

Traces  of  such  foreign  rudiments  may  be  gen¬ 
erally  discovered,  (Creuzer,  in  his  Symbolik, 
dwells  especially  on  this  point).  The  amours  of 
Zeus  appear  indeed  as  something  isolated,  ex¬ 
traneous,  adventitious,  but  it  may  be  shown  that 
foreign  theogonic  representations  form  their 
basis.  Hercules  is,  among  the  Hellenes,  that 
spiritual  humanity  which  by  native  energy  at¬ 
tains  Olympus  through  the  twelve  far-famed 
labours :  but  the  foreign  idea  that  lies  at  the  basis 
is  the  sun,  completing  its  revolution  through  the 
twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac.  The  mysteries  were 
only  such  ancient  rudiments,  and  certainly  con¬ 
tained  no  greater  wisdom  than  already  existed 
in  the  consciousness  of  the  Greeks.  All  Athenians 
were  initiated  in  the  mysteries — Socrates  ex¬ 
cepted,  who  refused  initiation,  because  he  knew 
well  that  science  and  art  are  not  the  product  of 
mysteries,  and  that  wisdom  never  lies  among 
arcana.  True  science  has  its  place  much  rather 
in  the  open  field  of  consciousness. 

In  summing  up  the  constituents  of  the  Greek 
spirit ,  we  find  its  fundamental  characteristic  to 
be  that  the  freedom  of  spirit  is  conditioned  by 
and  has  an  essential  relation  to  some  stimulus 
supplied  by  nature.  Greek  freedom  of  thought 
is  excited  by  an  alien  existence;  but  it  is  free 
because  it  transforms  and  virtually  reproduces 
the  stimulus  by  its  own  operation.  This  phase 
of  spirit  is  the  medium  between  the  loss  of  in¬ 
dividuality  on  the  part  of  man  (such  as  we  ob¬ 
serve  in  the  Asiatic  principle, in  which  the  spirit¬ 
ual  and  divine  exists  only  under  a  natural  form), 
and  infinite  subjectivity  as  pure  certainty  of  it¬ 
self — the  position  that  the  ego  is  the  ground  of 
all  that  can  lay  claim  to  substantial  existence. 
The  Greek  spirit  as  the  medium  between  these 
two,  begins  with  nature,  but  transforms  it  into 
a  mere  objective  form  of  its  (spirit’s)  own  ex¬ 
istence;  spirituality  is  therefore  not  yet  abso¬ 
lutely  free;  not  yet  absolutely  se//-produced — 
is  not  self-stimulation.  Setting  out  from  surmise 
and  wonder,  the  Greek  spirit  advances  to  definite 
conceptions  of  the  hidden  meanings  of  nature. 
In  the  subject  itself  too,  the  same  harmony  is 
produced.  In  man,  the  side  of  his  subjective 
existence  which  he  owes  to  nature  is  the  heart, 
the  disposition,  passion,  and  variety  of  tempera¬ 
ment:  this  side  is  then  developed  in  a  spiritual 
direction  to  free  individuality;  so  that  the  char¬ 
acter  is  not  placed  in  a  relation  to  universally 
valid  moral  authorities,  assuming  the  form  of 
duties,  but  the  moral  appears  as  a  nature  pecul¬ 
iar  to  the  individual — an  exertion  of  will,  the 
result  of  disposition  and  individual  constitution. 


OF  HISTORY 

This  stamps  the  Greek  character  as  that  of  in¬ 
dividuality  conditioned  by  beauty ,  which  is  pro¬ 
duced  by  spirit,  transforming  the  merely  natural 
into  an  expression  of  its  own  being.  The  activity 
of  spirit  does  not  yet  possess  in  itself  the  mate¬ 
rial  and  organ  of  expression,  but  needs  the  ex¬ 
citement  of  nature  and  the  matter  which  nature 
supplies:  it  is  not  free,  self-determining  spiritu¬ 
ality,  but  mere  naturalness  formed  to  spiritu¬ 
ality — spiritual  individuality.  The  Greek  spirit 
is  the  plastic  artist,  forming  the  stone  into  a 
work  of  art.  In  this  formative  process  the  stone 
does  not  remain  mere  stone — the  form  being 
only  superinduced  from  without;  but  it  is  made 
an  expression  of  the  spiritual,  even  contrary  to 
its  nature,  and  thus  /rawsformed.  Conversely, 
the  artist  needs  for  his  spiritual  conceptions, 
stone,  colours,  sensuous  forms  to  express  his  idea. 
Without  such  an  element  he  can  no  more  be 
conscious  of  the  idea  himself,  than  give  it  an 
objective  form  for  the  contemplation  of  others; 
since  it  cannot  in  thought  alone  become  an  ob¬ 
ject  to  him.  The  Egyptian  spirit  also  was  a  sim¬ 
ilar  labourer  in  matter,  but  the  natural  had  not 
yet  been  subjected  to  the  spiritual.  No  advance 
was  made  beyond  a  struggle  and  contest  with  it; 
the  natural  still  took  an  independent  position 
and  formed  one  side  of  the  image,  as  in  the  body 
of  the  Sphinx.  In  Greek  beauty  the  sensuous  is 
only  a  sign,  an  expression,  an  envelope,  in  which 
spirit  manifests  itself. 

It  must  be  added,  that  while  the  Greek  spirit 
is  a  transforming  artist  of  this  kind,  it  knows  it¬ 
self  free  in  its  productions;  for  it  is  their  creator, 
and  they  are  what  is  called  the  “work  of  man.” 
They  are,  however,  not  merely  this,  but  eternal 
truth — the  energizing  of  spirit  in  its  innate  es¬ 
sence,  and  quite  as  really  not  created  as  created 
by  man.  He  has  a  respect  and  veneration  for 
these  conceptions  and  images — this  Olympian 
Zeus,  this  Pallas  of  the  Acropolis — and  in  the 
same  way  for  the  laws,  political  and  ethical, 
that  guide  his  actions.  But  he,  the  human  being, 
is  the  womb  that  conceived  them,  he  the  breast 
that  suckled  them,  he  the  spiritual  to  which  their 
grandeur  and  purity  are  owing.  Thus  he  feels 
himself  calm  in  contemplating  them,  and  not 
only  free  in  himself,  but  possessing  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  his  freedom;  thus  the  honour  of 
the  human  is  swallowed  up  in  the  worship  of  the 
divine.  Men  honour  the  divine  in  and  for  itself, 
but  at  the  same  time  as  their  deed,  their  pro¬ 
duction,  their  phenomenal  existence;  thus  the 
divine  receives  its  honour  through  the  respect 
paid  to  the  human,  and  the  human  in  virtue  of 
the  honour  paid  to  the  divine. 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  267 


Such  are  the  qualities  of  that  beautiful  indi¬ 
viduality,  which  constitutes  the  centre  of  the 
Greek  character.  We  must  now  consider  the 
several  radiations  which  this  idea  throws  out 
in  realizing  itself.  All  issue  in  works  of  art,  and 
we  may  arrange  under  three  heads :  the  subjec¬ 
tive  work  of  art,  that  is,  the  culture  of  the  man 
himself;  the  objective  work  of  art,  i.e.,  the 
shaping  of  the  world  of  divinities;  lastly,  the 
political  work  of  art,  the  form  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  and  the  relations  of  the  individuals  who 
compose  it. 

Section  II 

PHASES  OF  INDIVIDUALITY 
MSTHETICALLY 
CONDITIONED 

Chapter  1.  The  Subjective  Work  of  Art 

Man  with  his  necessities  sustains  a  practical 
relation  to  external  nature,  and  in  making  it 
satisfy  his  desires,  and  thus  using  it  up,  has  re¬ 
course  to  a  system  of  means.  For  natural  objects 
are  powerful  and  offer  resistance  in  various 
ways.  In  order  to  subdue  them,  man  introduces 
other  natural  agents;  thus  turns  nature  against 
itself,  and  invents  instruments  for  this  purpose. 
These  human  inventions  belong  to  spirit,  and 
such  an  instrument  is  to  be  respected  more  than 
a  mere  natural  object.  We  see,  too,  that  the 
Greeks  are  accustomed  to  set  an  especial  value 
upon  them,  for  in  Homer,  man’s  delight  in  them 
appears  in  a  very  striking  way.  In  the  notice  of 
Agamemnon’s  sceptre,  its  origin  is  given  in  de¬ 
tail:  mention  is  made  of  doors  which  turn  on 
hinges,  and  of  accoutrements  and  furniture,  in 
a  way  that  expresses  satisfaction.  The  honour 
of  human  invention  in  subjugating  nature  is 
ascribed  to  the  gods. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  man  uses  nature  for 
ornament,  which  is  intended  only  as  a  token  of 
wealth  and  of  that  which  man  has  made  of  him¬ 
self.  We  find  ornament,  in  this  interest,  already 
very  much  developed  among  the  Homeric 
Greeks.  It  is  true  that  both  barbarians  and  civi¬ 
lized  nations  ornament  themselves ;  but  barbari¬ 
ans  content  themselves  with  mere  ornament; 
they  intend  their  persons  to  please  by  an  external 
addition.  But  ornament  by  its  very  nature  is 
destined  only  to  beautify  something  other  than 
itself,  viz.,  the  human  body,  which  is  man’s  im¬ 
mediate  environment,  and  which,  in  common 
with  nature  at  large,  he  has  to  transform.  The 
spiritual  interest  of  primary  importance  is, 
therefore,  the  development  of  the  body  to  a 


perfect  organ  for  the  will — an  adaptation  which 
may,  on  the  one  hand,  itself  be  the  means  for 
ulterior  objects,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  appear 
as  an  object  per  se.  Among  the  Greeks,  then, 
we  find  this  boundless  impulse  of  individuals  to 
display  themselves,  and  to  find  their  enjoyment 
in  so  doing.  Sensuous  enjoyment  does  not  be¬ 
come  the  basis  of  their  condition  when  a  state  of 
repose  has  been  obtained,  any  more  than  the 
dependence  and  stupor  of  superstition  which  en- 
j oyment  entails.  They  are  too  po werf  ully  excited, 
too  much  bent  upon  developing  their  individual¬ 
ity,  absolutely  to  adore  nature,  as  it  manifests 
itself  in  its  aspects  of  power  and  beneficence. 
That  peaceful  condition  which  ensued  when  a 
predatory  life  had  been  relinquished,  and  liberal 
nature  had  afforded  security  and  leisure,  turned 
their  energies  in  the  direction  of  self-assertion — 
the  effort  to  dignify  themselves.  But  while,  on 
the  one  side,  they  have  too  much  independent 
personality  to  be  subjugated  by  superstition, 
that  sentiment  has  not  gone  to  the  extent  of 
making  them  vain;  on  the  contrary,  essential 
conditions  must  be  first  satisfied,  before  this 
can  become  a  matter  of  vanity  with  them.  The 
exhilarating  sense  of  personality,  in  contrast 
with  sensuous  subjection  to  nature,  and  the 
need,  not  of  mere  pleasure,  but  of  the  display  of 
individual  powers,  in  order  thereby  to  gain  spe¬ 
cial  distinction  and  consequent  enjoyment,  con¬ 
stitute  therefore  the  chief  characteristic  and 
principal  occupation  of  the  Greeks.  Free  as  the 
bird  singing  in  the  sky,  the  individual  only  ex¬ 
presses  what  lies  in  his  untrammelled  human  na¬ 
ture  to  have  his  importance  recognized.  This  is 
the  subjective  beginning  of  Greek  art,  in  which 
the  human  being  elaborates  his  physical  being, 
in  free,  beautiful  movement  and  agile  vigour,  to 
a  work  of  art.  The  Greeks  first  trained  their  own 
persons  to  beautiful  configurations  before  they 
attempted  the  expression  of  such  in  marble  and 
in  paintings.  The  innocuous  contests  of  games, 
in  which  every  one  exhibits  his  powers,  is  of 
very  ancient  date.  Homer  gives  a  noble  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  games  conducted  by  Achilles,  in  hon¬ 
our  of  Patroclus ;  but  in  all  his  poems  there  is  no 
notice  of  statues  of  the  gods,  though  he  mentions 
the  sanctuary  at  Dodona,andthe  treasure-house 
of  Apollo  at  Delphi.  The  games  in  Homer  con¬ 
sist  in  wrestling  and  boxing,  running,  horse  and 
chariot  races,  throwing  the  discus  or  javelin,  and 
archery.  With  these  exercises  are  united  dance 
and  song,  to  express  and  form  part  of  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  social  exhilaration,  and  which  arts  like¬ 
wise  blossomed  into  beauty.  On  the  shield  of 
Achilles,  Hephaestus  represents,  among  other 


268  PHILOSOPHY 

things,  how  beautiful  youths  and  maidens  move 
as  quickly  “with  well-taught  feet/’  as  the  potter 
turns  his  wheel.  The  multitude  stand  round  en¬ 
joying  the  spectacle;  the  divine  singer  accom¬ 
panies  the  song  with  the  harp,  and  two  chief 
dancers  perform  their  evolutions  in  the  centre 
of  the  circle. 

These  games  and  aesthetic  displays,  with  the 
pleasures  and  honours  that  accompanied  them, 
were  at  the  outset  only  private,  originating  in 
particular  occasions;  but  in  the  sequel  they  be¬ 
came  an  affair  of  the  nation,  and  were  fixed  for 
certain  times  at  appointed  places.  Besides  the 
Olympic  games  in  the  sacred  district  of  Elis, 
there  were  also  held  the  Isthmian,  the  Pythian, 
and  Nemean,  at  other  places. 

If  we  look  at  the  inner  nature  of  these  sports, 
we  shall  first  observe  how  sport  itself  is  opposed 
to  serious  business,  to  dependence  and  need. 
This  wrestling,  running,  contending  was  no  seri¬ 
ous  affair;  bespoke  no  obligation  of  defence,  ho 
necessity  of  combat.  Serious  occupation  is  labour 
that  has  reference  to  some  want.  I  or  nature 
must  succumb;  if  the  one  is  to  continue, the  oth¬ 
er  must  fall.  In  contrast  with  this  kind  of  seri¬ 
ousness,  however,  sport  presents  the  higher  seri¬ 
ousness;  for  in  it  nature  is  wrought  into  spirit, 
and  although  in  these  contests  the  subject  has 
not  advanced  to  the  highest  grade  of  serious 
thought,  yet  in  this  exercise  of  his  physical  pow¬ 
ers,  man  shows  his  freedom,  viz.,  that  he  has 
transformed  his  body  to  an  organ  of  spirit. 

Man  has  immediately  in  one  of  his  organs, 
the  voice,  an  element  which  admits  and  requires 
a  more  extensive  purport  than  the  mere  sensu¬ 
ous  present.  We  have  seen  how  song  is  united 
with  the  dance,  and  ministers  to  it .  but,  subse¬ 
quently  song  makes  itself  independent,  and  re¬ 
quires  musical  instruments  to  accompany  it;  it 
then  ceases  to  be  unmeaning,  like  the  modula¬ 
tions  of  a  bird,  which  may  indeed  express  emo¬ 
tion,  but  which  have  no  objective  import;  but 
it  requires  an  import  created  by  imagination  and 
spirit,  and  which  is  then  further  formed  into 
an  objective  work  of  art. 

Chapter  2.  The  Objective  Work  of  Art 
If  the  subject  of  song  as  thus  developed  among 
the  Greeks  is  made  a  question,  we  should  say 
that  its  essential  and  absolute  purport  is  reli¬ 
gious.  We  have  examined  the  idea  embodied  in 
the  Greek  spirit;  and  religion  is  nothing  else 
than  this  idea  made  objective  as  the  essence  of 
being.  According  to  that  idea,  we  shall  observe 
also  that  the  divine  involves  the  vis  naturce  only 
as  an  element  suffering  a  process  of  transforma¬ 


OF  HISTORY 

tion  to  spiritual  power.  Of  this  natural  element, 
as  its  origin,  nothing  more  remains  than  the  ac¬ 
cord  of  analogy  involved  in  the  representation 
they  formed  of  spiritual  power;  for  the  Greeks 
worshipped  God  as  spiritual.  We  cannot,  there¬ 
fore,  regard  the  Greek  divinity  as  similar  to  the 
Indian — some  power  of  nature  for  which  the 
human  shape  supplies  only  an  outward  form.  The 
essence  is  the  spiritual  itself,  and  the  natural  is 
only  the  point  of  departure.  But  on  the  other 
hand,  it  must  be  observed,  that  the  divinity  of 
the  Greeks  is  not  yet  the  absolute,  free  spirit, 
but  spirit  in  a  particular  mode,  fettered  by  the 
limitations  of  humanity — still  dependent  as  a 
determinate  individuality  on  external  conditions. 
Individualities,  objectively  beautiful,  are  the 
gods  of  the  Greeks.  The  divine  spirit  is  here  so 
conditioned  as  to  be  not  yet  regarded  as  ab¬ 
stract  spirit,  but  has  a  specialized  existence — 
continues  to  manifest  itself  in  sense;  but  so  that 
the  sensuous  is  not  its  substance ,  but  is  only  an 
element  of  its  manifestation.  This  must  be  our 
leading  idea  in  the  consideration  of  the  Greek 
mythology,  and  we  must  have  our  attention  fixed 
upon  it  so  much  the  more  firmly,  as — partly 
through  the  influence  of  erudition,  which  has 
whelmed  essential  principles  beneath  an  infinite 
amount  of  details,  and  partly  through  that  de¬ 
structive  analysis  which  is  the  work  of  the  ab¬ 
stract  understanding — this  mythology,  together 
with  the  more  ancient  periods  of  Greek  history, 
has  become  a  region  of  the  greatest  intellectual 
confusion. 

In  the  idea  of  the  Greek  spirit  we  found  the 
two  elements,  nature  and  spirit,  in  such  a  rela¬ 
tion  to  each  other,  that  nature  forms  merely  the 
point  of  departure.  This  degradation  of  nature 
is  in  the  Greek  mythology  the  turning  point  of 
the  whole— expressed  as  the  war  of  the  gods,  the 
overthrow  of  the  Titans  by  the  race  of  Zeus.  The 
transition  from  the  Oriental  to  the  Occidental 
spirit  is  therein  represented,  for  the  Titans  are 
the  merely  physical,  natural  existences,  from 
whose  grasp  sovereignty  is  wrested.  It  is  true 
that  they  continue  to  be  venerated,  but  not  as 
governing  powers;  for  they  are  relegated  to  the 
verge  of  the  world.  The  Titans  are  powers  of  Na¬ 
ture,  Uranus,  Gaea,  Oceanus,  Selene,  Helios,  etc. 
Chronos  expresses  the  dominion  of  abstract  time, 
which  devours  its  children.  The  unlimited  power 
of  reproduction  is  restrained,  and  Zeus  appears 
as  the  head  of  the  new  divinities,  who  embody 
a  spiritual  import,  and  are  themselves  spirit.1 
It  is  not  possible  to  express  this  transition  more 

1  See  Hegel’s  Vorles,  iiber  die  Philos,  der  Religion,  II. 
p.  102,  sqq.  (2d  edition). 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  269 


distinctly  and  naively  than  in  this  myth;  the 
new  dynasty  of  divinities  proclaim  their  peculiar 
nature  to  be  of  a  spiritual  order. 

The  second  point  is,  that  the  new  divinities  re¬ 
tain  natural  elements,  and  consequently  in  them¬ 
selves  a  determinate  relation  to  the  powers  of 
nature,  as  was  previously  shown.  Zeus  has  his 
lightnings  and  clouds,  and  Hera  is  the  creatress 
of  the  natural,  the  producer  of  crescent  vitality. 
Zeus  is  also  the  political  god,  the  protector  of 
morals  and  of  hospitality.  Oceanus,  as  such,  is 
only  the  element  of  nature  which  his  name  de¬ 
notes.  Poseidon  has  still  the  wildness  of  that  ele¬ 
ment  in  his  character ;  but  he  is  also  an  ethical 
personage;  to  him  is  ascribed  the  building  of 
walls  and  the  production  of  the  Horse.  Helios  is 
the  sun  as  a  natural  element.  This  light,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  analogy  of  spirit,  has  been  trans¬ 
formed  to  self-consciousness,  and  Apollo  has 
proceeded  from  Helios.  The  name  Awceios  points 
to  the  connection  with  light ;  Apollo  was  a  herds¬ 
man  in  the  employ  of  Admetus,  but  oxen  not 
subjected  to  the  yoke  were  sacred  to  Helios :  his 
rays,  represented  as  arrows,  kill  the  python.  The 
idea  of  light  as  the  natural  power  constituting 
the  basis  of  the  representation,  cannot  be  dis¬ 
sociated  from  this  divinity;  especially  as  the 
other  predicates  attached  to  it  are  easily  united 
with  it,  and  the  explanations  of  Muller  and  oth¬ 
ers,  who  deny  that  basis, are  much  more  arbitary 
and  far-fetched.  For  Apollo  is  the  prophesying 
and  discerning  god — light,  that  makes  every¬ 
thing  clear.  He  is,  moreover,  the  healer  and 
strengthener ;  as  also  the  destroyer,  for  he  kills 
men.  He  is  the  propitiating  and  purifying  god, 
e.g.,  in  contravention  of  the  Eumenides,  the  an¬ 
cient  subterrene  divinities,  who  exact  hard,  stern 
justice.  He  himself  is  pure ;  he  has  no  wife,  but 
only  a  sister,  and  is  not  involved  in  various  dis¬ 
gusting  adventures,  like  Zeus;  moreover,  he  is 
the  discerner  and  declarer,  the  singer  and  leader 
of  the  dances,  as  the  sun  leads  the  harmonious 
dance  of  stars.  In  like  manner,  the  naiads  became 
the  Muses.  The  mother  of  the  gods,  Cybele,  con¬ 
tinuing  to  be  worshipped  at  Ephesus  as  Artemis, 
is  scarcely  to  be  recognized  as  the  Artemis  of 
the  Greeks,  the  chaste  huntress  and  destroyer  of 
wild  beasts.  Should  it  be  said  that  this  change 
of  the  natural  into  the  spiritual  is  owing  to  our 
allegorizing,  or  that  of  the  later  Greeks,  we  may 
reply,  that  this  transformation  of  the  natural 
to  the  spiritual  is  the  Greek  spirit  itself.  The 
epigrams  of  the  Greeks  exhibit  such  advances 
from  the  sensuous  to  the  spiritual.  But  the  ab¬ 
stract  understanding  cannot  comprehend  this 
blending  of  the  natural  with  the  spiritual. 


It  must  be  further  observed,  that  the  Greek 
gods  are  to  be  regarded  as  individualities — not 
abstractions,  like  “knowledge,”  “unity,”  “time,” 
“heaven,”  “necessity.”  Such  abstractions  do  not 
form  the  substance  of  these  divinities ;  they  are 
no  allegories,  no  abstract  beings,  to  which  vari¬ 
ous  attributes  are  attached,  like  the  Horatian 
“necessitas  clavis  trabalibus”  As  little  are  the 
divinities  symbols,  for  a  symbol  is  only  a  sign, 
an  adumbration  of  something  else.  The  Greek 
gods  express  of  themselves  what  they  are.  The 
eternal  repose  and  clear  intelligence  that  dig¬ 
nifies  the  head  of  Apollo,  is  not  a  symbol,  but 
the  expression  in  which  spirit  manifests  itself, 
and  shows  itself  present.  The  gods  are  personal¬ 
ities,  concrete  individualities :  an  allegorical  be¬ 
ing  has  no  qualities,  but  is  itself  one  quality  and 
no  more.  The  gods  are,  moreover,  special  char¬ 
acters,  since  in  each  of  them  one  peculiarity  pre¬ 
dominates  as  the  characteristic  one;  but  it  would 
be  vain  to  try  to  bring  this  circle  of  characters 
into  a  system.  Zeus,  perhaps,  may  be  regarded 
as  ruling  the  other  gods,  but  not  with  substantial 
power;  so  that  they  are  left  free  to  their  own 
idiosyncrasy.  Since  the  whole  range  of  spiritual 
and  moral  qualities  was  appropriated  by  the 
gods,  the  unity,  which  stood  above  them  all, 
necessarily  remained  abstract ;  it  was  therefore 
formless  and  unmeaning  fact — necessity,  whose 
oppressive  character  arises  from  the  absence  of 
the  spiritual  in  it;  whereas  the  gods  hold  a 
friendly  relation  to  men,  for  they  are  spiritual 
natures.  That  higher  thought,  the  knowledge 
of  unity  as  God — the  One  Spirit — lay  beyond 
that  grade  of  thought  which  the  Greeks  had  at¬ 
tained. 

With  regard  to  the  adventitious  and  special 
that  attaches  to  the  Greek  gods,  the  question 
arises,  where  the  external  origin  of  this  adven¬ 
titious  element  is  to  be  looked  for.  It  arises 
partly  from  local  characteristics,  the  scattered 
condition  of  the  Greeks  at  the  commencement 
of  their  national  life,  fixing  as  this  did  on  certain 
points,  and  consequently  introducing  local  rep¬ 
resentations.  The  local  divinities  stand  alone, 
and  occupy  a  much  greater  extent  than  they  do 
afterwards,  when  they  enter  into  the  circle  of 
the  divinities,  and  are  reduced  to  a  limited  posi¬ 
tion  ;  they  are  conditioned  by  the  particular  con¬ 
sciousness  and  circumstances  of  the  countries 
in  which  they  appear.  There  are  a  multitude  of 
Herculeses  and  Zeuses,  that  have  their  local  his¬ 
tory  like  the  Indian  gods,  who  also  at  different 
places  possess  temples  to  which  a  peculiar  legend 
attaches.  A  similar  relation  occurs  in  the  case 
of  the  Catholic  saints  and  their  legends ;  though 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


270 

here,  not  the  several  localities,  but  the  one 
Mater  Dei  supplies  the  point  of  departure,  being 
afterwards  localized  in  the  most  diversified 
modes.  The  Greeks  relate  the  liveliest  and  most 
attractive  stories  of  their  gods,  to  which  no  limit 
can  be  assigned,  since  rich  fancies  were  always 
gushing  forth  anew  in  the  living  spirit  of  the 
Greeks.  A  second  source  from  which  adventi¬ 
tious  specialities  in  the  conception  of  the  gods 
arose  is  that  worship  of  nature,  whose  represen¬ 
tations  retain  a  place  in  the  Greek  myths,  as  cer¬ 
tainly  as  they  appear  there  also  in  a  regenerated 
and  transfigured  condition. 

The  preservation  of  the  original  myths,  brings 
us  to  the  famous  chapter  of  the  “mysteries  ” 
already  mentioned.  These  mysteries  of  the 
Greeks  present  something  which,  as  unknown, 
has  attracted  the  curiosity  of  all  times,  under 
the  supposition  of  profound  wisdom.  It  must 
first  be  remarked  that  their  antique  and  primary 
character,  in  virtue  of  its  very  antiquity,  shows 
their  destitution  of  excellence — their  inferior¬ 
ity;  that  the  more  refined  truths  are  not  ex¬ 
pressed  in  these  mysteries,  and  that  the  view 
which  many  have  entertained  is  incorrect,  viz., 
that  the  unity  of  God,  in  opposition  to  poly¬ 
theism,  was  taught  in  them.  The  mysteries  were 
rather  antique  rituals;  and  it  is  as  unhistorical 
as  it  is  foolish  to  assume  that  profound  philosoph¬ 
ical  truths  are  to  be  found  there;  since,  on  the 
contrary,  only  natural  ideas — ruder  conceptions 
of  the  metamorphoses  occurring  everywhere  in 
nature,  and  of  the  vital  principle  that  pervades 
it — were  the  subjects  of  those  mysteries.  If  we 
put  together  all  the  historical  data  pertinent  to 
the  question,  the  result  we  shall  inevitably  arrive 
at  will  be  that  the  mysteries  did  not  constitute 
a  system  of  doctrines,  but  were  sensuous  cere¬ 
monies  and  exhibitions,  consisting  of  symbols  of 
the  universal  operations  of  nature,  as,  e.g.,  the 
relation  of  the  earth  to  celestial  phenomena.  The 
chief  basis  of  the  representations  of  Ceres  and 
Proserpine,  Bacchus  and  his  train,  was  the  uni¬ 
versal  principle  of  nature;  and  the  accompany¬ 
ing  details  were  obscure  stories  and  representa¬ 
tions,  mainly  bearing  on  the  universal  vital  force 
and  its  metamorphoses.  An  analogous  process 
to  that  of  nature,  spirit  has  also  to  undergo;  for 
it  must  be  twice-born,  i.e .,  abnegate  itself;  and 
thus  the  representations  given  in  the  mysteries 
called  attention,  though  only  feebly,  to  the  na¬ 
ture  of  spirit.  In  the  Greeks  they  produced  an 
emotion  of  shuddering  awe;  for  an  instinctive 
dread  comes  over  men,  when  a  signification  is 
perceived  in  a  form,  which  as  a  sensuous  phe¬ 
nomenon  does  not  express  that  signification,  and 


which  therefore  both  repels  and  attracts — 
awakes  surmises  by  the  import  that  reverberates 
through  the  whole,  but  at  the  same  time  a  thrill 
of  dread  at  the  repellent  form,  ^schylus  was  ac¬ 
cused  of  having  profaned  the  mysteries  in  his 
tragedies.  The  indefinite  representations  and 
symbols  of  the  mysteries,  in  which  the  profound 
import  is  only  surmised,  are  an  element  alien  to 
the  clear  pure  forms,  and  threaten  them  with 
destruction;  on  which  account  the  gods  of  art 
remain  separated  from  the  gods  of  the  mysteries, 
and  the  two  spheres  must  be  strictly  dissociated. 

Most  of  their  gods  the  Greeks  received  from 
foreign  lands,  as  Herodotus  states  expressly  with 
regard  to  Egypt,  but  these  exotic  myths  were 
transformed  and  spiritualized  by  the  Greeks; 
and  that  part  of  the  foreign  theogonies  which  ac¬ 
companied  them,  was,  in  the  mouth  of  the  Hel¬ 
lenes,  worked  up  into  a  legendary  narrative 
which  often  redounded  to  the  disadvantage  of 
the  divinities.  Thus  also  the  brutes  which  con¬ 
tinued  to  rank  as  gods  among  the  Egyptians 
were  degraded  to  external  signs,  accompanying 
the  spiritual  god.  While  they  have  each  an  indi¬ 
vidual  character,  the  Greek  gods  are  also  rep¬ 
resented  as  human,  and  this  anthropomorphism 
is  charged  as  a  defect.  On  the  contrary  (we  may 
immediately  rejoin),  man  as  the  spiritual  con¬ 
stitutes  the  element  of  truth  in  the  Greek  gods, 
which  rendered  them  superior  to  all  elemental 
deities,  and  all  mere  abstractions  of  the  One  and 
Highest  Being.  On  the  other  side  it  is  alleged  as 
an  advantage  of  the  Greek  gods  that  they  are 
represented  as  men — that  being  regarded  as  not 
the  case  with  the  Christian  God.  Schiller  says: 

While  the  gods  remained  more  human, 

The  men  were  more  divine. 

But  the  Greek  gods  must  not  be  regarded  as 
more  human  than  the  Christian  God.  Christ  is 
much  more  a  man:  he  lives,  dies,  suffers  death 
on  the  cross,  which  is  infinitely  more  human  than 
the  humanity  of  the  Greek  idea  of  the  beautiful. 
But  in  referring  to  this  common  element  of  the 
Greek  and  the  Christian  religions,  it  must  be 
said  of  both  that,  if  a  manifestation  of  God  is 
to  be  supposed  at  all,  his  natural  form  must  be 
that  of  spirit,  which  for  sensuous  conception 
is  essentially  the  human;  for  no  other  form  can 
lay  claim  to  spirituality.  God  appears  indeed  in 
the  sun,  in  the  mountains,  in  the  trees,  in  every¬ 
thing  that  has  life;  but  a  natural  appearance  of 
this  kind  is  not  the  form  proper  to  spirit:  here 
God  is  cognizable  only  in  the  mind  of  the  per¬ 
cipient.  If  God  himself  is  to  be  manifested  in  a 
corresponding  expression,  that  can  only  be  the 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  271 


human  form:  for  from  this  the  spiritual  beams 
forth.  But  if  it  were  asked:  Does  God  neces¬ 
sarily  manifest  himself?  The  question  must  be 
answered  in  the  affirmative;  for  there  is  no 
essential  existence  that  does  not  manifest  itself. 
The  real  defect  of  the  Greek  religion,  as  com¬ 
pared  with  the  Christian,  is,  therefore,  that  in 
the  former  the  manifestation  constitutes  the 
highest  mode  in  which  the  divine  being  is  con¬ 
ceived  to  exist — the  sum  and  substance  of  di¬ 
vinity;  while  in  the  Christian  religion  the  mani¬ 
festation  is  regarded  only  as  a  temporary  phase 
of  the  divine.  Here  the  manifested  God  dies,  and 
elevates  himself  to  glory;  only  after  death  is 
Christ  represented  as  sitting  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  The  Greek  god,  on  the  contrary,  exists 
for  his  worshippers  perennially  in  the  manifes¬ 
tation — only  in  marble,  in  metal  or  wood,  or  as 
figured  by  the  imagination. 

But  why  did  God  not  appear  to  the  Greeks  in 
the  flesh?  Because  man  was  not  duly  estimated, 
did  not  obtain  honour  and  dignity,  till  he  had 
more  fully  elaborated  and  developed  himself  in 
the  attainment  of  the  freedom  implicit  in  the 
aesthetic  manifestation  in  question;  the  form 
and  shaping  of  the  divinity  therefore  continued 
to  be  the  product  of  individual  views.  One  ele¬ 
ment  in  spirit  is  that  it  produces  itself — makes 
itself  what  it  is :  and  the  other  is  that  it  is  orig¬ 
inally  free — that  freedom  is  its  nature  and  its 
idea.  But  the  G  reeks,  since  they  had  not  attained 
an  intellectual  conception  of  themselves,  did  not 
yet  realize  spirit  in  its  universality,  had  not  the 
idea  of  man  and  the  essential  unity  of  the  divine 
and  human  nature  according  to  the  Christian 
view.  Only  the  self-reliant,  truly  subjective  spirit 
can  bear  to  dispense  with  the  phenomenal  side, 
and  can  venture  to  assign  the  divine  nature  to 
spirit  alone.  It  then  no  longer  needs  to  inweave 
the  natural  into  its  idea  of  the  spiritual,  in  order 
to  hold  fast  its  conception  of  the  divine,  and  to 
have  its  unity  with  the  divine,  externally  visible ; 
but  while  free  thought  thinks  the  phenomenal, 
it  is  content  to  leave  it  as  it  is ;  for  it  also  thinks 
that  union  of  the  finite  and  the  infinite,  and 
recognizes  it  not  as  a  mere  accidental  union,  but 
as  the  absolute — the  eternal  idea  itself.  Since 
subjectivity  was  not  comprehended  in  all  its 
depth  by  the  Greek  spirit,  the  true  reconcilia¬ 
tion  was  not  attained  in  it,  and  the  human  spirit 
did  not  yet  assert  its  true  position.  This  defect 
showed  itself  in  the  fact  of  fate  as  pure  sub¬ 
jectivity  appearing  superior  to  the  gods;  it  also 
shows  itself  in  the  fact,  that  men  derive  their 
resolves  not  yet  from  themselves,  but  from  their 
oracles.  Neither  human  nor  divine  subjectivity, 


recognized  as  infinite,  has  as  yet,  absolutely  de¬ 
cisive  authority. 

Chapter  3.  The  Political  Work  of  Art 
The  state  unites  the  two  phases  just  consid¬ 
ered,  viz.,  the  subjective  and  the  objective  work 
of  art.  In  the  state,  spirit  is  not  a  mere  object, 
like  the  deities,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it 
merely  subjectively  developed  to  a  beautiful 
physique.  It  is  here  a  living,  universal  spirit,  but 
which  is  at  the  same  time  the  self-conscious  spirit 
of  the  individuals  composing  the  community. 

The  democratical  constitution  alone  was 
adapted  to  the  spirit  and  political  condition  in 
question.  In  the  East  we  recognized  despotism, 
developed  in  magnificent  proportions,  as  a  form 
of  government  strictly  appropriate  to  the  dawn- 
land  of  history.  Not  less  adapted  is  the  democrat¬ 
ical  form  in  Greece,  to  the  part  assigned  to  it  in 
the  same  great  drama.  In  Greece,  viz.,  we  have 
the  freedom  of  the  individual,  but  it  has  not  yet 
advanced  to  such  a  degree  of  abstraction,  that 
the  subjective  unit  is  conscious  of  direct  depend¬ 
ence  on  the  substantial  principle — the  state  as 
such.  In  this  grade  of  freedom,  the  individual 
will  is  unfettered  in  the  entire  range  of  its  vital¬ 
ity,  and  embodies  that  substantial  principle,  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  particular  idiosyncrasy.  In  Rome, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  shall  observe  a  harsh  sov¬ 
ereignty  dominating  over  the  individual  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  state;  as  also  in  the  German  Empire, 
a  monarchy,  in  which  the  individual  is  connected 
with  and  has  devoirs  to  perform  not  only  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  monarch,  but  to  the  whole  monarch¬ 
ical  organization. 

The  democratical  state  is  not  patriarchal, 
does  not  rest  on  a  still  unreflecting,  undeveloped 
confidence,  but  implies  laws,  with  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  their  being  founded  on  an  equitable  and 
moral  basis,  and  the  recognition  of  these  laws  as 
positive.  At  the  time  of  the  kings,  no  political 
life  had  as  yet  made  its  appearance  in  Hellas; 
there  are,  therefore,  only  slight  traces  of  legis¬ 
lation.  But  in  the  interval  from  the  Trojan  War 
till  near  the  time  of  Cyrus,  its  necessity  was  felt. 
The  first  lawgivers  are  known  under  the  name  of 
The  Seven  Sages — a  title  which  at  that  time  did 
not  imply  any  such  character  as  that  of  the 
sophists — teachers  of  wisdom,  designedly  pro¬ 
claiming  the  right  and  true — but  merely  think¬ 
ing  men,  whose  thinking  stopped  short  of  science, 
properly  so  called.  They  were  practical  politi¬ 
cians;  the  good  counsels  which  two  of  them — 
Thales  of  Miletus  and  Bias  of  Priene — gave  to 
the  Ionian  cities,  have  been  already  mentioned. 
Thus  Solon  was  commissioned  by  the  Athenians 


27  2  PHILOSOPHY 

to  give  them  laws,  as  those  then  in  operation  no 
longer  sufficed.  Solon  gave  the  Athenians  a  con¬ 
stitution  by  which  all  obtained  equal  rights,  yet 
not  so  as  to  render  the  democracy  a  quite  ab¬ 
stract  one.  The  main  point  in  democracy  is  moral 
disposition.  Virtue  is  the  basis  of  democracy, 
remarks  Montesquieu ;  and  this  sentiment  is  as 
important  as  it  is  true  in  reference  to  the  idea 
of  democracy  commonly  entertained.  The  sub¬ 
stance  of  justice,  the  common  weal,  the  general 
interest,  is  the  main  consideration;  but  it  is  so 
only  as  custom,  in  the  form  of  objective  will, 
so  that  morality  properly  so  called — subjective 
conviction  and  intention — has  not  yet  mani¬ 
fested  itself.  Law  exists,  and  is  in  point  of  sub¬ 
stance,  the  law  of  freedom — rational  and  valid 
because  it  is  law ,  i.e.,  without  ulterior  sanction. 
As  in  beauty  the  natural  element — its  sensuous 
coefficient — remains,  so  also  in  this  customary 
morality,  laws  assume  the  form  of  a  necessity 
of  nature.  The  Greeks  occupy  the  middle  ground 
of  beauty  and  have  not  yet  attained  the  higher 
standpoint  of  truth.  While  custom  and  wont  is 
the  form  in  which  the  right  is  willed  and  done, 
that  form  is  a  stable  one,  and  has  not  yet  ad¬ 
mitted  into  it  the  foe  of  immediacy — reflection 
and  subjectivity  of  will.  The  interests  of  the 
community  may,  therefore,  continue  to  be  in¬ 
trusted  to  the  will  and  resolve  of  the  citizens, 
and  this  must  be  the  basis  of  the  Greek  consti¬ 
tution;  for  no  principle  has  as  yet  manifested 
itself,  which  can  contravene  such  choice  condi¬ 
tioned  by  custom,  and  hinder  its  realizing  itself 
in  action.  The  democratic  constitution  is  here 
the  only  possible  one :  the  citizens  are  still  un¬ 
conscious  of  particular  interests,  and  therefore 
of  a  corrupting  element:  the  objective  will  is  in 
their  case  not  disintegrated.  Athene  the  goddess 
is  Athens  itself — i.e.,  the  real  and  concrete  spirit 
of  the  citizens.  The  divinity  ceases  to  inspire 
their  life  and  conduct,  only  when  the  Will  has 
retreated  within  itself — into  the  adytum  of  cog¬ 
nition  and  conscience — and  has  posited  the  in¬ 
finite  schism  between  the  subjective  and  the 
objective.  The  above  is  the  true  position  of  the 
democratic  polity;  its  justification  and  abso¬ 
lute  necessity  rest  on  this  still  immanent  ob¬ 
jective  morality.  For  the  modern  conceptions  of 
democracy  this  justification  cannot  be  pleaded. 
These  provide  that  the  interests  of  the  commu¬ 
nity,  the  affairs  of  state,  shall  be  discussed  and 
decided  by  the  people;  that  the  individual  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  community  shall  deliberate,  urge 
their  respective  opinions,  and  give  their 
votes ;  and  this  on  the  ground  that  the  interests 
of  the  state  and  its  concerns  are  the  interests 


OF  HISTORY 

of  such  individual  members. 

All  this  is  very  well ;  but  the  essential  condi¬ 
tion  and  distinction  in  regard  to  various  phases 
of  democracy  is:  What  is  the  character  of  these 
individual  members?  They  are  absolutely  au¬ 
thorized  to  assume  their  position,  only  in  as  far 
as  their  will  is  still  objective  Will — not  one  that 
wishes  this  or  that,  not  mere  “good”  will.  For 
good  will  is  something  particular — rests  on  the 
morality  of  individuals,  on  their  conviction  and 
subjective  feeling.  That  very  subjective  freedom 
which  constitutes  the  principle  and  determines 
the  peculiar  form  of  freedom  in  our  world, 
which  forms  the  absolute  basis  of  our  political 
and  religious  life,  could  not  manifest  itself  in 
Greece  otherwise  than  as  a  destructive  element. 
Subjectivity  was  a  grade  not  greatly  in  advance 
of  that  occupied  by  the  Greek  spirit;  that  phase 
must  of  necessity  soon  be  attained:  but  it 
plunged  the  Greek  world  into  ruin,  for  the  polity 
which  that  world  embodied  was  not  calculated 
for  this  side  of  humanity,  did  not  recognize  this 
phase;  since  it  had  not  made  its  appearance 
when  that  polity  began  to  exist.  Of  the  Greeks  in 
the  first  and  genuine  form  of  their  freedom,  we 
may  assert,  that  they  had  no  conscience;  the 
habit  of  living  for  their  country  without  further 
reflection,  was  the  principle  dominant  among 
them.  The  consideration  of  the  state  in  the  ab¬ 
stract,  which  to  our  understanding  is  the  essen¬ 
tial  point,  was  alien  to  them.  Their  grand  object 
was  their  country  in  its  living  and  real  aspect 
— this  actual  Athens,  this  Sparta,  these  temples, 
these  altars,  this  form  of  social  life,  this  union 
of  fellow-citizens,  these  manners  and  customs. 
To  the  Greek  his  country  was  a  necessary  of  life, 
without  which  existence  was  impossible.  It  was 
the  Sophists — the  “Teachers  of  Wisdom” — who 
first  introduced  subjective  reflection,  and  the 
new  doctrine  that  each  man  should  act  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  ow?n  conviction.  When  reflection  once 
comes  into  play,  the  inquiry  is  started  whether 
the  principles  of  law  cannot  be  improved.  In¬ 
stead  of  holding  by  the  existing  state  of  things, 
internal  conviction  is  relied  upon;  and  thus  be¬ 
gins  a  subjective  independent  freedom,  in  which 
the  individual  finds  himself  in  a  position  to  bring 
everything  to  the  test  of  his  own  conscience, 
even  in  defiance  of  the  existing  constitution. 
Each  one  has  his  “principles,”  and  that  view 
which  accords  with  his  private  judgment  he  re¬ 
gards  as  practically  the  best,  and  as  claiming 
practical  realization.  This  decay  even  Thu¬ 
cydides  notices,  when  he  speaks  of  every  one’s 
thinking  that  things  are  going  on  badly  when  he 
has  not  a  hand  in  the  management. 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  273 


To  this  state  of  things,  in  which  every  one 
presumes  to  have  a  judgment  of  his  own,  con¬ 
fidence  in  great  men  is  antagonistic.  When,  in 
earlier  times,  the  Athenians  commission  Solon 
to  legislate  for  them,  or  when  Lycurgus  appears 
at  Sparta  as  lawgiver  and  regulator  of  the  state, 
it  is  evidently  not  supposed  that  the  people  in 
general  think  that  they  know  best  what  is  politi¬ 
cally  right.  At  a  later  time  also,  it  was  distin¬ 
guished  personages  of  plastic  genius  in  whom 
the  people  placed  their  confidence:  Cleisthenes, 
e.g.,  who  made  the  constitution  still  more  demo¬ 
cratic  than  it  had  been — Miltiades,  Themisto- 
cles,  Aristides,  and  Cimon,  who  in  the  Median 
wars  stand  at  the  head  of  Athenian  affairs — and 
Pericles,  in  whom  Athenian  glory  centres  as  in 
its  focus.  But  as  soon  as  any  of  these  great  men 
had  performed  what  was  needed,  envy  intruded, 

i.e.,  the  recoil  of  the  sentiment  of  equality 
against  conspicuous  talent,  and  he  was  either  im¬ 
prisoned  or  exiled.  Finally,  the  sycophants  arose 
among  the  people,  aspersing  all  individual  great¬ 
ness,  and  reviling  those  who  took  the  lead  in 
public  affairs. 

But  there  are  three  other  points  in  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  Greek  republics  that  must  be  particu¬ 
larly  observed. 

1.  With  democracy  in  that  form  in  which  alone 
it  existed  in  Greece,  oracles  are  intimately  con¬ 
nected.  To  an  independent  resolve,  a  consoli¬ 
dated  subjectivity  of  the  will  (in  which  the  latter 
is  determined  by  preponderating  reasons)  is  ab¬ 
solutely  indispensable;  but  the  Greeks  had  not 
this  element  of  strength  and  vigour  in  their  voli¬ 
tion.  When  a  colony  was  to  be  founded,  when 
it  was  proposed  to  adopt  the  worship  of  foreign 
deities,  or  when  a  general  was  about  to  give 
battle  to  the  enemy,  the  oracles  were  consulted. 
Before  the  battle  of  Plataea,  Pausanias  took  care 
that  an  augury  should  betaken  from  the  animals 
offered  in  sacrifice,  and  was  informed  by  the 
soothsayer  Tisamenus  that  the  sacrifices  were 
favorable  to  the  Greeks  provided  they  remained 
on  the  hither  side  of  the  Asopus,  but  the  con¬ 
trary,  if  they  crossed  the  stream  and  began  the 
battle.  Pausanias,  therefore,  awaited  the  attack. 
In  their  private  affairs,  too,  the  Greeks  came  to 
a  determination  not  so  much  from  subjective 
conviction  as  from  some  extraneous  suggestion. 
With  the  advance  of  democracy  we  observe  the 
oracles  no  longer  consulted  on  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  matters,  but  the  particular  views  of  popular 
orators  influencing  and  deciding  the  policy  of 
the  state.  As  at  this  time  Socrates  relied  upon 
his  “Daemon,”  so  the  popular  leaders  and  the 
people  relied  on  their  individual  convictions  in 


forming  their  decisions.  But  contemporaneously 
with  this  were  introduced  corruption,  disorder, 
and  an  unintermitted  process  of  change  in  the 
constitution. 

2.  Another  circumstance  that  demands  spe¬ 
cial  attention  here,  is  the  element  of  slavery. 
This  was  a  necessary  condition  of  an  aesthetic 
democracy,  where  it  was  the  right  and  duty  of 
every  citizen  to  deliver  or  to  listen  to  orations 
respecting  the  management  of  the  state  in  the 
place  of  public  assembly,  to  take  part  in  the 
exercise  of  the  gymnasia,  and  to  join  in  the  cele¬ 
bration  of  festivals.  It  was  a  necessary  condition 
of  such  occupations,  that  the  citizens  should  be 
freed  from  handicraft  occupations;  consequent¬ 
ly,  that  what  among  us  is  performed  by  free  citi¬ 
zens,  the  work  of  daily  life,  should  be  done  by 
slaves.  Slavery  does  not  cease  until  the  will  has 
been  infinitely  self-reflected,  until  right  is  con¬ 
ceived  as  appertaining  to  every  freeman,  and 
the  term  freeman  is  regarded  as  a  synonym  for 
man  in  his  generic  nature  as  endowed  with  rea¬ 
son.  But  here  we  still  occupy  the  standpoint  of 
morality  as  mere  wont  and  custom,  and  there¬ 
fore  known  only  as  a  peculiarity  attaching  to  a 
certain  kind  of  existence. 

3.  It  must  also  be  remarked,  thirdly,  that  such 
democratic  constitutions  are  possible  only  in 
small  states,  states  which  do  not  much  exceed 
the  compass  of  cities.  The  whole  polis  of  the 
Athenians  is  united  in  the  one  city  of  Athens. 
Tradition  tells  that  Theseus  united  the  scattered 
Demes  into  an  integral  totality.  In  the  time  of 
Pericles,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponnesian 
War,  when  the  Spartans  were  marching  upon 
Attica,  its  entire  population  took  refuge  in  the 
city.  Only  in  such  cities  can  the  interests  of  all 
be  similar;  in  large  empires,  on  the  contrary, 
diverse  and  conflicting  interests  are  sure  to  pre¬ 
sent  themselves.  The  living  together  in  one  city, 
the  fact  that  the  inhabitants  see  each  other 
daily,  render  a  common  culture  and  a  living 
democratic  polity  possible.  In  democracy,  the 
main  point  is  that  the  character  of  the  citizen 
be  plastic,  all  “of  a  piece.”  He  must  be  present  at 
the  critical  stages  of  public  business;  he  must 
take  part  in  decisive  crises  with  his  entire  per¬ 
sonality,  not  with  his  vote  merely;  he  must  min¬ 
gle  in  the  heat  of  action — the  passion  and  interest 
of  the  whole  man  being  absorbed  in  the  affair, 
and  the  warmth  with  which  a  resolve  was  made 
being  equally  ardent  during  its  execution.  That 
unity  of  opinion  to  which  the  whole  community 
must  be  brought  must  be  produced  in  the  individ¬ 
ual  members  of  the  state  by  oratorical  suasion.  If 
this  were  attempted  by  writing ,  in  an  abstract, 


274  PHILOSOPHY 

lifeless  way,  no  general  fervour  would  be  excited 
among  the  social  units ;  and  the  greater  the  num¬ 
ber.  the  less  weight  would  each  individual  vote 
have.  In  a  large  empire  a  general  inquiry  might 
be  made,  votes  might  be  gathered  in  the  several 
communities,  and  the  results  reckoned  up — as 
was  done  by  the  French  Convention.  But  a  polit¬ 
ical  existence  of  this  kind  is  destitute  of  life, 
and  the  world  is  ipso  facto  broken  into  frag¬ 
ments  and  dissipated  into  a  mere  paper-world. 
In  the  French  Revolution,  therefore,  the  repub¬ 
lican  constitution  never  actually  became  a  de¬ 
mocracy:  tyranny,  despotism,  raised  its  voice 
under  the  mask  of  freedom  and  equality. 

We  come  now  to  the  second  period  of  Greek 
History.  The  first  period  saw  the  Greek  spirit 
attain  its  aesthetic  development  and  reach  matu¬ 
rity — realize  its  essential  being.  The  second 
shows  it  manifesting  itself,  exhibits  it  in  its  full 
glory  as  producing  a  work  for  the  world,  assert¬ 
ing  its  principle  in  the  struggle  with  an  antago¬ 
nistic  force,  and  triumphantly  maintaining  it 
against  that  attack. 

The  Wars  with  the  Persians 

The  period  of  contact  with  the  preceding 
world-historical  people,  is  generally  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  the  second  in  the  history  of  any  nation. 
The  world-historical  contact  of  the  Greeks  was 
with  the  Persians;  in  that,  Greece  exhibited  it¬ 
self  in  its  most  glorious  aspect.  The  occasion  of 
the  Median  wars  was  the  revolt  of  the  Ionian 
cities  against  the  Persians,  in  which  the  Atheni¬ 
ans  and  Eretrians  assisted  them.  That  which,  in 
particular,  induced  the  Athenians  to  take  their 
part,  was  the  circumstance  that  the  son  of  Pisis- 
tratus,  after  his  attempts  to  regain  sovereignty 
in  Athens  had  failed  in  Greece, had  betaken  him¬ 
self  to  the  king  of  the  Persians.  The  Father  of 
history  has  given  us  a  brilliant  description  of 
these  Median  wars,  and  for  the  object  we  are 
now  pursuing  we  need  not  dwell  long  upon  them. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  Median  wars,  Lace¬ 
daemon  was  in  possession  of  the  hegemony,  part¬ 
ly  as  the  result  of  having  subjugated  and  en¬ 
slaved  the  free  nation  of  the  Messenians.  partly 
because  it  had  assisted  many  Greek  states  to 
expel  their  tyrants.  Provoked  by  the  part  the 
Greeks  had  taken  in  assisting  thelonians  against 
him,  the  Persian  King  sent  heralds  to  the  Greek 
cities  to  require  them  to  give  water  and  earth, 
i.e.y  to  acknowledge  his  supremacy.  The  Persian 
envoys  were  contemptuously  sent  back,  and  the 
Lacedaemonians  went  so  far  as  to  throw  them 
into  a  well — a  deed,  however,  of  which  they 
afterwards  so  deeply  repented,  as  to  send  two 


OF  HISTORY 

Lacedaemonians  to  Susa  in  expiation.  The  Per¬ 
sian  King  then  despatched  an  army  to  invade 
Greece.  With  its  vastly  superior  force  the  Atheni¬ 
ans  and  Plataeans,  without  aid  from  their  com¬ 
patriots,  contended  at  Marathon  under  Miltia- 
des,  and  gained  the  victory.  Afterwards,  Xerxes 
came  down  upon  Greece  with  his  enormous 
masses  of  nations  (Herodotus  gives  a  detailed 
description  of  this  expedition) ;  and  with  the 
terrible  array  of  land-forces  was  associated  the 
not  less  formidable  fleet.  Thrace,  Macedon,  and 
Thessaly  were  soon  subjugated;  but  the  en¬ 
trance  into  Greece  proper,  the  Pass  of  Thermo¬ 
pylae,  was  defended  by  three  hundred  Spartans 
and  seven  hundred  Thespians,  whose  fate  is  well 
known.  Athens,  voluntarily  deserted  by  its  in¬ 
habitants,  was  ravaged;  the  images  of  the  gods 
which  it  contained  were  “an  abomination”  to 
the  Persians,  who  worshipped  the  amorphous, 
the  unformed.  In  spite  of  the  disunion  of  the 
Greeks,  the  Persian  fleet  was  beaten  at  Salamis; 
and  this  glorious  battle-day  presents  the  three 
greatest  tragedians  of  Greece  in  remarkable 
chronological  association:  for/Eschylus  was  one 
of  the  combatants,  and  helped  to  gain  the  vic¬ 
tory,  Sophocles  danced  at  the  festival  that  cele¬ 
brated  it,  and  on  the  same  day  Euripides  was 
born.  The  host  that  remained  in  Greece,  under 
the  command  of  Mardonius,  was  beaten  at 
Plataea  by  Pausanias,  and  the  Persian  power  was 
consequently  broken  at  various  points. 

Thus  was  Greece  freed  from  the  pressure 
which  threatened  to  overwhelm  it.  Greater  bat¬ 
tles,  unquestionably,  have  been  fought;  but 
these  live  immortal  not  in  the  historical  records 
of  nations  only,  but  also  of  science  and  of  art, 
of  the  noble  and  the  moral  generally.  For  these 
are  world-historical  victories;  they  were  the 
salvation  of  culture  and  spiritual  vigour,  and 
they  rendered  the  Asiatic  principle  powerless. 
How  often,  on  other  occasions,  have  not  men 
sacrificed  everything  for  one  grand  object!  How 
often  have  not  warriors  fallen  for  duty  and  coun¬ 
try!  But  here  we  are  called  to  admire  not  only 
valour,  genius  and  spirit,  but  the  purport  of  the 
contest,  the  effect,  the  result,  which  are  unique 
in  their  kind.  In  all  other  battles  a  particular 
interest  is  predominant;  but  the  immortal  fame 
of  the  Greeks  is  none  other  than  their  due,  in 
consideration  of  the  noble  cause  for  which  de¬ 
liverance  was  achieved.  In  the  history  of  the 
world  it  is  not  the  formal  valour  that  has  been 
displayed,  not  the  so-called  merit  of  the  com¬ 
batants,  but  the  importance  of  the  cause  itself, 
that  must  decide  the  fame  of  the  achievement. 
In  the  case  before  us,  the  interest  of  the  world’s 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  275 


history  hung  trembling  in  the  balance.  Oriental 
despotism,  a  world  united  under  one  lord  and 
sovereign,  on  the  one  side,  and  separate  states, 
insignificant  in  extent  and  resources,  but  ani¬ 
mated  by  free  individuality,  on  the  other  side, 
stood  front  to  front  in  array  of  battle.  Never  in 
history  has  the  superiority  of  spiritual  power  over 
material  bulk,  and  that  of  no  contemptible 
amount,  been  made  so  gloriously  manifest.  This 
war,  and  the  subsequent  development  of  the 
states  which  took  the  lead  in  it,  is  the  most 
brilliant  period  of  Greece.  Everything  which 
the  Greek  principle  involved,  then  reached  its 
perfect  bloom  and  came  into  the  light  of  day. 

The  Athenians  continued  their  wars  of  con¬ 
quest  for  a  considerable  time,  and  thereby  at¬ 
tained  a  high  degree  of  prosperity;  while  the 
Lacedaemonians,  who  had  no  naval  power,  re¬ 
mained  quiet.  The  antagonism  of  Athens  and 
Sparta  now  commences — a  favorite  theme  for 
historical  treatment.  It  may  be  asserted  that  it 
is  an  idle  inquiry,  which  of  these  two  states  just¬ 
ly  claims  the  superiority,  and  that  the  endeavour 
should  rather  be,  to  exhibit  each  as  in  its  own 
department  a  necessary  and  worthy  phase  of  the 
Greek  spirit.  On  Sparta’s  behalf,  e.g.y  many  cate¬ 
gories  may  be  referred  to  in  which  she  displays 
excellence;  strictness  in  point  of  morals,  sub¬ 
jection  to  discipline,  etc.,  may  be  advantageous¬ 
ly  cited.  But  the  leading  principle  that  character¬ 
izes  this  state  is  political  virtue,  which  Athens 
and  Sparta  have,  indeed,  in  common,  but  which 
in  the  one  state  developed  itself  to  a  work  of 
art,  viz.,  free  individuality — in  the  other  re¬ 
tained  its  substantial  form.  Before  we  speak  of 
the  Peloponnesian  War,  in  which  the  jealousy 
of  Sparta  and  Athens  broke  out  into  a  flame,  we 
must  exhibit  more  specifically  the  fundamental 
character  of  the  two  states,  their  distinctions  in 
a  political  and  moral  respect. 

Athens 

We  have  already  become  acquainted  with 
Athens  as  an  asylum  for  the  inhabitants  of 
the  other  districts  of  Greece,  in  which  a  very 
mixed  population  was  congregated.  The  various 
branches  of  human  industry,  agriculture,  handi¬ 
craft,  and  trade  (especially  by  sea),  were  united 
in  Athens,  but  gave  occasion  to  much  dissension. 
An  antagonism  had  early  arisen  between  ancient 
and  wealthy  families  and  such  as  were  poorer. 
Three  parties,  whose  distinction  had  been 
grounded  on  their  local  position  and  the  mode 
of  life  which  that  position  suggested,  were  then 
fully  recognized.  These  were,  the  Pediaeans — 
inhabitants  of  the  plain,  the  rich  and  aristo¬ 


cratic  ;  theDiacrians — mountaineers,  cultivators 
of  the  vine  and  olive,  and  herdsmen,  who  were 
the  most  numerous  class;  and  between  the  two, 
the  Paralians,  inhabitants  of  the  coast,  the  mod¬ 
erate  party.  The  polity  of  the  state  was  waver¬ 
ing  between  aristocracy  and  democracy.  Solon 
effected,  by  his  division  into  four  property- 
classes,  a  medium  between  these  opposites.  All 
these  together  formed  the  popular  assembly  for 
deliberation  and  decision  on  public  affairs;  but 
the  offices  of  government  were  reserved  for  the 
three  superior  classes.  It  is  remarkable  that  even 
while  Solon  was  still  living  and  actually  present, 
and  in  spite  of  his  opposition,  Pisistratus  ac¬ 
quired  supremacy.  The  constitution  had,  as  it 
were,  not  yet  entered  into  the  blood  and  life 
of  the  community;  it  had  not  yet  become  the 
habit  of  moral  and  civil  existence.  But  it  is  still 
more  remarkable  that  Pisistratus  introduced  no 
legislative  changes,  and  that  he  presented  him¬ 
self  before  the  Areopagus  to  answer  an  accusa¬ 
tion  brought  against  him.  The  rule  of  Pisistra¬ 
tus  and  of  his  sons  appears  to  have  been  needed 
for  repressing  the  power  of  great  families  and 
factions — for  accustoming  them  to  order  and 
peace,  and  the  citizens  generally,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  the  Solonian  legislation.  This  being  ac¬ 
complished,  that  rule  was  necessarily  regarded 
as  superfluous,  and  the  principles  of  a  free  code 
enter  into  conflict  with  the  power  of  the  Pisis- 
tratidae.  The  Pisistratidae  were  expelled,  Hip¬ 
parchus  killed,  and  Hippias  banished.  Then  fac¬ 
tions  were  revived;  the  Alcmaeonidae,  who  took 
the  lead  in  the  insurrection,  favored  democracy; 
on  the  other  hand,  the  Spartans  aided  the  ad¬ 
verse  party  of  Isagoras,  which  followed  the 
aristocratic  direction.  The  Alcmaeonidae,  with 
Cleisthenes  at  their  head,  kept  the  upper  hand. 
This  leader  made  the  constitution  still  more  dem¬ 
ocratic  than  it  had  been;  the  <f>v Aat,  of  which 
hitherto  there  had  been  only  four,  were  increased 
to  ten,  and  this  had  the  effect  of  diminishing  the 
influence  of  the  clans.  Lastly,  Pericles  rendered 
the  constitution  yet  more  democratic  by  dimin¬ 
ishing  the  essential  dignity  of  the  Areopagus, 
and  bringing  causes  that  had  hitherto  belonged 
to  it,  before  the  demos  and  the  tribunals.  Peri¬ 
cles  was  a  statesman  of  plastic  antique  char¬ 
acter:  when  he  devoted  himself  to  public  life,  he 
renounced  private  life,  withdrew  from  all  feasts 
and  banquets,  and  pursued  without  intermission 
his  aim  of  being  useful  to  the  state — a  course  of 
conduct  by  which  he  attained  such  an  exalted 
position,  that  Aristophanes  calls  him  the  Zeus 
of  Athens.  We  cannot  but  admire  him  in  the 
highest  degree :  he  stood  at  the  head  of  a  light- 


276  PHILOSOPHY 

minded  but  highly  refined  and  cultivated  people; 
the  only  means  by  which  he  could  obtain  influ¬ 
ence  and  authority  over  them,  was  his  personal 
character  and  the  impression  he  produced  of  his 
being  a  thoroughly  noble  man,  exclusively  in¬ 
tent  upon  the  weal  of  the  state,  and  of  superior¬ 
ity  to  his  fellow-citizens  in  native  genius  and 
acquired  knowledge.  In  force  of  individual  char¬ 
acter  no  statesman  can  be  compared  with  him. 

As  a  general  principle,  the  democratic  consti¬ 
tution  affords  the  widest  scope  for  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  great  political  characters;  for  it  excels 
all  others  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that  it  not  only 
allows  of  the  display  of  their  powers  on  the  part 
of  individuals,  but  summons  them  to  use  those 
powers  for  the  general  weal.  At  the  same  time, 
no  member  of  the  community  can  obtain  influ¬ 
ence  unless  he  has  the  power  of  satisfying  the 
intellect  and  judgment,  as  well  as  the  passions 
and  volatility,  of  a  cultivated  people. 

In  Athens  a  vital  freedom  existed,  and  a  vital 
equality  of  manners  and  mental  culture;  and  if 
inequality  of  property  could  not  be  avoided,  it 
nevertheless  did  not  reach  an  extreme.  Together 
with  this  equality,  and  within  the  compass  of 
this  freedom,  all  diversities  of  character  and 
talent,  and  all  variety  of  idiosyncrasy  could  as¬ 
sert  themselves  in  the  most  unrestrained  man¬ 
ner,  and  find  the  most  abundant  stimulus  to 
development  in  its  environment;  for  the  pre¬ 
dominant  elements  of  Athenian  existence  were 
the  independence  of  the  social  units  and  a  cul¬ 
ture  animated  by  the  spirit  of  beauty.  It  was 
Pericles  who  originated  the  production  of  those 
eternal  monuments  of  sculpture,  whose  scanty 
remains  astonish  posterity;  it  was  before  this 
people  that  the  dramas  of  ;Eschylu.c  and  Sopho¬ 
cles  were  performed,  and  later  on  those  of  Euri¬ 
pides — which,  however,  do  not  exhibit  the  same 
plastic  moral  character,  and  in  which  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  corruption  is  more  manifest.  To  this  peo¬ 
ple  were  addressed  the  orations  of  Pericles:  from 
it  sprung  a  band  of  men  whose  genius  has  become 
classical  for  all  centuries;  for  to  this  number  be¬ 
long,  besides  those  already  named,  Thucydides, 
Socrates,  Plato,  and  Aristophanes — the  last  of 
whom  preserved  entire  the  political  seriousness 
of  his  people  at  the  time  when  it  was  being  cor¬ 
rupted;  and  who,  imbued  with  this  seriousness, 
wrote  anddramatizedwithaviewtohis  country’s 
weal.  We  recognize  in  the  Athenians  great  indus¬ 
try,  susceptibility  to  excitement,  and  develop¬ 
ment  of  individuality  within  the  sphere  of  spirit 
conditioned  by  the  morality  of  custom.  The  blame 
with  which  we  find  them  visited  in  Xenophon 
and  Plato,  attaches  rather  to  that  later  period 


OF  HISTORY 

when  misfortune  and  the  corruption  of  the  de¬ 
mocracy  had  already  supervened.  But  if  we 
would  have  the  verdict  of  the  ancients  on  the 
political  life  of  Athens,  we  must  turn,  not  to 
Xenophon,  nor  even  to  Plato,  but  to  those  who 
had  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  state  in 
its  full  vigour,  who  managed  its  affairs  and  have 
been  esteemed  its  greatest  leaders,  i.e.,  to  its 
statesmen.  Among  these,  Pericles  is  the  Zeus  of 
the  human  Pantheon  of  Athens.  Thucydides  puts 
into  his  mouth  the  most  profound  description 
of  Athenian  life,  on  the  occasion  of  the  funeral 
obsequies  of  the  warriors  who  fell  in  the  second 
year  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  He  proposes  to 
show  for  what  a  city  and  in  support  of  what  in¬ 
terests  they  had  died;  and  this  leads  the  speaker 
directly  to  the  essential  elements  of  the  Athe¬ 
nian  community.  He  goes  on  to  paint  the  char¬ 
acter  of  Athens,  and  what  he  says  is  most  pro¬ 
foundly  thoughtful,  as  well  as  most  just  and 
true.  “We  love  the  beautiful,”  he  says,  “but 
without  ostentation  or  extravagance;  we  phi¬ 
losophize  without  being  seduced  thereby  into 
effeminacy  and  inactivity  (for  when  men  give 
themselves  up  to  thought,  they  get  further  and 
further  from  the  practical — from  activity  for 
the  public,  for  the  common  weal).  We  are  bold 
and  daring ;  but  this  courageous  energy  in  action 
does  not  prevent  us  from  giving  ourselves  an  ac¬ 
count  of  what  we  undertake  (we  have  a  clear 
consciousness  respecting  it) ;  among  other  na¬ 
tions,  on  the  contrary,  martial  daring  has  its 
basis  in  deficiency  of  culture:  we  know  best  how 
to  distinguish  between  the  agreeable  and  the  irk¬ 
some  ;  notwithstanding  which,  we  do  not  shrink 
from  perils.”  Thus  Athens  exhibited  the  spec¬ 
tacle  of  a  state  whose  existence  was  essentially 
directed  to  realizing  the  beautiful,  which  had  a 
thoroughly  cultivated  consciousness  respecting 
the  serious  side  of  public  affairs  and  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  man’s  spirit  and  life,  and  united  with 
that  consciousness,  hardly  courage  and  practical 
ability. 

Sparta 

Here  we  witness  on  the  other  hand  rigid  ab¬ 
stract  virtue — a  life  devoted  to  the  state,  but  in 
which  the  activity  and  freedom  of  individuality 
are  put  in  the  background.  The  polity  of  Sparta 
is  based  on  institutions  which  do  full  justice  to 
the  interest  of  the  state,  but  whose  object  is  a 
lifeless  equality — not  free  movement.  The  very 
first  steps  in  Spartan  history  are  very  different 
from  the  early  stages  of  Athenian  development. 
The  Spartans  were  Dorians — the  Athenians, 
Ionians ;  and  this  national  distinction  has  an  in- 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  277 


fluence  on  their  constitution  also.  In  reference 
to  the  mode  in  which  the  Spartan  state  origi¬ 
nated,  we  observe  that  the  Dorians  invaded  the 
Peloponnesus  with  the  Heracleidae,  subdued  the 
indigenous  tribes,  and  condemned  them  to  slav¬ 
ery;  for  the  Helots  were  doubtless  aborigines. 
The  fate  that  had  befallen  the  Helots,  was  suf¬ 
fered  at  a  later  epoch  by  the  Messenians;  for  in¬ 
human  severity  of  this  order  was  innate  in  Spar¬ 
tan  character.  While  the  Athenians  had  a  family 
life,  and  slaves  among  them  were  inmates  of 
the  house,  the  relation  of  the  Spartans  to  the 
subjugated  race  was  one  of  even  greater  harsh¬ 
ness  than  that  of  the  Turks  to  the  Greeks;  a 
state  of  warfare  was  constantly  kept  up  in  La¬ 
cedaemon.  In  entering  upon  office,  the  Ephors 
made  an  unreserved  declaration  of  war  against 
the  Helots,  and  the  latter  were  habitually  given 
up  to  the  younger  Spartans  to  be  practised  upon 
in  their  martial  exercises.  The  Helots  were  on 
some  occasions  set  free,  and  fought  against  the 
enemy;  moreover,  they  displayed  extraordinary 
valour  in  the  ranks  of  the  Spartans ;  but  on  their 
return  they  were  butchered  in  the  most  coward¬ 
ly  and  insidious  way.  As  in  a  slave-ship  the  crew 
are  constantly  armed,  and  the  greatest  care  is 
taken  to  prevent  an  insurrection,  so  the  Spartans 
exercised  a  constant  vigilance  over  the  Helots, 
and  were  always  in  a  condition  of  war,  as  against 
enemies. 

Property  in  land  was  divided,  even  according 
to  the  constitution  of  Lycurgus  (as  Plutarch 
relates)  into  equal  parts,  of  which  9,000  only 
belonged  to  the  Spartans — i.e.y  the  inhabitants 
of  the  city — and  30,000  to  the  Lacedaemonians 
or  Periaeci.  At  the  same  time  it  was  appointed,  in 
order  to  maintain  this  equality,  that  the  por¬ 
tions  of  ground  should  not  be  sold.  But  how  lit¬ 
tle  such  an  institution  avails  to  effect  its  object, 
is  proved  by  the  fact,  that  in  the  sequel  Lace¬ 
daemon  owed  its  ruin  chiefly  to  the  inequality  of 
possessions.  As  daughters  were  capable  of  in¬ 
heriting,  many  estates  had  come  by  marriage 
into  the  possession  of  a  few  families,  and  at  last 
all  the  landed  property  was  in  the  hands  of  a 
limited  number;  as  if  to  show  how  foolish  it  is 
to  attempt  a  forced  equality — an  attempt  which, 
while  ineffective  in  realizing  its  professed  ob¬ 
ject,  is  also  destructive  of  a  most  essential  point 
of  liberty,  the  free  disposition  of  property.  An¬ 
other  remarkable  feature  in  the  legislation  of 
Lycurgus,  is  his  forbidding  all  money  except 
that  made  of  iron,  an  enactment  which  neces¬ 
sitated  the  abolition  of  all  foreign  business  and 
traffic.  The  Spartans  moreover  had  no  naval 
force — a  force  indispensable  to  the  support  and 


furtherance  of  commerce;  and  on  occasions 
when  such  a  force  was  required,  they  had  to  ap¬ 
ply  to  the  Persians  for  it. 

It  was  with  an  especial  view  to  promote  sim¬ 
ilarity  of  manners,  and  a  more  intimate  ac¬ 
quaintance  of  the  citizens  with  each  other,  that 
the  Spartans  had  meals  in  common — a  com¬ 
munity,  however,  which  disparaged  family  life; 
for  eating  and  drinking  is  a  private  affair,  and 
consequently  belongs  to  domestic  retirement. 
It  was  so  regarded  among  the  Athenians;  with 
them  association  was  not  material  but  spiritual, 
and  even  their  banquets,  as  we  see  from  Xeno¬ 
phon  and  Plato,  had  an  intellectual  tone.  Among 
the  Spartans,  on  the  other  hand,  the  costs  of  the 
common  meal  were  met  by  the  contributions  of 
the  several  members,  and  he  who  was  too  poor 
to  offer  such  a  contribution  was  consequently 
excluded. 

As  to  the  political  constitution  of  Sparta,  its 
basis  may  be  called  democratic,  but  with  con¬ 
siderable  modifications  which  rendered  it  almost 
an  aristocracy  and  oligarchy.  At  the  head  of  the 
state  were  two  kings,  at  whose  side  was  a  senate 
(yepowia),  chosen  from  the  best  men  of  the 
state,  and  which  also  performed  the  functions  of 
a  court  of  justice — deciding  rather  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  moral  and  legal  customs,  than  with 
written  laws.1  The  y epovo-ta  was  also  the  highest 
state-council — the  Council  of  the  Kings,  regu¬ 
lating  the  most  important  affairs.  Lastly,  one  of 
the  highest  magistracies  was  that  of  the  ephors , 
respecting  whose  election  we  have  no  definite  in¬ 
formation;  Aristotle  says  that  the  mode  of 
choice  was  exceedingly  childish.  We  learn  from 
Aristotle  that  even  persons  without  nobility  or 
property  could  attain  this  dignity.  The  ephors 
had  full  authority  to  convoke  popular  assem¬ 
blies,  to  put  resolutions  to  the  vote,  and  to  pro¬ 
pose  laws,  almost  in  the  same  way  as  the  trihuni 
plebis  in  Rome.  Their  power  became  tyrannical, 
like  that  which  Robespierre  and  his  party  exer¬ 
cised  for  a  time  in  France. 

While  the  Lacedaemonians  directed  their  en¬ 
tire  attention  to  the  state,  intellectual  culture — 
art  and  science — was  not  domiciled  among 
them.  The  Spartans  appeared  to  the  rest  of  the 
Greeks,  stiff,  coarse,  awkward  beings,  who  could 
not  transact  business  involving  any  degree  of 
intricacy,  or  at  least  performed  it  very  clumsily. 
Thucydides  makes  the  Athenians  say  to  the 

1  Otfried  Muller,  in  his  History  of  the  Dorians,  gives 
too  dignified  an  aspect  to  this  fact;  he  says  that  justice 
was,  as  it  were,  imprinted  on  their  minds.  But  such  an 
imprinting  is  always  something  indefinite;  laws  must  be 
written,  that  it  may  be  distinctly  known  what  is  forbid¬ 
den  and  what  is  allowed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


278 

Spartans:  “You  have  laws  and  customs  which 
have  nothing  in  common  with  others ;  and  be¬ 
sides  this,  you  proceed,  when  you  go  into  other 
countries,  neither  in  accordance  with  these,  nor 
with  the  traditionary  usages  of  Hellas.’'  In  their 
intercourse  at  home,  they  were,  on  the  whole, 
honourable:  but  as  regarded  their  conduct  to¬ 
wards  other  nations,  they  themselves  plainly  de¬ 
clared  that  they  held  their  own  good  pleasure 
for  the  commendable,  and  what  was  advanta¬ 
geous  for  theright.  It  is  well  known  that  in  Sparta 
(as  was  also  the  case  in  Egypt)  the  taking  away 
of  the  necessaries  of  life,  under  certain  condi¬ 
tions,  was  permitted;  only  the  thief  must  not 
allow  himself  to  be  discovered.  Thus  the  two 
states,  Athens  and  Sparta,  stand  in  contrast  with 
each  other.  The  morality  of  the  latter  is  rigidly 
directed  to  the  maintenance  of  the  state ;  in  the 
former  we  find  a  similar  ethical  relation,  but 
with  a  cultivated  consciousness,  and  boundless 
activity  in  the  production  of  the  beautiful — 
subsequently,  of  the  true  also. 

This  Greek  morality,  though  extremely  beau¬ 
tiful,  attractive  and  interesting  in  its  manifesta¬ 
tion,  is  not  the  highest  point  of  view  for  spiritual 
self-consciousness.  It  wants  the  form  of  infinity, 
the  reflection  of  thought  within  itself,  the  eman¬ 
cipation  from  the  natural  element — (the  sensu¬ 
ous  that  lurks  in  the  character  of  beauty  and 
divinity) — and  from  that  immediacy,  which  at¬ 
taches  to  their  ethics.  Self-comprehension  on 
the  part  of  thought  is  wanting — illimitable  self- 
consciousness — demanding,  that  what  is  re¬ 
garded  by  me  as  right  and  morality  should  have 
its  confirmation  in  myself,  from  the  testimony 
of  my  own  spirit;  that  the  beautiful  (the  idea 
as  manifested  in  sensuous  contemplation  or  con¬ 
ception)  may  also  become  the  true — an  inner, 
supersensuous  world.  The  standpoint  occupied 
by  the  aesthetic  spiritual  unity  which  we  have 
just  described,  could  not  long  be  the  resting- 
place  of  spirit;  and  the  element  in  which  fur¬ 
ther  advance  and  corruption  originated,  was 
that  of  subjectivity — inward  morality,  individ¬ 
ual  reflection,  and  an  inner  life  generally.  The 
perfect  bloom  of  Greek  life  lasted  only  about 
sixty  years — from  the  Median  wars,  b.c.  492,  to 
the  Peloponnesian  War,  b.c.  431.  The  principle 
of  subjective  morality  which  was  inevitably  in¬ 
troduced,  became  the  germ  of  corruption,  which, 
however,  showed  itself  in  a  different  form  in 
Athens  from  that  which  it  assumed  in  Sparta: 
in  Athens,  as  levity  in  public  conduct,  in  Sparta, 
as  private  depravation  of  morals.  In  their  fall, 
the  Athenians  showed  themselves  not  only  ami¬ 
able,  but  great  and  noble — to  such  a  degree  that 


we  cannot  but  lament  it;  among  the  Spartans, 
on  the  contrary,  the  principle  of  subjectivity  de¬ 
velops  itself  in  vulgar  greed  and  issues  in  vulgar 
ruin. 

The  Peloponnesian  War 

The  principle  of  corruption  displayed  itself 
first  in  the  external  political  development,  in 
the  contest  of  the  states  of  Greece  with  each 
other,  and  the  struggle  of  factions  within  the 
cities  themselves.  The  Greek  morality  had 
made  Hellas  unfit  to  form  one  common  state; 
for  the  dissociation  of  small  states  from  each 
other,  and  the  concentration  in  cities,  where  the 
interest  and  the  spiritual  culture  pervading  the 
whole,  could  be  identical,  was  the  necessary  con¬ 
dition  of  that  grade  of  freedom  which  the  Greeks 
occupied.  It  was  only  a  momentary  combination 
that  occurred  in  the  Trojan  War,  and  even  in 
the  Median  wars  a  union  could  not  be  accom¬ 
plished.  Although  the  tendency  towards  such  a 
union  is  discoverable,  the  bond  was  but  weak,  its 
permanence  was  always  endangered  by  jealousy, 
and  the  contest  for  the  hegemony  set  the  states 
at  variance  with  each  other.  A  general  outbreak 
of  hostilities  in  the  Peloponnesian  War  was  the 
consummation.  Before  it,  and  even  at  its  com¬ 
mencement,  Pericles  was  at  the  head  of  the 
Athenian  nation — that  people  most  jealous  of  its 
liberty;  it  was  only  his  elevated  personality  and 
great  genius  that  enabled  him  to  maintain  his 
position.  After  the  wars  with  the  Medes,  Athens 
enjoyed  the  hegemony;  a  number  of  allies — 
partly  islands,  partly  towns — were  obliged  to 
contribute  to  the  supplies  required  for  continu¬ 
ing  the  war  against  the  Persians;  and  instead  of 
the  contribution  being  made  in  the  form  of  fleets 
or  troops,  the  subsidy  was  paid  in  money.  There¬ 
by  an  immense  power  was  concentrated  in 
Athens;  a  part  of  the  money  was  expended  in 
great  architectural  works,  in  the  enjoyment  of 
which,  since  they  were  products  of  spirit,  the 
allies  had  some  share.  But  that  Pericles  did  not 
devote  the  whole  of  the  money  to  works  of  art, 
but  also  made  provision  for  the  demos  in  other 
ways,  was  evident  after  his  death,  from  the 
quantity  of  stores  amassed  in  several  magazines, 
but  especially  in  the  naval  arsenal.  Xenophon 
says:  “Who  does  not  stand  in  need  of  Athens? 
Is  she  not  indispensable  to  all  lands  that  are 
rich  in  corn  and  herds,  in  oil  and  wine — to  all 
who  wish  to  traffic  either  in  money  or  in  mind 
— to  craftsmen,  sophists,  philosophers,  poets, 
and  all  who  desire  what  is  worth  seeing  or  hear¬ 
ing  in  sacred  and  public  matters?” 

In  the  Peloponnesian  War,  the  struggle  was 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  279 


essentially  between  Athens  and  Sparta.  Thucy¬ 
dides  has  left  us  the  history  of  the  greater  part 
of  it.  and  his  immortal  work  is  the  absolute  gain 
which  humanity  has  derived  from  that  contest. 
Athens  allowed  herself  to  be  hurried  into  the  ex¬ 
travagant  projects  of  Alcibiades ;  and  when  these 
had  already  much  weakened  her,  she  was  com¬ 
pelled  to  succumb  to  the  Spartans,  who  were 
guilty  of  the  treachery  of  applying  for  aid  to 
Persia,  and  who  obtained  from  the  king  supplies 
of  money  and  a  naval  force.  They  were  also 
guilty  of  a  still  more  extensive  treason,  in  abol¬ 
ishing  democracy  in  Athens  and  in  the  cities  of 
Greece  generally,  and  in  giving  a  preponderance 
to  factions  that  desired  oligarchy,  but  were 
not  strong  enough  to  maintain  themselves  with¬ 
out  foreign  assistance.  Lastly,  in  the  peace  of 
Antalcidas,  Sparta  put  the  finishing  stroke  to 
her  treachery,  by  giving  over  the  Greek  cities 
in  Asia  Minor  to  Persian  dominion. 

Lacedaemon  had  therefore,  both  by  the  oli¬ 
garchies  which  it  had  set  up  in  various  countries, 
and  by  the  garrisons  which  it  maintained  in 
some  cities — as,  e.g.,  Thebes — obtained  a  great 
preponderance  in  Greece.  But  the  Greek  states 
were  far  more  incensed  at  Spartan  oppression 
than  they  had  previously  been  at  Athenian  su¬ 
premacy.  With  Thebes  at  their  head,  they  cast 
off  the  yoke,  and  the  Thebans  became  for  a  mo¬ 
ment  the  most  distinguished  people  in  Hellas. 
But  it  was  to  two  distinguished  men  among  its 
citizens  that  Thebes  owed  its  entire  power — 
Pelopidas  and  Epaminondas;  as  for  the  most 
part  in  that  state  we  find  the  subjective  pre¬ 
ponderant.  In  accordance  with  this  principle, 
lyrical  poetry,  that  which  is  the  expression  of 
subjectivity,  especially  flourished  there;  a  kind 
of  subjective  amenity  of  nature  shows  itself 
also  in  the  so-called  Sacred  Legion  which  form¬ 
ed  the  kernel  of  the  Theban  host,  and  was  re¬ 
garded  as  consisting  of  persons  connected  by 
amatory  bonds;  while  the  influence  of  subjec¬ 
tivity  among  them  was  especially  proved  by  the 
fact,  that  after  the  death  of  Epaminondas,  The¬ 
bes  fell  back  into  its  former  position.  Weakened 
and  distracted,  Greece  could  no  longer  find  safety 
in  itself,  and  needed  an  authoritative  prop.  In 
the  towns  there  were  incessant  contests;  the 
citizens  were  divided  into  factions,  as  in  the 
Italian  cities  of  the  middle  ages.  The  victory  of 
one  party  entailed  the  banishment  of  the  other; 
the  latter  then  usually  applied  to  the  enemies  of 
their  native  city,  to  obtain  their  aid  in  subjugat¬ 
ing  it  by  force  of  arms.  The  various  states  could 
no  longer  co-exist  peaceably:  they  prepared 
ruin  for  each  other,  as  well  as  for  themselves. 


We  have,  then,  now  to  investigate  the  corrup¬ 
tion  of  the  Greek  world  in  its  profounder  im¬ 
port,  and  may  denote  the  principle  of  that  cor¬ 
ruption  as  subjectivity  obtaining  emancipation 
for  itself.  We  see  subjectivity  obtruding  itself  in 
various  ways.  Thought — the  subjectively  univer¬ 
sal — menaces  the  beautiful  religion  of  Greece, 
while  the  passions  of  individuals  and  their  ca¬ 
price  menace  its  political  constitution.  In  short, 
subjectivity,  comprehending  and  manifesting 
itself,  threatens  the  existing  state  of  things  in 
every  department — characterized  as  that  state 
of  things  is  by  immediacy.  Thought,  therefore, 
appears  here  as  the  principle  of  decay — decay, 
viz.,  of  substantial  morality;  for  it  introduces 
an  antithesis,  and  asserts  essentially  rational 
principles.  In  the  oriental  states,  in  which  there 
is  no  such  antithesis,  moral  freedom  cannot  be 
realized,  since  the  highest  principle  is  abstrac¬ 
tion.  But  when  thought  recognizes  its  positive 
character,  as  in  Greece,  it  establishes  principles ; 
and  these  bear  to  the  real  world  the  relation  of 
essence  to  form.  For  the  concrete  vitality  found 
among  the  Greeks  is  customary  morality — a  life 
for  religion,  for  the  state,  without  further  re¬ 
flection,  and  without  analysis  leading  to  abstract 
definitions,  which  must  lead  away  from  the  con¬ 
crete  embodiment  of  them,  and  occupy  an  anti¬ 
thetical  position  to  that  embodiment.  Law  is 
part  of  the  existing  state  of  things,  with  spirit 
implicit  in  it.  But  as  soon  as  thought  arises,  it 
investigates  the  various  political  constitutions: 
as  the  result  of  its  investigation  it  forms  for  it¬ 
self  an  idea  of  an  improved  state  of  society,  and 
demands  that  this  ideal  should  take  the  place  of 
things  as  they  are. 

In  the  principle  of  Greek  freedom, inasmuch  as 
it  is  freedom,  is  involved  the  self-emancipation 
of  thought.  We  observed  the  dawn  of  thought 
in  the  circle  of  men  mentioned  above  under 
their  well-known  appellation  of  the  Seven  Sages. 
It  was  they  who  first  uttered  general  proposi¬ 
tions;  though  at  that  time  wisdom  consisted 
rather  in  a  concrete  insight.  Parallel  with  the 
advance  in  the  development  of  religious  art 
and  with  political  growth,  we  find  a  progressive 
strengthening  of  thought,  its  enemy  and  de¬ 
stroyer;  and  at  the  time  of  the  Peloponnesian 
War  science  was  already  developed.  With  the 
Sophists  began  the  process  of  reflection  on  the 
existing  state  of  things,  and  of  ratiocination. 
That  very  diligence  and  activity  which  we  ob¬ 
served  among  the  Greeks  in  their  practical  life, 
and  in  the  achievement  of  works  of  art,  showed 
itself  also  in  the  turns  and  windings  which  these 
ideas  took;  so  that,  as  material  things  are 


280  PHILOSOPHY 

changed,  worked  up  and  used  for  other  than 
their  original  purposes,  similarly  the  essential 
being  of  spirit — what  is  thought  and  known — is 
variously  handled;  it  is  made  an  object  about 
which  the  mind  can  employ  itself,  and  this  oc¬ 
cupation  becomes  an  interest  in  and  for  itself. 
The  movement  of  thought — that  which  goes  on 
within  its  sphere — a  process  which  had  formerly 
no  interest,  acquires  attractiveness  on  its  own 
account.  The  cultivated  Sophists,  who  were  not 
erudite  or  scientific  men,  but  masters  of  subtle 
turns  of  thought,  excited  the  admiration  of  the 
Greeks.  For  all  questions  they  had  an  answer; 
for  all  interests  of  a  political  or  religious  order 
they  had  general  points  of  view;  and  in  the 
ultimate  development  of  their  art,  they  claimed 
the  ability  to  prove  everything,  to  discover  a 
justifiable  side  in  every  position.  In  a  democ¬ 
racy  it  is  a  matter  of  the  first  importance  to  be 
able  to  speak  in  popular  assemblies,  to  urge 
one’s  opinions  on  public  matters.  Now  this  de¬ 
mands  the  power  of  duly  presenting  before  them 
that  point  of  view  which  we  desire  them  to  re¬ 
gard  as  essential.  For  such  a  purpose,  intellec¬ 
tual  culture  is  needed,  and  this  discipline  the 
Greeks  acquired  under  their  Sophists.  This  men¬ 
tal  culture  then  became  the  means,  in  the  hands 
of  those  who  possessed  it,  of  enforcing  their 
views  and  interests  on  the  demos:  the  expert 
Sophist  knew  how  to  turn  the^ubject  of  discus¬ 
sion  this  way  or  that  way  at  pleasure,  and  thus 
the  doors  were  thrown  wide  open  to  all  human 
passions.  A  leading  principle  of  the  Sophists 
was,  that  “Man  is  the  measure  of  all  things”; 
but  in  this,  as  in  all  their  apophthegms,  lurks 
an  ambiguity,  since  the  term  “man”  may  denote 
spirit  in  its  depth  and  truth,  or  in  the  aspect  of 
mere  caprice  and  private  interest.  The  Sophists 
meant  man  simply  as  subjective,  and  intended 
in  this  dictum  of  theirs,  that  mere  liking  was 
the  principle  of  right,  and  that  advantage  to  the 
individual  was  the  ground  of  final  appeal.  This 
sophistic  principle  appears  again  and  again, 
though  under  different  forms,  in  various  peri¬ 
ods  of  history ;  thus  even  in  our  own  times  sub¬ 
jective  opinion  of  what  is  right — mere  feeling — 
is  made  the  ultimate  ground  of  decision. 

In  beauty,  as  the  Greek  principle,  there  was 
a  concrete  unity  of  spirit,  united  with  reality, 
with  country  and  family,  etc.  In  this  unity  no 
fixed  point  of  view  had  as  yet  been  adopted 
within  the  spirit  itself,  and  thought,  as  far  as  it 
transcended  this  unity,  was  still  swayed  by  mere 
liking.  But  Anaxagoras  himself  had  taught,  that 
thought  itself  was  the  absolute  essence  of  the 
world.  And  it  was  in  Socrates,  that  at  the  be- 


OF  HISTORY 

ginning  of  the  Peloponnesian  War,  the  principle 
of  subjectivity — of  the  absolute  inherent  inde¬ 
pendence  of  thought — attained  free  expression. 
He  taught  that  man  has  to  discover  and  recog¬ 
nize  in  himself  what  is  the  right  and  good,  and 
that  this  right  and  good  is  in  its  nature  uni¬ 
versal.  Socrates  is  celebrated  as  a  teacher  of 
morality,  but  we  should  rather  call  him  the  in¬ 
ventor  of  morality.  The  Greeks  had  a  custom¬ 
ary  morality;  but  Socrates  undertook  to  teach 
them  what  moral  virtues,  duties,  etc.  were.  The 
moral  man  is  not  he  who  merely  wills  and  does 
that  which  is  right,  not  the  merely  innocent 
man,  but  he  who  has  the  consciousness  of  what 
he  is  doing. 

Socrates,  in  assigning  to  insight,  to  conviction, 
the  determination  of  men’s  actions,  posited  the 
individual  as  capable  of  a  final  moral  decision, 
in  contraposition  to  country  and  to  customary 
morality,  and  thus  made  himself  an  oracle,  in 
the  Greek  sense.  He  said  that  he  had  a  Saqu,oviov 
within  him,  which  counselled  him  what  to  do, 
and  revealed  to  him  what  was  advantageous  to 
his  friends.  The  rise  of  the  inner  world  of  sub¬ 
jectivity  was  the  rupture  with  the  existing  real¬ 
ity.  Though  Socrates  himself  continued  to  per¬ 
form  his  duties  as  a  citizen,  it  was  not  the  actual 
state  and  its  religion,  but  the  world  of  thought 
that  was  his  true  home.  Now  the  question  of 
the  existence  and  nature  of  the  gods  came  to 
be  discussed.  The  disciple  of  Socrates,  Plato, 
banished  from  his  ideal  state  Homer  and  Hes¬ 
iod,  the  originators  of  that  mode  of  conceiving 
of  religious  objects  which  prevailed  among  the 
Greeks;  for  he  desiderated  a  higher  conception 
of  what  was  to  be  reverenced  as  divine — one 
more  in  harmony  with  thought.  Many  citizens 
now  seceded  from  practical  and  political  life,  to 
live  in  the  ideal  world.  The  principle  of  Soc¬ 
rates  manifests  a  revolutionary  aspect  towards 
the  Athenian  state;  for  the  peculiarity  of  this 
state  was  that  customary  morality  was  the  form 
in  which  its  existence  was  moulded,  viz.,  an  in¬ 
separable  connection  of  thought  with  actual  life. 
When  Socrates  wishes  to  induce  his  friends  to 
reflection,  the  discourse  has  always  a  negative 
tone;  he  brings  them  to  the  consciousness  that 
they  do  not  know  what  the  right  is.  But  when  on 
account  of  the  giving  utterance  to  that  principle 
which  was  advancing  to  recognition,  Socrates  is 
condemned  to  death,  the  sentence  bears,  on  the 
one  hand,  the  aspect  of  unimpeachable  rectitude 
— inasmuch  as  the  Athenian  people  condemns 
its  deadliest  foe — but,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
of  a  deeply  tragical  character,  inasmuch  as  the 
Athenians  had  to  make  the  discovery  that  what 


THE  GREEK  WORLD 


they  reprobated  in  Socrates  had  already  struck 
firm  root  among  themselves,  and  that  they  must 
be  pronounced  guilty  or  innocent  with  him. 
With  this  feeling  they  condemned  the  accusers 
of  Socrates,  and  declared  him  guiltless.  In  Ath¬ 
ens  that  higher  principle  which  proved  the  ruin 
of  the  Athenian  state  advanced  in  its  develop¬ 
ment  without  intermission.  Spirit  had  acquired 
the  propensity  to  gain  satisfaction  for  itself — to 
reflect.  Even  in  decay  the  spirit  of  Athens  ap¬ 
pears  majestic,  because  it  manifests  itself  as  the 
free,  the  liberal,  exhibiting  its  successive  phases 
in  their  pure  idiosyncrasy,  in  that  form  in  which 
they  really  exist.  Amiable  and  cheerful  even  in 
the  midst  of  tragedy  is  the  light-heartedness 
and  nonchalance  with  which  the  Athenians 
accompany  their  morality  to  its  grave.  We  rec¬ 
ognize  the  higher  interest  of  the  new  culture  in 
the  fact  that  the  people  made  themselves  merry 
over  their  own  follies,  and  found  great  enter¬ 
tainment  in  the  comedies  of  Aristophanes,  which 
have  the  severest  satire  for  their  contents,  while 
they  bear  the  stamp  of  the  most  unbridled 
mirth. 

In  Sparta  the  same  corruption  is  introduced, 
since  the  social  unit  seeks  to  assert  his  individ¬ 
uality  against  the  moral  life  of  the  community: 
but  there  we  have  merely  the  isolated  side  of 
particular  subjectivity — corruption  in  its  un¬ 
disguised  form,  blank  immorality,  vulgar  self¬ 
ishness  and  venality.  All  these  passions  manifest 
themselves  in  Sparta,  especially  in  the  persons 
of  its  generals,  who,  for  the  most  part  living  at 
a  distance  from  their  country,  obtain  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  securing  advantages  at  the  expense  of 
their  own  state  as  well  as  of  those  to  whose  as¬ 
sistance  they  are  sent. 

The  Macedonian  Empire 

After  the  fall  of  Athens,  Sparta  took  upon 
herself  the  hegemony;  but  misused  it,  as  al¬ 
ready  mentioned,  so  selfishly,  that  she  was  uni¬ 
versally  hated.  Thebes  could  not  long  sustain 
the  part  of  humiliating  Sparta,  and  was  at  last 
exhausted  in  the  war  with  the  Phocians.  The 
Spartans  and  the  Phocians — the  former  because 
they  had  surprised  the  citadel  of  Thebes,  the 
latter  because  they  had  tilled  a  piece  of  land  be¬ 
longing  to  the  Delphic  Apollo — had  been  sen¬ 
tenced  to  pay  considerable  sums  of  money.  Both 
states  however  refused  payment;  for  the  Am- 
phictyonic  Council  had  not  much  more  author¬ 
ity  than  the  old  German  Diet,  which  the  Ger¬ 
man  princes  obeyed  only  so  far  as  suited  their 
inclination.  The  Phocians  were  then  to  be  pun¬ 
ished  by  the  Thebans ;  but  by  an  egregious  piece 


281 

of  violence,  by  desecrating  and  plundering  the 
temple  at  Delphi,  the  former  attained  momen¬ 
tary  superiority.  This  deed  completes  the  ruin 
of  Greece;  the  sanctuary  was  desecrated,  the 
god  so  to  speak,  killed ;  the  last  support  of  unity 
was  thereby  annihilated;  reverence  for  that 
which  in  Greece  had  been  as  it  were  always  the 
final  arbiter — its  monarchical  principle — was 
displaced,  insulted,  and  trodden  under  foot. 

The  next  step  in  advance  is  then  that  quite 
simple  one,  that  the  place  of  the  dethroned 
oracle  should  be  taken  by  another  deciding  will 
— a  real  authoritative  royalty.  The  foreign  Mac¬ 
edonian  king — Philip — undertook  to  avenge  the 
violation  of  the  oracle,  and  forthwith  took  its 
place,  by  making  himself  lord  of  Greece.  Philip 
reduced  under  his  dominion  the  Hellenic  states, 
and  convinced  them  that  it  was  all  over  with 
their  independence,  and  that  they  could  no 
longer  maintain  their  own  footing.  The  charge 
of  littleness,  harshness,  violence,  and  political 
treachery — all  those  hateful  characteristics  with 
which  Philip  has  so  often  been  reproached — did 
not  extend  to  the  young  Alexander,  when  he 
placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Greeks.  He 
had  no  need  to  incur  such  reproaches;  he  had 
not  to  form  a  military  force,  for  he  found  one 
already  in  existence.  As  he  had  only  to  mount 
Bucephalus,  and  take  the  rein  in  hand,  to  make 
him  obsequious  to  his  will,  just  so  he  found  that 
Macedonian  phalanx  prepared  for  his  purpose; 
that  rigid  well-trained  iron  mass,  the  power  of 
which  had  been  demonstrated  under  Philip,  who 
copied  it  from  Epaminondas. 

Alexander  had  been  educated  by  the  deepest 
and  also  the  most  comprehensive  thinker  of 
antiquity — Aristotle;  and  the  education  was 
worthy  of  the  man  who  had  undertaken  it.  Alex¬ 
ander  was  initiated  into  the  profoundest  meta¬ 
physics:  therefore  his  nature  was  thoroughly 
refined  and  liberated  from  the  customary  bonds 
of  mere  opinion,  crudities  and  idle  fancies.  Aris¬ 
totle  left  this  grand  nature  as  untrammelled  as 
it  was  before  his  instructions  commenced;  but 
impressed  upon  it  a  deep  perception  of  what  the 
true  is,  and  formed  the  spirit  which  nature  had 
so  richly  endowed,  to  a  plastic  being,  rolling 
freely  like  an  orb  through  its  circumambient 
ether. 

Thus  accomplished,  Alexander  placed  him¬ 
self  at  the  head  of  the  Hellenes,  in  order  to  lead 
Greece  over  into  Asia.  A  youth  of  twenty,  he 
commanded  a  thoroughly  experienced  army, 
whose  generals  were  all  veterans,  well  versed  in 
the  art  of  war.  It  was  Alexander’s  aim  to  avenge 
Greece  for  all  that  Asia  had  inflicted  upon  it 


282  PHILOSOPHY 

for  so  many  years,  and  to  fight  out  at  last  the 
ancient  feud  and  contest  between  the  east  and 
the  west.  While  in  this  struggle  he  retaliated 
upon  the  Oriental  world  what  Greece  had  suf¬ 
fered  from  it,  he  also  made  a  return  for  the  rudi¬ 
ments  of  culture  which  had  been  derived  thence, 
by  spreading  the  maturity  and  culmination  of 
that  culture  over  the  east;  and,  as  it  were, 
changed  the  stamp  of  subjugated  Asia  and  as¬ 
similated  it  to  a  Hellenic  land.  The  grandeur 
and  the  interest  of  this  work  were  proportioned 
to  his  genius,  to  his  peculiar  youthful  individ¬ 
uality,  the  like  of  which  in  so  beautiful  a  form 
we  have  not  seen  a  second  time  at  the  head  of 
such  an  undertaking.  For  not  only  were  the 
genius  of  a  commander,  the  greatest  spirit,  and 
consummate  bravery  united  in  him,  but  all  these 
qualities  were  dignified  by  the  beauty  of  his 
character  as  a  man  and  an  individual.  Though 
his  generals  are  devoted  to  him,  they  had  been 
the  long  tried  servants  of  his  father;  and  this 
made  his  position  difficult:  for  his  greatness  and 
youth  is  a  humiliation  to  them,  as  inclined  to 
regard  themselves  and  the  achievements  of  the 
past,  as  a  complete  work;  so  that  while  their 
envy,  as  in  Clitus’  case,  arose  to  blind  rage,  Alex¬ 
ander  also  was  excited  to  great  violence. 

Alexander’s  expedition  to  Asia  was  at  the 
same  time  a  journey  of  discovery;  for  it  was  he 
who  first  opened  the  Oriental  world  to  the  Euro¬ 
peans,  and  penetrated  into  countries — as,  e.g ., 
Bactria,  Sogdiana,  northern  India — which  have 
since  been  hardly  visited  by  Europeans.  The  ar¬ 
rangement  of  the  march,  and  not  less  the  mili¬ 
tary  genius  displayed  in  the  disposition  of  bat¬ 
tles,  and  in  tactics  generally,  will  always  remain 
an  object  of  admiration.  He  was  great  as  a  com¬ 
mander  in  battles,  wise  in  conducting  marches 
and  marshalling  troops,  and  the  bravest  soldier 
in  the  thick  of  the  fight.  Even  the  death  of 
Alexander,  which  occurred  at  Babylon  in  the 
three  and  thirtieth  year  of  his  age,  gives  us  a 
beautiful  spectacle  of  his  greatness,  and  shows 
in  what  relation  he  stood  to  his  army:  for  he 
takes  leave  of  it  with  the  perfect  consciousness 
of  his  dignity. 

Alexander  had  the  good  fortune  to  die  at  the 
proper  time;  i.e.y  it  may  be  called  good  fortune, 
but  it  is  rather  a  necessity.  That  he  may  stand 
before  the  eyes  of  posterity  as  a  youth,  an  early 
death  must  hurry  him  away.  Achilles,  as  re¬ 
marked  above,  begins  the  Greek  world,  and  his 
antitype  Alexander  concludes  it:  and  these 
youths  not  only  supply  a  picture  of  the  fairest 
kind  in  their  own  persons,  but  at  the  same  time 
afford  a  complete  and  perfect  type  of  Hellenic 


OF  HISTORY 

existence.  Alexander  finished  his  work  and  com¬ 
pleted  his  ideal;  and  thus  bequeathed  to  the 
world  one  of  the  noblest  and  most  brilliant  of 
visions,  which  our  poor  reflections  only  serve  to 
obscure.  For  the  great  world-historical  form  of 
Alexander,  the  modern  standard  applied  by  re¬ 
cent  historical  “philistines,”  that  of  virtue  or 
morality,  will  by  no  means  suffice.  And  if  it  be 
alleged  in  depreciation  of  his  merit,  that  he  had 
no  successor,  and  left  behind  no  dynasty,  we 
may  remark  that  the  Greek  kingdoms  that  arose 
in  Asia  after  him,  are  his  dynasty.  For  two  years 
he  was  engaged  in  a  campaign  in  Bactria,  which 
brought  him  into  contact  with  the  Massagetae 
and  Scythians;  and  there  arose  the  Graeco- 
Bactrian  kingdom  which  lasted  for  two  centuries. 
Thence  the  Greeks  came  into  connection  with 
India,  and  even  with  China.  The  Greek  domin¬ 
ion  spread  itself  over  northern  India,  and  San- 
dracottus  (Chandragupta)  is  mentioned  as  the 
first  who  emancipated  himself  from  it.  The  same 
name  presents  itself  indeed  among  the  Hindus, 
but  for  reasons  already  stated,  we  can  place 
very  little  dependence  upon  such  mention.  Other 
Greek  kingdoms  arose  in  Asia  Minor,  in  Ar¬ 
menia,  in  Syria,  and  Babylonia.  But  Egypt  es¬ 
pecially,  among  the  kingdoms  of  the  successors 
of  Alexander,  became  a  great  centre  of  science 
and  art;  for  a  great  number  of  its  architectural 
works  belong  to  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies,  as 
has  been  made  out  from  the  deciphered  inscrip¬ 
tions.  Alexandria  became  the  chief  centre  of 
commerce,  the  point  of  union  for  eastern  man¬ 
ners  and  tradition  with  western  civilization.  Be¬ 
sides  these,  the  Macedonian  kingdom,  that  of 
Thrace,  stretching  beyond  the  Danube,  that  of 
Illyria,  and  that  of  Epirus,  flourished  under  the 
sway  of  Greek  princes. 

Alexander  was  also  extraordinarily  attached 
to  the  sciences,  and  he  is  celebrated  as  next  to 
Pericles  the  most  liberal  patron  of  the  arts. 
Meier  says  in  his  History  of  Art,  that  his  intelli¬ 
gent  love  of  art  would  have  secured  him  an  im¬ 
mortality  of  fame  not  less  than  his  conquests. 

Section  III 

THE  FALL  OF  THE  GREEK 
SPIRIT 

This  third  period  in  the  history  of  the  Hellenic 
world,  which  embraces  the  protracted  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  evil  destiny  of  Greece,  interests  us 
less.  Those  who  had  been  Alexander’s  generals, 
now  assuming  an  independent  appearance  on 
the  stage  of  history  as  kings,  carried  on  long 
wars  with  each  other,  and  experienced,  almost 


THE  GREEK  WORLD  283 


all  of  them,  the  most  romantic  revolutions  of 
fortune.  Especially  remarkable  and  prominent 
in  this  respect  is  the  life  of  Demetrius  Polior- 
cetes. 

In  Greece  the  states  had  preserved  their  ex¬ 
istence :  brought  to  a  consciousness  of  their  weak¬ 
ness  by  Philip  and  Alexander,  they  contrived 
to  enjoy  an  apparent  vitality,  and  boasted  of  an 
unreal  independence.  That  self-consciousness 
which  independence  confers,  they  could  not 
have;  and  diplomatic  statesmen  took  the  lead 
in  the  several  states,  orators  who  were  not  at 
the  same  time  generals,  as  was  the  case  for¬ 
merly,  e.g.,  in  the  person  of  Pericles.  The  coun¬ 
tries  of  Greece  now  assume  various  relations  to 
the  different  monarchs,  who  continued  to  con¬ 
tend  for  the  sovereignty  of  the  Greek  states — 
partly  also  for  their  favour,  especially  for  that  of 
Athens:  for  Athens  still  presented  an  imposing 
figure — if  not  as  a  power,  yet  certainly  as  the 
centre  of  the  higher  arts  and  sciences,  especially 
of  philosophy  and  rhetoric.  Besides  it  kept  it¬ 
self  more  free  from  the  gross  excess,  coarseness 
and  passions  which  prevailed  in  the  other  states, 
and  made  them  contemptible;  and  the  Syrian 
and  Egyptian  kings  deemed  it  an  honour  to  make 
Athens  large  presents  of  corn  and  other  useful 
supplies.  To  some  extent  too  the  kings  of  the 
period  reckoned  it  their  greatest  glory  to  render 
and  to  keep  the  Greek  cities  and  states  inde¬ 
pendent.  The  emancipation  of  Greece  had  as  it 
were,  become  the  general  watchword;  and  it 
passed  for  a  high  title  of  fame  to  be  called  the 
deliverer  of  Greece.  If  we  examine  the  hidden 
political  bearing  of  this  word,  we  shall  find  that 
it  denotes  the  prevention  of  any  indigenous 
Greek  state  from  obtaining  decided  superiority, 
and  keeping  all  in  a  state  of  weakness  by  separa¬ 
tion  and  disorganization. 

The  special  peculiarity  by  which  each  Greek 
state  was  distinguished  from  the  others  con¬ 
sisted  in  a  difference  similar  to  that  of  their 
glorious  divinities,  each  one  of  whom  has  his 
particular  character  and  peculiar  being,  yet  so 
that  this  peculiarity  does  not  derogate  from  the 
divinity  common  to  all.  When  therefore,  this 
divinity  has  become  weak  and  has  vanished 
from  the  states,  nothing  but  the  bare  particular¬ 
ity  remains;  the  repulsive  speciality  which  ob¬ 
stinately  and  way wardly asserts  itself,  and  which 
on  that  very  account  assumes  a  position  of  abso¬ 
lute  dependence  and  of  conflict  with  others.  Yet 
the  feeling  of  weakness  and  misery  led  to  com¬ 
binations  here  and  there.  The  Mtolians  and 
their  allies  as  a  predatory  people,  set  up  injus¬ 
tice,  violence,  fraud,  and  insolence  to  others,  as 


their  charter  of  rights.  Sparta  was  governed  by 
infamous  tyrants  and  odious  passions,  and  in 
this  condition  was  dependent  on  the  Mace¬ 
donian  kings.  The  Boeotian  subjective  character 
had,  after  the  extinction  of  Theban  glory,  sunk 
down  into  indolence  and  the  vulgar  desire  of 
coarse  sensual  enjoyment.  The  Achcean  league 
distinguished  itself  by  the  aim  of  its  union  (the 
expulsion  of  tyrants) , by  rectitude  and  the  senti¬ 
ment  of  community.  But  this  too  was  obliged  to 
take  refuge  in  the  most  complicated  policy. 
What  we  see  here  on  the  whole  is  a  diplomatic 
condition,  an  infinite  involvement  with  the  most 
manifold  foreign  interests,  a  subtle  intertexture 
and  play  of  parties,  whose  threads  are  continu¬ 
ally  being  combined  anew. 

In  the  internal  condition  of  the  states,  which, 
enervated  by  selfishness  and  debauchery,  were 
broken  up  into  factions — each  of  which  on  the 
other  hand  directs  its  attention  to  foreign  lands, 
and  with  treachery  to  its  native  country  begs  for 
the  favours  of  the  kings — the  point  of  interest  is 
no  longer  the  fate  of  these  states,  but  the  great 
individuals ,  who  arise  amid  the  general  corrup¬ 
tion,  and  honourably  devote  themselves  to  their 
country.  They  appear  as  great  tragic  characters, 
who  with  their  genius,  and  the  most  intense 
exertion,  are  yet  unable  to  extirpate  the  evils  in 
question;  and  perish  in  the  struggle,  without 
having  had  the  satisfaction  of  restoring  to  their 
fatherland,  repose,  order  and  freedom,  nay,  even 
without  having  secured  a  reputation  with  poster¬ 
ity  free  from  all  stain.  Livy  says  in  his  prefa¬ 
tory  remarks :  “In  our  times  we  can  neither  en¬ 
dure  our  faults  nor  the  means  of  correcting 
them.”  And  this  is  quite  as  applicable  to  these 
last  of  the  Greeks,  who  began  an  undertaking 
which  was  as  honourable  and  noble,  as  it  was 
sure  of  being  frustrated.  Agis  and  Cleomenes, 
Aratus  and  Philopoemen,  thus  sunk  under  the 
struggle  for  the  good  of  their  nation.  Plutarch 
sketches  for  us  a  highly  characteristic  picture  of 
these  times,  in  giving  us  a  representation  of  the  im¬ 
portance  of  individuals  during  their  continuance. 

The  third  period  of  the  history  of  the  Greeks 
brings  us  to  their  contact  with  that  people  which 
was  to  play  the  next  part  on  the  theatre  of  the 
world’s  history;  and  the  chief  excuse  for  this 
contact  was,  as  pretexts  had  previously  been, 
the  liberation  of  Greece.  After  Perseus  the  last 
Macedonian  king,  in  the  year  168  B.c.  had  been 
conquered  by  the  Romans  and  brought  in  tri¬ 
umph  to  Rome,  the  Achaean  league  was  attacked 
and  broken  up,  and  at  last  in  the  year  146  B.c. 
Corinth  was  destroyed.  Looking  at  Greece  as 
Polybius  describes  it,  we  see  how  a  noble  nature. 


284  PHILOSOPHY 

such  as  his,  has  nothing  left  for  it  but  to  despair 
at  the  state  of  affairs  and  to  retreat  into  philoso¬ 
phy;  or  if  it  attempts  to  act,  can  only  die  in  the 
struggle.  In  deadly  contraposition  to  the  multi¬ 
form  variety  of  passion  which  Greece  presents 
— that  distracted  condition  which  whelms  good 


OF  HISTORY 

and  evil  in  one  common  ruin — stands  a  blind 
fate,  an  iron  power  ready  to  show  up  that  de¬ 
graded  condition  in  all  its  weakness,  and  to  dash 
it  to  pieces  in  miserable  ruin;  for  cure,  amend¬ 
ment,  and  consolation  are  impossible.  And  this 
crushing  destiny  is  the  Roman  power. 


THIRD  PART 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD 


Napoleon,  in  a  conversation  which  he  once 
had  with  Goethe  on  the  nature  of  tragedy,  ex¬ 
pressed  the  opinion  that  its  modern  phase  dif¬ 
fered  from  the  ancient,  through  our  no  longer 
recognizing  a  destiny  to  which  men  are  absolute¬ 
ly  subject,  and  that  policy  occupies  the  place  of 
the  ancient  fate.  This  therefore  he  thought  must 
be  used  as  the  modern  form  of  destiny  in  trag¬ 
edy,  the  irresistible  power  of  circumstances  to 
which  individuality  must  bend.  Such  a  power 
is  the  Roman  world ,  chosen  for  the  very  purpose 
of  casting  the  moral  units  into  bonds,  as  also  of 
collecting  all  deities  and  all  spirits  into  the 
pantheon  of  universal  dominion,  in  order  to 
make  out  of  them  an  abstract  universality  of 
power.  The  distinction  between  the  Roman  and 
the  Persian  principle  is  exactly  this — that  the 
former  stifles  all  vitality,  while  the  latter  allowed 
of  its  existence  in  the  fullest  measure.  Through 
its  being  the  aim  of  the  state  that  the  social  units 
in  their  moral  life  should  be  sacrificed  to  it, 
the  world  is  sunk  in  melancholy:  its  heart  is 
broken,  and  it  is  all  over  with  the  natural  side 
of  spirit,  which  has  sunk  into  a  feeling  of  un¬ 
happiness.  Yet  only  from  this  feeling  could  arise 
the  supersensuous,the  free  spirit  in  Christianity. 

In  the  Greek  principle  we  have  seen  spiritual 
existence  in  its  exhilaration,  its  cheerfulness  and 
enjoyment:  spirit  had  not  yet  drawn  back  into 
abstraction;  it  was  still  involved  with  the  nat¬ 
ural  element,  the  idiosyncrasy  of  individuals; 
on  which  account  the  virtues  of  individuals 
themselves  became  moral  works  of  art.  Abstract 
universal  personality  had  not  yet  appeared,  for 
spirit  must  first  develop  itself  to  that  form  of 
abstract  universality  which  exercised  the  severe 
discipline  over  humanity  now  under  consid¬ 
eration.  Here,  in  Rome,  then,  we  find  that  free 
universality,  that  abstract  freedom,  which  on 
the  one  hand  sets  an  abstract  state,  a  political 
constitution  and  power,  over  concrete  individ¬ 
uality;  on  the  other  side  creates  a  personality  in 
opposition  to  that  universality,  the  inherent  free¬ 
dom  of  the  abstract  ego,  which  must  be  distin¬ 


guished  from  individual  idiosyncrasy.  For  per¬ 
sonality  constitutes  the  fundamental  condition 
of  legal  right :  it  appears  chiefly  in  the  category 
of  property,  but  it  is  indifferent  to  the  concrete 
characteristics  of  the  living  spirit  with  which  in¬ 
dividuality  is  concerned.  These  two  elements, 
which  constitute  Rome — political  universality 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  abstract  freedom  of 
the  individual  on  the  other — appear,  in  the  first 
instance,  in  the  form  of  subjectivity.  This  sub¬ 
jectivity,  this  retreating  into  one’s  self  which 
we  observed  as  the  corruption  of  the  Greek 
spirit,  becomes  here  the  ground  on  which  a  new 
side  of  the  world’s  history  arises.  In  considering 
the  Roman  world,  we  have  not  to  do  with  a  con¬ 
cretely  spiritual  life,  rich  in  itself ;  but  the  world- 
historical  element  in  it  is  the  abstractum  of  uni¬ 
versality,  and  the  object  which  is  pursued  with 
soulless  and  heartless  severity,  is  mere  domin¬ 
ion,  in  order  to  enforce  that  abstractum. 

In  Greece,  democracy  was  the  fundamental 
condition  of  political  life,  as  in  the  east,  despot¬ 
ism;  here  we  have  aristocracy  of  a  rigid  order, 
in  a  state  of  opposition  to  the  people.  In  Greece 
also  the  democracy  was  rent  asunder,  but  only 
in  the  way  of  factions ;  in  Rome  it  is  principles 
that  keep  the  entire  community  in  a  divided 
state — they  occupy  a  hostile  position  towards, 
and  struggle  with,  each  other:  first  the  aris¬ 
tocracy  with  the  kings,  then  the  plebs  with  the 
aristocracy,  till  democracy  gets  the  upper  hand ; 
then  first  arise  factions  in  which  originated  that 
later  aristocracy  of  commanding  individuals 
which  subjugated  the  world.  It  is  this  dualism 
that,  properly  speaking,  marks  Rome’s  inmost 
being. 

Erudition  has  regarded  the  Roman  history 
from  various  points  of  view,  and  has  adopted 
very  different  and  opposing  opinions:  this  is 
especially  the  case  with  the  more  ancient  part 
of  the  history,  which  has  been  taken  up  by  three 
different  classes  of  literati — historians,  philolo¬ 
gists,  and  jurists.  The  historians  hold  to  the 
grand  features,  and  show  respect  for  the  history 


286  PHILOSOPHY 

as  such;  so  that  we  may  after  all  see  our  way 
best  under  their  guidance,  since  they  allow  the 
validity  of  the  records  in  the  case  of  leading 
events.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  philologists,  by 
whom  generally  received  traditions  are  less  re¬ 
garded,  and  who  devote  more  attention  to  small 
details  which  can  be  combined  in  various  ways. 
These  combinations  gain  a  footing  first  as  his¬ 
torical  hypotheses,  but  soon  after  as  established 
facts.  To  the  same  degree  as  the  philologists  in 
their  department,  have  the  jurists  in  that  of  Ro¬ 
man  law,  instituted  the  minutest  examination  and 
involved  their  inferences  with  hypothesis.  The 
result  is  that  the  most  ancient  part  of  Roman 
history  has  been  declared  to  be  nothing  but 
fable;  so  that  this  department  of  inquiry  is 
brought  entirely  within  the  province  of  learned 
criticism,  which  always  finds  the  most  to  do 
where  the  least  is  to  be  got  for  the  labour.  While, 
on  the  one  side,  the  poetry  and  the  myths  of  the 
Greeks  are  said  to  contain  profound  historical 
truths,  and  are  thus  transmuted  into  history,  the 
Romans,  on  the  contrary,  have  myths  and  poeti¬ 
cal  views  affiliated  upon  them;  and  epopees  are 
affirmed  to  be  at  the  basis  of  what  has  been 
hitherto  taken  for  prosaic  and  historical. 

With  these  preliminary  remarks  we  proceed 
to  describe  the  locality. 

The  Roman  world  has  its  centre  in  Italy; 
which  is  extremely  similar  to  Greece,  and,  like 
it,  forms  a  peninsula,  only  not  so  deeply  in¬ 
dented.  Within  this  country,  the  city  of  Rome 
itself  formed  the  centre  of  the  centre.  Napoleon 
in  his  memoirs  takes  up  the  question,  which 
city — if  Italy  were  independent  and  formed  a 
totality — would  be  best  adapted  for  its  capital. 
Rome,  Venice,  and  Milan  may  put  forward 
claims  to  the  honour;  but  it  is  immediately  evi¬ 
dent  that  none  of  these  cities  would  supply  a 
centre.  Northern  Italy  constitutes  a  basin  of  the 
river  Po,  and  is  quite  distinct  from  the  body  of 
the  peninsula;  Venice  is  connected  only  with 
higher  Italy,  not  with  the  south;  Rome,  on  the 
other  hand,  would,  perhaps, be  naturally  a  centre 
for  middle  and  lower  Italy,  but  only  artificially 
and  violently  for  those  lands  which  were  sub¬ 
jected  to  it  in  higher  Italy.  The  Roman  state 
rests  geographically,  as  well  as  historically,  on 
the  element  of  force. 

The  locality  of  Italy,  then,  presents  no  natural 
unity — as  the  valley  of  the  Nile ;  the  unity  was 
similar  to  that  which  Macedonia  by  its  sover¬ 
eignty  gave  to  Greece ;  though  Italy  wanted  that 
permeation  by  one  spirit,  which  Greece  pos¬ 
sessed  through  equality  of  culture ;  for  it  was  in¬ 
habited  by  very  various  races.  Niebuhr  has  pref- 


OF  HISTORY 

aced  his  Roman  history  by  a  profoundly  erudite 
treatise  on  the  peoples  of  Italy;  but  from  which 
no  connection  between  them  and  the  Roman 
history  is  visible.  In  fact,  Niebuhr’s  History  can 
only  be  regarded  as  a  criticism  of  Roman  his¬ 
tory,  for  it  consists  of  a  series  of  treatises  which 
by  no  means  possess  the  unity  of  history. 

We  observed  subjective  inwardness  as  the 
general  principle  of  the  Roman  world.  The 
course  of  Roman  history,  therefore,  involves 
the  expansion  of  undeveloped  subjectivity,  in¬ 
ward  conviction  of  existence,  to  the  visibility  of 
the  real  world.  The  principle  of  subjective  in¬ 
wardness  receives  positive  application  in  the 
first  place  only  from  without,  through  the  par¬ 
ticular  volition  of  the  sovereignty,  the  govern¬ 
ment,  etc.  The  development  consists  in  the  puri¬ 
fication  of  inwardness  to  abstract  personality, 
which  gives  itself  reality  in  the  existence  of  pri¬ 
vate  property;  the  mutually  repellent  social 
units  can  then  be  held  together  only  by  despotic 
power.  The  general  course  of  the  Roman  world 
may  be  defined  as  this:  the  transition  from  the 
inner  sanctum  of  subjectivity  to  its  direct  oppo¬ 
site.  The  development  is  here  not  of  the  same 
kind  as  that  in  Greece — the  unfolding  and  ex¬ 
panding  of  its  own  substance  on  the  part  of  the 
principle;  but  it  is  the  transition  to  its  opposite, 
which  latter  does  not  appear  as  an  element  of 
corruption,  but  is  demanded  and  posited  by  the 
principle  itself. 

As  to  the  particular  sections  of  the  Roman 
history,  the  common  division  is  that  into  the 
monarchy,  the  republic,  and  the  empire — as  if 
in  these  forms  different  principles  made  their 
appearance ;  but  the  same  principle,  that  of  the 
Roman  spirit,  underlies  their  development.  In 
our  division,  we  must  rather  keep  in  view  the 
course  of  history  generally.  The  annals  of  every 
world-historical  people  were  divided  above  into 
three  periods,  and  this  statement  must  prove  it¬ 
self  true  in  this  case  also.  The  first  period  com¬ 
prehends  the  rudiments  of  Rome,  in  which  the 
elements  which  are  essentially  opposed,  still 
repose  in  calm  unity;  until  the  contrarieties 
have  acquired  strength,  and  the  unity  of  the 
state  becomes  a  powerful  one,  through  that  an¬ 
tithetical  condition  having  been  produced  and 
maintained  within  it.  In  this  vigorous  condition 
the  state  directs  its  forces  outwards,  i.e.,  in  the 
second  period ,  and  makes  its  debut  on  the  theatre 
of  general  history;  this  is  the  noblest  period  of 
Rome,  the  Punic  Wars  and  the  contact  with  the 
antecedent  world-historical  people.  A  wider  stage 
is  opened,  towards  the  east;  the  history  at  the 
epoch  of  this  contact  has  been  treated  by  the 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  287 


noble  Polybius.  The  Roman  Empire  now  ac¬ 
quired  that  world-conquering  extension  which 
paved  the  way  for  its  fall.  Internal  distraction 
supervened,  while  the  antithesis  was  developing 
itself  to  self-contradiction  and  utter  incompati¬ 
bility;  it  closes  with  despotism,  which  marks  the 
third  period.  The  Roman  power  appears  here  in 
its  pomp  and  splendour;  but  it  is  at  the  same  time 
profoundly  ruptured  within  itself,  and  the  Chris¬ 
tian  religion,  which  begins  with  the  imperial 
dominion,  receives  a  great  extension.  The  third 
period  comprises  the  contact  of  Rome  with  the 
north  and  the  German  peoples,  whose  turn  is 
now  come  to  play  their  part  in  history. 

Section  I 

ROME  TO  THE  TIME  OF  THE 
SECOND  PUNIC  WAR 

Chapter  1.  The  Elements  of  the 
Roman  Spirit 

Before  we  come  to  the  Roman  history,  we  have 
to  consider  the  elements  of  the  Roman  spirit 
in  general,  and  mention  and  investigate  the 
origin  of  Rome  with  a  reference  to  them.  Rome 
arose  outside  recognized  countries ,  viz.,  in  an 
angle  where  three  different  districts  met — those 
of  the  Latins,  Sabines,  and  Etruscans ;  it  was  not 
formed  from  some  ancient  stem,  connected  by 
natural  patriarchal  bonds,  whose  origin  might 
be  traced  up  to  remote  times  (as  seems  to  have 
been  the  case  with  the  Persians,  who,  however, 
even  then  ruled  a  large  empire)  ;  but  Rome  was 
from  the  very  beginning,  of  artificial  and  violent, 
not  spontaneous  growth.  It  is  related  that  the 
descendants  of  the  Trojans,  led  by  /Eneas  to 
Italy,  founded  Rome;  for  the  connection  with 
Asia  was  a  much  cherished  tradition,  and  there 
are  in  Italy,  France,  and  Germany  itself  (Xan- 
ten)  many  towns  which  refer  their  origin,  or 
their  names,  to  the  fugitive  Trojans.  Livy  speaks 
of  the  ancient  tribes  of  Rome,  the  Ramnenses, 
Titienses,  and  Luceres .  Now  if  we  look  upon  these 
as  distinct  nations,  and  assert  that  they  were 
really  the  elements  from  which  Rome  was 
formed,  a  view  which  in  recent  times  has  very 
often  striven  to  obtain  currency,  we  directly 
subvert  the  historical  tradition.  All  historians 
agree  that  at  an  early  period,  shepherds,  under 
the  leadership  of  chieftains,  roved  about  on  the 
hills  of  Rome ;  that  the  first  Roman  community 
constituted  itself  asapredatorystate;and  that  it 
was  with  difficulty  that  the  scattered  inhabitants 
of  the  vicinity  were  thus  united.  The  details  of 
these  circumstances  are  also  given.  Those  preda¬ 


tory  shepherds  received  every  contribution  to 
their  community  that  chose  to  join  them,  (Livy 
calls  it  a  colluvies).  The  rabble  of  all  the  three 
districts  between  which  Rome  lay,  was  collected 
in  the  new  city.  The  historians  state  that  this 
point  was  very  well  chosen  on  a  hill  close  to  the 
river,  and  particularly  adapted  to  make  it  an 
asylum  for  all  delinquents.  It  is  equally  histor¬ 
ical  that  in  the  newly  formed  state  there  were 
no  women,  and  that  the  neighboring  states  would 
enter  into  no  connubia  with  it:  both  circum¬ 
stances  characterize  it  as  predatory  union,  with 
which  the  other  states  wished  to  have  no  connec¬ 
tion.  They  also  refused  the  invitation  to  their 
religious  festivals ;  and  only  the  Sabines — a  sim¬ 
ple  agricultural  people,  among  whom,  as  Livy 
says,  prevailed  a  tristis  atque  tetrica  superstitio 
— partly  from  superstition,  partly  from  fear,  pre¬ 
sented  themselves  at  them.  The  seizure  of  the 
Sabine  women  is  also  a  universally  received  his¬ 
torical  fact.  This  circumstance  itself  involves  a 
very  characteristic  feature,  viz.,  that  religion  is 
used  as  a  means  for  furthering  the  purposes  of 
the  infant  state.  Another  method  of  extension 
was  the  conveying  to  Rome  of  the  inhabitants  of 
neighboring  and  conquered  towns.  At  a  later 
date  there  was  also  a  voluntary  migration  of 
foreigners  to  Rome;  as  in  the  case  of  the  so 
celebrated  family  of  the  Claudii,  bringing  their 
whole  clientela.  The  Corinthian  Demaratus,  be¬ 
longing  to  a  family  of  consideration,  had  settled 
in  Etruria ;  but  as  being  an  exile  and  a  foreigner, 
he  was  little  respected  there,  and  his  son,  Lu- 
cumo,  could  no  longer  endure  this  degradation. 
He  betook  himself  to  Rome,  says  Livy,  because 
a  new  people  and  a  repentin  a  atque  ex  virtute 
nobilitas  were  to  be  found  there.  Lucumo  at¬ 
tained,  we  are  told,  such  a  degree  of  respect,  that 
he  afterwards  became  king. 

It  is  this  peculiarity  in  the  founding  of  the 
state  which  must  be  regarded  as  the  essential 
basis  of  the  idiosyncrasy  of  Rome.  For  it  di¬ 
rectly  involves  the  severest  discipline,  and  self- 
sacrifice  to  the  grand  object  of  the  union.  A 
state  which  had  first  to  form  itself,  and  which 
is  based  on  force,  must  be  held  together  by 
force.  It  is  not  a  moral,  liberal  connection,  but 
a  compulsory  condition  of  subordination,  that 
results  from  such  an  origin.  The  Roman  virtus 
is  valour;  not,  however,  the  merely  personal,  but 
that  which  is  essentially  connected  with  a  union 
of  associates;  which  union  is  regarded  as  the 
supreme  interest,  and  may  be  combined  with 
lawless  violence  of  all  kinds.  While  the  Romans 
formed  a  union  of  this  kind,  they  were  not,  in¬ 
deed,  like  the  Lacedaemonians,  engaged  in  an 


288  PHILOSOPHY 

internal  contest  with  a  conquered  and  subju¬ 
gated  people;  but  there  arose  a  distinction  and 
a  struggle  between  patricians  and  plebeians. 
This  distinction  was  mythically  adumbrated  in 
the  hostile  brothers,  Romulus  and  Remus.  Re¬ 
mus  was  buried  on  the  Aventine  mount ;  this  is 
consecrated  to  the  evil  genii,  and  to  it  are  di¬ 
rected  the  secessions  of  the  plebs.  The  question 
comes,  then,  how  this  distinction  originated? 
It  has  been  already  said,  that  Rome  was  formed 
by  robber-herdsmen,  and  the  concourse  of  rab¬ 
ble  of  all  sorts.  At  a  later  date,  the  inhabitants 
of  captured  and  destroyed  towns  were  also  con¬ 
veyed  thither.  The  weaker,  the  poorer,  the  later 
additions  of  population  are  naturally  under¬ 
rated  by,  and  in  a  condition  of  dependence  upon 
those  who  originally  founded  the  state,  and  those 
who  were  distinguished  by  valour,  and  also  by 
wealth.  It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  to  take 
refuge  in  a  hypothesis  which  has  recently  been 
a  favourite  one — that  the  patricians  formed  a 
particular  race. 

The  dependence  of  the  plebeians  on  the  patri¬ 
cians  is  often  represented  as  a  perfectly  legal 
relation — indeed,  even  a  sacred  one;  since  the 
patricians  had  the  sacra  in  their  hands,  while 
the  plebs  would  have  been  godless,  as  it  were, 
without  them.  The  plebeians  left  to  the  patri¬ 
cians  their  hypocritical  stuff  ( ad  decipiendam 
plebem,  Cicero)  and  cared  nothing  for  their 
sacra  and  auguries;  but  in  disjoining  political 
rights  from  these  ritual  observances,  and  mak¬ 
ing  good  their  claim  to  those  rights,  they  were 
no  more  guilty  of  a  presumptuous  sacrilege  than 
the  Protestants,  when  they  emancipated  the 
political  power  of  the  state  and  asserted  the 
freedom  of  conscience.  The  light  in  which,  as 
previously  stated,  we  must  regard  the  relation 
of  the  patricians  and  plebeians  is  that  those  who 
were  poor,  and  consequently  helpless,  were  com¬ 
pelled  to  attach  themselves  to  the  richer  and 
more  respectable,  and  to  seek  for  their  patro- 
cinium:  in  this  relation  of  protection  on  the  part 
of  the  more  wealthy,  the  protected  are  called 
clientes.  But  we  find  very  soon  a  fresh  distinc¬ 
tion  between  the  plebs  and  the  clientes.  In  the 
contentions  between  the  patricians  and  the  ple¬ 
beians,  the  clientes  held  to  their  patroni ,  though 
belonging  to  the  plebs  as  decidedly  as  any  class. 
That  this  relation  of  the  clientes  had  not  the 
stamp  of  right  and  law  is  evident  from  the  fact, 
that  with  the  introduction  and  knowledge  of  the 
laws  among  all  classes,  the  cliental  relation 
gradually  vanished;  for  as  soon  as  individuals 
found  protection  in  the  law,  the  temporary  ne¬ 
cessity  for  it  could  not  but  cease. 


OF  HISTORY 

In  the  first  predatory  period  of  the  state, 
every  citizen  was  necessarily  a  soldier,  for  the 
state  was  based  on  war;  this  burden  was  oppres¬ 
sive,  since  every  citizen  was  obliged  to  maintain 
himself  in  the  field.  This  circumstance,  there¬ 
fore,  gave  rise  to  the  contracting  of  enormous 
debts — the  patricians  becoming  the  creditors 
of  the  plebeians.  With  the  introduction  of  laws, 
this  arbitrary  relation  necessarily  ceased;  but 
only  gradually,  for  the  patricians  were  far  from 
being  immediately  inclined  to  release  the  plebs 
from  the  cliental  relation;  they  rather  strove 
to  render  it  permanent.  The  laws  of  the  Twelve 
Tables  still  contained  much  that  was  undefined; 
very  much  was  still  left  to  the  arbitrary  will  of 
the  judge,  the  patricians  alone  being  judges; 
the  antithesis,  therefore,  between  patricians  and 
plebeians,  continues  till  a  much  later  period. 
Only  by  degrees  do  the  plebeians  scale  all  the 
heights  of  official  station,  and  attain  those  privi¬ 
leges  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  patricians 
alone. 

In  the  life  of  the  Greeks,  although  it  did  not 
any  more  than  that  of  the  Romans  originate  in 
the  patriarchal  relation,  family  love  and  the 
family  tie  appeared  at  its  very  commencement, 
and  the  peaceful  aim  of  their  social  existence 
had  for  its  necessary  condition  the  extirpation 
of  freebooters  both  by  sea  and  land.  The  found¬ 
ers  of  Rome,  on  the  contrary — Romulus  and 
Remus — are,  according  to  the  tradition,  them¬ 
selves  freebooters — represented  as  from  their 
earliest  days  thrust  out  from  the  family  and  as 
having  grown  up  in  a  state  of  isolation  from 
family  affection.  In  like  manner,  the  first  Romans 
are  said  to  have  got  their  wives,  not  by  free 
courtship  and  reciprocated  inclination,  but  by 
force.  This  commencement  of  the  Roman  life 
in  savage  rudeness  excluding  the  sensibilities  of 
natural  morality,  brings  with  it  one  character¬ 
istic  element — harshness  in  respect  to  the  family 
relation;  a  selfish  harshness,  which  constituted 
the  fundamental  condition  of  Roman  manners 
and  laws,  as  we  observe  them  in  the  sequel.  We 
thus  find  family  relations  among  the  Romans 
not  as  a  beautiful,  free  relation  of  love  and  feel¬ 
ing;  the  place  of  confidence  is  usurped  by  the 
principle  of  severity,  dependence,  and  subordi¬ 
nation.  Marriage,  in  its  strict  and  formal  shape, 
bore  quite  the  aspect  of  a  mere  contract;  the 
wife  was  part  of  the  husband’s  property  (in 
manum  conventio),  and  the  marriage  ceremony 
was  based  on  a  coemptio ,  in  a  form  such  as 
might  have  been  adopted  on  the  occasion  of 
any  other  purchase.  The  husband  acquired  a 
power  over  his  wife,  such  as  he  had  over  his 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD 


daughter;  nor  less  over  her  property;  so  that 
everything  which  she  gained,  she  gained  for  her 
husband.  During  the  good  times  of  the  republic, 
the  celebration  of  marriages  included  a  reli¬ 
gious  ceremony — confarreatio — but  which  was 
omitted  at  a  later  period.  The  husband  obtained 
not  less  power  than  by  the  coemptio,  when  he 
married  according  to  the  form  called  usus;  that 
is,  when  the  wife  remained  in  the  house  of  her 
husband  without  having  been  absent  a  trinoc- 
tium  in  a  year.  If  the  husband  had  not  married 
in  one  of  the  forms  of  the  in  manum  conventio, 
the  wife  remained  either  in  the  power  of  her 
father,  or  under  the  guardianship  of  her  agnates , 
and  was  free  as  regarded  her  husband.  The 
Roman  matron,  therefore,  obtained  honour  and 
dignity  only  through  independence  of  her  hus¬ 
band,  instead  of  acquiring  her  honour  through 
her  husband  and  by  marriage.  If  a  husband  who 
had  married  under  the  freer  condition — that  is, 
when  the  union  was  not  consecrated  by  the  con¬ 
farreatio — wished  to  separate  from  his  wife,  he 
dismissed  her  without  further  ceremony.  The  re¬ 
lation  of  sons  was  perfectly  similar:  they  were, 
on  the  one  hand,  about  as  dependent  on  the 
paternal  power  as  the  wife  on  the  matrimonial ; 
they  could  not  possess  property,  it  made  no  dif¬ 
ference  whether  they  filled  a  high  office  in  the 
state  or  not  (though  the  peculia  castrensia ,  and 
adventitia  were  differently  regarded) ;  but  on 
the  other  hand,  when  they  were  emancipated, 
they  had  no  connection  with  their  father  and 
their  family.  An  evidence  of  the  degree  in  which 
the  position  of  children  was  regarded  as  analo¬ 
gous  to  that  of  slaves,  is  presented  in  the  ima- 
ginaria  servitus  (mancipium),  through  which 
emancipated  children  had  to  pass.  In  reference 
to  inheritance,  morality  would  seem  to  demand 
that  children  should  share  equally.  Among  the 
Romans,  on  the  contrary,  testamentary  caprice 
manifests  itself  in  its  harshest  form. 

Thus  perverted  and  demoralized,  do  we  here 
see  the  fundamental  relations  of  ethics.  The 
immoral  active  severity  of  the  Romans  in  this 
private  side  of  character,  necessarily  finds  its 
counterpart  in  the  passive  severity  of  their  polit¬ 
ical  union.  For  the  severity  which  the  Roman 
experienced  from  the  state  he  was  compensated 
by  a  severity,  identical  in  nature,  which  he  was 
allowed  to  indulge  towards  his  family — a  serv¬ 
ant  on  the  one  side,  a  despot  on  the  other.  This 
constitutes  the  Roman  greatness, whose  peculiar 
characteristic  was  stern  inflexibility  in  the  union 
of  individuals  with  the  state,  and  with  its  law 
and  mandate.  In  order  to  obtain  a  nearer  view 
of  this  spirit,  we  must  not  merely  keep  in  view 


289 

the  actions  of  Roman  heroes,  confronting  the 
enemy  as  soldiers  or  generals,  or  appearing  as 
ambassadors — since  in  these  cases  they  belong, 
with  their  whole  mind  and  thought,  only  to  the 
state  and  its  mandate,  without  hesitation  or 
yielding — but  pay  particular  attention  also  to 
the  conduct  of  the  plebs  in  times  of  revolt 
against  the  patricians.  How  often  in  insurrection 
and  in  anarchical  disorder  was  the  plebs  brought 
back  into  a  state  of  tranquillity  by  a  mere  form, 
and  cheated  of  the  fulfilment  of  its  demands, 
righteous  or  unrighteous!  How  often  was  a  dic¬ 
tator,  e.g.y  chosen  by  the  senate,  when  there  was 
neither  war  nor  danger  from  an  enemy,  in  order 
to  get  the  plebeians  into  the  army,  and  to  bind 
them  to  strict  obedience  by  the  military  oath! 
It  took  Licinius  ten  years  to  carry  laws  favour¬ 
able  to  the  plebs;  the  latter  allowed  itself  to  be 
kept  back  by  the  mere  formality  of  the  veto  on 
the  part  of  other  tribunes,  and  still  more  patient¬ 
ly  did  it  wait  for  the  long-delayed  execution  of 
these  laws.  It  may  be  asked:  by  what  were  such 
a  disposition  and  character  produced?  Produced 
it  cannot  be,  but  it  is  essentially  latent  in  the 
origination  of  the  state  from  that  primal  robber- 
community,  as  also  in  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the 
people  who  composed  it,  and  lastly,  in  that  phase 
of  the  world  spirit  which  was  just  ready  for  de¬ 
velopment.  The  elements  of  the  Roman  people 
were  Etruscan,  Latin,  and  Sabine;  these  must 
have  contained  an  inborn  natural  adaptation  to 
produce  the  Roman  spirit.  Of  the  spirit,  the 
character,  and  the  life  of  the  ancient  Italian  peo¬ 
ples  we  know  very  little — thanks  to  the  non- 
intelligent  character  of  Roman  historiography! 
— and  that  little,  for  the  most  part,  from  the 
Greek  writers  on  Roman  history.  In  contrast 
with  that  primeval  wild  poetry  and  transmuta¬ 
tion  of  the  finite  which  we  observe  in  the  east, 
in  contrast  with  the  beautiful,  harmonious  poetry 
and  well-balanced  freedom  of  spirit  among  the 
Greeks,  of  the  general  character  of  the  Romans 
we  may  say  that  the  prose  of  life  makes  its  ap¬ 
pearance — the  self-consciousness  of  finiteness, 
the  abstraction  of  the  understandingand  a  rigor¬ 
ous  principle  of  personality,  which  even  in  the 
family  does  not  expand  itself  to  natural  moral¬ 
ity,  but  remains  the  unfeeling  non-spiritual  unit, 
and  recognizes  the  uniting  bond  of  the  several 
social  units  only  in  abstract  universality. 

This  extreme  prose  of  the  spirit  we  find  in 
Etruscan  art,  which  though  technically  perfect 
and  so  far  true  to  nature,  has  nothing  of  Greek 
ideality  and  beauty:  we  also  observe  it  in  the 
development  of  Roman  law  and  in  the  Roman 
religion. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


290 

To  the  constrained,  non-spiritual,  and  unfeel¬ 
ing  intelligence  of  the  Roman  world  we  owe  the 
origin  and  the  development  of  positive  law.  For 
we  saw  above  how  in  the  east  relations  in  their 
very  nature  belonging  to  the  sphere  of  outward 
or  inward  morality  were  made  legal  mandates; 
even  among  the  Greeks,  morality  was  at  the 
same  time  juristic  right,  and  on  that  very  ac¬ 
count  the  constitution  was  entirely  dependent 
on  morals  and  disposition,  and  had  not  yet  a 
fixity  of  principle  within  it,  to  counterbalance 
the  mutability  of  men’s  inner  life  and  individual 
subjectivity.  The  Romans  then  completed  this 
important  separation,  and  discovered  a  princi¬ 
ple  of  right,  which  is  external,  i.e.,  one  not  de¬ 
pendent  on  disposition  and  sentiment.  While 
they  have  thus  bestowed  upon  us  a  valuable 
gift,  in  point  of  form,  we  can  use  and  enjoy 
it  without  becoming  victims  to  that  sterile  un¬ 
derstanding — without  regarding  it  as  the  ne  plus 
ultra  of  wisdom  and  reason.  They  were  its  vic¬ 
tims,  living  beneath  its  sway ;  but  they  thereby 
secured  for  others  freedom  of  spirit,  viz.,  that 
inward  freedom  which  has  consequently  become 
emancipated  from  the  sphere  of  the  limited  and 
the  external.  Spirit,  soul,  disposition,  religion 
have  now  no  longer  to  fear  being  involved  with 
that  abstract  juristical  understanding.  Art  too 
has  its  external  side ;  when  in  art  the  mechanical 
side  has  been  brought  to  perfection,  free  art 
can  arise  and  display  itself.  But  those  must  be 
pitied  who  knew  of  nothing  but  that  mechanical 
side,  and  desired  nothing  further;  as  also  those 
who,  when  art  has  arisen,  still  regard  the  mechan¬ 
ical  as  the  highest. 

We  see  the  Romans  thus  bound  up  in  that 
abstract  understanding  which  pertains  to  finite¬ 
ness.  This  is  their  highest  characteristic,  conse¬ 
quently  also  their  highest  consciousness,  in  re¬ 
ligion.  In  fact,  constraint  was  the  religion  of  the 
Romans;  among  the  Greeks,  on  the  contrary,  it 
was  the  cheerfulness  of  free  fantasy.  We  are  ac¬ 
customed  to  regard  Greek  and  Roman  religion 
as  the  same,  and  use  the  names  Jupiter,  Minerva, 
etc.  as  Roman  deities,  often  without  distinguish¬ 
ing  them  from  those  of  Greeks.  This  is  admissi¬ 
ble  inasmuch  as  the  Greek  divinities  were  more 
or  less  introduced  among  the  Romans;  but  as 
the  Egyptian  religion  is  by  no  means  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  identical  with  the  Greek,  merely  be¬ 
cause  Herodotus  and  the  Greeks  form  to  them¬ 
selves  an  idea  of  the  Egyptian  divinities  under 
the  names  “Latona,”  “Pallas,”  etc.,  so  neither 
must  the  Roman  be  confounded  with  the  Greek. 
We  have  said  that  in  the  Greek  religion  the  thrill 
of  awe  suggested  by  nature  was  fully  developed 


to  something  spiritual — to  a  free  conception, 
a  spiritual  form  of  fancy — that  the  Greek  spirit 
did  not  remain  in  the  condition  of  inward  fear, 
but  proceeded  to  make  the  relation  borne  to 
man  by  nature  a  relation  of  freedom  and  cheer¬ 
fulness.  The  Romans,  on  the  contrary,  remained 
satisfied  with  a  dull,  stupid  subjectivity;  conse¬ 
quently,  the  external  was  only  an  object — some¬ 
thing  alien,  something  hidden.  The  Roman  spirit, 
which  thus  remained  involved  in  subjectivity, 
came  into  a  relation  of  constraint  and  depend¬ 
ence,  to  which  the  origin  of  the  word  religio 
( lig-are )  points.  The  Roman  had  always  to  do 
with  something  secret;  in  everything  he  believed 
in  and  sought  for  something  concealed;  and 
while  in  the  Greek  religion  everything  is  open 
and  clear,  present  to  sense  and  contemplation — 
not  pertaining  to  a  future  world,  but  something 
friendly  and  of  this  world — among  the  Romans 
everything  exhibits  itself  as  mysterious,  dupli¬ 
cate:  they  saw  in  the  object  first  itself,  and  then 
that  which  lies  concealed  in  it:  their  history  is 
pervaded  by  this  duplicate  mode  of  viewing 
phenomena.  The  city  of  Rome  had  besides  its 
proper  name  another  secret  one,  known  only  to 
a  few.  It  is  believed  by  some  to  have  been 
Valentia,  the  Latin  translation  of  Roma;  others 
think  it  was  Amor  ( Roma  read  backwards). 
Romulus,  the  founder  of  the  state,  had  also  an¬ 
other,  a  sacred  name — Quirinus — by  which  title 
he  was  worshipped:  the  Romans  too  were  also 
called  Quirites.  (This  name  is  connected  with 
the  term  curia:  in  tracing  its  etymology,  the 
name  of  the  Sabine  town  Cures  has  been  had 
recourse  to.) 

Among  the  Romans  the  religious  thrill  of  awe 
remained  undeveloped;  it  was  shut  up  to  the 
mere  subjective  certainty  of  its  own  existence. 
Consciousness  has  therefore  given  itself  no 
spiritual  objectivity — has  not  elevated  itself  to 
the  theoretical  contemplation  of  the  eternally 
divine  nature,  and  to  freedom  in  that  contem¬ 
plation  ;  it  has  gained  no  religious  substantiality 
for  itself  from  spirit.  The  bare  subjectivity  of 
conscience  is  characteristic  of  the  Roman  in  all 
that  he  does  and  undertakes — in  his  covenants, 
political  relations,  obligations,  family  relations, 
etc. ;  and  all  these  relations  receive  thereby  not 
merely  a  legal  sanction,  but  as  it  were  a  solem¬ 
nity  analogous  to  that  of  an  oath.  The  infinite 
number  of  ceremonies  at  the  comitia,  on  assum¬ 
ing  offices,  etc.,  are  expressions  and  declarations 
that  concern  this  firm  bond.  Everywhere  the 
sacra  play  a  very  important  part.  Transactions, 
naturally  the  most  alien  to  constraint,  became  a 
sacrum,  and  were  petrified,  as  it  were,  into  that. 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD 


To  this  category  belongs,  e.g.,  in  strict  mar¬ 
riages,  the  confarreatio ,  and  the  auguries  and 
auspices  generally.  The  knowledge  of  these  sacra 
is  utterly  uninteresting  and  wearisome,  afford¬ 
ing  fresh  material  for  learned  research  as  to 
whether  they  are  of  Etruscan,  Sabine,  or  other 
origin.  On  their  account  the  Roman  people  have 
been  regarded  as  extremely  pious,  both  in  posi¬ 
tive  andnegative  observances ;  though  it  is  ridic¬ 
ulous  to  hear  recent  writers  speak  with  unction 
and  respect  of  these  sacra.  The  patricians  were 
especially  fond  of  them;  they  have  therefore 
been  elevated  in  the  judgement  of  some,  to  the 
dignity  of  sacerdotal  families,  and  regarded  as 
the  sacred  gentes — the  possessors  and  conserva¬ 
tors  of  Roman  religion:  the  plebeians  then  be¬ 
come  the  godless  element.  On  this  head  what  is 
pertinent  has  already  been  said.  The  ancient 
kings  were  at  the  same  time  also  reges  sacrorum. 
After  the  royal  dignity  had  been  done  away  with, 
there  still  remained  a  rex  sacrorum;  but  he,  like 
all  the  other  priests,  was  subject  to  the  pontifex 
maximus ,  who  presided  over  all  the  sacray  and 
gave  them  such  a  rigidity  and  fixity  as  enabled 
the  patricians  to  maintain  their  religious  power 
so  long. 

But  the  essential  point  in  pious  feeling  is  the 
subject  matter  with  which  it  occupies  itself, 
though  it  is  often  asserted,  on  the  contrary,  in 
modern  times,  that  if  pious  feelings  exist,  it  is 
a  matter  of  indifference  what  object  occupies 
them.  It  has  been  already  remarked  of  the 
Romans  that  their  religious  subjectivity  did  not 
expand  into  a  free  spiritual  and  moral  compre¬ 
hensiveness  of  being.  It  can  be  said  that  their 
piety  did  not  develop  itself  into  religion;  for  it 
remained  essentially  formal,  and  this  formalism 
took  its  real  side  from  another  quarter.  From 
the  very  definition  given,  it  follows  that  it  can 
only  be  of  a  finite,  unhallowed  order,  since  it  arose 
outside  the  secret  sanctum  of  religion.  The  chief 
characteristic  of  Roman  religion  is  therefore 
a  hard  and  dry  contemplation  of  certain  volun¬ 
tary  aims,  which  they  regard  as  existing  absolute¬ 
ly  in  their  divinities,  and  whose  accomplishment 
they  desire  of  them  as  embodying  absolute 
power.  These  purposes  constitute  that  for  the 
sake  of  which  they  worship  the  gods,  and  by 
which,  in  a  constrained,  limited  way,  they  are 
bound  to  their  deities.  The  Roman  religion  is 
therefore  the  entirely  prosaic  one  of  narrow 
aspirations,  expediency,  profit.  The  divinities 
peculiar  to  them  are  entirely  prosaic ;  they  are 
conditions,  sensations,  or  useful  arts,  to  which 
their  dry  fancy,  having  elevated  them  to  inde¬ 
pendent  power,  gave  objectivity ;  they  are  partly 


2QI 

abstractions,  which  could  only  become  frigid 
allegories — partly  conditions  of  being  which  ap¬ 
pear  as  bringing  advantage  or  injury,  and  which 
were  presented  as  objects  of  worship  in  their 
original  bare  and  limited  form.  We  can  but 
briefly  notice  a  few  examples.  The  Romans  wor¬ 
shipped  Pax,  Tranquillitas,  Vacuna  (Repose), 
Angeronia  (Sorrow  and  Grief),  as  divinities; 
they  consecrated  altars  to  the  Plague, to  Hunger, 
to  Mildew  (Robigo),  to  Fever,  and  to  the  Dea 
Cloacina.  Juno  appears  among  the  Romans  not 
merely  as  Lucina,  the  obstetric  goddess,  but  also 
as  Juno  Ossipagina,  the  divinity  who  forms  the 
bones  of  the  child,  and  as  Juno  Unxia,  who 
anoints  the  hinges  of  the  doors  at  marriages  (a 
matter  which  was  also  reckoned  among  the 
sacra).  How  little  have  these  prosaic  concep¬ 
tions  in  common  with  the  beauty  of  the  spiritual 
powers  and  deities  of  the  Greeks !  On  the  other 
hand,  Jupiter  as  Jupiter  Capitolinus  represents 
the  generic  essence  of  the  Roman  Empire,  which 
is  also  personified  in  the  divinities  Roma  and 
Fortuna  Publica. 

It  was  the  Romans  especially  who  introduced 
the  practice  of  not  merely  supplicating  the  gods 
in  time  of  need,  and  celebrating  lectisternia,  but 
of  also  making  solemn  promises  and  vows  to 
them.  For  help  in  difficulty  they  sent  even  into 
foreign  countries,  and  imported  foreign  divini¬ 
ties  and  rites.  The  introduction  of  the  gods  and 
most  of  the  Roman  temples  thus  arose  from 
necessity — from  a  vow  of  some  kind,  and  an 
obligatory,  not  disinterested  acknowledgment 
of  favours.  The  Greeks  on  the  contrary  erected 
and  instituted  their  beautiful  temples,  and  stat¬ 
ues,  and  rites,  from  love  to  beauty  and  divinity 
for  their  own  sake. 

Only  one  side  of  the  Roman  religion  exhibits 
something  attractive,  and  that  is  the  festivals, 
which  bear  a  relation  to  country  life,  and  whose 
observance  was  transmitted  from  the  earliest 
times.  The  idea  of  the  Saturnian  time  is  partly 
their  basis,  the  conception  of  a  state  of  things 
antecedent  to  and  beyond  the  limits  of  civil 
society  and  political  combination ;  but  their  im¬ 
port  is  partly  taken  from  nature  generally — the 
sun,  the  course  of  the  year,  the  seasons,  months, 
etc.,  (with  astronomical  intimations) — partly 
from  the  particular  aspects  of  the  course  of  na¬ 
ture,  as  bearing  upon  pastoral  and  agricultural 
life.  There  were  festivals  of  sowing  and  harvest¬ 
ing  and  of  the  seasons;  the  principal  was  that 
of  the  Saturnalia,  etc.  In  this  aspect  there  ap¬ 
pears  much  that  is  naive  and  ingenuous  in  the 
tradition.  Yet  this  series  of  rites,  on  the  whole, 
presents  a  very  iimited  and  prosaic  appearance ; 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


292 

deeper  views  of  the  great  powers  of  nature  and 
their  generic  processes  are  not  deducible  from 
them;  for  they  are  entirely  directed  to  external 
vulgar  advantage,  and  the  merriment  they  oc¬ 
casioned,  degenerated  into  a  buffoonery  unre¬ 
lieved  by  intellect.  While  among  the  Greeks 
their  tragic  art  developed  itself  from  similar 
rudiments,  it  is  on  the  other  hand  remarkable 
that  among  the  Romans  the  scurrilous  dances 
and  songs  connected  with  the  rural  festivals, 
were  kept  up  till  the  latest  periods  without  any 
advance  from  this  naive  but  rude  form  to  any¬ 
thing  really  artistic. 

It  has  already  been  said  that  the  Romans 
adopted  the  Greek  gods  (the  mythology  of  the 
Roman  poets  is  entirely  derived  from  the 
Greeks) ;  but  the  worship  of  these  beautiful  gods 
of  the  imagination  appears  to  have  been  among 
them  of  a  very  cold  and  superficial  order.  Their 
talk  of  Jupiter,  Juno,  Minerva,  sounds  like  a 
mere  theatrical  mention  of  them.  The  Greeks 
made  their  Pantheon  the  embodiment  of  a  rich 
intellectual  material,  and  adorned  it  with  bright 
fancies;  it  was  to  them  an  object  calling  forth 
continual  invention  and  exciting  thoughtful  re¬ 
flection;  and  an  extensive,  nay  inexhaustible 
treasure  has  thus  been  created  for  sentiment, 
feeling  and  thought,  in  their  mythology.  The 
spirit  of  the  Romans  did  not  indulge  and  delight 
itself  in  that  play  of  a  thoughtful  fancy;  the 
Greek  mythology  appears  lifeless  and  exotic  in 
their  hands.  Among  the  Roman  poets,  especial¬ 
ly  Virgil,  the  introduction  of  the  gods  is  the 
product  of  a  frigid  understanding  and  of  imita¬ 
tion.  The  gods  are  used  in  these  poems  as  ma¬ 
chinery,  and  in  a  merely  superficial  way;  re¬ 
garded  much  in  the  same  way  as  in  our  didactic 
treatises  on  the  belles-lettres,  where  among 
other  directions  we  find  one  relating  to  the  use 
of  such  machinery  in  epics — in  order  to  produce 
astonishment. 

The  Romans  were  as  essentially  different 
from  the  Greeks  in  respect  to  their  public  games. 
In  these  the  Romans  were,  properly  speaking, 
only  spectators.  The  mimetic  and  theatrical  rep¬ 
resentation,  the  dancing,  foot-racing,  and  wres¬ 
tling,  they  left  to  manumitted  slaves,  gladiators, 
or  criminals  condemned  to  death.  Nero’s  deep¬ 
est  degradation  was  his  appearing  on  a  public 
stage  as  a  singer,  lyrist,  and  combatant.  As  the 
Romans  were  only  spectators,  these  diversions 
were  something  foreign  to  them;  they  did  not 
enter  into  them  with  their  whole  souls.  With  in¬ 
creasing  luxury  the  taste  for  the  baiting  of 
beasts  and  men  became  particularly  keen.  Hun¬ 
dreds  of  bears,  lions,  tigers,  elephants,  croco¬ 


diles,  and  ostriches,  were  produced,  and  slaugh¬ 
tered  for  mere  amusement.  A  body  consisting 
of  hundreds,  nay  thousands  of  gladiators,  when 
entering  the  amphitheatre  at  a  certain  festival  to 
engage  in  a  sham  sea-fight,  addressed  the  em¬ 
peror  with  the  words :  “Those  who  are  devoted 
to  death  salute  thee,”  to  excite  some  compas¬ 
sion.  In  vain !  the  whole  were  devoted  to  mutual 
slaughter.  In  place  of  human  sufferings  in  the 
depths  of  the  soul  and  spirit,  occasioned  by  the 
contradictions  of  life,  and  which  find  their  solu¬ 
tion  in  destiny,  the  Romans  instituted  a  cruel 
reality  of  corporeal  sufferings:  blood  in  streams, 
the  rattle  in  the  throat  which  signals  death,  and 
the  expiring  gasp  were  the  scenes  that  delighted 
them. 

This  cold  negativity  of  naked  murder  exhibits 
at  the  same  time  that  murder  of  all  spiritual  ob¬ 
jective  aim  which  had  taken  place  in  the  soul.  I 
need  only  mention  in  addition,  the  auguries,  aus¬ 
pices,  and  Sibylline  Books,  to  remind  you  how 
fettered  the  Romans  were  by  superstitions  of  all 
kinds,  and  that  they  pursued  exclusively  their 
own  aims  in  all  the  observances  in  question.  The 
entrails  of  beasts,  flashes  of  lightning,  the  flight 
of  birds,  the  Sibylline  dicta  determined  the  ad¬ 
ministration  and  projects  of  the  state.  All  this 
was  in  the  hands  of  the  patricians,  who  con¬ 
sciously  made  use  of  it  as  a  mere  outward  means 
of  constraint  to  further  their  own  ends  and  op¬ 
press  the  people. 

The  distinct  elements  of  Roman  religion  are, 
according  to  what  has  been  said,  subjective  re¬ 
ligiosity  and  a  ritualism  having  for  its  object 
purely  superficial  external  aims.  Secular  aims 
are  left  entirely  free,  instead  of  being  limited 
by  religion — in  fact  they  are  rather  justified  by 
it.  The  Romans  are  invariably  pious,  whatever 
may  be  the  substantial  character  of  their  ac¬ 
tions.  But  as  the  sacred  principle  here  is  noth¬ 
ing  but  an  empty  form,  it  is  exactly  of  such  a 
kind  that  it  can  be  an  instrument  in  the  power 
of  the  devotee;  it  is  taken  possession  of  by  the 
individual,  who  seeks  his  private  objects  and 
interests ;  whereas  the  truly  divine  possesses  on 
the  contrary  a  concrete  power  in  itself.  But 
where  there  is  only  a  powerless  form,  the  indi¬ 
vidual — the  will,  possessing  an  independent  con¬ 
creteness  able  to  make  that  form  its  own,  and 
render  it  subservient  to  its  views — stands  above 
it.  This  happened  in  Rome  on  the  part  of  the 
patricians.  The  possession  of  sovereignty  by  the 
patricians  is  thereby  made  firm,  sacred,  incom¬ 
municable,  peculiar:  the  administration  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  and  political  privileges,  receive  the 
character  of  hallowed  private  property.  There 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  293 


does  not  exist  therefore  a  substantial  national 
unity,  not  that  beautiful  and  moral  necessity  of 
united  life  in  the  polis;  but  every  gens  is  itself 
firm,  stern,  having  its  own  penates  and  sacra; 
each  has  its  own  political  character,  which  it 
always  preserves:  strict,  aristocratic  severity 
distinguished  the  Claudii ;  benevolence  towards 
the  people,  the  Valerii;  nobleness  of  spirit,  the 
Cornelii.  Separation  and  limitation  were  ex¬ 
tended  even  to  marriage,  for  the  connubia  of 
patricians  with  plebeians  were  deemed  profane. 
But  in  that  very  subjectivity  of  religion  we  find 
also  the  principle  of  arbitrariness:  and  while,  on 
the  one  hand,  we  have  arbitrary  choice  invoking 
religion  to  bolster  up  private  possession,  we 
have,  on  the  other  hand,  the  revolt  of  arbitrary 
choice  against  religion.  For  the  same  order  of 
things  can,  on  the  one  side,  be  regarded  as  priv¬ 
ileged  by  its  religious  form,  and,  on  the  other 
side,  wear  the  aspect  of  being  merely  a  matter 
of  choice — of  arbitrary  volition  on  the  part  of 
man.  When  the  time  was  come  for  it  to  be  de¬ 
graded  to  the  rank  of  a  mere  form,  it  was  neces¬ 
sarily  known  and  treated  as  a  form,  trodden  un¬ 
der  foot,  represented  as  formalism. 

The  inequality  which  enters  into  the  domain 
of  sacred  things  forms  the  transition  from  re¬ 
ligion  to  the  bare  reality  of  political  life.  The 
consecrated  inequality  of  will  and  of  private 
property  constitutes  the  fundamental  condition 
of  the  change.  The  Roman  principle  admits  of 
aristocracy  alone  as  the  constitution  proper  to 
it,  but  which  directly  manifests  itself  only  in 
an  antithetical  form — internal  inequality.  Only 
from  necessity  and  the  pressure  of  adverse  cir¬ 
cumstances  is  this  contradiction  momentarily 
smoothed  over;  for  it  involves  a  duplicate 
power,  the  sternness  and  malevolent  isolation  of 
whose  components  can  only  be  mastered  and 
bound  together  by  a  still  greater  sternness,  into 
a  unity  maintained  by  force. 

Chapter  2.  The  History  of  Rome 
to  the  Second  Punic  W ar 
In  the  first  period,  several  successive  stages  dis¬ 
play  their  characteristic  varieties.  The  Roman 
state  here  exhibits  its  first  phase  of  growth,  un¬ 
der  kings ;  then  it  receives  a  republican  constitu¬ 
tion,  at  whose  head  stand  consuls.  The  struggle 
between  patricians  and  plebeians  begins;  and 
after  this  has  been  set  at  rest  by  the  concession 
of  the  plebeian  demands,  there  ensues  a  state  of 
contentment  in  the  internal  affairs  of  Rome,  and 
it  acquires  strength  to  combat  victoriously  with 
the  nation  that  preceded  it  on  the  stage  of  gen¬ 
eral  history.  As  regards  the  accounts  of  the  first 


Roman  kings,  every  datum  has  met  with  flat 
contradiction  as  the  result  of  criticism ;  but  it  is 
going  too  far  to  deny  them  all  credibility.  Seven 
kings  in  all  are  mentioned  by  tradition ;  and  even 
the  “higher  criticism”  is  obliged  to  recognize  the 
last  links  in  the  series  as  perfectly  historical. 
Romulus  is  called  the  founder  of  this  union  of 
freebooters ;  he  organized  it  into  a  military  state. 
Although  the  traditions  respecting  him  appear 
fabulous,  they  only  contain  what  is  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  Roman  spirit  as  above  described. 
To  the  second  king,  Numa,  is  ascribed  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  the  religious  ceremonies.  This  trait  is 
very  remarkable  from  its  implying  that  religion 
was  introduced  later  than  political  union,  while 
among  other  peoples  religious  traditions  make 
their  appearance  in  the  remotest  periods  and  be¬ 
fore  all  civil  institutions.  The  king  was  at  the 
same  time  a  priest  {rex  is  referred  by  etymolo¬ 
gists  to  pe£e iv — to  sacrifice).  As  is  the  case  with 
states  generally,  the  political  was  at  first  united 
with  the  sacerdotal,  and  a  theocratical  state  of 
things  prevailed.  The  king  stood  here  at  the  head 
of  those  who  enjoyed  privileges  in  virtue  of  the 
sacra. 

The  separation  of  the  distinguished  and  pow¬ 
erful  citizens  as  senators  and  patricians  took 
place  as  early  as  the  first  kings.  Romulus  is  said 
to  have  appointed  100  patres,  respecting  which 
however,  the  higher  criticism  is  sceptical.  In  re¬ 
ligion,  arbitrary  ceremonies — the  sacra — became 
fixed  marks  of  distinction,  and  peculiarities  of 
the  gentes  and  orders.  The  internal  organization 
of  the  state  was  gradually  realized.  Livy  says 
that  as  Numa  established  all  divine  matters,  so 
Servius  Tullius  introduced  the  different  classes, 
and  the  census,  according  to  which  the  share  of 
each  citizen  in  the  administration  of  public  af¬ 
fairs  was  determined.  The  patricians  were  dis¬ 
contented  with  this  scheme,  especially  because 
Servius  Tullius  abolished  a  part  of  the  debts 
owed  by  the  plebeians,  and  gave  public  lands  to 
the  poorer  citizens,  which  made  them  possessors 
of  landed  property.  He  divided  the  people  into 
six  classes,  of  which  the  first  together  with  the 
knights  formed  ninety-eight  centuries,  the  in¬ 
ferior  classes  proportionately  fewer.  Thus,  as 
they  voted  by  centuries,  the  class  first  in  rank 
had  also  the  greatest  weight  in  the  state.  It  ap¬ 
pears  that  previously  the  patricians  had  the 
power  exclusively  in  their  hands,  but  that  after 
Servius’s  division  they  had  merely  a  preponder¬ 
ance;  which  explains  their  discontent  with  his 
institutions.  With  Servius  the  history  becomes 
more  distinct;  and  under  him  and  his  predeces¬ 
sor,  the  elder  Tarquinius,  traces  of  prosperity 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


294 

are  exhibited.  Niebuhr  is  surprised  that  accord¬ 
ing  to  Dionysius  and  Livy,  the  most  ancient  con¬ 
stitution  was  democratic,  inasmuch  as  the  vote 
of  every  citizen  had  equal  weight  in  the  assem¬ 
bly  of  the  people.  But  Livy  only  says  that  Ser- 
vius  abolished  the  suffragium  viritim.  Now  in 
the  comitia  curiata — the  cliental  relation,  which 
absorbed  the  plebs,  extending  to  all — the  patri¬ 
cians  alone  had  a  vote,  and  populus  denoted  at 
that  time  only  the  patricians.  Dionysius  there¬ 
fore  does  not  contradict  himself,  when  he  says 
that  the  constitution  according  to  the  laws  of 
Romulus  was  strictly  aristocratic. 

Almost  all  the  kings  were  foreigners,  a  cir¬ 
cumstance  very  characteristic  of  the  origin  of 
Rome.  Numa,  who  succeeded  the  founder  of 
Rome,  was  according  to  the  tradition,  one  of  the 
Sabines — a  people  which  under  the  reign  of 
Romulus,  led  by  Tatius,  is  said  to  have  settled 
on  one  of  the  Roman  hills.  At  a  later  date  how¬ 
ever  the  Sabine  country  appears  as  a  region  en¬ 
tirely  separated  from  the  Roman  state.  Numa 
was  followed  by  Tullus  Hostilius ,  and  the  very 
name  of  this  king  points  to  his  foreign  origin. 
Ancus  Martins }  the  fourth  king,  was  the  grand¬ 
son  of  Numa.  Tarquinius  Prisons  sprang  from  a 
Corinthian  family,  as  we  had  occasion  to  ob¬ 
serve  above.  Servius  Tnllius  was  from  Cornicu- 
lum,  a  conquered  Latin  town ;  Tarquinius  Super¬ 
bus  was  descended  from  the  elder  Tarquinius. 
Under  this  last  king  Rome  reached  a  high  de¬ 
gree  of  prosperity:  even  at  so  early  a  period  as 
this,  a  commercial  treaty  is  said  to  have  been 
concluded  with  the  Carthaginians;  and  to  be 
disposed  to  reject  this  as  mythical  would  imply 
forgetfulness  of  the  connection  w’hich  Rome 
had,  even  at  that  time,  with  the  Etrurians  and 
other  bordering  peoples  whose  prosperity  de¬ 
pended  on  trade  and  maritime  pursuits.  The 
Romans  were  probably  even  then  acquainted 
with  the  art  of  writing,  and  already  possessed 
that  clear-sighted  comprehension  which  was 
their  remarkable  characteristic,  and  which  led 
to  that  perspicuous  historical  composition  for 
which  they  are  famous. 

In  the  growth  of  the  inner  life  of  the  state, 
the  power  of  the  patricians  had  been  much  re¬ 
duced;  and  the  kings  often  courted  the  support 
of  the  people,  as  we  see  w7as  frequently  the  case 
in  the  mediaeval  history  of  Europe,  in  order  to 
steal  a  march  upon  the  patricians.  We  have  al¬ 
ready  observed  this  in  Servius  Tullius.  The  last 
king,  Tarquinius  Superbus,  consulted  the  senate 
but  little  in  state  affairs;  he  also  neglected  to 
supply  the  place  of  its  deceased  members,  and 
acted  in  every  respect  as  if  he  aimed  at  its  utter 


dissolution.  Then  ensued  a  state  of  political  ex¬ 
citement  which  only  needed  an  occasion  to  break 
out  into  open  revolt.  An  insult  to  the  honour  of 
a  matron — the  invasion  of  that  sanction  sanc¬ 
torum — by  the  son  of  the  king,  supplied  such  an 
occasion.  The  kings  were  banished  in  the  year 
244  of  the  city  and  510  of  the  Christian  Era 
(that  is,  if  the  building  of  Rome  is  to  be  dated 
753  B.c.),  and  the  royal  dignity  abolished  for¬ 
ever. 

The  kings  were  expelled  by  the  patricians,  not 
by  the  plebeians;  if  therefore  the  patricians  are 
to  be  regarded  as  possessed  of  “divine  right”  as 
being  a  sacred  race,  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  we 
find  them  here  contravening  such  legitimation; 
for  the  king  was  their  high  priest.  We  observe  on 
this  occasion  with  what  dignity  the  sanctity  of 
marriage  was  invested  in  the  eyes  of  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  The  principle  of  subjectivity  and  piety 
( pudor )  was  with  them  the  religious  and  guard¬ 
ed  element;  and  its  violation  becomes  the  oc¬ 
casion  of  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  and  later  on 
of  the  decemvirs  too.  We  find  monogamy  there¬ 
fore  also  looked  upon  by  the  Romans  as  an  un¬ 
derstood  thing.  It  was  not  introduced  by  an  ex¬ 
press  law;  we  have  nothing  but  an  incidental 
testimony  in  the  institutes,  where  it  is  said  that 
marriages  under  certain  conditions  of  relation¬ 
ship  are  not  allowable,  because  a  man  may  not 
have  two  wives.  It  is  not  until  the  reign  of  Dio¬ 
cletian  that  we  find  a  law  expressly  determining 
that  no  one  belonging  to  the  Roman  empire  may 
have  two  wives,  “since  according  to  a  pretorian 
edict  also,  infamy  attaches  to  such  a  condition” 
( cum  etiam  in  edict 0  prcetoris  hujusmodi  viri 
infamia  notati  sunt).  Monogamy  therefore  is 
regarded  as  naturally  valid,  and  is  based  on  the 
principle  of  subjectivity. 

Lastly,  we  must  also  observe  that  royalty  was 
not  abrogated  here  as  in  Greece  by  suicidal  de¬ 
struction  on  the  part  of  the  royal  races,  but  was 
exterminated  in  hate.  The  king,  himself  the 
chief  priest, had  been  guilty  of  the  grossest  prof¬ 
anation;  the  principle  of  subjectivity  revolted 
against  the  deed,  and  the  patricians,  thereby 
elevated  to  a  sense  of  independence,  threw  off 
the  yoke  of  royalty.  Possessed  by  the  same  feel¬ 
ing,  the  plebs  at  a  later  date  rose  against  the 
patricians,  and  the  Latins  and  the  allies  against 
the  Romans;  until  the  equality  of  the  social 
units  was  restored  through  the  wThole  Roman 
dominion  (a  multitude  of  slaves,  too,  being 
emancipated),  and  they  were  held  together  by 
simple  despotism. 

Livy  remarks  that  Brutus  hit  upon  the  right 
epoch  for  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  for  that  if 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  295 


it  had  taken  place  earlier,  the  state  would  have 
suffered  dissolution.  What  would  have  hap¬ 
pened,  he  asks,  if  this  homeless  crowd  had  been 
liberated  earlier,  when  living  together  had  not 
yet  produced  a  mutual  conciliation  of  disposi¬ 
tions?  The  constitution  now  became  in  name 
republican.  If  we  look  at  the  matter  more  close¬ 
ly,  it  is  evident  (Livy  ii.  1)  that  no  other  es¬ 
sential  change  took  place  than  the  transference 
of  the  power  which  was  previously  permanent 
in  the  king,  to  two  annual  consuls.  These  two, 
equal  in  power,  managed  military  and  judicial 
as  well  as  administrative  business;  for  praetors, 
as  supreme  judges,  do  not  appear  till  a  later 
date. 

At  first  all  authority  remained  in  the  hands  of 
the  consuls ;  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  repub¬ 
lic,  externally  and  internally,  the  state  was  in 
evil  plight.  In  the  Roman  history  a  period  oc¬ 
curs  as  troubled  as  that  in  the  Greek  which  fol¬ 
lowed  the  extinction  of  the  dynasties.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  had  first  to  sustain  a  severe  conflict  with 
their  expelled  king,  who  had  sought  and  found 
help  from  the  Etrurians.  In  the  war  against 
Porsena,  the  Romans  lost  all  their  conquests 
and  even  their  independence:  they  were  com¬ 
pelled  to  lay  down  their  arms  and  to  give  hos¬ 
tages;  according  to  an  expression  of  Tacitus 
{Histories,  111.  72)  it  seems  as  if  Porsena  had 
even  taken  Rome.  Soon  after  the  expulsion  of 
the  kings  we  have  the  contest  between  the  patri¬ 
cians  and  plebeians;  for  the  abolition  of  royalty 
had  taken  place  exclusively  to  the  advantage  of 
the  aristocracy,  to  which  the  royal  power  was 
transferred,  while  the  plebs  lost  the  protection 
which  the  kings  had  afforded  it.  All  magisterial 
and  juridical  power,  and  all  property  in  land, 
was  at  this  time  in  the  hands  of  the  patricians; 
while  the  people,  continually  dragged  out  to 
war,  could  not  employ  themselves  in  peaceful 
occupations:  handicrafts  could  not  flourish,  and 
the  only  acquisition  the  plebeians  could  make 
was  their  share  in  the  booty.  The  patricians  had 
their  territory  and  soil  cultivated  by  slaves,  and 
assigned  some  of  their  land  to  their  clients,  who 
on  condition  of  paying  taxes  and  contributions 
— as  tenant  cultivators,  therefore — had  the  usu¬ 
fruct  of  it.  This  relation,  on  account  of  the  form 
in  which  the  dues  were  paid  by  the  clientes,  was 
very  similar  to  vassalage :  they  were  obliged  to 
give  contributions  towards  the  marriage  of  the 
daughters  of  the  patronus,  to  ransom  him  or  his 
sons  when  in  captivity,  to  assist  them  in  obtain¬ 
ing  magisterial  offices,  and  to  make  up  the  losses 
sustained  in  suits  at  law.  The  administration  of 
justice  was  likewise  in  the  hands  of  the  patri¬ 


cians,  and  that  without  the  limitations  of  defi¬ 
nite  and  written  laws — a  desideratum  which  at 
a  later  period  the  decemvirs  were  created  to  sup¬ 
ply.  All  the  power  of  government  belonged 
moreover  to  the  patricians,  for  they  were  in 
possession  of  all  offices — first  of  the  consul¬ 
ship,  afterwards  of  the  military  tribuneship  and 
censorship  (instituted  a.u.c.  31  i) — by  which 
the  actual  administration  of  government  as  like¬ 
wise  the  oversight  of  it,  was  left  to  them  alone. 
Lastly,  it  was  the  patricians  who  constituted  the 
senate.  The  question  as  to  how  that  body  was 
recruited  appears  very  important.  But  in  this 
matter  no  systematic  plan  was  followed.  Romu¬ 
lus  is  said  to  have  founded  the  senate,  consist¬ 
ing  then  of  one  hundred  members ;  the  succeed¬ 
ing  kings  increased  this  number,  and  Tarquinius 
Priscus  fixed  it  at  three  hundred.  Junius  Brutus 
restored  the  senate,  which  had  very  much  fallen 
away,  de  novo.  In  after  times  it  would  appear 
that  the  censors  and  sometimes  the  dictators 
filled  up  the  vacant  places  in  the  senate.  In 
the  Second  Punic  War,  a.u.c.  538,  a  dictator 
was  chosen,  who  nominated  one  hundred  and 
seventy-seven  new  senators :  he  selected  those 
who  had  been  invested  with  curule  dignities,  the 
plebeian  aediles,  tribunes  of  the  people  and  quaes¬ 
tors,  citizens  who  had  gained  spolia  opima  or 
the  corona  civica.  Under  Caesar  the  number  of 
the  senators  was  raised  to  eight  hundred;  Au¬ 
gustus  reduced  it  to  six  hundred.  It  has  been  re¬ 
garded  as  great  negligence  on  the  part  of  the 
Roman  historians,  that  they  give  us  so  little 
information  respecting  the  composition  and  red¬ 
integration  of  the  senate.  But  this  point  which 
appears  to  us  to  be  invested  with  infinite  im¬ 
portance,  was  not  of  so  much  moment  to  the 
Romans  at  large ;  they  did  not  attach  so  much 
weight  to  formal  arrangements,  for  their  prin¬ 
cipal  concern  was  how  the  government  was  con¬ 
ducted.  How,  in  fact,  can  we  suppose  the  con¬ 
stitutional  rights  of  the  ancient  Romans  to  have 
been  so  well  defined,  and  that  at  a  time  which 
is  even  regarded  as  mythical  and  its  traditionary 
history  as  epical? 

The  people  were  in  some  such  oppressed  con¬ 
dition  as,  e.g.,  the  Irish  were  a  few  years  ago  in 
the  British  Isles,  while  they  remained  at  the 
same  time  entirely  excluded  from  the  govern¬ 
ment.  Often  they  revolted  and  made  a  secession 
from  the  city.  Sometimes  they  also  refused  mili¬ 
tary  service ;  yet  it  always  remains  a  very  strik¬ 
ing  fact  that  the  senate  could  so  long  resist  su¬ 
perior  numbers  irritated  by  oppression  and 
practised  in  war;  for  the  main  struggle  lasted 
for  more  than  a  hundred  years.  In  the  fact  that 


296  PHILOSOPHY 

the  people  could  so  long  be  kept  in  check  is 
manifested  its  respect  for  legal  order  and  the 
sacra.  But  of  necessity  the  plebeians  at  last  se¬ 
cured  their  righteous  demands,  and  their  debts 
were  often  remitted.  The  severity  of  the  patri¬ 
cians  their  creditors,  the  debts  due  to  whom 
they  had  to  discharge  by  slave-work,  drove  the 
plebs  to  revolts.  At  first  it  demanded  and  re¬ 
ceived  only  what  it  had  already  enjoyed  under 
the  kings — landed  property  and  protection 
against  the  powerful.  It  received  assignments  of 
land,  and  tribunes  of  the  people — functionaries, 
that  is  to  say,  who  had  the  power  to  put  a  veto 
on  every  decree  of  the  senate.  When  this  office 
commenced,  the  number  of  tribunes  was  limited 
to  two:  later  there  were  ten  of  them;  which 
however  was  rather  injurious  to  the  plebs,  since 
all  that  the  senate  had  to  do  was  to  gain  over 
one  of  the  tribunes,  in  order  to  thwart  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  all  the  rest  by  his  single  opposition.  The 
plebs  obtained  at  the  same  time  the  provocatio 
ad  populum:  that  is,  in  every  case  of  magisterial 
oppression,  the  condemned  person  might  appeal 
to  the  decision  of  the  people — a  privilege  of 
infinite  importance  to  the  plebs,  and  which  es¬ 
pecially  irritated  the  patricians.  At  the  repeated 
desire  of  the  people  the  decemviri  were  nomi¬ 
nated,  the  tribunate  of  the  people  being  sus¬ 
pended,  to  supply  the  desideratum  of  a  determi¬ 
nate  legislation;  they  perverted,  as  is  well 
known,  their  unlimited  power  to  tyranny,  and 
were  driven  from  power  on  an  occasion  entail¬ 
ing  similar  disgrace  to  that  which  led  to  the  pun¬ 
ishment  of  the  kings.  The  dependence  of  the 
clientela  was  in  the  meantime  weakened;  after 
the  decemviral  epoch,  the  clientes  are  less  and 
less  prominent  and  are  merged  in  the  plebs, 
which  adopts  resolutions  ( plebiscita ) ;  the  sen¬ 
ate  by  itself  could  only  issue  senatus  consulta , 
and  the  tribunes,  as  well  as  the  senate,  could 
now  impede  the  comitia  and  elections.  By  de¬ 
grees,  the  plebeians  effected  their  admissibility 
to  all  dignities  and  offices;  but,  at  first,  a  ple¬ 
beian  consul,  aedile,  censor,  etc.,  was  not  equal 
to  the  patrician  one,  on  account  of  the  sacra 
which  the  latter  kept  in  his  hands;  and  a  long 
time  intervened  after  this  concession  before  a 
plebeian  actually  became  a  consul.  It  was  the 
tribunis  plebis ,  Licinius,  who  established  the 
whole  cycle  of  these  political  arrangements  in 
the  second  half  of  the  fourth  century,  a.u.c. 
387.  It  was  he  also  who  chiefly  commenced  the 
agitation  for  the  lex  agraria,  respecting  which  so 
much  has  been  written  and  debated  among  the 
learned  of  the  day.  The  agitators  for  this  law 
excited  during  every  period  very  great  commo¬ 


OF  HISTORY 

tions  in  Rome.  The  plebeians  were  practically 
excluded  from  almost  all  the  landed  property, 
and  the  object  of  the  agrarian  laws  was  to  pro¬ 
vide  lands  for  them — partly  in  the  neighborhood 
of  Rome,  partly  in  the  conquered  districts,  to 
which  colonies  were  to  be  then  led  out.  In  the 
time  of  the  republic  we  frequently  see  military 
leaders  assigning  lands  to  the  people;  but  in 
every  case  they  were  accused  of  striving  after 
royalty,  because  it  was  the  kings  who  had  ex¬ 
alted  the  plebs.  The  agrarian  law  required  that 
no  citizen  should  possess  more  than  five  hun¬ 
dred  jugera:  the  patricians  were  consequently 
obliged  to  surrender  a  large  part  of  their  prop¬ 
erty.  Niebuhr,  in  particular,  has  undertaken  ex¬ 
tensive  researches  respecting  the  agrarian  laws, 
and  has  conceived  himself  to  have  made  great 
and  important  discoveries:  he  says,  viz.,  that 
an  infringement  of  the  sacred  right  of  property 
was  never  thought  of,  but  that  the  state  had 
only  assigned  a  portion  of  the  public  lands  for 
the  use  of  the  plebs,  having  always  had  the  right 
of  disposing  of  them  as  its  own  property.  I  only 
remark  in  passing  that  Hegewisch  had  made  this 
discovery  before  Niebuhr,  and  that  Niebuhr 
derived  the  particular  data  on  which  his  asser¬ 
tion  rests  from  Appian  and  Plutarch;  that  is 
from  Greek  authors,  respecting  whom  he  him¬ 
self  allows  that  we  should  have  recourse  to  only 
in  an  extreme  case.  How  often  does  Livy,  as 
well  as  Cicero  and  others,  speak  of  the  agrarian 
laws,  while  nothing  definite  can  be  inferred  from 
their  statements! 

This  is  another  proof  of  the  inaccuracy  of  the 
Roman  historians.  The  whole  affair  ends  in 
nothing  but  a  useless  question  of  jurisprudence. 
The  land  which  the  patricians  had  taken  into 
possession  or  in  which  colonies  settled,  was 
originally  public  land;  but  it  also  certainly  be¬ 
longed  to  those  in  possession,  and  our  informa¬ 
tion  is  not  at  all  promoted  by  the  assertion  that 
it  always  remained  public  land.  This  discovery 
of  Niebuhr’s  turns  upon  a  very  immaterial  dis¬ 
tinction,  existing  perhaps  in  his  ideas,  but  not  in 
reality.  The  Licinian  law  was  indeed  carried,  but 
soon  transgressed  and  utterly  disregarded.  Li¬ 
cinius  Stolo  himself,  who  had  first  “agitated” 
for  the  law,  was  punished  because  he  possessed 
a  larger  property  in  land  than  was  allowed,  and 
the  patricians  opposed  the  execution  of  the  law 
with  the  greatest  obstinacy.  We  must  here  call 
especial  attention  to  the  distinction  which  exists 
between  the  Roman,  the  Greek,  and  our  own 
circumstances.  Our  civil  society  rests  on  other 
principles,  and  in  it  such  measures  are  not  neces¬ 
sary.  Spartans  and  Athenians,  who  had  not  ar- 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  297 


rived  at  such  an  abstract  idea  of  the  state  as  was 
so  tenaciously  held  by  the  Romans,  did  not 
trouble  themselves  with  abstract  rights,  but 
simply  desired  that  the  citizens  should  have  the 
means  of  subsistence ;  and  they  required  of  the 
state  that  it  should  take  care  that  such  should 
be  the  case. 

This  is  the  chief  point  in  the  first  period  of 
Roman  history,  that  the  plebs  attained  the  right 
of  being  eligible  to  the  higher  political  offices, 
and  that,  by  a  share  which  they  too  managed  to 
obtain  in  the  land  and  soil,  the  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  were  assured  to  the  citizens.  By  this  union 
of  the  patriciate  and  the  plebs,  Rome  first  at¬ 
tained  true  internal  consistency;  and  only  after 
this  had  been  realized  could  the  Roman  power 
develop  itself  externally.  A  period  of  satisfied 
absorption  in  the  common  interest  ensues,  and 
the  citizens  are  weary  of  internal  struggles. 
When  after  civil  discords  nations  direct  their 
energies  outward,  they  appear  in  their  greatest 
strength;  for  the  previous  excitement  continues, 
and  no  longer  having  its  object  within,  seeks  for 
it  without.  This  direction  given  to  the  Roman 
energies  was  able  for  a  moment  to  conceal  the 
defect  of  that  union ;  equilibrium  was  restored, 
but  without  an  essential  centre  of  unity  and  sup¬ 
port.  The  contradiction  that  existed  could  not 
but  break  out  again  fearfully  at  a  later  period; 
but  previously  to  this  time  the  greatness  of 
Rome  had  to  display  itself  in  war  and  the  con¬ 
quest  of  the  world.  The  power,  the  wealth,  the 
glory  derived  from  these  wars,  as  also  the  diffi¬ 
culties  to  which  they  led,  kept  the  Romans  to¬ 
gether  as  regards  the  internal  affairs  of  the  state. 
Their  courage  and  discipline  secured  their  vic¬ 
tory.  As  compared  with  the  Greek  or  Mace¬ 
donian,  the  Roman  art  of  war  has  special  pe¬ 
culiarities.  The  strength  of  the  phalanx  lay  in 
its  mass  and  in  its  massive  character.  The  Ro¬ 
man  legions  also  present  a  close  array,  but  they 
had  at  the  same  time  an  articulated  organiza¬ 
tion  :  they  united  the  two  extremes  of  massive¬ 
ness  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  dispersion  into  light 
troops  on  the  other  hand:  they  held  firmly  to¬ 
gether,  while  at  the  same  time  they  were  capa¬ 
ble  of  ready  expansion.  Archers  and  slingers 
preceded  the  main  body  of  the  Roman  army 
when  they  attacked  the  enemy,  afterwards  leav¬ 
ing  the  decision  to  the  sword. 

It  would  be  a  wearisome  task  to  pursue  the 
wars  of  the  Romans  in  Italy;  partly  because 
they  are  in  themselves  unimportant,  even  the 
often  empty  rhetoric  of  the  generals  in  Livy 
cannot  very  much  increase  the  interest;  partly 
on  account  of  the  unintelligent  character  of  the 


Roman  annalists,  in  whose  pages  we  see  the 
Romans  carrying  on  war  only  with  “enemies” 
without  learning  anything  further  of  their  in¬ 
dividuality,  e.g.y  the  Etruscans,  the  Samnites, 
the  Ligurians,  with  whom  they  carried  on  wars 
during  many  hundred  years.  It  is  singular  in  re¬ 
gard  to  these  transactions  that  the  Romans,  who 
have  the  justification  conceded  by  world-history 
on  their  side,  should  also  claim  for  themselves 
the  minor  justification  in  respect  to  manifes¬ 
toes  and  treaties  on  occasion  of  minor  infringe¬ 
ments  of  them,  and  maintain  it  as  it  were  after 
the  fashion  of  advocates.  But  in  political  com¬ 
plications  of  this  kind,  either  party  may  take 
offence  at  the  conduct  of  the  other,  if  it  pleases, 
and  deems  it  expedient  to  be  offended.  The  Ro¬ 
mans  had  long  and  severe  contests  to  maintain 
with  the  Samnites,  the  Etruscans,  the  Gauls, 
the  Marsi,  the  Umbrians,  and  the  Bruttii,  be¬ 
fore  they  could  make  themselves  masters  of  the 
whole  of  Italy.  Their  dominion  was  extended 
thence  in  a  southerly  direction;  they  gained  a 
secure  footing  in  Sicily,  where  the  Carthagin¬ 
ians  had  long  carried  on  war;  then  they  ex¬ 
tended  their  power  towards  the  west :  from  Sar¬ 
dinia  and  Corsica  they  went  to  Spain.  They  thus 
soon  came  into  frequent  contact  with  the  Car¬ 
thaginians,  and  were  obliged  to  form  a  naval 
power  in  opposition  to  them.  This  transition 
was  easier  in  ancient  times  than  it  would  per¬ 
haps  be  now,  when  long  practice  and  superior 
knowledge  are  required  for  maritime  service. 
The  mode  of  warfare  at  sea  was  not  very  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  on  land. 

We  have  thus  reached  the  end  of  the  first 
epoch  of  Roman  history,  in  which  the  Romans 
by  their  retail  military  transactions  had  become 
capitalists  in  a  strength  proper  to  themselves, 
and  with  which  they  were  to  appear  on  the  thea¬ 
tre  of  the  world.  The  Roman  dominion  was,  on 
the  whole,  not  yet  very  greatly  extended:  only 
a  few  colonies  had  settled  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Po,  and  on  the  south  a  considerable  power 
confronted  that  of  Rome.  It  was  the  Second 
Punic  War,  therefore,  that  gave  the  impulse  to 
its  terrible  collision  with  the  most  powerful 
states  of  the  time ;  through  it  the  Romans  came 
into  contact  with  Macedonia,  Asia,  Syria,  and 
subsequently  also  with  Egypt.  Italy  and  Rome 
remained  the  centre  of  their  great  far-stretching 
empire,  but  this  centre  was,  as  already  remarked, 
not  the  less  an  artificial,  forced,  and  compulsory 
one.  This  grand  period  of  the  contact  of  Rome 
with  other  states,  and  of  the  manifold  compli¬ 
cations  thence  arising,  has  been  depicted  by  the 
noble  Achaean,  Polybius,  whose  fate  it  was  to 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


298 

observe  the  fall  of  his  country  through  the  dis¬ 
graceful  passions  of  the  Greeks  and  the  baseness 
and  inexorable  persistency  of  the  Romans. 

Section  II 

ROME  FROM  THE  SECOND 
PUNIC  WAR  TO  THE 
EMPERORS 

The  second  period,  according  to  our  division, 
begins  with  the  Second  Punic  War,  that  epoch 
which  decided  and  stamped  a  character  upon 
Roman  dominion.  In  the  First  Punic  War,  the 
Romans  had  shown  that  they  had  become  a 
match  for  the  mighty  Carthage,  which  possessed 
a  great  part  of  the  coast  of  Africa  and  southern 
Spain,  and  had  gained  a  firm  footing  in  Sicily 
and  Sardinia.  The  Second  Punic  War  laid  the 
might  of  Carthage  prostrate  in  the  dust.  The 
proper  element  of  that  state  was  the  sea;  but 
it  had  no  original  territory,  formed  no  nation, 
had  no  national  army;  its  hosts  were  composed 
of  the  troops  of  subjugated  and  allied  peoples. 
In  spite  of  this,  the  great  Hannibal  with  such  a 
host,  formed  from  the  most  diverse  nations, 
brought  Rome  near  to  destruction.  Without  any 
support  he  maintained  his  position  in  Italy  for 
sixteen  years  against  Roman  patience  and  per¬ 
severance  ;  during  which  time  however  the  Scip¬ 
ios  conquered  Spain  and  entered  into  alliances 
with  the  princes  of  Africa.  Hannibal  was  at  last 
compelled  to  hasten  to  the  assistance  of  his 
hard-pressed  country;  he  lost  the  battle  of 
Zama  in  the  year  552  a.u.c.  and  after  six  and 
thirty  years  revisited  his  paternal  city,  to  which 
he  was  now  obliged  to  offer  pacific  counsels. 
The  Second  Punic  War  thus  eventually  estab¬ 
lished  the  undisputed  power  of  Rome  over  Car¬ 
thage;  it  occasioned  the  hostile  collision  of  the 
Romans  with  the  king  of  Macedonia,  who  was 
conquered  five  years  later.  Now  Antiochus,  the 
king  of  Syria,  is  involved  in  the  melee.  He  op¬ 
posed  a  huge  power  to  the  Romans,  was  beaten 
at  Thermopylae  and  Magnesia,  and  was  com¬ 
pelled  to  surrender  to  the  Romans  Asia  Minor 
as  far  as  the  Taurus.  After  the  conquest  of 
Macedonia  both  that  country  and  Greece  were 
declared  free  by  the  Romans — a  declaration 
whose  meaning  we  have  already  investigated, 
in  treating  of  the  preceding  historical  nation.  It 
was  not  till  this  time  that  the  Third  Punic  War 
commenced,  for  Carthage  had  once  more  raised 
its  head  and  excited  the  jealousy  of  the  Romans. 
After  long  resistance  it  was  taken  and  laid  in 
ashes.  Nor  could  the  Achaean  league  now  long 


maintain  itself  in  the  face  of  Roman  ambition: 
the  Romans  were  eager  for  war,  destroyed  Cor¬ 
inth  in  the  same  year  as  Carthage,  and  made 
Greece  a  province.  The  fall  of  Carthage  and  the 
subjugation  of  Greece  were  the  central  points 
from  which  the  Romans  gave  its  vast  extent  to 
their  sovereignty. 

Rome  seemed  now  to  have  attained  perfect 
security;  no  external  power  confronted  it:  she 
was  the  mistress  of  the  Mediterranean — that  is, 
of  the  media  terra  of  all  civilization.  In  this 
period  of  victory,  its  morally  great  and  fortu¬ 
nate  personages,  especially  the  Scipios,  attract 
our  attention.  They  were  morally  fortunate,  al¬ 
though  the  greatest  of  the  Scipios  met  with  an 
end  outwardly  unfortunate,  because  they  de¬ 
voted  their  energies  to  their  country  during  a 
period  when  it  enjoyed  a  sound  and  unimpaired 
condition.  But  after  the  feeling  of  patriotism, 
the  dominant  instinct  of  Rome,  had  been  satis¬ 
fied,  destruction  immediately  invades  the  state 
regarded  en  masse;  the  grandeur  of  individual 
character  becomes  stronger  in  intensity,  and 
more  vigorous  in  the  use  of  means,  on  account 
of  contrasting  circumstances.  We  see  the  in¬ 
ternal  contradiction  of  Rome  now  beginning  to 
manifest  itself  in  another  form;  and  the  epoch 
which  concludes  the  second  period  is  also  the 
second  mediation  of  that  contradiction.  We  ob¬ 
served  that  contradiction  previously  in  the 
struggle  of  the  patricians  against  the  plebeians: 
now  it  assumes  the  form  of  private  interest, 
contravening  patriotic  sentiment;  and  respect 
for  the  state  no  longer  holds  these  opposites  in 
the  necessary  equipoise.  Rather,  we  observe 
now  side  by  side  with  wars  for  conquest,  plunder 
and  glory,  the  fearful  spectacle  of  civil  discords 
in  Rome,  and  intestine  wars.  There  does  not  fol¬ 
low,  as  among  the  Greeks  after  the  Median  wars, 
a  period  of  brilliant  splendour  in  culture,  art  and 
science,  in  which  spirit  enjoys  inwardly  and 
ideally  that  which  it  had  previously  achieved 
in  the  world  of  action.  If  inward  satisfaction  was 
to  follow  the  period  of  that  external  prosperity 
in  war,  the  principle  of  Roman  life  must  be 
more  concrete.  But  if  there  were  such  a  con¬ 
crete  life  to  evolve  as  an  object  of  consciousness 
from  the  depths  of  their  souls  by  imagination 
and  thought,  what  would  it  have  been!  Their 
chief  spectacles  were  triumphs,  the  treasures 
gained  in  war,  and  captives  from  all  nations, 
unsparingly  subjected  to  the  yoke  of  abstract 
sovereignty.  The  concrete  element,  which  the 
Romans  actually  find  within  themselves,  is  only 
this  unspiritual  unity,  and  any  definite  thought 
or  feeling  of  a  non-abstract  kind,  can  lie  only  in 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  299 


the  idiosyncrasy  of  individuals.  The  tension  of 
virtue  is  now  relaxed,  because  the  danger  is  past. 
At  the  time  of  the  First  Punic  War,  necessity 
united  the  hearts  of  all  for  the  saving  of  Rome. 
In  the  following  wars  too,  with  Macedonia, 
Syria,  and  the  Gauls  in  upper  Italy,  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  entire  state  was  still  concerned.  But 
after  the  danger  from  Carthage  and  Macedon 
was  over,  the  subsequent  wars  were  more  and 
more  the  mere  consequences  of  victories,  and 
nothing  else  was  needed  than  to  gather  in  their 
fruits.  The  armies  were  used  for  particular  ex¬ 
peditions,  suggested  by  policy,  or  for  the  ad¬ 
vantages  of  individuals — for  acquiring  wealth, 
glory,  sovereignty  in  the  abstract.  The  relation 
to  other  nations  was  purely  that  of  force.  The 
national  individuality  of  peoples  did  not,  as 
early  as  the  time  of  the  Romans,  excite  respect, 
as  is  the  case  in  modern  times.  The  various  peo¬ 
ples  were  not  yet  recognized  as  legitimated ;  the 
various  states  had  not  yet  acknowledged  each 
other  as  real  essential  existences.  Equal  right  to 
existence  entails  a  union  of  states,  such  as  exists 
in  modern  Europe,  or  a  condition  like  that  of 
Greece,  in  which  the  states  had  an  equal  right 
to  existence  under  the  protection  of  the  Delphic 
god.  The  Romans  do  not  enter  into  such  a  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  other  nations,  for  their  god  is  only 
the  Jupiter  Capitolinus ;  neither  do  they  respect 
the  sacra  of  the  other  nations  (any  more  than 
the  plebeians  those  of  the  patricians) ;  but  as 
conquerors  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  they 
plunder  the  palladia  of  the  nations.  Rome  kept 
standing  armies  in  the  conquered  provinces,  and 
proconsuls  and  propraetors  were  sent  into  them 
as  viceroys.  The  equites  collected  the  taxes  and 
tributes,  which  they  farmed  under  the  state.  A 
net  of  such  fiscal  farmers  ( publicani )  was  thus 
drawn  over  the  whole  Roman  world.  Cato  used 
to  say,  after  every  deliberation  of  the  senate: 
“Ceterum  censeo  Carthaginem  esse  delendam>} ; 
and  Cato  was  a  thorough  Roman.  The  Roman 
principle  thereby  exhibits  itself  as  the  cold  ab¬ 
straction  of  sovereignty  and  power,  as  the  pure 
egotism  of  the  will  in  opposition  to  others,  in¬ 
volving  no  moral  element  of  determination,  but 
appearing  in  a  concrete  form  only  in  the  shape 
of  individual  interests.  Increase  in  the  number 
of  provinces  issued  in  the  aggrandizement  of 
individuals  within  Rome  itself,  and  the  corrup¬ 
tion  thence  arising.  From  Asia,  luxury  and  de¬ 
bauchery  were  brought  to  Rome.  Riches  flowed 
in  after  the  fashion  of  spoils  in  war,  and  were 
not  the  fruit  of  industry  and  honest  activity;  in 
the  same  way  as  the  marine  had  arisen,  not  from 
the  necessities  of  commerce,  but  with  a  warlike 


object.  The  Roman  state,  drawing  its  resources 
from  rapine,  came  to  be  rent  in  sunder  by  quar¬ 
rels  about  dividing  the  spoil.  For  the  first  oc¬ 
casion  of  the  breaking  out  of  contention  within 
it,  was  the  legacy  of  Attalus,  king  of  Pergamus, 
who  had  bequeathed  his  treasures  to  the  Roman 
state.  Tiberius  Gracchus  came  forward  with  the 
proposal  to  divide  it  among  the  Roman  citizens ; 
he  likewise  renewed  the  Licinian  agrarian  laws, 
which  had  been  entirely  set  aside  during  the  pre¬ 
dominance  of  individuals  in  the  state.  His  chief 
object  was  to  procure  property  for  the  free 
citizens,  and  to  people  Italy  with  citizens  in¬ 
stead  of  slaves.  This  noble  Roman,  however, 
was  vanquished  by  the  grasping  nobles,  for  the 
Roman  constitution  was  no  longer  in  a  condi¬ 
tion  to  be  saved  by  the  constitution  itself.  Caius 
Gracchus,  the  brother  of  Tiberius,  prosecuted 
the  same  noble  aim  as  his  brother  and  shared  the 
same  fate.  Ruin  now  broke  in  unchecked,  and. 
as  there  existed  no  generally  recognized  and  ab¬ 
solutely  essential  object  to  which  the  country’s 
energy  could  be  devoted,  individualities  and 
physical  force  were  in  the  ascendant.  The 
enormous  corruption  of  Rome  displays  itself  in 
the  war  with  Jugurtha,  who  had  gained  the  sen¬ 
ate  by  bribery  and  so  indulged  himself  in  the 
most  atrocious  deeds  of  violence  and  crime. 
Rome  was  pervaded  by  the  excitement  of  the 
struggle  against  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones,  who 
assumed  a  menacing  position  towards  the  state. 
With  great  exertions  the  latter  were  utterly 
routed  in  Provence,  near  Aix;  the  others  in 
Lombardy,  at  the  Adige,  by  Marius  the  con¬ 
queror  of  Jugurtha.  Then  the  Italian  allies, 
whose  demand  of  Roman  citizenship  had  been 
refused,  raised  a  revolt;  and  while  the  Romans 
had  to  sustain  a  struggle  against  a  vast  power 
in  Italy,  they  received  the  news  that,  at  the 
command  of  Mithridates,  80,000  Romans  had 
been  put  to  death  in  Asia  Minor.  Mithridates 
was  King  of  Pontus,  governed  Colchis  and  the 
lands  of  the  Black  Sea  as  far  as  the  Tauric  pen¬ 
insula,  and  could  summon  to  his  standard  in  his 
war  with  Rome  the  populations  of  the  Caucasus, 
of  Armenia,  Mesopotamia,  and  a  part  of  Syria, 
through  his  son-in-law  Tigranes.  Sulla,  who  had 
already  led  the  Roman  hosts  in  the  Social  War, 
conquered  him.  Athens,  which  had  hitherto  been 
spared,  was  beleaguered  and  taken,  but  “for  the 
sake  of  their  fathers,”  as  Sulla  expressed  him¬ 
self,  not  destroyed.  He  then  returned  to  Rome, 
reduced  the  popular  faction,  headed  by  Marius 
and  Cinna,  became  master  of  the  city,  and  com¬ 
menced  systematic  massacres  of  Roman  citi¬ 
zens  of  consideration.  Forty  senators  and  six 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


300 

hundred  knights  were  sacrificed  to  his  ambition 
and  lust  of  power. 

Mithridates  was  indeed  defeated,  but  not 
overcome,  and  was  able  to  begin  the  war  anew. 
At  the  same  time,  Sertorius,  a  banished  Roman, 
arose  in  revolt  in  Spain,  carried  on  a  contest 
there  for  eight  years,  and  perished  only  through 
treachery.  The  war  against  Mithridates  was 
terminated  by  Pompey;  the  king  of  Pontus 
killed  himself  when  his  resources  were  ex¬ 
hausted.  The  Servile  War  in  Italy  is  a  contem¬ 
poraneous  event.  A  great  number  of  gladiators 
and  mountaineers  had  formed  a  union  under 
Spartacus,  but  were  vanquished  by  Crassus.  To 
this  confusion  was  added  the  universal  preva¬ 
lence  of  piracy,  which  Pompey  rapidly  reduced 
by  a  large  armament. 

We  thus  see  the  most  terrible  and  dangerous 
powers  arising  against  Rome;  yet  the  military 
force  of  this  state  is  victorious  over  all.  Great 
individuals  now  appear  on  the  stage  as  during 
the  times  of  the  fall  of  Greece.  The  biographies 
of  Plutarch  are  here  also  of  the  deepest  interest. 
It  was  from  the  disruption  of  the  state,  which 
had  no  longer  any  consistency  or  firmness  in 
itself,  that  these  colossal  individualities  arose, 
instinctively  impelled  to  restore  that  political 
unity  which  was  no  longer  to  be  found  in  men’s 
dispositions,  It  is  their  misfortune  that  they 
cannot  maintain  a  pure  morality,  for  their  course 
of  action  contravenes  things  as  they  are,  and  is 
a  series  of  transgressions.  Even  the  noblest — the 
Gracchi — were  not  merely  the  victims  of  injus¬ 
tice  and  violence  from  without,  but  were  them¬ 
selves  involved  in  the  corruption  and  wrong  that 
universally  prevailed.  But  that  which  these  in¬ 
dividuals  purpose  and  accomplish  has  on  its 
side  the  higher  sanction  of  the  world-spirit  and 
must  eventually  triumph.  The  idea  of  an  organ¬ 
ization  for  the  vast  empire  being  altogether 
absent,  the  senate  could  not  assert  the  author¬ 
ity  of  government.  The  sovereignty  was  made 
dependent  on  the  people — that  people  which 
was  now  a  mere  mob,  and  was  obliged  to  be 
supported  by  corn  from  the  Roman  provinces. 
We  should  refer  to  Cicero  to  see  how  all  affairs 
of  state  were  decided  in  riotous  fashion,  and 
with  arms  in  hand,  by  the  wealth  and  power  of 
the  grandees  on  the  one  side,  and  by  a  troop  of 
rabble  on  the  other.  The  Roman  citizens  attach 
themselves  to  individuals  who  flatter  them,  and 
who  then  become  prominent  in  factions,  in  order 
to  make  themselves  masters  of  Rome.  Thus  we 
see  in  Pompey  and  Caesar  the  two  foci  of  Rome’s 
splendor  coming  into  hostile  opposition:  on  the 
one  side,  Pompey  with  the  senate,  and  there¬ 


fore  apparently  the  defender  of  the  Republic 
— on  the  other,  Caesar  with  his  legions  and  a 
superiority  of  genius.  This  contest  between  the 
two  most  powerful  individualities  could  not  be 
decided  at  Rome  in  the  forum.  Caesar  made  him¬ 
self  master  in  succession,  of  Italy,  Spain,  and 
Greece,  utterly  routed  his  enemy  at  Pharsalus, 
forty-eight  years  before  Christ,  made  himself 
sure  of  Asia,  and  so  returned  victor  to  Rome. 

In  this  way  the  world-wide  sovereignty  of 
Rome  became  the  property  of  a  single  posses¬ 
sor.  This  important  change  must  not  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  thing  of  chance ;  it  was  necessary — 
postulated  by  the  circumstances.  The  demo¬ 
cratic  constitution  could  no  longer  be  really 
maintained  in  Rome,  but  only  kept  up  in  ap¬ 
pearance.  Cicero,  who  had  procured  himself 
great  respect  through  his  high  oratorical  talent, 
and  whose  learning  acquired  him  considerable 
influence,  always  attributes  the  corrupt  state  of 
the  republic  to  individuals  and  their  passions. 
Plato,  whom  Cicero  professedly  followed,  had 
the  full  consciousness  that  the  Athenian  state, 
as  it  presented  itself  to  him,  could  not  maintain 
its  existence,  and  therefore  sketched  the  plan  of 
a  perfect  constitution  accordant  with  his  views. 
Cicero,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  consider  it  im¬ 
possible  to  preserve  the  Roman  Republic,  and 
only  desiderates  some  temporary  assistance  for 
it  in  its  adversity.  The  nature  of  the  state,  and 
of  the  Roman  state  in  particular,  transcends  his 
comprehension.  Cato,  too,  says  of  Caesar:  “His 
virtues  be  execrated,  for  they  have  ruined  my 
country!”  But  it  was  not  the  mere  accident  of 
Caesar’s  existence  that  destroyed  the  republic — 
it  was  necessity.  All  the  tendencies  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  principle  were  to  sovereignty  and  military 
force :  it  contained  in  it  no  spiritual  centre  which 
it  could  make  the  object,  occupation,  and  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  its  spirit.  The  aim  of  patriotism,  that  of 
preserving  the  state,  ceases  when  the  lust  of  per¬ 
sonal  dominion  becomes  the  impelling  passion. 
The  citizens  were  alienated  from  the  state,  for 
they  found  in  it  no  objective  satisfaction;  and 
the  interests  of  individuals  did  not  take  the  same 
direction  as  among  the  Greeks,  who  could  set 
against  the  incipient  corruption  of  the  practical 
world,  the  noblest  works  of  art  in  painting, 
sculpture,  and  poetry,  and  especially  a  highly 
cultivated  philosophy.  Their  works  of  art  were 
only  what  they  had  collected  from  every  part  of 
Greece,  and  therefore  not  productions  of  their 
own;  their  riches  were  not  the  fruit  of  industry, 
as  was  the  case  in  Athens,  but  the  result  of 
plunder.  Elegance — culture — was  foreign  to  the 
Romans  per  se;  they  sought  to  obtain  it  from 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD 


the  Greeks,  and  for  this  purpose  a  vast  number 
of  Greek  slaves  were  brought  to  Rome.  Delos 
was  the  centre  of  this  slave  trade,  and  it  is  said 
that  sometimes  on  a  single  day,  ten  thousand 
slaves  were  purchased  there.  To  the  Romans, 
Greek  slaves  were  their  poets,  their  authors,  the 
superintendents  of  their  manufactories,  the  in¬ 
structors  of  their  children. 

The  republic  could  not  longer  exist  in  Rome. 
We  see,  especially  from  Cicero’s  writings,  how 
all  public  affairs  were  decided  by  the  private  au¬ 
thority  of  the  more  eminent  citizens — by  their 
power,  their  wealth ;  and  what  tumultuary  pro¬ 
ceedings  marked  all  political  transactions.  In  the 
republic,  therefore,  there  was  no  longer  any  se¬ 
curity;  that  could  be  looked  for  only  in  a  single 
will.  Caesar,  who  may  be  adduced  as  a  paragon 
of  Roman  adaptation  of  means  to  ends — who 
formed  his  resolves  with  the  most  unerring  per¬ 
spicuity,  and  executed  them  with  the  greatest 
vigor  and  practical  skill,  without  any  superflu¬ 
ous  excitement  of  mind — Caesar,  judged  by  the 
great  scope  of  history,  did  the  right;  since  he 
furnished  a  mediating  element,  and  that  kind  of 
political  bond  which  men’s  condition  required. 
Caesar  effected  two  objects:  he  calmed  the  in¬ 
ternal  strife,  and  at  the  same  time  originated  a 
new  one  outside  the  limits  of  the  empire.  For 
the  conquest  of  the  world  had  reached  hitherto 
only  to  the  circle  of  the  Alps,  but  Caesar  opened 
a  new  scene  of  achievement:  he  founded  the 
theatre  which  was  on  the  point  of  becoming  the 
centre  of  history.  He  then  achieved  universal 
sovereignty  by  a  struggle  which  was  decided  not 
in  Rome  itself,  but  by  his  conquest  of  the  whole 
Roman  world.  His  position  was  indeed  hostile 
to  the  republic,  but,  properly  speaking,  only  to 
its  shadow;  for  all  that  remained  of  that  repub¬ 
lic  was  entirely  powerless.  Pompey,and  all  those 
who  were  on  the  side  of  the  senate,  exalted  their 
dignitas  auctoritas,  their  individual  rule,  as  the 
power  of  the  republic ;  and  the  mediocrity  which 
needed  protection  took  refuge  under  this  title. 
Caesar  put  an  end  to  the  empty  formalism  of  this 
title,  made  himself  master,  and  held  together 
the  Roman  world  by  force,  in  opposition  to  iso¬ 
lated  factions.  In  spite  of  this,  we  see  the  noblest 
men  of  Rome  supposing  Caesar’s  rule  to  be  a 
merely  adventitious  thing,  and  the  entire  posi¬ 
tion  of  affairs  to  be  dependent  on  his  individual¬ 
ity.  So  thought  Cicero,  so  Brutus  and  Cassius. 
They  believed  that  if  this  one  individual  were 
out  of  the  way,  the  republic  would  be  ipso  facto 
restored.  Possessed  by  this  remarkable  hallucina¬ 
tion,  Brutus,  a  man  of  highly  noble  character, 
and  Cassius,  endowed  with  greater  practical 


energy  than  Cicero,  assassinated  the  man  whose 
virtues  they  appreciated.  But  it  became  immedi¬ 
ately  manifest  that  only  a  single  will  could  guide 
the  Roman  state,  and  now  the  Romans  were 
compelled  to  adopt  that  opinion;  since  in  all 
periods  of  the  world  a  political  revolution  is 
sanctioned  in  men’s  opinions,  when  it  repeats 
itself.  Thus  Napoleon  was  twice  defeated,  and 
the  Bourbons  twice  expelled.  By  repetition  that 
which  at  first  appeared  merely  a  matter  of 
chance  and  contingency,  becomes  a  real  and  rati¬ 
fied  existence. 

Section  III 

Chapter  i.  Rome  Under  the  Emperors 

During  this  period  the  Romans  come  into  con¬ 
tact  with  the  people  destined  to  succeed  them  as 
a  world-historical  nation;  and  we  have  to  con¬ 
sider  that  period  in  two  essential  aspects,  the 
secular  and  the  spiritual.  In  the  secular  aspect 
two  leading  phases  must  be  specially  regarded : 
first,  the  position  of  the  ruler;  and  secondly,  the 
conversion  of  mere  individuals  into  persons — 
the  world  of  legal  relations. 

The  first  thing  to  be  remarked  respecting  the 
imperial  rule  is  that  the  Roman  government  was 
so  abstracted  from  interest,  that  thegreat  transi¬ 
tion  to  that  rule  hardly  changed  anything  in  the 
constitution.  The  popular  assemblies  alone  were 
unsuited  to  the  new  state  of  things  and  dis¬ 
appeared.  The  emperor  was  princeps  senatus, 
censor,  consul,  tribune:  he  united  all  their 
nominally  continuing  offices  in  himself ;  and  the 
military  power,  here  the  most  essentially  im¬ 
portant,  was  exclusively  in  his  hands.  The  con¬ 
stitution  was  an  utterly  unsubstantial  form,  from 
which  all  vitality,  consequently  all  might  and 
power,  had  departed;  and  the  only  means  of 
maintaining  its  existence  were  the  legions  which 
the  emperor  constantly  kept  in  the  vicinity  of 
Rome.  Public  business  was  indeed  brought  be¬ 
fore  the  senate,  and  the  emperor  appeared  sim¬ 
ply  as  one  of  its  members;  but  the  senate  was 
obliged  to  obey,  and  whoever  ventured  to  gain¬ 
say  his  will  was  punished  with  death,  and  his 
property  confiscated.  Those  therefore  who  had 
certain  death  in  anticipation,  killed  themselves, 
that  if  they  could  do  nothing  more  they  might 
at  least  preserve  their  property  to  their  family. 
Tiberius  was  the  most  odious  to  the  Romans  on 
account  of  his  power  of  dissimulation :  he  knew 
very  well  how  to  make  good  use  of  the  baseness 
of  the  senate,  in  extirpating  those  among  them 
whom  he  feared.  The  power  of  the  emperor 
rested,  as  we  have  said,  on  the  army,  and  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


302 

Pretorian  bodyguard  which  surrounded  him. 
But  the  legions,  and  especially  the  Pretorians, 
soon  became  conscious  of  their  importance,  and 
arrogated  to  themselves  the  disposal  of  the  im¬ 
perial  throne.  At  first  they  continued  to  show 
some  respect  for  the  family  of  Caesar  Augustus, 
but  subsequently  the  legions  chose  their  own 
generals;  such,  viz.,  as  had  gained  their  good 
will  and  favor,  partly  by  courage  and  intelli¬ 
gence,  partly  also  by  bribes,  and  indulgence  in 
the  administration  of  military  discipline. 

The  emperors  conducted  themselves  in  the 
enjoyment  of  their  powerwithperfect  simplicity, 
and  did  not  surround  themselves  with  pomp  and 
splendour  in  Oriental  fashion.  We  find  in  them 
traits  of  simplicity  which  astonish  us.  Thus,  e.g., 
Augustus  writes  a  letter  to  Horace,  in  which  he 
reproaches  him  for  having  failed  to  address  any 
poem  to  him.  and  asks  him  whether  he  thinks 
that  that  would  disgrace  him  with  posterity. 
Sometimes  the  senate  made  an  attempt  to  regain 
its  consequence  by  nominating  the  emperor:  but 
their  nominees  were  either  unable  to  maintain 
their  ground,  or  could  do  so  only  by  bribing  the 
Pretorians.  The  choice  of  the  senators  and  the 
constitution  of  the  senate  was  moreover  left 
entirely  to  the  caprice  of  the  emperor.  The  polit¬ 
ical  institutions  were  united  in  the  person  of 
the  emperor;  no  moral  bond  any  longer  existed; 
the  will  of  the  emperor  was  supreme,  and  before 
him  there  was  absolute  equality.  The  freedmen 
who  surrounded  the  emperor  were  often  the 
mightiest  in  the  empire;  for  caprice  recognizes 
no  distinction.  In  the  person  of  the  emperor, 
isolated  subjectivity  has  gained  a  perfectly  un¬ 
limited  realization.  Spirit  has  renounced  its 
proper  nature,  inasmuch  as  limitation  of  being 
and  of  volition  has  been  constituted  an  unlimited 
absolute  existence.  This  arbitrary  choice,  more¬ 
over,  has  only  one  limit,  the  limit  of  all  that  is 
human — death;  and  even  death  became  a  theat¬ 
rical  display.  Nero,  e.g.,  died  a  death,  which 
may  furnish  an  example  for  the  noblest  hero  as 
for  the  most  resigned  of  sufferers.  Individual 
subjectivity  thus  entirely  emancipated  from  con¬ 
trol  has  no  inward  life,  no  prospective  nor  retro¬ 
spective  emotions,  no  repentance,  nor  hope,  nor 
fear — not  even  thought;  for  all  these  involve 
fixed  conditions  and  aims,  while  here  every  con¬ 
dition  is  purely  contingent. The  springs  of  action 
are  none  other  than  desire,  lust,  passion,  fancy — 
in  short,  caprice  absolutely  unfettered.  It  finds 
so  little  limitation  in  the  will  of  others  that  the 
relation  of  will  to  will  may  be  called  that  of  ab¬ 
solute  sovereignty  to  absolute  slavery.  In  the 
whole  known  world,  no  will  is  imagined  that  is 


not  subject  to  the  will  of  the  emperor.  But  under 
the  sovereignty  of  that  one,  everything  is  in  a 
condition  of  order;  for  as  it  actually  is,  it  is  in 
due  order,  and  government  consists  in  bringing 
all  into  harmony  with  the  sovereign  one .  The 
concrete  element  in  the  character  of  the  emper¬ 
ors  is  therefore  of  itself  of  no  interest,  because 
the  concrete  is  not  of  essential  importance.  Thus 
there  were  emperors  of  noble  character  and  noble 
nature,  and  who  highly  distinguished  themselves 
by  mental  and  moral  culture.  Titus,  Trajan,  the 
Antonines,  are  known  as  such  characters,  rigor¬ 
ously  strict  in  self-government;  yet  even  these 
produced  no  change  in  the  state.  The  proposition 
was  never  made  during  their  time,  to  give  the 
Roman  Empire  an  organization  of  free  social 
relationship:  they  were  only  a  kind  of  happy 
chance,  which  passes  over  without  a  trace  and 
leaves  the  condition  of  things  as  it  was.  For 
these  persons  find  themselves  here  in  a  position 
in  which  they  cannot  be  said  to  act,  since  no  ob¬ 
ject  confronts  them  in  opposition;  they  have 
only  to  will — well  or  ill — and  it  is  so.  The  praise¬ 
worthy  emperors,  Vespasian  andTitus,were  suc¬ 
ceeded  by  that  coarsest  and  most  loathsome  ty¬ 
rant,  Domitian:  yet  the  Roman  historian  tells 
us  that  the  Roman  world  enjoyed  tranquillizing 
repose  under  him.  Those  single  points  of  light, 
therefore,  effected  no  change;  the  whole  empire 
was  subject  to  the  pressure  of  taxation  and 
plunder;  Italy  was  depopulated;  the  most  fertile 
lands  remained  untilled :  and  this  state  of  things 
lay  as  a  fate  on  the  Roman  world. 

The  second  point  which  we  have  particularly 
to  remark,  is  the  position  taken  by  individuals 
as  persons.  Individuals  were  perfectly  equal 
(slavery  made  only  a  trifling  distinction)  and 
without  any  political  right.  As  early  as  the  ter¬ 
mination  of  the  Social  War,  the  inhabitants  of  the 
whole  of  Italy  were  put  on  an  equal  footing  with 
Roman  citizens ;  and  under  Caracalla  all  distinc¬ 
tion  between  the  subjects  of  the  entire  Roman 
empire  was  abolished.  Private  right  developed 
and  perfected  this  equality.  The  right  of  prop¬ 
erty  had  been  previously  limited  by  distinctions 
of  various  kinds,  which  were  now  abrogated.  We 
observed  the  Romans  proceeding  from  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  abstract  subjectivity,  which  now  realizes 
itself  as  personality  in  the  recognition  of  private 
right.  Private  right,  viz.,  is  this:  that  the  social 
unit  as  such  enjoys  consideration  in  the  state, 
in  the  reality  which  he  gives  to  himself — viz.,  in 
property.  The  living  political  body,  that  Roman 
feeling  which  animated  it  as  its  soul,  is  now 
brought  back  to  the  isolation  of  a  lifeless  pri¬ 
vate  right.  As,  when  the  physical  body  suffers 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  303 


dissolution,  each  point  gains  a  life  of  its  own, 
but  which  is  only  the  miserable  life  of  worms; 
so  the  political  organism  is  here  dissolved  into 
atoms — viz.,  private  persons.  Such  a  condition 
is  Roman  life  at  this  epoch:  on  the  one  side, 
fate  and  the  abstract  universality  of  sovereignty; 
on  the  other,  the  individual  abstraction.  “Per¬ 
son,”  which  involves  the  recognition  of  the  inde¬ 
pendent  dignity  of  the  social  unit,  not  on  the 
ground  of  the  display  of  the  life  which  he  pos¬ 
sesses — in  his  complete  individuality — but  as 
the  abstract  individuum. 

It  is  the  pride  of  the  social  units  to  enjoy  ab¬ 
solute  importance  as  private  persons;  for  the 
ego  is  thus  enabled  to  assert  unbounded  claims; 
but  the  substantial  interest  thus  comprehended 
— the  meum — is  only  of  a  superficial  kind,  and 
the  development  of  private  right,  which  this 
high  principle  introduced,  involved  the  decay  of 
political  life.  The  emperor  domineered  only,  and 
could  not  be  said  to  rule;  for  the  equitable  and 
moral  medium  between  the  sovereign  and  the 
subjects  was  wanting — the  bond  of  a  constitu¬ 
tion  and  organization  of  the  state,  in  which  a 
gradation  of  circles  of  social  life,  enjoying  in¬ 
dependent  recognition,  exists  in  communities 
and  provinces,  which,  devoting  their  energies  to 
the  general  interest,  exert  an  influence  on  the 
general  government.  There  are  indeed  curice  in 
the  towns,  but  they  are  either  destitute  of 
weight,  or  used  only  as  means  for  oppressing  in¬ 
dividuals,  and  for  systematic  plunder.  That, 
therefore,  which  was  abidingly  present  to  the 
minds  of  men  was  not  their  country,  or  such  a 
moral  unity  as  that  supplies :  the  whole  state  of 
things  urged  them  to  yield  themselves  to  fate, 
and  to  strive  for  a  perfect  indifference  to  life — 
an  indifference  which  they  sought  either  in  free¬ 
dom  of  thought  or  in  directly  sensuous  enjoy¬ 
ment.  Thus  man  was  either  at  war  with  ex¬ 
istence,  or  entirely  given  up  to  mere  sensuous 
existence.  He  either  recognized  his  destiny  in 
the  task  of  acquiring  the  means  of  enjoyment 
through  the  favor  of  the  emperor,  or  through 
violence,  testamentary  frauds,  and  cunning;  or 
he  sought  repose  in  philosophy,  which  alone 
was  still  able  to  supply  something  firm  and 
independent:  for  the  systems  of  that  time — 
Stoicism,  Epicureanism,  and  Scepticism — al¬ 
though  within  their  common  sphere  opposed  to 
each  other,  had  the  same  general  purport,  viz., 
rendering  the  soul  absolutely  indifferent  to 
everything  which  the  real  world  had  to  offer. 
These  philosophies  were  therefore  widely  ex¬ 
tended  among  the  cultivated :  they  produced  in 
man  a  self-reliant  immobility  as  the  result  of 


thought,  i.e.,  of  the  activity  which  produces  the 
universal.  But  the  inward  reconciliation  by 
means  of  philosophy  was  itself  only  an  abstract 
one — in  the  pure  principle  of  personality;  for 
thought,  which,  as  perfectly  refined,  made  it¬ 
self  its  own  object,  and  thus  harmonized  itself, 
was  entirely  destitute  of  a  real  object,  and  the 
immobility  of  Scepticism  made  aimlessness  it¬ 
self  the  object  of  the  will.  This  philosophy  knew 
nothing  but  the  negativity  of  all  that  assumed 
to  be  real  and  was  the  counsel  of  despair  to  a 
world  which  no  longer  possessed  anything  stable. 
It  could  not  satisfy  the  living  spirit,  which 
longed  after  a  higher  reconciliation. 

Chapter  2.  Christianity 
It  has  been  remarked  that  Caesar  inaugurated 
the  modern  world  on  the  side  of  reality,  while 
its  spiritual  and  inward  existence  was  unfolded 
under  Augustus.  At  the  beginning  of  that  em¬ 
pire,  whose  principle  we  have  recognized  as 
finiteness  and  particular  subjectivity  exaggerated 
to  infinitude,  the  salvation  of  the  world  had  its 
birth  in  the  same  principle  of  subjectivity — 
viz.,  as  a  particular  person,  in  abstract  subjec¬ 
tivity,  but  in  such  a  way  that  conversely,  finite¬ 
ness  is  only  the  form  of  his  appearance,  while 
infinity  and  absolutely  independent  existence 
constitute  the  essence  and  substantial  being 
which  it  embodies.  The  Roman  world,  as  it  has 
been  described — in  its  desperate  condition  and 
the  pain  of  abandonment  by  God — came  to  an 
open  rupture  with  reality,  and  made  prominent 
the  general  desire  for  a  satisfaction  such  as  can 
only  be  attained  in  “the  inner  man,”  the  soul, 
thus  preparing  the  ground  for  a  higher  spiritual 
world.  Rome  was  the  fate  that  crushed  down  the 
gods  and  all  genial  life  in  its  hard  service,  while 
it  was  the  power  that  purified  the  human  heart 
from  all  speciality.  Its  entire  condition  is  there¬ 
fore  analogous  to  a  place  of  birth,  and  its  pain 
is  like  the  travail-throes  of  another  and  higher 
spirit,  which  manifested  itself  in  connection 
with  the  Christian  religion.  This  higher  spirit 
involves  the  reconciliation  and  emancipation 
of  spirit;  while  man  obtains  the  consciousness 
of  spirit  in  its  universality  and  infinity.  The  ab¬ 
solute  object,  truth,  is  spirit;  and  as  man  him¬ 
self  is  spirit,  he  is  present  to  himself  in  that  ob¬ 
ject,  and  thus  in  his  absolute  object  has  found 
essential  being  and  his  own  essential  being.  But 
in  order  that  the  objectivity  of  essential  being 
may  be  done  away  with,  and  spirit  be  no  longer 
alien  to  itself,  may  be  with  itself,  the  natural¬ 
ness  of  spirit — that  in  virtue  of  which  man  is  a 
special,  empirical  existence — must  be  removed ; 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


304 

so  that  the  alien  element  may  be  destroyed,  and 
the  reconciliation  of  spirit  be  accomplished. 

God  is  thus  recognized  as  spirit ,  only  when 
known  as  the  triune.  This  new  principle  is  the 
axis  on  which  the  history  of  the  world  turns. 
This  is  the  goal  and  the  starting  point  of  history. 
“When  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God 
sent  His  Son,” is  the  statement  of  the  Bible.  This 
means  nothing  else  than  that  self-consciousness 
had  reached  the  phases  of  development  [mo- 
mente ],  whose  resultant  constitutes  the  idea 
of  spirit,  and  had  come  to  feel  the  necessity  of 
comprehending  those  phases  absolutely.  This 
must  now  be  more  fully  explained.  We  said  of 
the  Greeks,  that  the  law  for  their  spirit  was: 
“Man,  know  thyself.”  The  Greek  spirit  was  a 
consciousness  of  spirit,  but  under  a  limited 
form,  having  the  element  of  nature  as  an  essen¬ 
tial  ingredient.  Spirit  may  have  had  the  upper 
hand,  but  the  unity  of  the  superior  and  the  sub¬ 
ordinate  was  itself  still  natural.  Spirit  appeared 
as  specialized  in  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  genius 
of  the  several  Greek  nationalities  and  of  their 
divinities,  and  was  represented  by  art ,  in  whose 
sphere  the  sensuous  is  elevated  only  to  the  mid¬ 
dle  ground  of  beautiful  form  and  shape,  but  not 
to  pure  thought.  The  element  of  subjectivity 
that  was  wanting  to  the  Greeks,  we  foundamong 
the  Romans:  but  as  it  was  merely  formal  and 
in  itself  indefinite,  it  took  its  material  from 
passion  and  caprice; — even  the  most  shameful 
degradations  could  be  here  connected  with  a 
divine  dread  ( vide  the  declaration  of  Hispala 
respecting  the  Bacchanalia,  Livy  xxxix.  13). 
This  element  of  subjectivity  is  afterwards  fur¬ 
ther  realized  as  personality  of  individuals — a 
realization  which  is  exactly  adequate  to  the 
principle,  and  is  equally  abstract  and  formal. 
As  such  an  ego,  I  am  infinite  to  myself,  and  my 
phenomenal  existence  consists  in  the  property 
recognized  as  mine,  and  the  recognition  of  my 
personality.  This  inner  existence  goes  no  fur¬ 
ther  ;  all  the  applications  of  the  principle  merge 
in  this. Individuals  are  thereby  posited  as  atoms; 
but  they  are  at  the  same  time  subject  to  the 
severe  rule  of  the  One ,  which  as  monas  mona- 
dum  is  a  power  over  private  persons.  That  pri¬ 
vate  right  is  therefore,  ipso  facto,  a  nullity,  an 
ignoring  of  the  personality;  and  the  supposed 
condition  of  right  turns  out  to  be  an  absolute 
destitution  of  it.  This  contradiction  is  the 
misery  of  the  Roman  world.  Each  person  is,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  principle  of  his  personality,  en¬ 
titled  only  to  possession,  while  the  person  of 
persons  lays  claim  to  the  possession  of  all  these 
individuals,  so  that  the  right  assumed  by  the 


social  unit  is  at  once  abrogated  and  robbed  of 
validity.  But  the  misery  of  this  contradiction  is 
the  discipline  of  the  world.  Zucht  (discipline)  is 
derived  from  ziehen  (to  draw).  This  “drawing” 
must  be  towards  something;  there  must  be  some 
fixed  unity  in  the  background  in  whose  direc¬ 
tion  that  drawing  takes  place,  and  for  which  the 
subject  of  it  is  being  trained,  in  order  that  the 
standard  of  attainment  may  be  reached.  A  re¬ 
nunciation,  a  disaccustoming,  is  the  means  of 
leading  to  an  absolute  basis  of  existence.  That 
contradiction  which  afflicts  the  Roman  world  is 
the  very  state  of  things  which  constitutes  such 
a  discipline,  the  discipline  of  that  culture  which 
compels  personality  to  display  its  nothingness. 
But  it  is  reserved  for  us  of  a  later  period  to  re¬ 
gard  this  as  a  training;  to  those  who  are  thus 
trained,  it  seems  a  blind  destiny,  to  which  they 
submit  in  the  stupor  of  suffering.  The  higher 
condition,  in  which  the  soul  itself  feels  pain  and 
longing — in  which  man  is  not  only  “drawn,” 
but  feels  that  the  drawing  is  into  himself — is 
still  absent.  What  has  been  reflection  on  our  part 
must  arise  in  the  mind  of  the  subject  of  this  dis¬ 
cipline,  in  the  form  of  a  consciousness  that  in 
himself  he  is  miserable  and  null.  Outward  suf¬ 
fering  must,  as  already  said,  be  merged  in  a  sor¬ 
row  of  the  inner  man.  He  must  feel  himself  as 
the  negation  of  himself;  he  must  see  that  his 
misery  is  the  misery  of  his  nature — that  he  is 
in  himself  a  divided  and  discordant  being.  This 
state  of  mind,  this  self-chastening,  this  pain 
occasioned  by  our  individual  nothingness — the 
wretchedness  of  our  self,  and  the  longing  to 
transcend  this  condition  of  soul — must  be  looked 
for  elsewhere  than  in  the  properly  Roman  world. 
It  is  this  which  gives  to  the  Jewish  people  their 
world  historical  importance  and  weight;  for 
from  this  state  of  mind  arose  that  higher  phase 
in  which  spirit  came  to  absolute  self-conscious¬ 
ness — passing  from  that  alien  form  of  being 
which  is  its  discord  and  pain,  and  mirroring  it¬ 
self  in  its  own  essence.  The  state  of  feeling  in 
question  we  find  expressed  most  purely  and 
beautifully  in  the  Psalms  of  David,  and  in  the 
Prophets,  the  chief  burden  of  whose  utterances 
is  the  thirst  of  the  soul  after  God,  its  profound 
sorrow  for  its  transgressions,  and  the  desire  for 
righteousness  and  holiness.  Of  this  spirit  we 
have  the  mythical  representation  at  the  very 
beginning  of  the  Jewish  canonical  books,  in  the 
account  of  the  Fall.  Man,  created  in  the  image 
of  God,  lost,  it  is  said,  his  state  of  absolute  con¬ 
tentment,  by  eating  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil.  Sin  consists  here  only  in  knowl¬ 
edge:  this  is  the  sinful  element,  and  by  it  man  is 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD 


stated  to  have  trifled  away  his  natural  happiness. 
This  is  a  deep  truth,  that  evil  lies  in  conscious¬ 
ness:  for  the  brutes  are  neither  evil  nor  good; 
the  merely  natural  man  quite  as  little.1  Con¬ 
sciousness  occasions  the  separation  of  the  ego, 
in  its  boundless  freedom  as  arbitrary  choice, 
from  the  pure  essence  of  the  will — i.e.,  from  the 
good.  Knowledge,  as  the  disannulling  of  the 
unity  of  mere  nature,  is  the  Fall,  which  is  no 
casual  conception,  but  the  eternal  history  of 
spirit.  For  the  state  of  innocence,  the  paradisai¬ 
cal  condition,  is  that  of  the  brute.  Paradise  is  a 
park,  where  only  brutes,  not  men,  can  remain. 
For  the  brute  is  one  with  God  only  implicitly. 
Only  man’s  spirit  (that  is)  has  a  self -cognizant 
existence.  This  existence  for  self,  this  conscious¬ 
ness,  is  at  the  same  time  separation  from  the 
universal  and  divine  spirit.  If  I  hold  to  my  ab¬ 
stract  freedom,  in  contraposition  to  the  good, 
I  adopt  the  standpoint  of  evil.  The  Fall  is  there¬ 
fore  the  eternal  mythus  of  man — in  fact,  the 
very  transition  by  which  he  becomes  man.  Per¬ 
sistence  in  this  standpoint  is,  however,  evil,  and 
the  feeling  of  pain  at  such  a  condition,  and  of 
longing  to  transcend  it,  we  find  in  David,  when 
he  says:  “Lord,  create  for  me  a  pure  heart,  a 
new  steadfast  Spirit.”  This  feeling  we  observe 
even  in  the  account  of  the  Fall;  though  an  an¬ 
nouncement  of  reconciliation  is  not  made  there, 
but  rather  one  of  continuance  in  misery.  Yet  we 
have  in  this  narrative  the  prediction  of  recon¬ 
ciliation  in  the  sentence,  “The  serpent’s  head 
shall  be  bruised” ;  but  still  more  profoundly  ex¬ 
pressed  where  it  is  stated  that  when  God  saw 
that  Adam  had  eaten  of  that  tree,  he  said,  “Be¬ 
hold  Adam  is  become  as  one  of  us,  knowing 
good  and  evil.”  God  confirms  the  words  of  the 
serpent.  Implicitly  and  explicitly,  then,  we  have 
the  truth  that  man  through  spirit — through  cog¬ 
nition  of  the  universal  and  the  particular — com¬ 
prehends  God  Himself.  But  it  is  only  God  that 
declares  this — not  man:  the  latter  remains,  on 
the  contrary,  in  a  state  of  internal  discord.  The 
joy  of  reconciliation  is  still  distant  from  human¬ 
ity;  the  absolute  and  final  repose  of  his  whole 
being  is  not  yet  discovered  to  man.  It  exists,  in 
the  first  instance,  only  for  God.  As  far  as  the 
present  is  concerned,  the  feeling  of  pain  at  his 
condition  is  regarded  as  a  final  award.  The  satis¬ 
faction  which  man  enjoys  at  first,  consists  in  the 
finite  and  temporal  blessings  conferred  on  the 
chosen  family  and  the  possession  of  the  Land  of 
Canaan.  His  repose  is  not  found  in  God.  Sacri¬ 
fices  are,  it  is  true,  offered  to  Him  in  the  temple, 
and  atonement  made  by  outward  offerings  and 
1 1  was  alive  without  the  law  once,  etc.  Romans,  7.  9. 


inward  penitence.  But  that  mundane  satisfaction 
in  the  chosen  family,  and  its  possession  of  Ca¬ 
naan,  was  taken  from  the  Jewish  people  in  the 
chastisement  inflicted  by  the  Roman  Empire. 
The  Syrian  kings  did  indeed  oppress  it,  but  it  was 
left  for  the  Romans  to  annul  its  individuality. 
The  Temple  of  Zion  is  destroyed;  the  God¬ 
serving  nation  is  scattered  to  the  winds.  Here 
every  source  of  satisfaction  is  taken  away,  and 
the  nation  is  driven  back  to  the  standpoint  of 
that  primeval  mythus — the  standpoint  of  that 
painful  feeling  which  humanity  experiences 
when  thrown  upon  itself.  Opposed  to  the  uni¬ 
versal  fatnm  of  the  Roman  world,  we  have  here 
the  consciousness  of  evil  and  the  direction  of 
the  mind  Godwards.  All  that  remains  to  be 
done,  is  that  this  fundamental  idea  should  be 
expanded  to  an  objective  universal  sense,  and 
be  taken  as  the  concrete  existence  of  man — as 
the  completion  of  his  nature.  Formerly  the  Land 
of  Canaan  and  themselves  as  the  people  of  God 
had  been  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  that  concrete 
and  complete  existence.  But  this  basis  of  satis¬ 
faction  is  now  lost,  and  thence  arises  the  sense 
of  misery  and  failure  of  hope  in  God,  with  whom 
that  happy  reality  had  been  essentially  con¬ 
nected.  Here,  then,  misery  is  not  the  stupid  im¬ 
mersion  in  a  blind  fate,  but  a  boundless  energy 
of  longing.  Stoicism  taught  only  that  the  nega¬ 
tive  is  not — that  pain  must  not  be  recognized 
as  a  veritable  existence ;  but  Jewish  feeling  per¬ 
sists  in  acknowledging  reality  and  desires  har¬ 
mony  and  reconciliation  within  its  sphere;  for 
that  feeling  is  based  on  the  Oriental  unity  of 
nature — i.e.,  the  unity  of  reality,  of  subjectiv¬ 
ity,  with  the  substance  of  the  one  esssential  be¬ 
ing.  Through  the  loss  of  mere  outward  reality 
spirit  is  driven  back  within  itself;  the  side  of 
reality  is  thus  refined  to  universality,  through 
the  reference  of  it  to  the  one.  The  Oriental  an¬ 
tithesis  of  light  and  darkness  is  transferred  to 
spirit,  and  the  darkness  becomes  sin.  For  the 
abnegation  of  reality  there  is  no  compensation 
but  subjectivity  itself — the  human  will  as  in¬ 
trinsically  universal;  and  thereby  alone  does 
reconciliation  become  possible.  Sin  is  the  dis¬ 
cerning  of  good  and  evil  as  separation ;  but  this 
discerning  likewise  heals  the  ancient  hurt,  and 
is  the  fountain  of  infinite  reconciliation.  The  dis¬ 
cerning  in  question  brings  with  it  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  that  which  is  external  and  alien  in  con¬ 
sciousness,  and  is  consequently  the  return  of 
subjectivity  into  itself.  This,  then,  adopted  into 
the  actual  self-consciousness  of  the  world  is  the 
reconciliation  of  the  world.  From  that  unrest  of 
infinite  sorrow,  in  which  the  two  sides  of  the  an- 


3o6  PHILOSOPHY 

tithesis  stand  related  to  each  other,  is  developed 
the  unity  of  God  with  reality  (which  latter  had 
been  posited  as  negative),  i.e.,  with  subjectivity 
which  had  been  separated  from  Him.  The  in¬ 
finite  loss  is  counterbalanced  only  by  its  infinity 
and  thereby  becomes  infinite  gain.  The  recogni¬ 
tion  of  the  identity  of  the  subject  and  God  was 
introduced  into  the  world  when  the  fulness  of 
time  was  come:  the  consciousness  of  this  iden¬ 
tity  is  the  recognition  of  God  in  his  true  essence. 
The  material  of  truth  is  spirit  itself — inherent 
vital  movement.  The  nature  of  God  as  pure 
spirit,  is  manifested  to  man  in  the  Christian 
religion. 

But  what  is  spirit?  It  is  the  one  immutably 
homogeneous  infinite — pure  identity — which  in 
its  second  phase  separates  itself  from  itself  and 
makes  this  second  aspect  its  own  polar  opposite, 
viz.,  as  existence  for  and  in  self  as  contrasted 
with  the  universal.  But  this  separation  is  annulled 
by  the  fact  that  atomistic  subjectivity,  as  sim¬ 
ple  relation  to  itself  is  itself  the  universal,  the 
identical  with  self.  If  spirit  be  defined  as  abso¬ 
lute  reflection  within  itself  in  virtue  of  its  ab¬ 
solute  duality — love,  on  the  one  hand,  as  compre¬ 
hending  the  emotional,  knowledge,  on  the  other 
hand,  as  spirit — it  is  recognized  as  triune:  the 
“Father”  and  the  “Son,”  and  that  duality  which 
essentially  characterizes  it  as  “Spirit.”  It  must 
further  be  observed,  that  in  this  truth,  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  man  to  this  truth  is  also  posited.  For 
spirit  makes  itself  its  own  opposite  and  is  the 
return  from  this  opposite  into  itself.  Compre¬ 
hended  in  pure  ideality,  that  antithetic  form  of 
spirit  is  the  Son  of  God;  reduced  to  limited  and 
particular  conceptions,  it  is  the  world-nature 
and  finite  spirit:  finite  spirit  itself  therefore  is 
posited  as  a  constituent  element  in  the  divine 
being.  Man  himself  therefore  is  comprehended 
in  the  idea  of  God,  and  this  comprehension  may 
be  thus  expressed — that  the  unity  of  man  with 
God  is  posited  in  the  Christian  religion.  But  this 
unity  must  not  be  superficially  conceived,  as  if 
God  were  only  man,  and  man,  without  further 
condition,  were  God.  Man,  on  the  contrary,  is 
God  only  in  so  far  as  he  annuls  the  merely  nat¬ 
ural  and  limited  in  his  spirit  and  elevates  him¬ 
self  to  God.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  obligatory  on 
him  who  is  a  partaker  of  the  truth,  and  knows 
that  he  himself  is  a  constituent  of  the  divine 
idea,  to  give  up  his  merely  natural  being:  for 
the  natural  is  the  unspiritual.  In  this  idea  of 
God,  then,  is  to  be  found  also  the  reconciliation 
that  heals  the  pain  and  inward  suffering  of  man. 
For  suffering  itself  is  henceforth  recognized  as 
an  instrument  necessary  for  producing  the  unity 


OF  HISTORY 

of  man  with  God.  This  implicit  unity  exists  in 
the  first  place  only  for  the  thinking  speculative 
consciousness;  but  it  must  also  exist  for  the 
sensuous,  representative  consciousness — it  must 
become  an  object  for  the  world — it  must  appear, 
and  that  in  the  sensuous  form  appropriate  to 
spirit,  which  is  the  human. 

Christ  has  appeared — a  man  who  is  God — 
God  who  is  man ;  and  thereby  peace  and  recon¬ 
ciliation  have  accrued  to  the  world.  Our  thoughts 
naturally  revert  to  the  Greek  anthropomor¬ 
phism,  of  which  we  affirmed  that  it  did  not  go 
far  enough.  For  that  natural  elation  of  soul  which 
characterized  the  Greeks  did  not  rise  to  the  sub¬ 
jective  freedom  of  the  ego  itself,  to  the  inward¬ 
ness  that  belongs  to  the  Christian  religion,  to  the 
recognition  of  spirit  as  a  definite  positive  being. 
The  appearance  of  the  Christian  God  involves 
further  its  being  unique  in  its  kind;  it  can  occur 
only  once,  for  God  is  realized  as  subject,  and  as 
manifested  subjectivity  is  exclusively  one  indi¬ 
vidual.  The  lamas  are  ever  and  anon  chosen 
anew;  because  God  is  known  in  the  East  as  sub¬ 
stance,  whose  infinity  of  form  is  recognized 
merely  in  an  unlimited  multeity  of  outward  and 
particular  manifestations.  But  subjectivity  as 
infinite  relation  to  self,  has  its  form  in  itself, 
and  as  manifested,  must  be  a  unity  excluding 
all  others.  Moreover,  the  sensuous  existence  in 
which  spirit  is  embodied  is  only  a  transitional 
phase.  Christ  dies ;  only  as  dead,  is  he  exalted  to 
heaven  and  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God;  only 
thus  is  he  spirit.  He  himself  says:  “When  I  am 
no  longer  with  you,  the  Spirit  will  guide  you 
into  all  truth.”  Not  till  the  Feast  of  Pentecost 
were  the  Apostles  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 
To  the  Apostles,  Christ  as  living,  was  not  that 
which  he  was  to  them  subsequently  as  the  spirit 
of  the  Church,  in  which  he  became  to  them  for 
the  first  time  an  object  for  their  truly  spiritual 
consciousness.  On  the  same  principle,  we  do 
not  adopt  the  right  point  of  view  in  thinking  of 
Christ  only  as  a  historical  bygone  personality. 
So  regarded,  the  question  is  asked:  what  are  we 
to  make  of  his  birth,  his  father  and  mother,  his 
early  domestic  relations,  his  miracles,  etc.? — 
i.e.,  what  is  he  unspiritually  regarded?  Consid¬ 
ered  only  in  respect  of  his  talents,  character  and 
morality,  as  a  teacher  and  so  forth,  we  place 
him  in  the  same  category  with  Socrates  and 
others,  though  his  morality  may  be  ranked 
higher.  But  excellence  of  character,  morality, 
etc. — all  this  is  not  the  ne  plus  ultra  in  the  re¬ 
quirements  of  spirit — does  not  enable  man  to 
gain  the  speculative  idea  of  spirit  for  his  con- 
ceptive  faculty.  If  Christ  is  to  be  looked  upon 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  307 


only  as  an  excellent,  even  impeccable  individual, 
and  nothing  more,  the  conception  of  the  specu¬ 
lative  idea,  of  absolute  truth  is  ignored.  But  this 
is  the  desideratum,  the  point  from  which  we 
have  to  start.  Make  of  Christ  what  you  will, 
exegetically,  critically,  historically — demon¬ 
strate  as  you  please,  how  the  doctrines  of  the 
Church  were  established  by  councils,  attained 
currency  as  the  result  of  this  or  that  episcopal 
interest  or  passion,  or  originated  in  this  or  that 
quarter;  let  all  such  circumstances  have  been 
what  they  might — the  only  concerning  question 
is :  what  is  the  idea  or  the  truth  in  and  for  itself? 

Further,  the  real  attestation  of  the  divinity 
of  Christ  is  the  witness  of  one’s  own  spirit — not 
miracles;  for  only  spirit  recognizes  spirit.  The 
miracles  may  lead  the  way  to  such  recognition. 
A  miracle  implies  that  the  natural  course  of 
things  is  interrupted:  but  it  is  very  much  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  relation  what  we  call  the  “natural 
course”;  and  the  phenomena  of  the  magnet 
might,  under  cover  of  this  definition,  be  reckoned 
miraculous.  Nor  does  the  miracle  of  the  divine 
mission  of  Christ  prove  anything;  for  Socrates 
likewise  introduced  a  new  self-consciousness 
on  the  part  of  spirit, diverse  from  the  traditional 
tenor  of  men’s  conceptions.  The  main  question, 
is  not  his  divine  mission  but  the  revelation  made 
in  Christ  and  the  purport  of  his  mission.  Christ 
himself  blames  the  Pharisees  for  desiring  mira¬ 
cles  of  him,  and  speaks  of  false  prophets  who 
will  perform  miracles. 

We  have  next  to  consider  how  the  Christian 
view  resulted  in  the  formation  of  the  Church. 
To  pursue  the  rationale  of  its  development  from 
the  idea  of  Christianity  would  lead  us  too  far, 
and  we  have  here  to  indicate  only  the  general 
phases  which  the  process  assumed.  The  first 
phase  is  the  founding  of  the  Christian  religion, 
in  which  its  principle  is  expressed  with  unre¬ 
strained  energy,  but  in  the  first  instance  ab¬ 
stractly.  This  we  find  in  the  Gospels,  where  the 
infinity  of  spirit,  its  elevation  into  the  spiritual 
world,  is  the  main  theme.  With  transcendent 
boldness  does  Christ  stand  forth  among  the 
Jewish  people.  “Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart, 
for  they  shall  see  God,”  he  proclaims  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount — a  dictum  of  the  noblest 
simplicity,  and  pregnant  with  an  elastic  energy 
of  rebound  against  all  the  adventitious  appli¬ 
ances  with  which  the  human  soul  can  be  burden¬ 
ed.  The  pure  heart  is  the  domain  in  which  God  is 
present  to  man :  he  who  is  imbued  with  the  spirit 
of  this  apophthegm  is  armed  against  all  alien 
bonds  and  superstitions.  The  other  utterances  are 
of  the  same  tenor:  “Blessed  are  the  peacemak¬ 


ers  ;  for  they  shall  be  called  the  children  of  God” ; 
and,  “Blessed  are  they  which  are  persecuted  for 
righteousness’  sake:  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven”;  and,  “Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect.”  Christ 
enforces  here  a  completely  unmistakable  re¬ 
quirement.  The  infinite  exaltation  of  spirit  to 
absolute  purity  is  placed  at  the  beginning  as  the 
foundation  of  all.  The  form  of  the  instrumental¬ 
ity  by  which  that  result  is  to  be  accomplished 
is  not  yet  given,  but  the  result  itself  is  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  an  absolute  command.  As  regards  the  re¬ 
lation  of  this  standpoint  of  spirit  to  secular 
existence,  we  find  that  spiritual  purity  presented 
as  the  substantial  basis.  “Seek  ye  first  the  king¬ 
dom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  things 
shall  be  added  unto  you”;  and,  “The  sufferings 
of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  com¬ 
pared  with  that  glory.”1  Here  Christ  says  that 
outward  sufferings,  as  such,  are  not  to  be  feared 
or  fled  from,  for  they  are  nothing  as  compared 
with  that  glory.  Further  on,  this  doctrine,  as  the 
natural  consequence  of  its  appearing  in  an  ab¬ 
stract  form,  assumes  a  polemical  direction.  “If 
thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out  and  cast  it 
from  thee:  if  thy  right  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it 
off  and  cast  it  from  thee.  It  is  better  that  one  of 
thy  members  should  perish,  and  not  that  thy 
whole  body  should  be  cast  into  hell.”  Whatever 
might  disturb  the  purity  of  the  soul,  should  be 
destroyed.  So  in  reference  to  property  and 
worldly  gain,  it  is  said:  “Care  not  for  your  life, 
what  ye  shall  eat  and  drink,  nor  for  your  body, 
what  ye  shall  put  on.  Is  not  the  life  more  than 
meat,  and  the  body  more  than  raiment?  Behold 
the  fowls  of  the  air:  for  they  sow  not,  neither  do 
they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns ;  yet  your  heav¬ 
enly  Father  feedeth  them.  Are  ye  not  much  bet¬ 
ter  than  they?”  Labor  for  subsistence  is  thus 
reprobated:  “Wilt  thou  be  perfect,  go  and  sell 
what  thou  hast,  and  give  it  to  the  poor,  so  shalt 
thou  have  a  treasure  in  heaven,  and  come,  fol¬ 
low  me.”  Were  this  precept  directly  complied 
with,  a  social  revolution  must  take  place;  the 
poor  would  become  the  rich.  Of  such  supreme 
moment,  it  is  implied,  is  the  doctrine  of  Christ, 
that  all  duties  and  moral  bonds  are  unimportant 
as  compared  with  it.  To  a  youth  who  wishes  to 
delay  the  duties  of  discipleship  till  he  has  buried 
his  father,  Christ  says :  “Let  the  dead  bury  their 
dead — follow  thou  me.”  “He  that  loveth  father 
or  mother  more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me.” 
He  said:  “Who  is  my  mother?  and  who  are  my 
brethren?  and  stretched  his  hand  out  over  his 

1  The  words  in  the  text  occur  in  Romans,  8.  18,  but  the 
import  of  Matthew,  5.  12,  is  nearly  the  same. 


3o8  PHILOSOPHY 

disciples  and  said,  “Behold  my  mother  and  my 
brethren!  For  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my 
Father  in  heaven,  the  same  is  my  brother,  and 
sister  and  mother.”  Yes,  it  is  even  said:  “Think 
not  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  the  earth. 

I  am  not  come  to  send  peace  but  the  sword.  For 
I  am  come  to  set  a  ma?i  against  his  father,  and 
the  daughter  against  her  mother , and  the  mother- 
in-law  against  her  daughter-in-law  ”  Here  then 
is  an  abstraction  from  all  that  belongs  to  reality, 
even  from  moral  ties.  We  may  say  that  nowhere 
are  to  be  found  such  revolutionary  utterances  as 
in  the  Gospels;  for  everything  that  had  been  re¬ 
spected,  is  treated  as  a  matter  of  indifference — 
as  worthy  of  no  regard. 

The  next  point  is  the  development  of  this 
principle ;  and  the  whole  sequel  of  history  is  the 
history  of  its  development.  Its  first  realization 
is  the  formation,  by  the  friends  of  Christ,  of  a 
society — a  church.  It  hasbeen  already  remarked 
that  only  after  the  death  of  Christ  could  the 
spirit  come  upon  his  friends;  that  only  then  were 
they  able  to  conceive  the  true  idea  of  God,  viz., 
that  in  Christ  man  is  redeemed  and  reconciled : 
for  in  him  the  idea  of  eternal  truth  is  recognized, 
the  essence  of  man  acknowledged  to  be  spirit, 
and  the  fact  proclaimed  that  only  by  stripping 
himself  of  his  finiteness  and  surrendering  him¬ 
self  to  pure  self-consciousness,  does  he  attain 
the  truth.  Christ — man  as  man — in  whom  the 
unity  of  God  and  man  has  appeared,  has  in  his 
death,  and  his  history  generally,  himself  pre¬ 
sented  the  eternal  history  of  spirit — a  history 
which  every  man  has  to  accomplish  in  himself, 
in  order  to  exist  as  spirit,  or  to  become  a  child 
of  God,  a  citizen  of  his  kingdom.  The  followers 
of  Christ,  who  combine  on  this  principle  and  live 
in  the  spiritual  life  as  their  aim,  form  the  Church, 
which  is  the  Kingdom  of  God.  “Where  two  or 
three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name,”  ( i.e ., 
“in  the  character  of  partakers  in  my  being”) 
says  Christ,  “there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them.” 
The  church  is  a  real  present  life  in  the  spirit  of 
Christ. 

It  is  important  that  the  Christian  religion  be 
not  limited  to  the  teachings  of  Christ  himself: 
it  is  in  the  Apostles  that  the  completed  and  de¬ 
veloped  truth  is  first  exhibited.  This  complex  of 
thought  unfolded  itself  in  the  Christian  commu¬ 
nity.  That  community,  in  its  first  experiences, 
found  itself  sustaining  a  double  relation — first, 
a  relation  to  the  Roman  world,  and  secondly,  to 
the  truth  whose  development  was  its  aim.  We 
will  pursue  these  different  relations  separately. 

The  Christian  community  found  itself  in  the 
Roman  world,  and  in  this  world  the  extension  of 


OF  HISTORY 

the  Christian  religion  was  to  take  place.  That 
community  must  therefore  keep  itself  removed 
from  all  activity  in  the  state,  constitute  itself 
a  separate  company,  and  not  react  against  the 
decrees,  views,  and  transactions  of  the  state.  But 
as  it  was  secluded  from  the  state,  and  conse¬ 
quently  did  not  hold  the  emperor  for  its  abso¬ 
lute  sovereign,  it  was  the  object  of  persecution 
and  hate.  Then  was  manifested  that  infinite  in¬ 
ward  liberty  which  it  enjoyed,  in  the  great  stead¬ 
fastness  with  which  sufferings  and  sorrows  were 
patiently  borne  for  the  sake  of  the  highest  truth. 
It  was  less  the  miracles  of  the  Apostles  that 
gave  to  Christianity  its  outward  extension  and 
inward  strength,  than  the  substance,  the  truth 
of  the  doctrine  itself.  Christ  himself  says: 
“Many  will  say  to  me  at  that  day:  Lord,  Lord! 
have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name,  have  we 
not  cast  out  devils  in  thy  name,  have  we  not  in 
thy  name  done  many  wonderful  deeds?  Then 
will  I  profess  unto  them:  I  never  knew  you, 
depart  from  me  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity.” 

As  regards  its  other  relation,  viz.,  that  to  the 
truth,  it  is  especially  important  to  remark  that 
the  dogma — the  theoretical — was  already  ma¬ 
tured  within  the  Roman  world,  while  we  find  the 
development  of  the  state  from  that  principle  a 
much  later  growth.  The  Fathers  of  the  Church 
and  the  councils  constituted  the  dogma;  but  a 
chief  element  in  this  constitution  was  supplied 
by  the  previous  development  of  philosophy.  Let 
us  examine  more  closely  how  the  philosophy  of 
the  time  stood  related  to  religion.  It  has  already 
been  remarked  that  the  Roman  inwardness  and 
subjectivity,  which  presented  itself  only  ab¬ 
stractly,  as  soulless  personality  in  the  exclusive 
position  assumed  by  the  ego,  was  refined  by  the 
philosophy  of  stoicism  and  scepticism  to  the 
form  of  universality.  The  ground  of  thought  was 
thereby  reached,  and  God  was  known  in  thought 
as  the  One  Infinite.  The  universal  stands  here 
only  as  an  unimportant  predicate — not  itself  a 
subject,  but  requiring  a  concrete  particular  ap¬ 
plication  to  make  it  such.  But  the  one  and  uni¬ 
versal,  the  illimitable  conceived  by  fancy,  is 
essentially  Oriental;  for  measureless  concep¬ 
tions,  carrying  all  limited  existence  beyond  its 
proper  bounds,  are  indigenous  to  the  east.  Pre¬ 
sented  in  the  domain  of  thought  itself,  the 
Oriental  One  is  the  invisible  and  non-sensuous 
God  of  thelsraelitish  people,  but  whom  they  also 
make  an  object  of  conception  as  a  person.  This 
principle  became  world-historical  with  Chris¬ 
tianity. 

In  the  Roman  world,  the  union  of  the  east 
and  west  had  taken  place  in  the  first  instance 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  309 


by  means  of  conquest:  it  took  place  now  in¬ 
wardly,  psychologically,  also — the  spirit  of  the 
east  spreading  over  the  west.  The  worship  of 
Isis  and  that  of  Mithra  had  been  extended 
through  the  whole  Roman  world;  spirit,  lost  in 
the  outward  and  in  limited  aims,  yearned  after 
an  infinite.  But  the  west  desired  a  deeper,  pure¬ 
ly  inward  universality — an  infinite  possessed  at 
the  same  time  of  positive  qualities.  Again,  it 
was  in  Egypt — in  Alexandria,  viz.,  the  centre  of 
communication  between  the  east  and  the  west — 
that  the  problem  of  the  age  was  proposed  for 
thought;  and  the  solution  now  found  was  spirit. 
There  the  two  principles  came  into  scientific 
contact,  and  were  scientifically  worked  out.  It 
is  especially  remarkable  to  observe  there  learned 
Jews  such  as  Philo  connecting  abstract  forms  of 
the  concrete,  which  they  derived  from  Plato  and 
Aristotle,  with  their  conception  of  the  infinite, 
and  recognizing  God  according  to  the  more  con¬ 
crete  idea  of  spirit,  under  the  definition  of  the 
Aoyos.  So,  also,  did  the  profound  thinkers  of 
Alexandria  comprehend  the  unity  of  the  Pla¬ 
tonic  and  Aristotelian  philosophy;  and  their 
speculative  thinking  attained  those  abstract 
ideas  which  are  likewise  the  fundamental  purport 
of  the  Christian  religion.  The  application,  by 
way  of  postulate,  to  the  pagan  religion,  of  ideas 
recognized  as  true,  was  a  direction  which  phi¬ 
losophy  had  already  taken  among  the  heathen. 
Plato  had  altogether  repudiated  the  current 
mythology,  and,  with  his  followers,  was  accused 
of  atheism.  The  Alexandrians,  on  the  contrary, 
endeavoured  to  demonstrate  a  speculative  truth 
in  the  Greek  conceptions  of  the  gods:  and  the 
Emperor  Julian  the  Apostate  resumed  the  at¬ 
tempt,  asserting  that  the  pagan  ceremonials  had 
a  strict  connection  with  rationality.  The  hea¬ 
then  felt,  as  it  were,  obliged  to  give  to  their 
divinities  the  semblance  of  something  higher 
than  sensuous  conceptions;  they  therefore  at¬ 
tempted  to  spiritualize  them.  Thus  much  is  also 
certain,  that  the  Greek  religion  contains  a  de¬ 
gree  of  reason;  for  the  substance  of  spirit  is 
reason,  and  its  product  must  be  something  ra¬ 
tional.  It  makes  a  difference,  however,  whether 
reason  is  explicitly  developed  in  religion,  or 
merely  adumbrated  by  it,  as  constituting  its 
hidden  basis.  And  while  the  Greeks  thus  spirit¬ 
ualized  their  sensuous  divinities,  the  Christians 
also,  on  their  side,  sought  for  a  profounder  sense 
in  the  historical  part  of  their  religion.  Just  as 
Philo  found  a  deeper  import  shadowed  forth  in 
the  Mosaic  record  and  idealized  what  he  con¬ 
sidered  the  bare  shell  of  the  narrative,  so  also 
did  the  Christians  treat  their  records — partly 


with  a  polemic  view,  but  still  more  largely  from 
a  free  and  spontaneous  interest  in  the  process. 
But  the  instrumentality  of  philosophy  in  intro¬ 
ducing  these  dogmas  into  the  Christian  religion 
is  no  sufficient  ground  for  asserting  that  they 
were  foreign  to  Christianity  and  had  nothing  to 
do  with  it.  It  is  a  matter  of  perfect  indifference 
where  a  thing  originated;  the  only  question  is: 
“Is  it  true  in  and  for  itself?”  Many  think  that 
by  pronouncing  the  doctrine  to  be  Neo-Platonic, 
they  have  ipso  facto  banished  it  from  Christian¬ 
ity.  Whether  a  Christian  doctrine  stands  exactly 
thus  or  thus  in  the  Bible,  the  point  to  which  the 
exegetical  scholars  of  modern  times  devote  all 
their  attention,  is  not  the  only  question.  The 
letter  kills,  the  spirit  makes  alive:  this  they  say 
themselves,  yet  pervert  the  sentiment  by  taking 
the  understanding  for  the  spirit.  It  was  the 
Church  that  recognized  and  established  the  doc¬ 
trines  in  question,  i.e.,  the  spirit  of  the  Church; 
and  it  is  itself  an  article  of  doctrine:  “I  believe 
in  a  Holy  Church”;1  as  Christ  himself  also  said: 
“The  Spirit  will  guide  you  into  all  truth.”  In  the 
Nicene  Council  (a.d.  3 25), was  ultimately  estab¬ 
lished  a  fixed  confession  of  faith,  to  which  we 
still  adhere:  this  confession  had  not,  indeed,  a 
speculative  form ,  but  the  profoundly  specula¬ 
tive  is  most  intimately  inwoven  with  the  mani¬ 
festation  of  Christ  himself.  Even  in  John  (eV 
apxfi  Vv  ®  Aoyos  Kal  6  Aoyos  rjv  irpos  tov  ®eov, 
Kal  ©eo?  rjv  o  Aoyos)  we  see  the  commencement 
of  a  profounder  comprehension.  The  profound- 
est  thought  is  connected  with  the  personality  of 
Christ,  with  the  historical  and  external;  and  it 
is  the  very  grandeur  of  the  Christian  religion 
that,  with  all  this  profundity,  it  is  easy  of  com¬ 
prehension  by  our  consciousness  in  its  outward 
aspect,  while,  at  the  same  time,  it  summons  us 
to  penetrate  deeper.  It  is  thus  adapted  to  every 
grade  of  culture  and  yet  satisfies  the  highest 
requirements. 

Having  spoken  of  the  relation  of  the  Christian 
community  to  the  Roman  world  on  the  one  side, 
and  to  the  truth  contained  in  its  doctrines  on  the 
other  side,  we  come  to  the  third  point,  in  which 
both  doctrine  and  the  external  world  are  con¬ 
cerned,  the  Church.  The  Christian  community 
is  the  kingdom  of  Christ — its  influencing  present 
spirit  being  Christ:  for  this  kingdom  has  an 
actual  existence,  not  a  merely  future  one.  This 
spiritual  actuality  has,  therefore,  also  a  phenom¬ 
enal  existence;  and  that,  not  only  as  contrasted 
with  heathenism,  but  with  secular  existence 

1  In  the  Lutheran  ritual,  “a  holy  Catholic  Church’’  is 
substituted  for  “ the  Holy  Catholic  Church,”  in  the 
creed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


310 

generally.  For  the  Church,  as  presenting  this 
outward  existence,  is  not  merely  a  religion  as 
opposed  to  another  religion,  but  is  at  the  same 
time  a  particular  form  of  secular  existence,  oc¬ 
cupying  a  place  side  by  side  with  other  secular 
existence.  The  religious  existence  of  the  Church 
is  governed  by  Christ ;  the  secular  side  of  its 
government  is  left  to  the  free  choice  of  the 
members  themselves.  Into  this  kingdom  of  God 
an  organization  must  be  introduced.  In  the  first 
instance,  all  the  members  know  themselves  filled 
with  the  spirit ;  the  whole  community  perceives 
the  truth  and  gives  expression  to  it;  yet,  to¬ 
gether  with  this  common  participation  of  spirit¬ 
ual  influence,  arises  the  necessity  of  a  presidency 
of  guidance  and  teaching — a  body  distinct  from 
the  community  at  large.  Those  are  chosen  as 
presidents  who  are  distinguished  for  talents, 
character,  fervor  of  piety,  a  holy  life,  learning, 
and  culture  generally.  The  presidents — those 
who  have  a  superior  acquaintance  with  that  sub¬ 
stantial  life  of  which  all  are  partakers,  and  who 
are  instructors  in  that  life,  those  who  establish 
what  is  truth,  and  those  who  dispense  its  enjoy¬ 
ment — are  distinguished  from  the  community 
at  large,  as  persons  endowed  with  knowledge 
and  governing  power  are  from  the  governed.  To 
the  intelligent  presiding  body,  the  spirit  comes 
in  a  fully  revealed  and  explicit  form ;  in  the  mass 
of  the  community  that  spirit  is  only  implicit. 
While,  therefore,  in  the  presiding  body,  the 
spirit  exists  as  self-appreciating  and  self-cogniz- 
ant,  it  becomes  an  authority  in  spiritual  as  well 
as  in  secular  matters — an  authority  for  the 
truth  and  for  the  relation  of  each  individual  to 
the  truth,  determining  how  he  should  conduct 
himself  so  as  to  act  in  accordance  with  the  truth. 
This  distinction  occasions  the  rise  of  an  eccle¬ 
siastical  kingdom  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Such 
a  distinction  is  inevitable;  but  the  existence  of 
an  authoritative  government  for  the  spiritual, 
when  closely  examined,  shows  that  human  sub¬ 
jectivity  in  its  proper  form  has  not  yet  devel¬ 
oped  itself.  In  the  heart,  indeed,  the  evil  will  is 
surrendered,  but  the  will,  as  human,  is  not  yet 
interpenetrated  by  the  deity;  the  human  will  is 
emancipated  only  abstractly,  not  in  its  concrete 
reality,  for  the  whole  sequel  of  history  is  occu¬ 
pied  with  the  realization  of  this  concrete  free¬ 
dom.  Up  to  this  point,  finite  freedom  has  been 
only  annulled,  to  make  way  for  infinite  freedom. 
The  latter  has  not  yet  penetrated  secular  exist¬ 
ence  with  its  rays.  Subjective  freedom  has  not 
yet  attained  validity  as  such:  insight  does  not 
yet  rest  on  a  basis  of  its  own,  but  is  content  to 
inhere  in  the  spirit  of  an  extrinsic  authority. 


That  spiritual  kingdom  has,  therefore,  assumed 
the  shape  of  an  ecclesiastical  one,  as  the  relation 
of  the  substantial  being  and  essence  of  spirit  to 
human  freedom.  Besides  the  interior  organiza¬ 
tion  already  mentioned,  we  find  the  Christian 
community  assuming  also  a  definite  external 
position,  and  becoming  the  possessor  of  prop¬ 
erty  of  its  own.  As  property  belonging  to  the 
spiritual  world,  it  is  presumed  to  enjoy  special 
protection;  and  the  immediate  inference  from 
this  is  that  the  Church  has  no  dues  to  pay  to  the 
state,  and  that  ecclesiastical  persons  are  not 
amenable  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  secular 
courts.  This  entails  the  government  by  the 
Church  itself  of  ecclesiastical  property  and  ec¬ 
clesiastical  persons.  Thus  there  originates  with 
the  Church  the  contrasted  spectacle  of  a  body 
consisting  only  of  private  persons  and  the  power 
of  the  emperor  on  the  secular  side;  on  the  other 
side,  the  perfect  democracy  of  the  spiritual  com¬ 
munity,  choosing  its  own  president.  Priestly 
consecration,  however,  soon  changes  this  de¬ 
mocracy  into  aristocracy;  though  the  further 
development  of  the  Church  does  not  belong  to 
the  period  now  under  consideration,  but  must  be 
referred  to  the  world  of  a  later  date. 

It  was  then  through  the  Christian  religion  that 
the  absolute  idea  of  God,  in  its  true  conception, 
attained  consciousness.  Here  man,  too,  finds 
himself  comprehended  in  his  true  nature,  given 
in  the  specific  conception  of  “the  Son.”  Man,  fi¬ 
nite  when  regarded  for  himself,  is  yet  at  the  same 
time  the  image  of  God  and  a  fountain  of  infinity 
in  himself.  He  is  the  object  of  his  own  existence 
— has  in  himself  an  infinite  value,  an  eternal 
destiny.  Consequently  he  has  his  true  home  in 
a  supersensuous  world — an  infinite  subjectivity, 
gained  only  by  a  rupture  with  mere  natural  ex¬ 
istence  and  volition,  and  by  his  labour  to  break 
their  power  within  him.  This  is  religious  self- 
consciousness.  But  in  order  to  enter  the  sphere 
and  display  the  active  vitality  of  that  religious 
life,  humanity  must  become  capable  of  it.  This 
capability  is  the  Svva pus  for  that  ivcpyeia.  What 
therefore  remains  to  be  considered  is  those  con¬ 
ditions  of  humanity  which  are  the  necessary 
corollary  to  the  consideration  that  man  is  ab¬ 
solute  self-consciousness — his  spiritual  nature 
being  the  starting-point  and  presupposition. 
These  conditions  are  themselves  not  yet  of  a 
concrete  order,  but  simply  the  first  abstract 
principles ,  which  are  won  by  the  instrumental¬ 
ity  of  the  Christian  religion  for  the  secular  state. 
First,  under  Christianity  slavery  is  impossible; 
for  man  is  man,  in  the  abstract  essence  of  his 
nature,  is  contemplated  in  God;  each  unit  of 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  «ii 


mankind  is  an  object  of  the  grace  of  God  and 
of  the  divine  purpose:  “God  will  have  all  men 
to  be  saved.”  Utterly  excluding  all  speciality, 
therefore,  man,  in  and  for  himself,  in  his  simple 
quality  of  man,  has  infinite  value;  and  this  in¬ 
finite  values  abolishes,  ipso  facto,  all  particular¬ 
ity  attaching  to  birth  or  country.  The  other,  the 
second  principle,  regards  the  subjectivity  of 
man  in  its  bearing  on  the  fortuitous — on  chance. 
Humanity  has  this  sphere  of  free  spirituality  in 
and  for  itself,  and  everything  else  must  proceed 
from  it.  The  place  appropriated  to  the  abode 
and  presence  of  the  divine  spirit,  the  sphere  in 
question,  is  spiritual  subjectivity,  and  is  con¬ 
stituted  the  place  to  which  all  contingency  is 
amenable.  It  follows  thence  that  what  we  ob¬ 
served  among  the  Greeks,  as  a  form  of  custom¬ 
ary  morality,  cannot  maintain  its  position  in 
the  Christian  world.  For  that  morality  is  spon¬ 
taneous  unreflected  wont;  while  the  Christian 
principle  is  independent  subjectivity — the  soil 
on  which  grows  the  true.  Now  an  unreflected 
morality  cannot  continue  to  hold  its  ground 
against  the  principle  of  subjective  freedom. 
Greek  freedom  was  that  of  hap  and  “genius” ;  it 
was  still  conditioned  by  slaves  and  oracles ;  but 
now  the  principle  of  absolute  freedom  in  God 
makes  its  appearance.  Man  now  no  longer  sus¬ 
tains  the  relation  of  dependence,  but  of  love — in 
the  consciousness  that  he  is  a  partaker  in  the  di¬ 
vine  existence.  In  regard  to  particular  aims,  man 
now  forms  his  own  determinations  and  recog¬ 
nizes  himself  as  plenipotentiary  in  regard  to  all 
finite  existence.  All  that  is  special  retreats  into 
the  background  before  that  spiritual  sphere  of 
subjectivity,  which  takes  a  secondary  position 
only  in  presence  of  the  divine  spirit.  The  super¬ 
stition  of  oracles  and  auspices  is  thereby  en¬ 
tirely  abrogated:  man  is  recognized  as  the  abso¬ 
lute  authority  in  crises  of  decision. 

It  is  the  two  principles  just  treated  of,  that 
now  attach  to  spirit  in  this  its  self-contained 
phase.  The  inner  shrine  of  man  is  designed,  on 
the  one  hand,  to  train  the  citizen  of  the  religious 
life  to  bring  himself  into  harmony  with  the 
spirit  of  God;  on  the  other  hand,  this  is- the 
point  du  depart  for  determining  secular  rela¬ 
tions,  and  its  condition  is  the  theme  of  Christian 
history.  The  change  which  piety  effects  must 
not  remain  concealed  in  the  recesses  of  the 
heart,  but  must  become  an  actual,  present  world, 
complying  with  the  conditions  prescribed  by 
that  absolute  spirit.  Piety  of  heart  does  not,  per 
se,  involve  the  submission  of  the  subjective  will, 
in  its  external  relations,  to  that  piety.  On  the 
contrary  we  see  all  passions  increasingly  ram¬ 


pant  in  the  sphere  of  reality,  because  that  sphere 
is  looked  down  upon  with  contempt,  from  the 
lofty  position  attained  by  the  world  of  mind,  as 
one  destitute  of  all  claim  and  value.  The  prob¬ 
lem  to  be  solved  is  therefore  the  imbuing  of  the 
sphere  of  unreflected  spiritual  existence  with  the 
idea  of  spirit.  A  general  observation  here  sug¬ 
gests  itself.  From  time  immemorial  it  has  been 
customary  to  assume  an  opposition  between  rea¬ 
son  and  religion,  as  also  between  religion  and 
the  world;  but  on  investigation  this  turns  out 
to  be  only  a  distinction .  Reason  in  general  is  the 
positive  existence  of  spirit,  divine  as  well  as 
human.  The  distinction  between  religion  and  the 
world  is  only  this:  that  religion  as  such, is  reason 
in  the  soul  and  heart,  that  it  is  a  temple  in  which 
truth  and  freedom  in  God  are  presented  to  the 
conceptive  faculty.  The  state,  on  the  other  hand, 
regulated  by  the  selfsame  reason,  is  a  temple  of 
human  freedom  concerned  with  the  perception 
and  volition  of  a  reality,  whose  purport  may  it¬ 
self  be  called  divine.  Thus  freedom  in  the  state 
is  preserved  and  established  by  religion,  since 
moral  rectitude  in  the  state  is  only  the  carrying 
out  of  that  which  constitutes  the  fundamental 
principle  of  religion.  The  process  displayed  in 
history  is  only  the  manifestation  of  religion  as 
human  reason — the  production  of  the  religious 
principle  which  dwells  in  the  heart  of  man,  un¬ 
der  the  form  of  secular  freedom.  Thus  the  dis¬ 
cord  between  the  inner  life  of  the  heart  and  the 
actual  world  is  removed.  To  realize  this  is,  how¬ 
ever,  the  vocation  of  another  people,  or  other 
peoples,  viz.,  the  German.  In  ancient  Rome  it¬ 
self,  Christianity  cannot  find  a  ground  on  which 
it  may  become  actual  and  develop  an  empire. 

Chapter  3  .The  Byzantine  Empire 
With  Constantine  the  Great,  the  Christian  re¬ 
ligion  ascended  the  throne  of  the  empire.  He  was 
followed  by  a  succession  of  Christian  emperors, 
interrupted  only  by  Julian — who  however,  could 
do  but  little  for  the  prostrate  ancient  faith.  The 
Roman  Empire  embraced  the  whole  civilized 
earth,  from  the  western  ocean  to  the  Tigris — 
from  the  interior  of  Africa,  to  the  Danube  (Pan- 
nonia,  Dacia).  Christianity  soon  spread  through 
the  length  and  breadth  of  this  enormous  realm. 
Rome  had  long  ceased  to  be  the  exclusive  resi¬ 
dence  of  the  emperors.  Many  of  Constantine’s 
predecessors  had  resided  in  Milan  or  other 
places;  and  he  himself  established  a  second 
court  in  the  ancient  Byzantium,  which  received 
the  name  of  Constantinople.  From  the  first  its 
population  consisted  chiefly  of  Christians,  and 
Constantine  lavished  every  appliance  to  render 


3l2  PHILOSOPHY 

this  new  abode  equal  in  splendour  to  the  old.  The 
empire  still  remained  in  its  integrity  till  Theo¬ 
dosius  the  Great  made  permanent  a  separation 
that  had  been  only  occasional,  and  divided  it 
between  his  two  sons.  The  reign  of  Theodosius 
displayed  the  last  faint  glimmer  of  that  splendour 
which  had  glorified  the  Roman  world.  Under 
him  the  pagan  temples  were  shut,  the  sacrifices 
and  ceremonies  abolished,  and  paganism  itself 
forbidden:  gradually  however  it  entirely  van¬ 
ished  of  itself.  The  heathen  orators  of  the  time 
cannot  sufficiently  express  their  wonder  and  as¬ 
tonishment  at  the  monstrous  contrast  between 
the  days  of  their  forefathers  and  their  own. 
“Our  temples  have  become  tombs.  The  places 
which  were  formerly  adorned  with  the  holy 
statues  of  the  gods  are  now  covered  with  sacred 
bones  [relics  of  the  martyrs] ;  men  who  have 
suffered  a  shameful  death  for  their  crimes, 
whose  bodies  are  covered  with  stripes,  and 
whose  heads  have  been  embalmed,  are  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  veneration.”  All  that  was  contemned  is 
exalted;  all  that  was  formerly  revered,  is  trod¬ 
den  in  the  dust.  The  last  of  the  pagans  express 
this  enormous  contrast  with  profound  lamenta¬ 
tion. 

The  Roman  Empire  was  divided  between  the 
two  sons  of  Theodosius.  The  elder,  Arcadius,  re¬ 
ceived  the  Eastern  Empire:  ancient  Greece, 
with  Thrace,  Asia  Minor,  Syria,  Egypt;  the 
younger,  Honorius,  the  Western:  Italy,  Africa, 
Spain,  Gaul,  Britain.  Immediately  after  the 
death  of  Theodosius,  confusion  entered,  and  the 
Roman  provinces  were  overwhelmed  by  alien 
peoples.  Already,  under  the  Emperor  Valens, 
the  Visigoths,  pressed  by  the  Huns,  had  solicited 
a  domicile  on  the  hither  side  of  the  Danube. 
This  was  granted  them,  on  the  condition  that 
they  should  defend  the  border  provinces  of  the 
empire.  But  maltreatment  roused  them  to  re¬ 
volt.  Valens  was  beaten  and  fell  on  the  field.  The 
later  emperors  paid  court  to  the  leader  of  these 
Goths.  Alaric,  the  bold  Gothic  chief,  turned  his 
arms  against  Italy.  Stilicho,  the  general  and  min¬ 
ister  of  Honorius,  stayed  his  course,  a.d.  403,  by 
the  battle  of  Pollentia,  as  at  a  later  date  he  also 
routed  Radagaisus,  leader  of  the  Alani,  Suevi, 
and  others.  Alaric  now  attacked  Gaul  and  Spain 
and,  on  the  fall  of  Stilicho,  returned  to  Italy. 
Rome  was  stormed  and  plundered  by  him  a.d. 
410.  Afterwards  Attila  advanced  on  it  with  the 
terrible  might  of  the  Huns — one  of  those  purely 
Oriental  phenomena,  which,  like  a  mere  storm- 
torrent,  rise  to  a  furious  height  and  bear  down 
everything  in  their  course,  but  in  a  brief  space 
are  so  completely  spent  that  nothing  is  seen  of 


OF  HISTORY 

them  but  the  traces  they  have  left  in  the  ruins 
which  they  have  occasioned.  Attila  pressed  into 
Gaul,  where,  a.d.  451,  a  vigorous  resistance  was 
offered  him  by  ^tius,  near  Chalons  on  the 
Marne.  Victory  remained  doubtful.  Attila  sub¬ 
sequently  marched  upon  Italy  and  died  in  the 
year  453.  Soon  afterwards  however  Rome  was 
taken  and  plundered  by  the  Vandals  under  Gen- 
seric.  Finally,  the  dignity  of  the  western  em¬ 
perors  became  a  farce,  and  their  empty  title  was 
abolished  by  Odoacer,  king  of  the  Heruli. 

The  Eastern  Empire  long  survived,  and  in  the 
west  a  new  Christian  population  was  formed 
from  the  invading  barbarian  hordes.  Christian¬ 
ity  had  at  first  kept  aloof  from  the  state,  and 
the  development  which  it  experienced  related  to 
doctrine,  internal  organization,  discipline,  etc. 
But  now  it  had  become  dominant:  it  was  now  a 
political  power,  a  political  motive.  We  now  see 
Christianity  under  two  forms :  on  the  one  side, 
barbarian  nations  whose  culture  was  yet  to  be¬ 
gin,  who  have  to  acquire  the  very  rudiments  of 
science,  law,  and  polity;  on  other  side,  civilized 
peoples  in  possession  of  Greek  science  and  a 
highly  refined  oriental  culture.  Municipal  leg¬ 
islation  among  them  was  complete — having 
reached  the  highest  perfection  through  the  la¬ 
bors  of  the  great  Roman  jurisconsults;  so  that 
the  corpus  juris  compiled  at  the  instance  of  the 
Emperor  Justinian  still  excites  the  admiration 
of  the  world.  Here  the  Christian  religion  is 
placed  in  the  midst  of  a  developed  civilization, 
which  did  not  proceed  from  it.  There,  on  the 
contrary,  the  process  of  culture  has  its  very  first 
step  still  to  take,  and  that  within  the  sphere  of 
Christianity. 

These  two  empires,  therefore,  present  a  most 
remarkable  contrast,  in  which  we  have  before 
our  eyes  a  grand  example  of  the  necessity  of  a 
people’s  having  its  culture  developed  in  the 
spirit  of  the  Christian  religion.  The  history  of 
the  highly  civilized  Eastern  Empire — where  as 
we  might  suppose,  the  spirit  of  Christianity 
could  be  taken  up  in  its  truth  and  purity — ex¬ 
hibits  to  us  a  millennial  series  of  uninterrupted 
crimes,  weaknesses, basenesses  and  want  of  prin¬ 
ciple;  a  most  repulsive  and  consequently  a  most 
uninteresting  picture.  It  is  evident  here  how 
Christianity  may  be  abstract  and  how,  as  such  it 
is  powerless,  on  account  of  its  very  purity  and 
intrinsic  spirituality.  It  may  even  be  entirely 
separated  from  the  world,  as,  e.g in  Monasti- 
cism — which  originated  in  Egypt.  It  is  a  common 
notion  and  saying,  in  reference  to  the  power  of 
religion,  abstractly  considered,  over  the  hearts 
of  men,  that  if  Christian  love  were  universal, 


THE  ROMAN  WORLD  313 


private  and  political  life  would  both  be  perfect, 
and  the  state  of  mankind  would  be  thoroughly 
righteous  and  moral.  Such  representations  may 
be  a  pious  wish,  but  do  not  possess  truth ;  for  re¬ 
ligion  is  something  internal,  having  to  do  with 
conscience  alone.  To  it  all  the  passions  and  de¬ 
sires  are  opposed,  and  in  order  that  heart,  will, 
intelligence  may  become  true,  they  must  be 
thoroughly  educated;  right  must  become  cus¬ 
tom — habit;  practical  activity  must  be  elevated 
to  rational  action ;  the  state  must  have  a  rational 
organization,  and  then  at  length  does  the  will  of 
individuals  become  a  truly  righteous  one.  Light 
shining  in  darkness  may  perhaps  give  colour,  but 
not  a  picture  animated  by  spirit.  The  Byzantine 
Empire  is  a  grand  example  of  how  the  Chris¬ 
tian  religion  may  maintain  an  abstract  character 
among  a  cultivated  people,  if  the  whole  organi¬ 
zation  of  the  state  and  of  the  laws  is  not  recon¬ 
structed  in  harmony  with  its  principle.  At  By¬ 
zantium,  Christianity  had  fallen  into  the  hands 
of  the  dregs  of  the  population — the  lawless  mob. 
Popular  license,  on  the  one  side,  and  courtly 
baseness,  on  the  other  side,  take  refuge  under 
the  sanction  of  religion  and  degrade  the  latter 
to  a  disgusting  object.  In  regard  to  religion,  two 
interests  obtained  prominence:  first,  the  settle¬ 
ment  of  doctrine;  and  secondly,  the  appoint¬ 
ment  to  ecclesiastical  offices.  The  settlement  of 
doctrine  pertained  to  the  councils  and  Church 
authorities;  but  the  principle  of  Christianity 
is  freedom — subjective  insight.  These  matters 
therefore,  were  special  subjects  of  contention 
for  the  populace;  violent  civil  wars  arose,  and 
everywhere  might  be  witnessed  scenes  of  mur¬ 
der,  conflagration  and  pillage,  perpetrated  in  the 
cause  of  Christian  dogmas.  A  famous  schism, 
e.g.,  occurred  in  reference  to  the  dogma  of  the 
Tpio-ayioi/.  The  words  read:  “Holy,  Holy,  Holy, 
is  the  Lord  God  of  Zebaoth.”  To  this,  one  party, 
in  honor  of  Christ,  added — “who  was  crucified 
for  us.”  Another  party  rejected  the  addition, 
and  sanguinary  struggles  ensued.  In  the  contest 
on  the  question  whether  Christ  were  o/xoovo-ios 
or  ofjLOLovaios — that  is,  of  the  same  or  of  similar 
nature  with  God — the  one  letter  L  cost  many 
thousands  their  lives.  Especially  notorious  are 
the  contentions  about  images,  in  which  it  often 
happened,  that  the  emperor  declared  for  the 
images  and  the  patriarch  against,  or  conversely. 
Streams  of  blood  flowed  as  the  result.  Gregory 
Nazianzen  says  somewhere:  “This  city  [Con¬ 
stantinople]  is  full  of  handicraftsmen  and 
slaves,  who  are  all  profound  theologians,  and 
preach  in  their  workshops  and  in  the  streets.  If 
you  want  a  man  to  change  a  piece  of  silver,  he 


instructs  you  in  what  consists  the  distinction 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son:  if  you  ask  the 
price  of  a  loaf  of  bread,  you  receive  for  answer 
— that  the  Son  is  inferior  to  the  Father;  and  if 
you  ask,  whether  the  bread  is  ready,  the  re¬ 
joinder  is  that  the  genesis  of  the  Son  was  from 
nothing.”  The  idea  of  spirit  contained  in  this 
doctrine  was  thus  treated  in  an  utterly  unspirit¬ 
ual  manner.  The  appointment  to  the  Patriarch¬ 
ate  at  Constantinople,  Antioch  and  Alexandria, 
and  the  jealousy  and  ambition  of  the  patriarchs 
likewise  occasioned  many  intestine  struggles. 
To  all  these  religious  contentions  was  added  the 
interest  in  the  gladiators  and  their  combats,  and 
in  the  parties  of  the  blue  and  green  colour,  which 
likewise  occasioned  the  bloodiest  encounters ;  a 
sign  of  the  most  fearful  degradation,  as  proving 
that  all  feeling  for  what  is  serious  and  elevated 
is  lost,  and  that  the  delirium  of  religious  pas¬ 
sion  is  quite  consistent  with  an  appetite  for 
gross  and  barbarous  spectacles. 

The  chief  points  in  the  Christian  religion  were 
at  last,  by  degrees,  established  by  the  councils. 
The  Christians  of  the  Byzantine  Empire  re¬ 
mained  sunk  in  the  dream  of  superstition — per¬ 
sisting  in  blind  obedience  to  the  patriarchs  and 
the  priesthood.  Image-worship,  to  which  we  al¬ 
luded  above,  occasioned  the  most  violent  strug¬ 
gles  and  storms.  The  brave  Emperor  Leo  the 
Isaurian,  in  particular,  persecuted  images  with 
the  greatest  obstinacy,  and  in  the  year  754, 
image-worship  was  declared  by  a  council  to  be 
an  invention  of  the  devil.  Nevertheless,  in  the 
year  787  the  Empress  Irene  had  it  restored  un¬ 
der  the  authority  of  a  Nicene  council,  and  the 
Empress  Theodora  definitively  established  it — 
proceeding  against  its  enemies  with  energetic 
rigour.  The  iconoclastic  patriarch  received  two 
hundred  blows,  the  bishops  trembled,  the  monks 
exulted,  and  the  memory  of  this  orthodox  pro¬ 
ceeding  was  celebrated  by  an  annual  ecclesias¬ 
tical  festival.  The  west,  on  the  contrary,  repu¬ 
diated  image-worship  as  late  as  the  year  794,  in 
the  council  held  at  Frankfort;  and,  though  re¬ 
taining  the  images,  blamed  most  severely  the 
superstition  of  the  Greeks.  Not  till  the  later 
middle  ages  did  image-worship  meet  with  uni¬ 
versal  adoption  as  the  result  of  quiet  and  slow 
advances. 

The  Byzantine  Empire  was  thus  distracted 
by  passions  of  all  kinds  within,  and  pressed  by 
the  barbarians — to  whom  the  emperors  could 
offer  but  feeble  resistance — without.  The  realm 
was  in  a  condition  of  perpetual  insecurity.  Its 
general  aspect  presents  a  disgusting  picture  of 
imbecility;  wretched,  nay,  insane  passions,  stifle 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


3i4 

the  growth  of  all  that  is  noble  in  thoughts,  deeds, 
and  persons.  Rebellion  on  the  part  of  generals, 
depositions  of  the  emperors  by  their  means  or 
through  the  intrigues  of  the  courtiers,  assassina¬ 
tion  or  poisoning  of  the  emperors  by  their  own 
wives  and  sons,  women  surrendering  themselves 


to  lusts  and  abominations  of  all  kinds — such  are 
the  scenes  which  history  here  brings  before  us; 
till  at  last,  about  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  cen¬ 
tury  (a.d.  1453),  the  rotten  edifice  of  the  East¬ 
ern  Empire  crumbled  in  pieces  before  the  might 
of  the  vigorous  Turks. 


FOURTH  PART 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD 


The  German  spirit  is  the  spirit  of  the  new 
world.  Its  aim  is  the  realization  of  absolute 
truth  as  the  unlimited  self-determination  of 
freedom — that  freedom  which  has  its  own  abso¬ 
lute  form  itself  as  its  purport.1  The  destiny  of 
the  German  peoples  is  to  be  the  bearers  of  the 
Christian  principle.  The  principle  of  spiritual 
freedom — of  reconciliation,  was  introduced  in¬ 
to  the  still  simple,  unformed  minds  of  those 
peoples ;  and  the  part  assigned  them  in  the  serv¬ 
ice  of  the  world  spirit  was  that  of  not  merely 
possessing  the  idea  of  freedom  as  the  substra¬ 
tum  of  their  religious  conceptions,  but  of  pro¬ 
ducing  it  in  free  and  spontaneous  developments 
from  their  subjective  self-consciousness. 

In  entering  on  the  task  of  dividing  the  Ger¬ 
man  world  into  its  natural  periods,  we  must  re¬ 
mark  that  we  have  not,  as  was  the  case  in  treat¬ 
ing  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  a  double  external 
relation — backwards  to  an  earlier  world-histori¬ 
cal  people,  and  forwards  to  a  later  one — to  guide 
us.  History  shows  that  the  process  of  develop¬ 
ment  among  the  peoples  now  under  considera¬ 
tion  was  an  altogether  different  one.  The  Greeks 
and  Romans  had  reached  maturity  within,  ere 
they  directed  their  energies  outwards.  The  Ger¬ 
mans,  on  the  contrary,  began  with  self-diffusion 
— deluging  the  world,  and  overpowering  in  their 
course  the  inwardly  rotten,  hollow  political  fab¬ 
rics  of  the  civilized  nations.  Only  then  did  their 
development  begin,  kindled  by  a  foreign  culture, 
a  foreign  religion,  polity  and  legislation.  The 
process  of  culture  they  underwent  consisted  in 
taking  up  foreign  elements  and  reductively 
amalgamating  them  with  their  own  national  life. 
Thus  their  history  presents  an  introversion,  the 
attraction  of  alien  forms  of  life  and  the  bring- 

1  That  is:  The  supreme  law  of  the  universe  is  recog¬ 
nized  as  identical  with  the  dictates  of  conscience — be¬ 
comes  a  “law  of  liberty.”  Morality — that  authority 
which  has  the  incontestable  right  to  determine  men’s  ac¬ 
tions,  which  therefore  is  the  only  absolutely  free  and  un¬ 
limited  power — is  no  longer  a  compulsory  enactment, 
but  the  free  choice  of  human  beings.  The  good  man 
would  make  law  for  himself  if  he  found  none  made  for 
him. 


ing  these  to  bear  upon  their  own.  In  the  Cru¬ 
sades,  indeed,  and  in  the  discovery  of  America, 
the  western  world  directed  its  energies  out¬ 
wards.  But  it  was  not  thus  brought  in  contact 
with  a  world-historical  people  that  had  pre¬ 
ceded  it;  it  did  not  dispossess  a  principle  that 
had  previously  governed  the  world.  The  rela¬ 
tion  to  an  extraneous  principle  here  only  ac¬ 
companies  the  history,  does  not  bring  with  it  es¬ 
sential  changes  in  the  nature  of  those  conditions 
which  characterize  the  peoples  in  question,  but 
rather  wears  the  aspect  of  internal  evolution. 2 

The  relation  to  other  countries  and  periods  is 
thus  entirely  different  from  that  sustained  by 
the  Greeks  and  Romans.  For  the  Christian 
world  is  the  world  of  completion;  the  grand 
principle  of  being  is  realized,  consequently  the 
end  of  days  is  fully  come.  The  idea  can  discover 
in  Christianity  no  point  in  the  aspirations  of 
spirit  that  is  not  satisfied.  For  its  individual 
members,  the  church  is,  it  is  true,  a  preparation 
for  an  eternal  state  as  something  future;  since 
the  units  who  compose  it,  in  their  isolated  and 
several  capacity,  occupy  a  position  of  particu¬ 
larity:  but  the  church  has  also  the  spirit  of  God 
actually  present  in  it,  it  forgives  the  sinner  and 
is  a  present  kingdom  of  heaven.  Thus  the  Chris¬ 
tian  world  has  no  absolute  existence  outside  its 
sphere,  but  only  a  relative  one  which  is  already 
implicitly  vanquished,  and  in  respect  to  which 
its  only  concern  is  to  make  it  apparent  that  this 
conquest  has  taken  place.  Hence  it  follows  that 
an  external  reference  ceases  to  be  the  character¬ 
istic  element  determining  the  epochs  of  the 
modern  world.  We  have  therefore  to  look  for 
another  principle  of  division. 

The  German  world  took  up  the  Roman  cul¬ 
ture  and  religion  in  their  completed  form.  There 
was  indeed  a  German  and  northern  religion,  but 
it  had  by  no  means  taken  deep  root  in  the  soul  ; 
Tacitus  therefore  calls  the  Germans:  “Securi 

2  The  influence  of  the  Crusades  and  of  the  discovery 
of  America  was  simply  reflex.  No  other  phase  of  human¬ 
ity  was  thereby  merged  in  Christendom. 


315 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


316 

adversus  Deos.”  The  Christian  religion  which 
they  adopted,  had  received  from  councils  and 
Fathers  of  the  Church,  who  possessed  the  whole 
culture,  and  in  particular,  the  philosophy  of  the 
Greek  and  Roman  world,  a  perfected  dogmatic 
system;  the  Church,  too,  had  a  completely  de¬ 
veloped  hierarchy.  To  the  native  tongue  of  the 
Germans,  the  Church  likewise  opposed  one  per¬ 
fectly  developed — the  Latin.  In  art  and  philoso¬ 
phy  a  similar  alien  influence  predominated. 
What  of  Alexandrian  and  of  formal  Aristotelian 
philosophy  was  still  preserved  in  the  writings  of 
Boethius,  and  elsewhere,  became  the  fixed  basis 
of  speculative  thought  in  the  west  for  many 
centuries.  The  same  principle  holds  in  regard  to 
the  form  of  the  secular  sovereignty.  Gothic  and 
other  chiefs  gave  themselves  the  name  of  Ro¬ 
man  patricians,  and  at  a  later  date  the  Roman 
Empire  was  restored.  Thus  the  German  world 
appears,  superficially,  to  be  only  a  continuation 
of  the  Roman.  But  there  lived  in  it  an  entirely 
new  spirit,  through  which  the  world  was  to  be 
regenerated,  the  free  spirit,  viz.,  which  reposes 
on  itself,  the  absolute  self-determination  of 
subjectivity.  To  this  self-involved  subjectivity, 
the  corresponding  objectivity  stands  opposed 
as  absolutely  alien.  The  distinction  and  antith¬ 
esis  which  is  evolved  from  these  principles,  is 
that  of  church  and  state.  On  the  one  side,  the 
church  develops  itself,  as  the  embodiment  of 
absolute  truth;  for  it  is  the  consciousness  of 
this  truth,  and  at  the  same  time  the  agency  for 
rendering  the  individual  harmonious  with  it.  On 
the  other  side  stands  secular  consciousness, 
which,  with  its  aims,  occupies  the  world  of  limi¬ 
tation — the  state,  based  on  heart  or  mutual  con¬ 
fidence  and  subjectivity  generally.  European 
history  is  the  exhibition  of  the  growth  of  each 
of  these  principles  severally,  in  church  and 
state ;  then  of  an  antithesis  on  the  part  of  both 
— not  only  of  the  one  to  the  other,  but  appear¬ 
ing  within  the  sphere  of  each  of  these  bodies 
themselves  (since  each  of  them  is  itself  a  total¬ 
ity)  ;  lastly,  of  the  harmonizing  of  the  anti¬ 
thesis. 

The  three  periods  of  this  world  will  have  to 
be  treated  accordingly. 

The  first  begins  with  the  appearance  of  the 
German  nations  in  the  Roman  Empire — the  in¬ 
cipient  development  of  these  peoples,  converts 
to  Christianity,  and  now  established  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  the  west.  Their  barbarous  and  simple 
character  prevents  this  initial  period  from  pos¬ 
sessing  any  great  interest.  The  Christian  world 
then  presents  itself  as  “Christendom” — one 
mass,  in  which  the  spiritual  and  the  secular  form 


only  different  aspects.  This  epoch  extends  to 
Charlemagne. 

The  second  period  develops  the  two  sides  of 
the  antithesis  to  a  logically  consequential  inde¬ 
pendence  and  opposition — the  Church  for  itself 
as  a  theocracy ,  and  the  state  for  itself  as  a  feu¬ 
dal  monarchy.  Charlemagne  had  formed  an  al¬ 
liance  with  the  Holy  See  against  the  Lombards 
and  the  factions  of  the  nobles  in  Rome.  A  union 
thus  arose  between  the  spiritual  and  the  secular 
power,  and  a  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth  prom¬ 
ised  to  follow  in  the  wake  of  this  conciliation. 
But  just  at  this  time,  instead  of  a  spiritual  king¬ 
dom  of  heaven,  the  inwardness  of  the  Christian 
principle  wears  the  appearance  of  being  alto¬ 
gether  directed  outwards  and  leaving  its  proper 
sphere.  Christian  freedom  is  perverted  to  its 
very  opposite,  both  in  a  religious  and  secular 
respect;  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  severest  bond¬ 
age,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  most  immoral 
excess — a  barbarous  intensity  of  every  passion. 
In  this  period  two  aspects  of  society  are  to  be 
especially  noticed:  the  first  is  the  formation  of 
states — superior  and  inferior  suzerainties  exhib¬ 
iting  a  regulated  subordination,  so  that  every  re¬ 
lation  becomes  a  firmly-fixed  private  right,  ex¬ 
cluding  a  sense  of  universality.  This  regulated 
subordination  appears  in  the  feudal  system. 
The  second  aspect  presents  the  antithesis  of 
Church  and  state.  This  antithesis  exists  solely 
because  the  Church,  to  whose  management  the 
spiritual  was  committed,  itself  sinks  down  into 
every  kind  of  worldliness — a  worldliness  which 
appears  only  the  more  detestable,  because  all 
passions  assume  the  sanction  of  religion. 

The  time  of  Charles  V’s  reign,  i.e.,  the  first 
half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  forms  the  end  of 
the  second,  and  likewise  the  beginning  of  the 
third  period.  Secularity  appears  now  as  gaining 
a  consciousness  of  its  intrinsic  worth — becomes 
aware  of  its  having  a  value  of  its  own  in  the 
morality,  rectitude,  probity  and  activity  of  man. 
The  consciousness  of  independent  validity  is 
aroused  through  the  restoration  of  Christian 
freedom.  The  Christian  principle  has  now  passed 
through  the  terrible  discipline  of  culture,  and 
it  first  attains  truth  and  reality  through  the  Ref¬ 
ormation.  This  third  period  of  the  German 
world  extends  from  the  Reformation  to  our  own 
times.  The  principle  of  free  spirit  is  here  made 
the  banner  of  the  world,  and  from  this  principle 
are  evolved  the  universal  axioms  of  reason.  For¬ 
mal  thought — the  understanding — had  been  al¬ 
ready  developed;  but  thought  received  its  true 
material  first  with  the  Reformation,  through  the 
reviviscent  concrete  consciousness  of  free  spirit. 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  317 


From  that  epoch  thought  began  to  gain  a  cul¬ 
ture  properly  its  own:  principles  were  derived 
from  it  which  were  to  be  the  norm  for  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  state.  Political  life  was  now  to 
be  consciously  regulated  by  reason.  Customary 
morality,  traditional  usage  lost  its  validity;  the 
various  claims  insisted  upon,  must  prove  their 
legitimacy  as  based  on  rational  principles.  Not 
till  this  era  is  the  freedom  of  spirit  realized. 

We  may  distinguish  these  periods  as  King¬ 
doms  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Spirit.1 
The  Kingdom  of  the  Father  is  the  consolidated, 
undistinguished  mass,  presenting  a  self-repeat¬ 
ing  cycle,  mere  change — like  that  sovereignty  of 
Chronos  engulfing  his  offspring.  The  Kingdom 
of  the  Son  is  the  manifestation  of  God  merely  in 
a  relation  to  secular  existence — shining  upon  it 
as  upon  an  alien  object.  The  Kingdom  of  the 
Spirit  is  the  harmonizing  of  the  antithesis. 

These  epochs  may  be  also  compared  with  the 
earlier  empires.  In  the  German  aeon,  as  the  realm 
of  totality,  we  see  the  distinct  repetition  of  the 
earlier  epochs.  Charlemagne’s  time  may  be  com¬ 
pared  with  the  Persian  Empire ;  it  is  the  period 
of  substantial  unity — this  unity  having  its  foun¬ 
dation  in  the  inner  man,  the  heart,  and  both  in 
the  spiritual  and  the  secular  still  abiding  in  its 
simplicity. 

To  the  Greek  world  and  its  merely  ideal  unity, 
the  time  preceding  Charles  V  answers;  where 
real  unity  no  longer  exists,  because  all  phases  of 
particularity  have  become  fixed  in  privileges 
and  peculiar  rights.  As  in  the  interior  of  the 
realms  themselves,  the  different  estates  of  the 
realm,  with  their  several  claims,  are  isolated, 
so  do  the  various  states  in  their  foreign  aspects 
occupy  a  merely  external  relation  to  each  other. 
A  diplomatic  policy  arises,  which  in  the  interest 
of  a  European  balance  of  power,  unites  them 
with  and  against  each  other.  It  is  the  time  in 
which  the  world  becomes  clear  and  manifest  to 
itself  (discovery  of  America).  So  too  does  con¬ 
sciousness  gain  clearness  in  the  supersensuous 
world  and  respecting  it.  Substantial  objective 
religion  brings  itself  to  sensuous  clearness  in  the 

1  The  conception  of  a  mystical  regnum  Patris,  regnum 
Filii,  and  regnum  Spiritus  Sancti  is  perfectly  familiar  to 
metaphysical  theologians.  The  first  represents  the  period 
in  which  deity  is  not  yet  manifested — remains  self -in¬ 
volved.  The  second  is  that  of  manifestation  in  an  individ¬ 
ual  being,  standing  apart  from  mankind  generally — “the 
Son.”  The  third  is  that  in  which  this  barrier  is  broken 
down,  and  an  intimate  mystical  communion  ensues  be¬ 
tween  God  in  Christ  and  the  regenerated,  when  God  is 
“all  in  all.”  This  remark  may  serve  to  prevent  miscon¬ 
ception  as  to  the  tone  of  the  remainder  of  the  paragraph. 
The  mention  of  the  Greek  myth  will  appear  pertinent 
in  the  view  of  those  who  admit  what  seems  a  very  rea¬ 
sonable  explanation  of  it — viz.,  as  an  adumbration  of 
the  self-involved  character  of  the  prehistorical  period. 


sensuous  element  (Christian  art  in  the  age  of 
Pope  Leo),  and  also  becomes  clear  to  itself  in 
the  element  of  inmost  truth.  We  may  compare 
this  time  with  that  of  Pericles.  The  introversion 
of  spirit  begins  (Socrates — Luther),  though 
Pericles  is  wanting  in  this  epoch.  Charles  V 
possesses  enormous  possibilities  in  point  of  out¬ 
ward  appliances,  and  appears  absolute  in  his 
power;  but  the  inner  spirit  of  Pericles,  and 
therefore  the  absolute  means  of  establishing  a 
free  sovereignty,  are  not  in  him.  This  is  the 
epoch  when  spirit  becomes  clear  to  itself  in  sep¬ 
arations  occurring  in  the  realm  of  reality;  now 
the  distinct  elements  of  the  German  world  man¬ 
ifest  their  essential  nature. 

The  third  epoch  may  be  compared  with  the 
Roman  world.  The  unity  of  a  universal  princi¬ 
ple  is  here  quite  as  decidedly  present,  yet  not 
as  the  unity  of  abstract  universal  sovereignty, 
but  as  the  hegemony  of  self-cognizant  thought. 
The  authority  of  rational  aim  is  acknowledged, 
and  privileges  and  particularities  melt  away  be¬ 
fore  the  common  object  of  the  state.  Peoples 
will  the  right  in  and  for  itself ;  regard  is  not  had 
exclusively  to  particular  conventions  between 
nations,  but  principles  enter  into  the  considera¬ 
tions  with  which  diplomacy  is  occupied.  As  little 
can  religion  maintain  itself  apart  from  thought, 
but  either  advances  to  the  comprehension  of  the 
idea,  or,  compelled  by  thought  itself,  becomes 
intensive  belief — or  lastly,  from  despair  of  find¬ 
ing  itself  at  home  in  thought,  flees  back  from  it 
in  pious  horror,  and  becomes  superstition. 

Section  I 

THE  ELEMENTS  OF  THE 
CHRISTIAN  GERMAN  WORLD 

Chapter  1.  The  Barbarian  Migrations 

Respecting  this  first  period,  we  have  on  the 
whole  little  to  say,  for  it  affords  us  compara¬ 
tively  slight  materials  for  reflection.  We  will  not 
follow  the  Germans  back  into  their  forests,  nor 
investigate  the  origin  of  their  migrations.  Those 
forests  of  theirs  have  always  passed  for  the 
abodes  of  free  peoples,  and  Tacitus  sketched 
his  celebrated  picture  of  Germany  with  a  cer¬ 
tain  love  and  longing,  contrasting  it  with  the 
corruption  and  artificiality  of  that  world  to 
which  he  himself  belonged.  But  we  must  not  on 
this  account  regard  such  a  state  of  barbarism  as 
an  exalted  one,  or  fall  into  some  such  error  as 
Rousseau’s,  who  represents  the  condition  of  the 
American  savages  as  one  in  which  man  is  in  pos¬ 
session  of  true  freedom.  Certainly  there  is  an 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


immense  amount  of  misfortune  and  sorrow  of 
which  the  savage  knows  nothing;  but  this  is  a 
merely  negative  advantage,  while  freedom  is 
essential  positive.  It  is  only  the  blessings  con¬ 
ferred  by  affirmative  freedom  that  are  regarded 
as  such  in  the  highest  grade  of  consciousness. 

Our  first  acquaintance  with  the  Germans  finds 
each  individual  enjoying  an  independent  free¬ 
dom;  and  yet  there  is  a  certain  community  of 
feeling  and  interest,  though  not  yet  matured  to 
a  political  condition.  Next  we  see  them  inundat¬ 
ing  the  Roman  Empire.  It  was  partly  the  fertil¬ 
ity  of  its  domains,  partly  the  necessity  of  seek¬ 
ing  other  habitations,  that  furnished  the  inciting 
cause.  In  spite  of  the  wars  in  which  they  engage 
with  the  Romans,  individuals,  and  even  entire 
clans,  enter  their  service  as  soldiers.  Even  so 
early  as  the  battle  of  Pharsalia  we  find  German 
cavalry  united  with  the  Roman  forces  of  Caesar. 
In  military  service  and  intercourse  with  civilized 
peoples,  they  became  acquainted  with  their  ad¬ 
vantages — advantages  tending  to  the  enjoyment 
and  convenience  of  life, but  also, and  principally, 
those  of  mental  cultivation.  In  the  later  emigra¬ 
tions,  many  nations — some  entirely,  others  par¬ 
tially — remained  behind  in  their  original  abodes. 

Accordingly,  a  distinction  must  be  made  be¬ 
tween  the  German  nations  who  remained  in 
their  ancient  habitations  and  those  who  spread 
themselves  over  the  Roman  Empire,  and  min¬ 
gled  with  the  conquered  peoples.  Since  in  their 
migratory  expeditions  the  Germans  attached 
themselves  to  their  leaders  of  their  own  free 
choice,  we  find  a  peculiar  duplicate  condition  of 
the  great  Teutonic  families  (Eastern  and  West¬ 
ern  Goths;  Goths  in  all  parts  of  the  world  and 
in  their  original  country;  Scandinavians  and 
Normans  in  Norway,  but  also  appearing  as 
knightly  adventurers  in  the  wide  world).  How¬ 
ever  different  might  be  the  fates  of  these  peo¬ 
ples,  they  nevertheless  had  one  aim  in  common 
— to  procure  themselves  possessions,  and  to  de¬ 
velop  themselves  in  the  direction  of  political 
organization.  This  process  of  growth  is  equally 
characteristic  of  all.  In  the  west,  in  Spain  and 
Portugal,  the  Suevi  and  Vandals  are  the  first 
settlers,  but  are  subdued  and  dispossessed  by 
the  Visigoths.  A  great  Visigothic  kingdom  was 
established,  to  which  Spain,  Portugal,  and  a  part 
of  southern  France  belonged.  The  second  king¬ 
dom  is  that  of  the  Franks — a  name  which,  from 
the  end  of  the  second  century,  was  given  in 
common  to  the  Istaevonian  races  between  the 
Rhine  and  the  Weser.  They  established  them¬ 
selves  between  the  Moselle  and  the  Scheldt,  and 
under  their  leader,  Clovis,  pressed  forward  into 


Gaul  as  far  as  the  Loire.  He  afterwards  reduced 
the  Franks  on  the  lower  Rhine,  and  theAlemanni 
on  the  upper  Rhine;  his  sons  subjugated  the 
Thuringians  and  Burgundians.  The  third  king¬ 
dom  is  that  of  the  Ostrogoths  in  Italy,  founded 
by  Theodoric,  and  highly  flourishing  beneath  his 
rule.  The  learned  Romans  Cassiodorus  and 
Boethius  filled  the  highest  offices  of  state  under 
Theodoric.  But  this  Ostrogothic  kingdom  did 
not  last  long;  it  was  destroyed  by  the  Byzan¬ 
tines  under  Belisarius  and  Narses.  In  the  second 
half  (568)  of  the  sixth  century,  the  Lombards 
invaded  Italy  and  ruled  for  two  centuries,  till 
this  kingdom  also  was  subjected  to  the  Frank 
sceptre  by  Charlemagne.  At  a  later  date,  the 
Normans  also  established  themselves  in  lower 
Italy.  Our  attention  is  next  claimed  by  the  Bur¬ 
gundians,  who  were  subjugated  by  the  Franks, 
and  whose  kingdom  forms  a  kind  of  partition 
wall  between  France  and  Germany.  The  Angles 
and  Saxons  entered  Britain  and  reduced  it  under 
their  sway.  Subsequently,  the  Normans  make 
their  appearance  here  also. 

These  countries,  previously  a  part  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  empire,  thus  experienced  the  fate  of  subju¬ 
gation  by  the  barbarians.  In  the  first  instance,  a 
great  contrast  presented  itself  between  the  al¬ 
ready  civilized  inhabitants  of  those  countries 
and  the  victors ;  but  this  contrast  terminated  in 
the  hybrid  character  of  the  new  nations  that 
were  now  formed.  The  whole  mental  and  moral 
existence  of  such  states  exhibits  a  divided  as¬ 
pect;  in  their  inmost  being  we  have  character¬ 
istics  that  point  to  an  alien  origin.  This  distinc¬ 
tion  strikes  us  even  on  the  surface,  in  their 
language,  which  is  an  intermixture  of  the  ancient 
Roman,  already  united  with  the  vernacular,  and 
the  German.  We  may  class  these  nations  to¬ 
gether  as  Romanic — comprehending  thereby  It¬ 
aly,  Spain,  Portugal,  and  France.  Contrasted 
with  these  stand  three  others,  more  or  less  Ger¬ 
man-speaking  nations,  which  have  maintained  a 
consistent  tone  of  uninterrupted  fidelity  to  na¬ 
tive  character — Germany  itself,  Scandinavia, 
and  England.  The  last  was,  indeed,  incorporated 
in  the  Roman  Empire,  but  was  affected  by  Roman 
culture  little  more  than  superficially — like  Ger¬ 
many  itself — and  was  again  Germanized  by 
Angles  and  Saxons.  Germany  proper  kept  itself 
pure  from  any  admixture ;  only  the  southern  and 
western  border,  on  the  Danube  and  the  Rhine, 
had  been  subjugated  by  the  Romans.  The  por¬ 
tion  between  the  Rhine  and  the  Elbe  remained 
thoroughly  national.  This  part  of  Germany  was 
inhabited  by  several  tribes.  Besides  the  Ripu- 
arian  Franks  and  those  established  by  Clovis  in 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  319 

the  districts  of  the  Maine,  four  leading  tribes —  of  the  soul — a  general  sense  of  enjoyment.  Will 
the  Alemanni,  the  Boioarians,  the  Thuringians,  in  the  case  of  such  an  idiosyncrasy  is  exclusively 


and  the  Saxons — must  be  mentioned.  The  Scan¬ 
dinavians  retained  in  their  fatherland  a  similar 
purity  from  intermixture;  and  also  made  them¬ 
selves  celebrated  by  their  expeditions,  under  the 
name  of  Normans.  They  extended  their  chivalric 
enterprises  over  almost  all  parts  of  Europe. 
Part  of  them  went  to  Russia,  and  there  became 
the  founders  of  the  Russian  Empire;  part  set¬ 
tled  in  northern  France  and  Britain;  another 
established  principalities  in  lower  Italy  and 
Sicily.  Thus  a  part  of  the  Scandinavians  founded 
states  in  foreign  lands,  another  maintained  its 
nationality  by  the  ancestral  hearth. 

We  find,  moreover,  in  the  east  of  Europe,  the 
great  Slavonic  nation,  whose  settlements  ex¬ 
tended  west  of  the  Elbe  to  the  Danube.  The 
Magyars  (Hungarians)  settled  in  between  them. 
In  Moldavia,  Wallachia,  and  northern  Greece 
appear  the  Bulgarians,  Servians,  and  Albanians, 
likewise  of  Asiatic  origin — left  behind  as  broken 
barbarian  remains  in  the  shocks  and  counter¬ 
shocks  of  the  advancing  hordes.  These  people 
did,  indeed,  found  kingdoms  and  sustain  spirited 
conflicts  with  the  various  nations  that  came 
across  their  path.  Sometimes,  as  an  advanced 
guard,  an  intermediate  nationality,  they  took 
part  in  the  struggle  between  Christian  Europe 
and  unchristian  Asia.  The  Poles  even  liberated 
beleaguered  Vienna  from  the  Turks;  and  the 
Slavs  have  to  some  extent  been  drawn  within  the 
sphere  of  Occidental  reason.  Yet  this  entire  body 
of  peoples  remains  excluded  from  our  considera¬ 
tion,  because  hitherto  it  has  not  appeared  as  an 
independent  element  in  the  series  of  phases  that 
reason  has  assumed  in  the  world.  Whether  it  will 
do  so  hereafter,  is  a  question  that  does  not  con¬ 
cern  us  here;  for  in  history  we  have  to  do  with 
the  past. 

The  German  nation  was  characterized  by  the 
sense  of  natural  totality — an  idiosyncrasy  which 
we  may  call  heart }  “Heart”  is  that  undeveloped, 
indeterminate  totality  of  spirit,  in  reference  to 
the  will,  in  which  satisfaction  of  soul  is  attained 
in  a  correspondingly  general  and  indeterminate 
way.  Character  is  a  particular  form  of  will  and 
interest  asserting  itself ;  but  the  quality  in  ques¬ 
tion  has  no  particular  aim — riches,  honour,  or  the 
like;  in  fact  does  not  concern  itself  with  any  ob¬ 
jective  condition,  but  with  the  entire  condition 

1  The  word  Gemuth  has  no  exactly  corresponding 
term  in  English.  It  is  used  further  on  synonymously 
with  Herz,  and  the  openness  to  various  emotions  and 
impressions  which  it  implies,  may  perhaps  be  approxi¬ 
mately  rendered  by  “heart.”  Yet  it  is  but  an  awkward 
substitute. 


formal  will2 — its  purely  subjective  freedom  ex¬ 
hibits  itself  as  self-will.  To  the  disposition  thus 
designated,  every  particular  object  of  attraction 
seems  important,  for  “heart”  surrenders  itself 
entirely  to  each ;  but  as,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is 
not  interested  in  the  quality  of  such  aim  in  the 
abstract,  it  does  not  become  exclusively  ab¬ 
sorbed  in  that  aim,  so  as  to  pursue  it  with  vio¬ 
lent  and  evil  passion — does  not  go  the  length  of 
abstract  vice.  In  the  idiosyncrasy  we  term 
“heart,”  no  such  absorption  of  interest  presents 
itself ;  it  wears,  on  the  whole,  the  appearance  of 
“well-meaning.”  Character  is  its  direct  opposite. 

This  is  the  abstract  principle  innate  in  the 
German  peoples,  and  that  subjective  side  which 
they  present  to  the  objective  in  Christianity. 
“Heart”  has  no  particular  object;  in  Christian¬ 
ity  we  have  the  absolute  object — all  that  can 
engage  and  occupy  human  subjectivity.  Now  it 
is  the  desire  of  satisfaction  without  further 
definition  or  restriction,  that  is  involved  in 
“heart”;  and  it  is  exactly  that  for  which  we 
found  an  appropriate  application  in  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  Christianity.  The  indefinite  as  substance, 
in  objectivity,  is  the  purely  universal — God; 
while  the  reception  of  the  individual  will  to  a 
participation  in  His  favour  is  the  complementary 
element  in  the  Christian  concrete  unity.  The  ab¬ 
solutely  universal  is  that  which  contains  in  it  all 
determinations,  and  in  virtue  of  this  is  itself  in¬ 
determinate.  Subject  is  the  absolutely  determi¬ 
nate;  and  these  two  are  identical.3  This  was 

2  Formal  will  or  subjective  freedom  is  inclination  or 
mere  casual  liking,  and  is  opposed  to  substantial  or  ob¬ 
jective  will — also  called  objective  freedom — which  de¬ 
notes  the  principles  that  form  the  basis  of  society,  and 
that  have  been  spontaneously  adopted  by  particular  na¬ 
tions  or  by  mankind  generally.  The  latter  as  well  as  the 
former  may  lay  claim  to  being  a  manifestation  of  hu¬ 
man  will.  For  however  rigid  the  restraints  which  those 
principles  impose  on  individuals,  they  are  the  result  of 
no  extraneous  compulsion  brought  to  bear  on  the  com¬ 
munity  at  large,  and  are  recognized  as  rightfully  author¬ 
itative  even  by  the  individuals  whose  physical  comfort 
or  relative  affections  they  most  painfully  contravene. 
Unquestioning  homage  to  unreasonable  despotism,  and 
the  severe  rubrics  of  religious  penance,  can  be  traced  to 
no  natural  necessity  or  stimulus  ab  extra.  The  principles 
in  which  these  originate,  may  rather  be  called  the  settled 
and  supreme  determination  of  the  community  that  recog¬ 
nizes  them.  The  term  “objective  will”  seems  therefore 
not  unfitly  used  to  describe  the  psychological  phenomena 
in  question.  The  term  “ substantial  will”  (as  opposed  to 
“formal  will”),  denoting  the  same  phenomena,  needs  no 
defence  or  explanation.  The  third  term,  “objective  free¬ 
dom,”  used  synonymously  with  the  two  preceding,  is 
justified  on  the  ground  of  the  unlimited  dominion  exer¬ 
cised  by  such  principles  as  those  mentioned  above. 
“Deus  solus  liber”  (See  remarks  to  this  effect  on  page 
169  of  the  Introduction,  and  elsewhere.) 

3  Pure  self — pure  subjectivity  or  personality — not  on¬ 
ly  excludes  all  that  is  manifestly  objective,  all  that  is 


320  PHILOSOPHY 

exhibited  above  as  the  material  content  in  Chris¬ 
tianity;  here  we  find  it  subjectively  as  “heart.” 
Subject  must  then  also  gain  an  objective  form, 
that  is,  be  expanded  to  an  object.  It  is  necessary 
that  for  the  indefinite  susceptibility  which  we 
designate  “heart,”  the  absolute  also  should  as¬ 
sume  the  form  of  an  object,  in  order  that  man 
on  his  part  may  attain  a  consciousness  of  his 
unity  with  that  object.  But  this  recognition  of 
the  absolute  requires  the  purification  of  man’s 
subjectivity — requires  it  to  become  a  real,  con¬ 
crete  self,  a  sharer  in  general  interests  as  a  deni¬ 
zen  of  the  world  at  large,  and  that  it  should  act 
in  accordance  with  large  and  liberal  aims,  recog¬ 
nize  law,  and  find  satisfaction  in  it.  Thus  we  find 
here  two  principles  corresponding  the  one  with 
the  other,  and  recognize  the  adaptation  of  the 
German  peoples  to  be,  as  we  stated  above,  the 
bearers  of  the  higher  principle  of  spirit. 

We  advance  then  to  the  consideration  of  the 
German  principle  in  its  primary  phase  of  exist¬ 
ence,  i.e.y  the  earliest  historical  condition  of  the 
German  nations.  Their  quality  of  “heart”  is  in  its 
first  appearance  quite  abstract,  undeveloped  and 
destitute  of  any  particular  object;  for  substan¬ 
tial  aims  are  not  involved  in  “heart”  itself.  Where 
this  susceptibility  stands  alone,  it  appears  as  a 
want  of  character — mere  inanity.  “Heart”  as 
purely  abstract,  is  dulness;  thus  we  see  in  the 
original  condition  of  the  Germans  a  barbarian 
dulness,  mental  confusion  and  vagueness.  Of  the 
religion  of  the  Germans  we  know  little.  The 
Druids  belonged  to  Gaul  and  were  extirpated  by 
the  Romans.  There  was  indeed,  a  peculiar  north¬ 
ern  mythology ;  but  how  slight  ahold  the  religion 
of  the  Germans  had  upon  their  hearts  has  been 
already  remarked,  andit  is  also  evident  from  the 
fact  that  the  Germans  were  easily  converted  to 
Christianity.  The  Saxons,  it  is  true,  offered  con¬ 
siderable  resistance  to  Charlemagne;  but  this 
was  directed,  not  so  much  against  the  religion 
he  brought  with  him,  as  against  oppression  it¬ 
self.  Their  religion  had  no  profundity;  and  the 
same  may  be  said  of  their  ideas  of  law.  Murder 
was  not  regarded  and  punished  as  a  crime:  it 

evidently  not-self,  but  also  abstracts  from  any  peculiar 
conditions  that  may  temporarily  adhere  to  it,  e.g.,  youth 
or  age,  riches  or  poverty,  a  present  or  a  future  state. 
Thus  though  it  seems,  prima  facie,  a  fixed  point  or  atom, 
it  is  absolutely  unlimited.  By  loss  or  degradation  of 
bodily  and  mental  faculties,  it  is  possible  to  conceive 
one’s  self  degraded  to  a  position  which  it  would  be  im¬ 
possible  to  distinguish  from  that  which  we  attribute  to 
the  brutes,  or  by  increase  and  improvement  of  those 
faculties,  indefinitely  elevated  in  the  scale  of  being,  while 
yet  self — personal  identity — is  retained.  On  the  other 
hand,  absolute  being  in  the  Christian  concrete  view,  is 
an  infinite  self.  The  absolutely  limited  is  thus  shown  to 
be  identical  with  the  absolutely  unlimited. 


OF  HISTORY 

was  expiated  by  a  pecuniary  fine.  This  indicates 
a  deficiency  in  depth  of  sentiment,  that  absence 
of  a  power  of  abstraction  and  discrimination 
that  marks  their  peculiar  temperament,  a  tem¬ 
perament  which  leads  them  to  regard  it  only  as 
an  injury  to  the  community  when  one  of  its 
members  is  killed,  and  nothing  further.  The 
blood-revenge  of  the  Arabs  is  based  on  the  feel¬ 
ing  that  the  honour  of  the  family  is  injured. 
Among  the  Germans  the  community  had  no 
dominion  over  the  individual,  for  the  element  of 
freedom  is  the  first  consideration  in  their  union 
in  a  social  relationship.  The  ancient  Germans 
were  famed  for  their  love  of  freedom;  the  Ro¬ 
mans  formed  a  correct  idea  of  them  in  this  par¬ 
ticular  from  the  first.  Freedom  has  been  the 
watchword  in  Germany  down  to  the  most  recent 
times,  and  even  the  league  of  princes  under  Fred¬ 
erick  II  had  its  origin  in  the  love  of  liberty.  This 
element  of  freedom,  in  passing  over  to  a  social 
relationship,  can  establish  only  popular  commu¬ 
nities;  so  that  these  communities  constitute  the 
whole  state,  and  every  member  of  the  commu¬ 
nity,  as  such,  is  a  free  man.  Homicide  could  be 
expiated  by  a  pecuniary  mulct,  because  the  in¬ 
dividuality  of  the  free  man  was  regarded  as 
sacred,  permanently  and  inviolably,  whatever  he 
might  have  done.  The  community  or  its  presiding 
power,  with  the  assistance  of  members  of  the 
community,  delivered  judgment  in  affairs  of  pri¬ 
vate  right,  with  a  view  to  the  protection  of  per¬ 
son  and  property.  For  affairs  affecting  the  body 
politic  at  large,  for  wars  and  similar  contingen¬ 
cies,  the  whole  community  had  to  be  consulted. 
The  second  point  to  be  observed  is,  that  social 
nuclei  were  formed  by  free  confederation,  and  by 
voluntary  attachment  to  military  leaders  and 
princes.  The  connection  in  this  case  was  that  of 
fidelity;  for  fidelity  is  the  second  watchword 
of  the  Germans,  as  freedom  was  the  first.  Indi¬ 
viduals  attach  themselves  with  free  choice  to  an 
individual,  and  without  external  prompting  make 
this  relation  an  inviolable  one.  This  we  find 
neither  among  the  Greeks  nor  the  Romans.  The 
relation  of  Agamemnon  and  the  princes  who  ac¬ 
companied  him  was  not  that  of  feudal  suit  and 
service:  it  was  a  free  association  merely  for 
a  particidar  purpose — a  hegemony.  But  the  Ger¬ 
man  confederations  have  their  being  not  in  a  rela¬ 
tion  to  a  mere  external  aim  or  cause,  but  in  a 
relation  to  the  spiritual  self — the  subjective  in¬ 
most  personality.  Heart,  disposition,  the  concrete 
subjectivity  in  its  integrity,  which  does  not  at¬ 
tach  itself  to  any  abstract  bearing  of  an  object, 
but  regards  the  whole  of  it  as  a  condition  of  at¬ 
tachment — making  itself  dependent  on  the  per- 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  321 


son  and  the  cause — renders  this  relation  a  com¬ 
pound  of  fidelity  to  a  person  and  obedience  to  a 
principle. 

The  union  of  the  two  relations — of  individual 
freedom  in  the  community,  and  of  the  bond  im¬ 
plied  in  association — is  the  main  point  in  the 
formation  of  the  state.  In  this,  duties  and  rights 
are  no  longer  left  to  arbitrary  choice  but  are 
determined  as  fixed  relations ;  involving,  more¬ 
over,  the  condition  that  the  state  be  the  soul  of 
the  entire  body,  and  remain  its  sovereign,  that 
from  it  should  be  derived  particular  aims  and 
the  authorization  both  of  political  acts  and  polit¬ 
ical  agents,  the  generic  character  and  interests 
of  the  community  constituting  the  permanent 
basis  of  the  whole.  But  here  we  have  the  pecu¬ 
liarity  of  the  German  states,  that  contrary  to  the 
view  thus  presented,  social  relations  do  not  as¬ 
sume  the  character  of  general  definitions  and 
laws,  but  are  entirely  split  up  into  private  rights 
and  private  obligations.  They  perhaps  exhibit 
a  social  or  communal  mould  or  stamp,  but  noth¬ 
ing  universal;  the  laws  are  absolutely  particular, 
and  the  rights  are  privileges.  Thus  the  state 
was  a  patchwork  of  private  rights,  and  a  rational 
political  life  was  the  tardy  issue  of  wearisome 
struggles  and  convulsions. 

We  have  said,  that  the  Germans  were  pre¬ 
destined  to  be  the  bearers  of  the  Christian  prin¬ 
ciple,  and  to  carry  out  the  idea  as  the  absolutely 
rational  aim.  In  the  first  instance  we  have  only 
vague  volition,  in  the  background  of  which  lies 
the  true  and  infinite.  The  true  is  present  only  as 
an  unsolved  problem,  for  their  soul  is  not  yet 
purified.  A  long  process  is  required  to  complete 
this  purification  so  as  to  realize  concrete  spirit. 
Religion  comes  forward  with  a  challenge  to  the 
violence  of  the  passions,  and  rouses  them  to 
madness.  The  excess  of  passions  is  aggravated 
by  evil  conscience,  and  heightened  to  an  insane 
rage;  which  perhaps  would  not  have  been  the 
case,  had  that  opposition  been  absent.  We  be¬ 
hold  the  terrible  spectacle  of  the  most  fearful 
extravagance  of  passion  in  all  the  royal  houses 
of  that  period.  Clovis,  the  founder  of  the  Frank 
monarchy,  is  stained  with  the  blackest  crimes. 
Barbarous  harshness  and  cruelty  characterize 
all  the  succeeding  Merovingians ;  the  same  spec¬ 
tacle  is  repeated  in  the  Thuringian  and  other 
royal  houses.  The  Christian  principle  is  cer¬ 
tainly  the  problem  implicit  in  their  souls;  but 
these  are  primarily  still  crude.  The  will — poten¬ 
tially  true — mistakes  itself,  and  separates  itself 
from  the  true  and  proper  aim  by  particular, 
limited  aims.  Yet  it  is  in  this  struggle  with  itself 
and  contrariety  to  its  bias,  that  it  realizes  its 


wishes;  it  contends  against  the  object  which  it 
really  desires,  and  thus  accomplishes  it;  for 
implicitly,  potentially,  it  is  reconciled.  The 
spirit  of  God  lives  in  the  church ;  it  is  the  inward 
impelling  spirit.  But  it  is  in  the  world  that  spirit 
is  to  be  realized — in  a  material  not  yet  brought 
into  harmony  with  it.  Now  this  material  is  the 
subjective  will,  which  thus  has  a  contradiction 
in  itself.  On  the  religious  side,  we  often  observe 
a  change  of  this  kind:  a  man  who  has  all  his  life 
been  fighting  and  hewing  his  way — who  with  all 
vehemence  of  character  and  passion,  has  strug¬ 
gled  and  revelled  in  secular  occupations — on  a 
sudden  repudiates  it  all,  to  betake  himself  to  re¬ 
ligious  seclusion.  But  in  the  world,  secular  busi¬ 
ness  cannot  be  thus  repudiated;  it  demands  ac¬ 
complishment,  and  ultimately  the  discovery  is 
made  that  spirit  finds  the  goal  of  its  struggle 
and  its  harmonization  in  that  very  sphere  which 
it  made  the  object  of  its  resistance — it  finds 
that  secular  pursuits  are  a  spiritual  occupation. 

We  thus  observe  that  individuals  and  peoples 
regard  that  which  is  their  misfortune  as  their 
greatest  happiness  and,  conversely,  struggle 
against  their  happiness  as  their  greatest  misery. 
La  verite,  en  la  repoussant,  on  Vembrasse. 
Europe  comes  to  the  truth  while,  and  to  the  de¬ 
gree  in  which,  she  has  repulsed  it.  It  is  in  the 
agitation  thus  occasioned  that  providence  espe¬ 
cially  exercises  its  sovereignty;  realizing  its 
absolute  aim — its  honour — as  the  result  of  un¬ 
happiness,  sorrow,  private  aims  and  the  uncon¬ 
scious  will  of  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

While,  therefore,  in  the  West  this  long  process 
in  the  world’s  history — necessary  to  that  puri¬ 
fication  by  which  spirit  in  the  concrete  is  real¬ 
ized — is  commencing,  the  purification  requisite 
for  developing  spirit  in  the  abstract  which  we 
observe  carried  on  contemporaneously  in  the 
East  is  more  quickly  accomplished.  The  latter 
does  not  need  a  long  process,  and  we  see  it  pro¬ 
duced  rapidly,  even  suddenly,  in  the  first  half 
of  the  seventh  century,  in  Mohammedanism. 

Chapter  2.  Mohammedanism 
On  the  one  hand,  we  see  the  European  world 
forming  itself  anew — the  nations  taking  firm 
root  there,  to  produce  a  world  of  free  reality  ex¬ 
panded  and  developed  in  every  direction.  We 
behold  them  beginning  their  work  by  bringing 
all  social  relations  under  the  form  of  particu¬ 
larity — with  dull  and  narrow  intelligence  split¬ 
ting  that  which  in  its  nature  is  generic  and  nor¬ 
mal,  into  a  multitude  of  chance  contingencies; 
rendering  that  which  ought  to  be  simple  princi¬ 
ple  and  law  a  tangled  web  of  convention.  In 


322  PHILOSOPHY 

short,  while  the  West  began  to  shelter  itself  in 
a  political  edifice  of  chance,  entanglement  and 
particularity,  the  very  opposite  direction  neces¬ 
sarily  made  its  appearance  in  the  world,  to  pro¬ 
duce  the  balance  of  the  totality  of  spiritual  mani¬ 
festation.  This  took  place  in  the  revolution  of 
the  East,  which  destroyed  all  particularity  and 
dependence,  and  perfectly  cleared  up  and  puri¬ 
fied  the  soul  and  disposition;  making  the  ab¬ 
stract  One  the  absolute  object  of  attention  and 
devotion,  and  to  the  same  extent,  pure  subjec¬ 
tive  consciousness — the  knowledge  of  this  One 
alone — the  only  aim  of  reality;  making  the  un¬ 
conditioned  the  condition  of  existence . 

We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the 
nature  of  the  Oriental  principle,  and  seen  that 
its  highest  being  is  only  negative;  that  with  it 
the  positive  imports  an  abandonment  to  mere 
nature,  the  enslavement  of  spirit  to  the  world 
of  realities.  Only  among  the  Jews  have  we  ob¬ 
served  the  principle  of  pure  unity  elevated  to  a 
thought;  for  only  among  them  was  adoration 
paid  to  the  One,  as  an  object  of  thought.  This 
unity  then  remained,  when  the  purification  of 
the  mind  to  the  conception  of  abstract  spirit  had 
been  accomplished;  but  it  was  freed  from  the 
particularity  by  which  the  worship  of  Jehovah 
had  been  hampered.  Jehovah  was  only  the  God 
of  that  one  people — the  God  of  Abraham,  of 
Isaac  and  Jacob:  only  with  the  Jews  had  this 
God  made  a  covenant ;  only  to  this  people  had 
he  revealed  himself.  That  speciality  of  relation 
was  done  away  with  in  Mohammedanism.  In 
this  spiritual  universality,  in  this  unlimited  and 
indefinite  purity  and  simplicity  of  conception, 
human  personality  has  no  other  aim  than  the 
realization  of  this  universality  and  simplicity. 
Allah  has  not  the  affirmative,  limited  aim  of  the 
Judaic  God.  The  worship  of  the  One  is  the  only 
final  aim  of  Mohammedanism,  and  subjectivity 
has  this  worship  for  the  sole  occupation  of  its 
activity,  combined  with  the  design  to  subjugate 
secular  existence  to  the  One.  This  One  has  in¬ 
deed  the  quality  of  spirit;  yet  because  subjec¬ 
tivity  suffers  itself  to  be  absorbed  in  the  object, 
this  One  is  deprived  of  every  concrete  predi¬ 
cate;  so  that  neither  does  subjectivity  become 
on  its  part  spiritually  free,  nor  on  the  other  hand 
is  the  object  of  its  veneration  concrete.  But  Mo¬ 
hammedanism  is  not  the  Hindu,  not  the  monas¬ 
tic  immersion  in  the  absolute.  Subjectivity  is 
here  living  and  unlimited — an  energy  which  en¬ 
ters  into  secular  life  with  a  purely  negative  pur¬ 
pose,  and  busies  itself  and  interferes  with  the 
world,  only  in  such  a  way  as  shall  promote  the 
pure  adoration  of  the  One.  The  object  of  Mo¬ 


OF  HISTORY 

hammedan  worship  is  purely  intellectual;  no 
image,  no  representation  of  Allah  is  tolerated. 
Mohammed  is  a  prophet  but  still  man — not  ele¬ 
vated  above  human  weaknesses.  The  leading 
features  of  Mohammedanism  involve  this,  that 
in  actual  existence  nothing  can  become  fixed, 
but  that  everything  is  destined  to  expand  itself 
in  activity  and  life  in  the  boundless  amplitude 
of  the  world,  so  that  the  worship  of  the  One  re¬ 
mains  the  only  bond  by  which  the  whole  is  capa¬ 
ble  of  uniting.  In  this  expansion,  this  active 
energy,  all  limits,  all  national  and  caste  distinc¬ 
tions  vanish;  no  particular  race,  political  claim 
of  birth  or  possession  is  regarded — only  7nan  as 
a  believer.  To  adore  the  One,  to  believe  in  him, 
to  fast — to  remove  the  sense  of  speciality  and 
consequent  separation  from  the  infinite,  arising 
from  corporeal  limitation — and  to  give  alms — 
that  is,  to  get  rid  of  particular  private  possession 
— these  are  the  essence  of  Mohammedan  injunc¬ 
tions;  but  the  highest  merit  is  to  die  for  the 
faith.  He  who  perishes  for  it  in  battle  is  sure  of 
Paradise. 

The  Mohammedan  religion  originated  among 
the  Arabs.  Here  spirit  exists  in  its  simplest  form, 
and  the  sense  of  the  formless  has  its  especial 
abode;  for  in  their  deserts  nothing  can  be 
brought  into  a  firm  consistent  shape.  The  flight 
of  Mohammed  from  Mecca  in  the  year  622  be¬ 
gins  the  Moslem  era.  Even  during  his  life,  and 
under  his  own  leadership,  but  especially  by  fol¬ 
lowing  up  his  designs  after  his  death  under  the 
guidance  of  his  successors,  the  Arabs  achieved 
their  vast  conquests.  They  first  came  down  upon 
Syria  and  conquered  its  capital  Damascus  in  the 
year  634.  They  then  passed  the  Euphrates  and 
Tigris  and  turned  their  arms  against  Persia, 
which  soon  submitted  to  them.  In  the  west  they 
conquered  Egypt,  northern  Africa  and  Spain, 
and  pressed  into  southern  France  as  far  as  the 
Loire,  where  they  were  defeated  by  Charles 
Martel  near  Tours,  in  732.  Thus  the  dominion 
of  the  Arabs  extended  itself  in  the  west.  In  the 
east  they  reduced  successively  Persia,  as  already 
stated,  Samarkand,  and  the  southwestern  part 
of  Asia  Minor.  These  conquests,  as  also  the 
spread  of  their  religion,  took  place  with  extra¬ 
ordinary  rapidity.  Whoever  became  a  convert  to 
Islam  gained  a  perfect  equality  of  rights  with 
all  Mussulmans.  Those  who  rejected  it,  were, 
during  the  earliest  period,  slaughtered.  Subse¬ 
quently,  however,  the  Arabs  behaved  more  leni¬ 
ently  to  the  conquered;  so  that,  if  they  were 
unwilling  to  go  over  to  Islam,  they  were  only 
required  to  pay  an  annual  poll-tax.  The  towns 
that  immediately  submitted,  were  obliged  to  pay 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  323 


the  victor  a  tithe  of  all  their  possessions ;  those 
which  had  to  be  captured,  a  fifth. 

Abstraction  swayed  the  minds  of  the  Moham¬ 
medans.  Their  object  was  to  establish  an  ab¬ 
stract  worship,  and  they  struggled  for  its  ac¬ 
complishment  with  the  greatest  enthusiasm. 
This  enthusiasm  was  fanaticism,  that  is,  an  en¬ 
thusiasm  for  something  abstract — for  an  ab¬ 
stract  thought  which  sustains  a  negative  position 
towards  the  established  order  of  things.  It  is 
the  essence  of  fanaticism  to  bear  only  a  desolat¬ 
ing  destructive  relation  to  the  concrete;  but  that 
of  Mohammedanism  was,  at  the  same  time, 
capable  of  the  greatest  elevation — an  elevation 
free  from  all  petty  interests  and  united  with  all 
the  virtues  that  appertain  to  magnanimity  and 
valour.  La  religion  et  la  terrenr  was  the  principle 
in  this  case,  as  with  Robespierre,  la  liberte  et  la 
terreur.  But  real  life  is  nevertheless  concrete 
and  introduces  particular  aims;  conquest  leads 
to  sovereignty  and  wealth,  to  the  conferring  of 
prerogatives  on  a  dynastic  family,  and  to  a  union 
of  individuals.  But  all  this  is  only  contingent  and 
built  on  sand;  it  is  to-day,  and  to-morrow  is  not. 
With  all  the  passionate  interest  he  shows,  the 
Mohammedan  is  really  indifferent  to  this  social 
fabric,  and  rushes  on  in  the  ceaseless  whirl  of 
fortune.  In  its  spread  Mohammedanism  founded 
many  kingdoms  and  dynasties.  On  this  bound¬ 
less  sea  there  is  a  continual  onward  movement ; 
nothing  abides  firm.  Whatever  curls  up  into  a 
form  remains  all  the  while  transparent,  and  in 
that  very  instant  glides  away.  Those  dynasties 
were  destitute  of  the  bond  of  an  organic  firm¬ 
ness:  the  kingdoms,  therefore,  did  nothing  but 
degenerate ;  the  individuals  that  composed  them 
simply  vanished.  Where,  however,  a  noble  soul 
makes  itself  prominent — like  a  billow  in  the 
surging  of  the  sea — it  manifests  itself  in  a  maj¬ 
esty  of  freedom,  such  that  nothing  more  noble, 
more  generous,  more  valiant,  more  devoted  was 
ever  witnessed.  The  particular  determinate  ob¬ 
ject  which  the  individual  embraces  is  grasped  by 
him  entirely — with  the  whole  soul.  While  Eu¬ 
ropeans  are  involved  in  a  multitude  of  relations, 
and  form,  so  to  speak,  “a  bundle”  of  them — in 
Mohammedanism  the  individual  is  one  passion 
and  that  alone  ;he  is  superlatively  cruel,  cunning, 
bold,  or  generous.  Where  the  sentiment  of  love 
exists,  there  is  an  equal  abandon — love  the  most 
fervid.  The  ruler  who  loves  the  slave,  glorifies 
the  object  of  his  love  by  laying  at  his  feet  all 
his  magnificence,  power  and  honour — forgetting 
sceptre  and  throne  for  him;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  he  will  sacrifice  him  just  as  recklessly.  This 
reckless  fervour  shows  itself  also  in  the  glowing 


warmth  of  the  Arab  and  Saracen  poetry.  That 
glow  is  the  perfect  freedom  of  fancy  from  every 
fetter — an  absorption  in  the  life  of  its  object 
and  the  sentiment  it  inspires,  so  that  selfishness 
and  egotism  are  utterly  banished. 

Never  has  enthusiasm,  as  such,  performed 
greater  deeds.  Individuals  may  be  enthusiastic 
for  what  is  noble  and  exalted  in  various  particu¬ 
lar  forms.  The  enthusiasm  of  a  people  for  its  in¬ 
dependence  has  also  a  definite  aim.  But  abstract 
and  therefore  all-comprehensive  enthusiasm — 
restrained  by  nothing,  finding  its  limits  nowhere, 
and  absolutely  indifferent  to  all  beside — is  that 
of  the  Mohammedan  East. 

Proportioned  to  the  rapidity  of  the  Arab  con¬ 
quests  was  the  speed  with  which  the  arts  and 
sciences  attained  among  them  their  highest 
bloom.  At  first  we  see  the  conquerors  destroying 
everything  connected  with  art  and  science.  Omar 
is  said  to  have  caused  the  destruction  of  the  no¬ 
ble  Alexandrian  library.  “These  books,”  said  he, 
“either  contain  what  is  in  the  Koran,  or  some¬ 
thing  else:  in  either  case  they  are  superfluous.”  5 
But  soon  afterwards  the  Arabs  became  zealous 
in  promoting  the  arts  and  spreading  them  every¬ 
where.  Their  empire  reached  the  summit  of  its 
glory  under  the  Caliphs  Al-Mansur  and  Harun 
al-Rashid.  Large  cities  arose  in  all  parts  of  the 
empire,  where  commerce  and  manufactures 
flourished,  splendid  palaces  were  built,  and 
schools  created.  The  learned  men  of  the  empire 
assembled  at  the  caliph’s  court,  which  not  mere¬ 
ly  shone  outwardly  with  the  pomp  of  the  cost¬ 
liest  jewels,  furniture  and  palaces,  but  was  re¬ 
splendent  with  the  glory  of  poetry  and  all  the 
sciences.  At  first  the  caliphs  still  maintained  en¬ 
tire  that  simplicity  and  plainness  which  char¬ 
acterized  the  Arabs  of  the  desert  (the  Caliph 
Abu-Bekr  is  particularly  famous  in  this  re¬ 
spect),  and  which  acknowledged  no  distinction 
of  station  and  culture.  The  meanest  Saracen,  the 
most  insignificant  old  woman  approached  the 
caliph  as  his  equals.  Unreflecting  naivete  does 
not  stand  in  need  of  culture;  and  in  virtue  of 
the  freedom  of  his  spirit,  each  one  sustains  a  re¬ 
lation  of  equality  to  the  ruler. 

The  great  empire  of  the  caliphs  did  not  last 
long:  for  on  the  basis  presented  by  universality 
nothing  is  firm.  The  great  Arabian  empire  fell 
about  the  same  time  as  that  of  the  Franks: 
thrones  were  demolished  by  slaves  and  by  fresh 
invading  hordes — theSeljuks  and  Mongols — and 

1  “If  these  writings  of  the  Greeks  agree  with  the  book 
of  God,  they  are  useless  and  need  not  be  preserved;  if 
they  disagree,  they  are  pernicious  and  ought  to  be  de¬ 
stroyed.” — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


324 

new  kingdoms  founded,  new  dynasties  raised  to 
the  throne.  The  Osman  race  at  last  succeeded  in 
establishing  a  firm  dominion,  by  forming  for 
themselves  a  firm  centre  in  the  Janizaries. 
Fanaticism  having  cooled  down,  no  moral  prin¬ 
ciple  remained  in  men’s  souls.  In  the  struggle 
with  the  Saracens,  European  valour  had  idealized 
itself  to  a  fair  and  noble  chivalry.  Science  and 
knowledge,  especially  that  of  philosophy,  came 
from  the  Arabs  into  the  West.  A  noble  poetry 
and  free  imagination  were  kindled  among  the 
Germans  by  the  East — a  fact  which  directed 
Goethe’s  attention  to  the  Orient  and  occasioned 
the  composition  of  a  string  of  lyric  pearls,  in  his 
W  estostlicher  Diwan,  which  in  warmth  and  fe¬ 
licity  of  fancy  cannot  be  surpassed.  But  the 
East  itself,  when  by  degrees  enthusiasm  had 
vanished,  sank  into  the  grossest  vice.  The  most 
hideous  passions  became  dominant,  and  as  sen¬ 
sual  enjoyment  was  sanctioned  in  the  first  form 
which  Mohammedan  doctrine  assumed,  and  was 
exhibited  as  a  reward  of  the  faithful  in  Paradise, 
it  took  the  place  of  fanaticism.  At  present, 
driven  back  into  its  Asiatic  and  African  quar¬ 
ters,  and  tolerated  only  in  one  corner  of  Europe 
through  the  jealousy  of  Christian  powers,  Islam 
has  long  vanished  from  the  stage  of  history  at 
large,  and  has  retreated  into  Oriental  ease  and 
repose. 

Chapter  3.  The  Empire  of  Charlemagne 
The  empire  of  the  Franks,  as  already  stated, 
was  founded  by  Clovis.  After  his  death,  it  was 
divided  among  his  sons.  Subsequently,  after 
many  struggles  and  the  employment  of  treach¬ 
ery,  assassination  and  violence,  it  was  again 
united,  and  once  more  divided.  Internally  the 
power  of  the  kings  was  very  much  increased,  by 
their  having  become  princes  in  conquered  lands. 
These  were  indeed  parcelled  out  among  the 
Frank  freemen;  but  very  considerable  perma¬ 
nent  revenues  accrued  to  the  king,  together 
with  what  had  belonged  to  the  emperors,  and 
the  spoils  of  confiscation.  These  therefore  the 
king  bestowed  as  personal,  i.e.,  not  heritable, 
beneficia,  on  his  warriors,  who  in  receiving  them 
entered  into  a  personal  obligation  to  him,  be¬ 
came  his  vassals,  and  formed  his  feudal  array. 
The  very  opulent  bishops  were  united  with  them 
in  constituting  the  king’s  council,  which  how¬ 
ever  did  not  circumscribe  the  royal  authority. 
At  the  head  of  the  feudal  array  was  the  major 
domus.  These  majores  domus  soon  assumed  the 
entire  power  and  threw  the  royal  authority  into 
the  shade,  while  the  kings  sank  into  a  torpid 
condition  and  became  mere  puppets.  From  the 


former  sprang  the  dynasty  of  the  Carlovingians. 
Pepin  le  Bref,  the  son  of  Charles  Martel,  was 
in  the  year  752  raised  to  the  dignity  of  King  of 
the  Franks.  Pope  Zacharias  released  the  Franks 
from  their  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  still  living 
Childeric  III — the  last  of  the  Merovingians — 
who  received  the  tonsure,  i.e.,  became  a  monk, 
and  was  thus  deprived  of  the  royal  distinction 
of  long  hair.  The  last  of  the  Merovingians  were 
utter  weaklings,  who  contented  themselves  with 
the  name  of  royalty,  and  gave  themselves  up 
almost  entirely  to  luxury — a  phenomenon  that 
is  quite  common  in  the  dynasties  of  the  east  and 
is  also  met  with  again  among  the  last  of  the 
Carlovingians.  The  majores  domus ,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  were  in  the  very  vigour  of  ascendant  for¬ 
tunes,  and  were  in  such  close  alliance  with  the 
feudal  nobility,  that  it  became  easy  for  them 
ultimately  to  secure  the  throne. 

The  Popes  were  most  severely  pressed  by  the 
Lombard  kings  and  sought  protection  from  the 
Franks.  Out  of  gratitude  Pepin  undertook  to 
defend  Stephen  II.  He  led  an  army  twice  across 
the  Alps  and  twice  defeated  the  Lombards.  His 
victories  gave  splendour  to  his  newly  established 
throne,  and  entailed  a  considerable  heritage  on 
the  Chair  of  St.  Peter.  In  a.d.  800  the  son  of 
Pepin — Charlemagne — was  crowned  Emperor 
by  the  Pope,  and  hence  originated  the  firm  union 
of  the  Carlovingians  with  the  Papal  See.  For  the 
Roman  Empire  continued  to  enjoy  among  the 
barbarians  the  prestige  of  a  great  power,  and 
was  ever  regarded  by  them  as  the  centre  from 
which  civil  dignities,  religion,  laws  and  all 
branches  of  knowledge — beginning  with  written 
characters  themselves — flowed  to  them.  Charles 
Martel,  after  he  had  delivered  Europe  from 
Saracen  domination,  was,  himself  and  his  succes¬ 
sors,  dignified  with  the  title  of  “Patrician”  by 
the  people  and  senate  of  Rome;  but  Charle¬ 
magne  was  crowned  Emperor,  and  that  by  the 
Pope  himself. 

There  were  now,  therefore,  two  empires,  and 
in  them  the  Christian  confession  was  gradually 
divided  into  two  churches,  the  Greek  and  the 
Roman.  The  Roman  Emperor  was  the  born  de¬ 
fender  of  the  Roman  Church,  and  this  position 
of  the  Emperor  towards  the  Pope  seemed  to 
declare  that  the  Frank  sovereignty  was  only  a 
continuation  of  the  Roman  Empire. 

The  empire  of  Charlemagne  had  a  very  con¬ 
siderable  extent.  Franconia  proper  stretched 
from  the  Rhine  to  the  Loire.  Aquitania,  south 
of  the  Loire,  was  in  768 — the  year  of  Pepin’s 
death — entirely  subjugated.  The  Frank  Empire 
also  included  Burgundy,  Alemannia  (southern 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  325 


Germany  between  the  Lech,  the  Maine,  and  the 
Rhine),  Thuringia,  which  extended  to  the  Saale, 
and  Bavaria.  Charlemagne  likewise  conquered 
the  Saxons,  who  dwelt  between  the  Rhine  and 
the  Weser,  and  put  an  end  to  the  Lombard  do¬ 
minion,  so  that  he  became  master  of  upper  and 
central  Italy. 

This  great  empire  Charlemagne  formed  into 
a  systematically  organized  state,  and  gave  the 
Frank  dominion  settled  institutions  adapted  to 
impart  to  it  strength  and  consistency.  This  must 
however  not  be  understood,  as  if  he  first  intro¬ 
duced  the  constitution  of  his  empire  in  its 
whole  extent,  but  as  implying  that  institutions 
partly  already  in  existence,  were  developed  un¬ 
der  his  guidance,  and  attained  a  more  decided 
and  unobstructed  efficiency.  The  king  stood  at 
the  head  of  the  officers  of  the  empire,  and  the 
principle  of  hereditary  monarchy  was  already 
recognized.  The  king  was  likewise  master  of  the 
armed  force,  as  also  the  largest  landed  proprie¬ 
tor,  while  the  supreme  judicial  power  was  equal¬ 
ly  in  his  hands.  The  military  constitution  was 
based  on  the  u  arriere-ban.11  Every  freeman  was 
bound  to  arm  for  the  defence  of  the  realm, 
and  had  to  provide  for  his  support  in  the  held 
for  a  certain  time.  This  militia  (as  it  would  now 
be  called)  was  under  the  command  of  counts 
and  margraves,  which  latter  presided  over  large 
districts  on  the  borders  of  the  empire — the 
'‘Marches.”  According  to  the  general  partition 
of  the  country,  it  was  divided  into  provinces  [or 
counties]  over  each  of  which  a  count  presided. 
Over  them  again,  under  the  later  Carlovingians, 
were  dukes,  whose  seats  were  large  cities,  such 
as  Cologne,  Ratisbon,  and  the  like.  Their  office 
gave  occasion  to  the  division  of  the  country  into 
duchies:  thus  there  was  a  Duchy  of  Alsatia, 
Lorraine,  Frisia,  Thuringia, Rhaetia.  These  dukes 
were  appointed  by  the  Emperor.  Peoples  that 
had  retained  their  hereditary  princes  after  their 
subjugation,  lost  this  privilege  and  received 
dukes,  when  they  revolted;  this  was  the  case 
with  Alemannia,  Thuringia,  Bavaria,  and  Sax¬ 
ony.  But  there  was  also  a  kind  of  standing  army 
for  readier  use.  The  vassals  of  the  Emperor, 
namely,  had  the  enjoyment  of  estates  on  the 
condition  of  performing  military  service,  when¬ 
ever  commanded.  And  with  a  view  to  maintain 
these  arrangements,  commissioners  {mis si)  were 
sent  out  by  the  Emperor,  to  observe  and  report 
concerning  the  affairs  of  the  empire,  and  to  in¬ 
quire  into  the  state  of  judicial  administration 
and  inspect  the  royal  estates. 

Not  less  remarkable  is  the  management  of 
the  revenues  of  the  state.  There  were  no  direct 


taxes  and  few  tolls  on  rivers  and  roads,  of  which 
several  were  farmed  out  to  the  higher  officers  of 
the  empire.  Into  the  treasury  flowed  on  the  one 
hand  judicial  fines,  on  the  other  hand  the  pecu¬ 
niary  satisfactions  made  for  not  serving  in  the 
army  at  the  Emperor’s  summons.  Those  who  en¬ 
joyed  beneficia ,  lost  them  on  neglecting  this 
duty.  The  chief  revenue  was  derived  from  the 
crown-lands,  of  which  the  Emperor  had  a  great 
number,  on  which  royal  palaces  were  erected. 
It  had  been  long  the  custom  for  the  kings  to 
make  progresses  through  the  chief  provinces, 
and  to  remain  for  a  time  in  each  palatinate;  the 
due  preparations  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
court  having  been  already  made  by  marshals, 
chamberlains,  etc. 

As  regards  the  administration  of  justice ,  crim¬ 
inal  causes  and  those  which  concern  real  prop¬ 
erty  were  tried  before  the  communal  assemblies 
under  the  presidency  of  a  count.  Those  of  less 
importance  were  decided  by  at  least  seven  free 
men,  an  elective  bench  of  magistrates,  under 
the  presidency  of  the  Centgraves.  The  supreme 
jurisdiction  belonged  to  the  royal  tribunals,  over 
which  the  king  presided  in  his  palace:  to  these 
the  feudatories,  spiritual  and  temporal,  were 
amenable.  The  royal  commissioners  mentioned 
above  gave  especial  attention  in  their  inquisi¬ 
torial  visits  to  the  judicial  administration,  heard 
all  complaints,  and  punished  injustice.  A  spirit¬ 
ual  and  a  temporal  envoy  had  to  go  their  circuit 
four  times  a  year. 

In  Charlemagne’s  time  the  ecclesiastical  body 
had  already  acquired  great  weight.  The  bishops 
presided  over  great  cathedral  establishments, 
with  which  were  also  connected  seminaries  and 
scholastic  institutions.  For  Charlemagne  en¬ 
deavoured  to  restore  science,  then  almost  extinct, 
by  promoting  the  foundation  of  schools  in  towns 
and  villages.  Pious  souls  believed  that  they  were 
doing  a  good  work  and  earning  salvation  by 
making  presents  to  the  Church;  in  this  way  the 
most  savage  and  barbarous  monarchs  sought  to 
atone  for  their  crimes.  Private  persons  most 
commonly  made  their  offerings  in  the  form  of  a 
bequest  of  their  entire  estate  to  religious  houses, 
stipulating  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  usufruct 
only  for  life  or  for  a  specified  time.  But  it  often 
happened  that,  on  the  death  of  a  bishop  or  ab¬ 
bot,  the  temporal  magnates  and  their  retainers 
invaded  the  possessions  of  the  clergy,  and  fed 
and  feasted  there  till  all  was  consumed;  for  re¬ 
ligion  had  not  yet  such  an  authority  over  men’s 
minds  as  to  be  able  to  bridle  the  rapacity  of  the 
powerful.  The  clergy  were  obliged  to  appoint 
stewards  and  bailiffs  to  manage  their  estates; 


326  PHILOSOPHY 

besides  this,  guardians  had  charge  of  all  their 
secular  concerns,  led  their  men-at-arms  into  the 
field,  and  gradually  obtained  from  the  king  terri¬ 
torial  jurisdiction,  when  the  ecclesiastics  had 
secured  the  privilege  of  being  amenable  only  to 
their  own  tribunals,  and  enjoyed  immunity  from 
the  authority  of  the  royal  officers  of  justice  (the 
counts).  This  involved  an  important  step  in  the 
change  of  political  relations,  inasmuch  as  the 
ecclesiastical  domains  assumed  more  and  more 
the  aspect  of  independent  provinces  enjoying  a 
freedom  surpassing  anything  to  which  those  of 
secular  princes  had  yet  made  pretensions.  More¬ 
over  the  clergy  contrived  subsequently  to  free 
themselves  from  the  burdens  of  the  state,  and 
opened  the  churches  and  monasteries  as  asy¬ 
lums — that  is,  inviolable  sanctuaries  for  all  of¬ 
fenders.  This  institution  was  on  the  one  hand 
very  beneficial  as  a  protection  in  cases  of  vio¬ 
lence  and  oppression;  but  it  was  perverted  on 
the  other  hand  into  a  means  of  impunity  for  the 
grossest  crimes.  In  Charlemagne’s  time,  the  law 
could  still  demand  from  conventual  authorities 
the  surrender  of  offenders.  The  bishops  were 
tried  by  a  judicial  bench  consisting  of  bishops; 
as  vassals  they  were  properly  subject  to  the 
royal  tribunal.  Afterwards  the  monastic  estab¬ 
lishments  sought  to  free  themselves  from  epis¬ 
copal  jurisdiction  also:  and  thus  they  made 
themselves  independent  even  of  the  Church. 
The  bishops  were  chosen  by  the  clergy  and  the 
religious  communities  at  large;  but  as  they  were 
also  vassals  of  the  sovereign,  their  feudal  dig¬ 
nity  had  to  be  conferred  by  him.  The  contin¬ 
gency  of  a  contest  was  avoided  by  the  obliga¬ 
tion  to  choose  a  person  approved  of  by  the  king. 

The  imperial  tribunals  were  held  in  the  palace 
where  the  Emperor  resided.  The  sovereign  him¬ 
self  presided  in  them,  and  the  magnates  of  the 
imperial  court  constituted  with  him  the  supreme 
judicial  body.  The  deliberations  of  the  imperial 
council  on  the  affairs  of  the  empire  did  not  take 
place  at  appointed  times,  but  as  occasions  of¬ 
fered,  at  military  reviews  in  the  spring,  at  ec¬ 
clesiastical  councils  and  on  court-days.  It  was 
especially  these  court-days,  to  which  the  feudal 
nobles  were  invited — when  the  king  held  his 
court  in  a  particular  province,  generally  on  the 
Rhine,  the  centre  of  the  Frank  Empire — that 
gave  occasion  to  the  deliberations  in  question. 
Custom  required  the  sovereign  to  assemble 
twice  a  year  a  select  body  of  the  higher  temporal 
and  ecclesiastical  functionaries, but  here  also  the 
king  had  decisive  power.  These  conventions  are 
therefore  of  a  different  character  from  the  im¬ 
perial  diets  of  later  times,  in  which  the  nobles 


OF  HISTORY 

assume  a  more  independent  position. 

Such  was  the  state  of  the  Frank  Empire — that 
first  consolidation  of  Christianity  into  a  political 
form  proceeding  from  itself,  the  Roman  Empire 
having  been  swallowed  up  by  Christianity.  The 
constitution  just  described  looks  excellent;  it 
introduced  a  firm  military  organization  and  pro¬ 
vided  for  the  administration  of  justice  within 
the  empire.  Yet  after  Charlemagne’s  death  it 
proved  itself  utterly  powerless — externally  de¬ 
fenceless  against  the  invasions  of  the  Normans, 
Hungarians,  and  Arabs,  and  internally  inefficient 
in  resisting  lawlessness,  spoliation,  and  oppres¬ 
sion  of  every  kind.  Thus  we  see,  side  by  side 
with  an  excellent  constitution,  the  most  deplor¬ 
able  condition  of  things,  and  therefore  confu¬ 
sion  in  all  directions.  Such  political  edifices 
need,  for  the  very  reason  that  they  originate 
suddenly,  the  additional  strengthening  afforded 
by  negativity  evolved  within  themselves:  they 
need  reactions  in  every  form,  such  as  manifest 
themselves  in  the  following  period. 

Section  II 

THE  MIDDLE  AGES 

While  the  first  period  of  the  German  world 
ends  brilliantly  with  a  mighty  empire,  the  sec¬ 
ond  is  commenced  by  the  reaction  resulting 
from  the  antithesis  occasioned  by  that  infinite 
falsehood  which  rules  the  destinies  of  the  Mid¬ 
dle  Ages  and  constitutes  their  life  and  spirit. 
This  reaction  is,  first,  that  of  the  particular  na¬ 
tionalities  against  the  universal  sovereignty  of 
the  Frank  Empire — manifesting  itself  in  the 
splitting  up  of  that  great  empire.  The  second  re¬ 
action  is  that  of  individuals  against  legal  au¬ 
thority  and  the  executive  power,  against  subor¬ 
dination,  and  the  military  and  judicial  arrange¬ 
ments  of  the  constitution.  This  produced  the 
isolation  and  therefore  defencelessness  of  indi¬ 
viduals.  The  universality  of  the  power  of  the 
state  disappeared  through  this  reaction:  indi¬ 
viduals  sought  protection  with  the  powerful, 
and  the  latter  became  oppressors.  Thus  was 
gradually  introduced  a  condition  of  universal 
dependence,  and  this  protecting  relation  is  then 
systematized  into  the  feudal  system.  The  third 
reaction  is  that  of  the  Church,  the  reaction  of 
the  spiritual  element  against  the  existing  order 
of  things.  Secular  extravagances  of  passion  were 
repressed  and  kept  in  check  by  the  Church,  but 
the  latter  was  itself  secularized  in  the  process, 
and  abandoned  its  proper  position.  From  that 
moment  begins  the  introversion  of  the  secular 
principle.  These  relations  and  reactions  all  go 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  327 


to  constitute  the  history  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and 
the  culminating  point  of  this  period  is  the  Cru¬ 
sades;  for  with  them  arises  a  universal  insta¬ 
bility,  but  one  through  which  the  states  of  Chris¬ 
tendom  first  attain  internal  and  external  inde¬ 
pendence. 

Chapter  1.  The  Feudality  and  the  Hierarchy 
The  first  reaction  is  that  of  particular  national¬ 
ity  against  the  universal  sovereignty  of  the 
Franks.  It  appears  indeed,  at  first  sight,  as  if  the 
Frank  Empire  was  divided  by  the  mere  choice 
of  its  sovereigns ;  but  another  consideration  de¬ 
serves  attention,  viz.,  that  this  division  was  pop¬ 
ular,  and  was  accordingly  maintained  by  the  peo¬ 
ples.  It  was,  therefore,  not  a  mere  dynastic  act — 
which  might  appear  unwise,  since  the  princes 
thereby  weakened  their  own  power — but  a  res¬ 
toration  of  those  distinct  nationalities  which 
had  been  held  together  by  a  connecting  bond  of 
irresistible  might  and  the  genius  of  a  great  man. 
Louis  the  Pious,  son  of  Charlemagne,  divided 
the  empire  among  his  three  sons.  But  subse¬ 
quently,  by  a  second  marriage,  another  son  was 
born  to  him — Charles  the  Bald.  As  he  wished 
to  give  him  also  an  inheritance,  wars  and  con¬ 
tentions  arose  between  Louis  and  his  other  sons, 
whose  already  received  portion  would  have  to 
be  diminished  by  such  an  arrangement.  In  the 
first  instance,  therefore,  a  private  interest  was 
involved  in  the  contest ;  but  that  of  the  nations 
which  composed  the  empire  made  the  issue  not 
indifferent  to  them.  The  western  Franks  had  al¬ 
ready  identified  themselves  with  the  Gauls,  and 
with  them  originated  a  reaction  against  the  Ger¬ 
man  Franks,  as  also  at  a  later  epoch  one  on  the 
part  of  Italy  against  the  Germans.  By  the  treaty 
of  Verdun,  a.d.  843,  a  division  of  the  empire 
among  Charlemagne’s  descendants  took  place; 
the  whole  Frank  Empire,  some  provinces  ex¬ 
cepted,  was  for  a  moment  again  united  under 
Charles  the  Gross.  It  was,  however,  only  for  a 
short  time  that  this  weak  prince  was  able  to 
hold  the  vast  empire  together;  it  was  broken  up 
into  many  smaller  sovereignties,  which  devel¬ 
oped  and  maintained  an  independent  position. 
These  were  the  Kingdom  of  Italy,  which  was 
itself  divided,  the  two  Burgundian  sovereignties 
— Upper  Burgundy,  of  which  the  chief  centres 
were  Geneva  and  the  convent  of  St.  Maurice  in 
Valaise,  and  Lower  Burgundy  between  the  Jura, 
the  Mediterranean  and  the  Rhone — Lorraine, 
between  the  Rhine  and  the  Meuse,  Normandy, 
and  Brittany.  France  proper  was  shut  in  be¬ 
tween  these  sovereignties;  and  thus  limited  did 
Hugh  Capet  find  it  when  he  ascended  the  throne. 


Eastern  Franconia,  Saxony,  Thuringia,  Bavaria, 
Swabia,  remained  parts  of  the  German  Empire. 
Thus  did  the  unity  of  the  Frank  monarchy  fall 
to  pieces.  The  internal  arrangements  of  the 
Frank  Empire  also  suffered  a  gradual  but  total 
decay;  and  the  first  to  disappear  was  the  mili¬ 
tary  organization.  Soon  after  Charlemagne  we 
see  the  Norsemen  from  various  quarters  making 
inroads  into  England,  France,  and  Germany.  In 
England  seven  dynasties  of  Anglo-Saxon  kings 
were  originally  established,  but  in  the  year  827 
Egbert  united  these  sovereignties  into  a  single 
kingdom.  In  the  reign  of  his  successor  the  Danes 
made  very  frequent  invasions  and  pillaged  the 
country.  In  Alfred  the  Great’s  time  they  met 
with  vigorous  resistance,  but  subsequently  the 
Danish  King  Canute  conquered  all  England. 
The  inroads  of  the  Normans  into  France  were 
contemporaneous  with  these  events.  They  sailed 
up  the  Seine  and  the  Loire  in  light  boats,  plun¬ 
dered  the  towns,  pillaged  the  convents,  and 
went  off  with  their  booty.  They  beleaguered 
Paris  itself,  and  the  Carlovingian  kings  were  re¬ 
duced  to  the  base  necessity  of  purchasing  a 
peace.  In  the  same  way  they  devastated  the 
towns  lying  on  the  Elbe;  and  from  the  Rhine 
plundered  Aix-la-Chapelle  and  Cologne,  and 
made  Lorraine  tributary  to  them.  The  Diet  of 
Worms,  in  882,  did  indeed  issue  a  general  proc¬ 
lamation,  summoning  all  subjects  to  rise  in 
arms,  but  they  were  compelled  to  put  up  with 
a  disgraceful  composition.  These  storms  came 
from  the  north  and  the  west.  The  eastern  side 
of  the  empire  suffered  from  the  inroads  of  the 
Magyars.  These  barbarian  peoples  traversed  the 
country  in  wagons,  and  laid  waste  the  whole  of 
southern  Germany.  Through  Bavaria,  Swabia, 
and  Switzerland  they  penetrated  into  the  in¬ 
terior  of  France  and  reached  Italy.  The  Sara¬ 
cens  pressed  forward  from  the  south.  Sicily  had 
been  long  in  their  hands :  they  thence  obtained  a 
firm  footing  in  Italy,  menaced  Rome — which 
diverted  their  attack  by  a  composition — and 
were  the  terror  of  Piedmont  and  Provence. 

Thus  these  three  peoples  invaded  the  empire 
from  all  sides  in  great  masses,  and  in  their  deso¬ 
lating  marches  almost  came  into  contact  with 
each  other.  France  was  devastated  by  the  Nor¬ 
mans  as  far  as  the  Jura;  the  Hungarians  reached 
Switzerland,  and  the  Saracens  Valaise.  Calling 
to  mind  that  organization  of  the  “arriere-ban,” 
and  considering  it  in  juxtaposition  with  this  mis¬ 
erable  state  of  things,  we  cannot  fail  to  be  struck 
with  the  inefficiency  of  all  those  far-famed  in¬ 
stitutions,  which  at  such  a  juncture  ought  to 
have  shown  themselves  most  effective.  We  might 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


328 

be  inclined  to  regard  the  picture  of  the  noble 
and  rational  constitution  of  the  Frank  monarchy 
under  Charlemagne — exhibiting  itself  as  strong, 
comprehensive,  and  well  ordered,  internally  and 
externally — as  a  baseless  figment.  Yet  it  ac¬ 
tually  existed;  the  entire  political  system  being 
held  together  only  by  the  power,  the  greatness, 
the  regal  soul  of  this  one  man,  not  based  on  the 
spirit  of  the  people,  not  having  become  a  vital 
element  in  it.  It  was  superficially  induced — an 
a  priori  constitution  like  that  which  Napoleon 
gave  to  Spain,  and  which  disappeared  with  the 
physical  power  that  sustained  it.  That,  on  the 
contrary,  which  renders  a  constitution  real,  is 
that  it  exists  as  objective  freedom — the  sub¬ 
stantial  form  of  volition — as  duty  and  obliga¬ 
tion  acknowledged  by  the  subjects  themselves. 
But  obligation  was  not  yet  recognized  by  the 
German  spirit,  which  hitherto  showed  itself  only 
as  “heart”  and  subjective  choice;  for  it  there 
was  as  yet  no  subjectivity  involving  unity,  but 
only  a  subjectivity  conditioned  by  a  careless 
superficial  self-seeking.  Thus  that  constitution 
was  destitute  of  any  firm  bond;  it  had  no  ob¬ 
jective  support  in  subjectivity;  for,  in  fact,  no 
constitution  was  as  yet  possible. 

This  leads  us  to  the  second  reaction — that  of 
individuals  against  the  authority  of  law.  The 
capacity  of  appreciating  legal  order  and  the 
common  weal  is  altogether  absent,  has  no  vital 
existence  in  the  peoples  themselves.  The  duties 
of  every  free  citizen,  the  authority  of  the  judge 
to  give  judicial  decisions,  that  of  the  count  of  a 
province  to  hold  his  court,  and  interest  in  the 
laws  as  such,  are  no  longer  regarded  as  valid  now 
that  the  strong  hand  from  above  ceases  to  hold 
the  reins  of  sovereignty.  The  brilliant  adminis¬ 
tration  of  Charlemagne  had  vanished  without 
leaving  a  trace,  and  the  immediate  consequence 
was  the  general  defencelessness  of  individuals. 
The  need  of  protection  is  sure  to  be  felt  in  some 
degree  in  every  well-organized  state :  each  citi¬ 
zen  knows  his  rights  and  also  knows  that  for 
the  security  of  possession  the  social  state  is  ab¬ 
solutely  necessary.  Barbarians  have  not  yet  at¬ 
tained  this  sense  of  need,  the  want  of  protection 
from  others.  They  look  upon  it  as  a  limitation 
of  their  freedom  if  their  rights  must  be  guaran¬ 
teed  them  by  others.  Thus,  therefore,  the  im¬ 
pulse  towards  a  firm  organization  did  not  exist : 
men  must  first  be  placed  in  a  defenceless  condi¬ 
tion,  before  they  were  sensible  of  the  necessity 
of  the  organization  of  a  state.  The  political  edi¬ 
fice  had  to  be  reconstructed  from  the  very 
foundations.  The  commonwealth  as  then  organ¬ 
ized  bad  no  vitality  or  firmness  at  all  either  in 


itself  or  in  the  minds  of  the  people;  and  its 
weakness  manifested  itself  in  the  fact  that  it 
was  unable  to  give  protection  to  its  individual 
members.  As  observed  above,  the  idea  of  duty 
was  not  present  in  the  spirit  of  the  Germans;  it 
had  to  be  restored.  In  the  first  instance  voli¬ 
tion  could  only  be  arrested  in  its  wayward  career 
in  reference  to  the  merely  external  point  of  pos¬ 
session;  and  to  make  it  feel  the  importance  of 
the  protection  of  the  state,  it  had  to  be  violently 
dislodged  from  its  obtuseness  and  impelled  by 
necessity  to  seek  union  and  a  social  condition. 
Individuals  were  therefore  obliged  to  consult 
for  themselves  by  taking  refuge  with  individu¬ 
als,  and  submitted  to  the  authority  of  certain 
powerful  persons,  who  constituted  a  private  pos¬ 
session  and  personal  sovereignty  out  of  that  au¬ 
thority  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  com¬ 
monwealth.  As  officers  of  the  state ,  the  counts 
did  not  meet  with  obedience  from  those  com¬ 
mitted  to  their  charge,  and  they  were  as  little 
desirous  of  it.  Only  for  themselves  did  they 
covet  it.  They  assumed  to  themselves  the  power 
of  the  state,  and  made  the  authority  with  which 
they  had  been  intrusted  as  a  beneficium,  a  herit¬ 
able  possession.  As  in  earlier  times  the  king  or 
other  magnates  conferred  fiefs  on  their  vassals 
by  way  of  rewards,  now,  conversely,  the  weaker 
and  poorer  surrendered  their  possessions  to  the 
strong,  for  the  sake  of  gaining  efficient  protec¬ 
tion.  They  committed  their  estates  to  a  lord,  a 
convent,  an  abbot,  a  bishop  ( feudum  oblatum ), 
and  received  them  back,  encumbered  with 
feudal  obligations  to  these  superiors.  Instead  of 
freemen  they  became  vassals,  feudal  dependants, 
and  their  possession  a  beneficium.  This  is  the 
constitution  of  the  feudal  system.  “Feudum”  is 
connected  with  “fides” ;  the  fidelity  implied  in 
this  case  is  a  bond  established  on  unjust  prin¬ 
ciples,  a  relation  that  does  indeed  contemplate 
a  legitimate  object,  but  whose  import  is  not  a 
whit  the  less  injustice;  for  the  fidelity  of  vas¬ 
sals  is  not  an  obligation  to  the  commonwealth, 
but  a  private  one — ipso  facto  therefore  subject 
to  the  sway  of  chance,  caprice,  and  violence. 
Universal  injustice,  universal  lawlessness  is  re¬ 
duced  to  a  system  of  dependence  on  and  obliga¬ 
tion  to  individuals,  so  that  the  mere  formal  side 
of  the  matter,  the  mere  fact  of  compact  con¬ 
stitutes  its  sole  connection  with  the  principle  of 
right. 

Since  every  man  had  to  protect  himself,  the 
martial  spirit,  which  in  point  of  external  de¬ 
fence  seemed  to  have  most  ignominiously  van¬ 
ished,  was  reawakened;  for  torpidity  was  roused 
to  action  partly  by  extreme  ill-usage,  partly  by 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  329 


the  greed  and  ambition  of  individuals.  The  valour 
that  now  manifested  itself,  was  displayed  not 
on  behalf  of  the  state,  but  of  private  interests. 
In  every  district  arose  castles;  fortresses  were 
erected,  and  that  for  the  defence  of  private 
property,  and  with  a  view  to  plunder  the  tyr¬ 
anny.  In  the  way  just  mentioned,  the  political 
totality  was  ignored  at  those  points  where  indi¬ 
vidual  authority  was  established,  among  which 
the  seats  of  bishops  and  archbishops  deserve 
especial  mention.  The  bishoprics  had  been  freed 
from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  judicial  tribunals, 
and  from  the  operations  of  the  executive  gen¬ 
erally.  The  bishops  had  stewards  on  whom  at 
their  request  the  emperors  conferred  the  juris¬ 
diction  which  the  counts  had  formerly  exercised. 
Thus  there  were  detached  ecclesiastical  domains 
— ecclesiastical  districts  which  belonged  to  a 
saint.  Similar  suzerainties  of  a  secular  kind  were 
subsequently  constituted.  Both  occupied  the 
position  of  the  previous  provinces  or  counties. 
Only  in  a  few  towns  where  communities  of  free¬ 
men  were  independently  strong  enough  to  secure 
protection  and  safety,  did  relics  of  the  ancient 
free  constitution  remain.  With  these  exceptions 
the  free  communities  entirely  disappeared,  and 
became  subject  to  the  prelates  or  to  the  counts 
and  dukes,  thenceforth  known  as  seigneurs  and 
princes.  The  imperial  power  was  extolled  in  gen¬ 
eral  terms,  as  something  very  great  and  exalted : 
the  Emperor  passed  for  the  secular  head  of  en¬ 
tire  Christendom :  but  the  more  exalted  the  ideal 
dignity  of  the  emperors,  the  more  limited  was 
it  in  reality.  France  derived  extraordinary  ad¬ 
vantage  from  the  fact  that  it  entirely  repudi¬ 
ated  this  baseless  assumption,  while  in  Germany 
the  advance  of  political  development  was  hin¬ 
dered  by  that  pretence  of  power.  The  kings  and 
emperors  were  no  longer  chiefs  of  the  state,  but 
of  the  princes,  who  were  indeed  their  vassals, 
but  possessed  sovereignty  and  territorial  lord- 
ships  of  their  own.  The  whole  social  condition 
therefore,  being  founded  on  individual  sover¬ 
eignty,  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  advance 
to  a  state  would  be  possible  only  through  the 
return  of  those  individual  sovereignties  to  an 
official  relationship.  But  to  accomplish  this,  a 
superior  power  would  have  been  required,  such 
as  was  not  in  existence;  for  the  feudal  lords 
themselves  determined  how  far  they  were  still 
dependent  on  the  general  constitution  of  the 
state.  No  authority  of  law  and  right  is  valid 
any  longer;  nothing  but  chance  power — the 
crude  caprice  of  particular  as  opposed  to  uni¬ 
versally  valid  right;  and  this  struggles  against 
equality  of  rights  and  laws.  Inequality  of  politi¬ 


cal  privileges,  the  allotment  being  the  work  of 
the  purest  haphazard,  is  the  predominant  fea¬ 
ture.  It  is  impossible  that  a  monarchy  can  arise 
from  such  a  social  condition  through  the  sub¬ 
jugation  of  the  several  minor  powers  under  the 
chief  of  the  state,  as  such.  Reversely, the  former 
were  gradually  transformed  into  principalities 
and  became  united  with  the  principality  of  the 
chief,  thus  enabling  the  authority  of  the  king 
and  of  the  state  to  assert  itself.  While,  therefore, 
the  bond  of  political  unity  was  still  wanting,  the 
several  seigneuries  attained  their  development 
independently. 

In  France  the  dynasty  of  Charlemagne,  like 
that  of  Clovis,  became  extinct  through  the 
weakness  of  the  sovereigns  who  represented  it. 
Their  dominion  was  finally  limited  to  the  petty 
sovereignty  of  Laon;  and  the  last  of  the  Carlo- 
vingians,  Duke  Charles  of  Lorraine,  who  laid 
claim  to  the  crown  after  the  death  of  Louis  V, 
was  defeated  and  taken  prisoner.  The  powerful 
Hugh  Capet,  Duke  of  France,  was  proclaimed 
king.  The  title  of  king,  however,  gave  him  no 
real  power ;  his  authority  was  based  on  his  ter¬ 
ritorial  possessions  alone.  At  a  later  date,  through 
purchase,  marriage,  and  the  dying  out  of  fami¬ 
lies,  the  kings  became  possessed  of  many  feudal 
domains ;  and  their  authority  was  frequently  in¬ 
voked  as  a  protection  against  the  oppressions 
of  the  nobles.  The  royal  authority  in  France  be¬ 
came  heritable  at  an  early  date,  because  the 
fiefs  were  heritable;  though  at  first  the  kings 
took  the  precaution  to  have  their  sons  crowned 
during  their  lifetime.  France  was  divided  into 
many  sovereignties :  the  Duchy  of  Guienne,  the 
Earldom  of  Flanders,  the  Duchy  of  Gascony, 
the  Earldom  of  Toulouse,  the  Duchy  of  Bur¬ 
gundy,  the  Earldom  of  Vermandois;  Lorraine 
too  had  belonged  to  France  for  some  time.  Nor¬ 
mandy  had  been  ceded  to  the  Normans  by  the 
kings  of  France,  in  order  to  secure  a  temporary 
repose  from  their  incursions.  From  Normandy 
Duke  William  passed  over  into  England  and 
conquered  it  in  the  year  1066.  Here  he  intro¬ 
duced  a  fully  developed  feudal  constitution — a 
network  which,  to  a  great  extent,  encompasses 
England  even  at  the  present  day.  And  thus  the 
dukes  of  Normandy  confronted  the  compara¬ 
tively  feeble  kings  of  France  with  a  power  of 
no  inconsiderable  pretensions. — Germany  was 
composed  of  the  great  duchies  of  Saxony,  Swa¬ 
bia,  Bavaria,  Carinthia,  Lorraine  and  Burgundy, 
the  margraviate  of  Thuringia,  etc.,  with  several 
bishoprics  and  archbishoprics.  Each  of  those 
duchies  again  was  divided  into  several  fiefs,  en¬ 
joying  more  or  less  independence.  The  Emperor 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


330 

seems  often  to  have  united  several  duchies  un¬ 
der  his  immediate  sovereignty.  The  Emperor 
Henry  III  was,  when  he  ascended  the  throne, 
lord  of  many  large  dukedoms;  but  he  weakened 
his  own  power  by  enfeoffing  them  to  others. 
Germany  was  radically  a  free  nation,  and  had 
not,  as  France  had,  any  dominant  family  as  a 
central  authority;  it  continued  an  elective  em¬ 
pire.  Its  princes  refused  to  surrender  the  privi¬ 
lege  of  choosing  their  sovereign  for  themselves; 
and  at  every  new  election  they  introduced  new 
restrictive  conditions,  so  that  the  imperial  power 
was  degraded  to  an  empty  shadow.  In  Italy  we 
find  the  same  political  condition.  The  German 
emperors  had  pretensions  to  it:  but  their  au¬ 
thority  was  valid  only  so  far  as  they  could  sup¬ 
port  it  by  direct  force  of  arms,  and  as  the  Italian 
cities  and  nobles  deemed  their  own  advantage 
to  be  promoted  by  submission.  Italy  was.  like 
Germany,  divided  into  many  larger  and  smaller 
dukedoms,  earldoms,  bishoprics,  and  seign- 
euries.  The  Pope  had  very  little  power,  either  in 
the  north  or  in  the  south ;  which  latter  was  long 
divided  between  the  Lombards  and  the  Greeks, 
until  both  were  overcome  by  the  Normans. 
Spain  maintained  a  contest  with  the  Saracens, 
either  defensive  or  victorious,  through  the  whole 
mediaeval  period,  till  the  latter  finally  succumbed 
to  the  more  matured  power  of  Christian  civili¬ 
zation. 

Thus  all  right  vanished  before  individual 
might;  for  equality  of  rights  and  rational  legis¬ 
lation,  where  the  interests  of  the  political  total¬ 
ity,  of  the  state,  are  kept  in  view,  had  no  ex¬ 
istence. 

The  third  reaction ,  noticed  above,  was  that  of 
the  element  of  universality  against  the  real 
world  as  split  up  into  particularity.  This  reac¬ 
tion  proceeded  from  below  upwards — from  that 
condition  of  isolated  possession  itself ;  and  was 
then  promoted  chiefly  by  the  Church.  A  sense  of 
the  nothingness  of  its  condition  seized  on  the 
world  as  it  were  universally.  In  that  condition  of 
utter  isolation,  wfiere  only  the  unsanctioned 
might  of  individuals  had  any  validity  men 
could  find  no  repose,  and  Christendom  was,  so 
to  speak,  agitated  by  the  tremor  of  an  evil  con¬ 
science.  In  the  eleventh  century,  the  fear  of  the 
approaching  final  judgment  and  the  belief  in 
the  speedy  dissolution  of  the  world,  spread 
through  all  Europe.  This  dismay  of  soul  im¬ 
pelled  men  to  the  most  irrational  proceedings. 
Some  bestowmd  the  wThole  of  their  possessions  on 
the  Church,  and  passed  their  lives  in  continual 
penance;  the  majority  dissipated  their  worldly 
all  in  riotous  debauchery.  The  Church  alone  in¬ 


creased  its  riches  by  the  hallucinations,  through 
donations  and  bequests. 

About  the  same  time  too,  terrible  famines 
swept  away  their  victims:  human  flesh  was  sold 
in  open  market.  During  this  state  of  things,  law¬ 
lessness,  brutal  lust,  the  most  barbarous  caprice, 
deceit  and  cunning,  were  the  prevailing  moral 
features.  Italy,  the  centre  of  Christendom,  pre¬ 
sented  the  most  revolting  aspect.  Every  virtue 
was  alien  to  the  times  in  question;  consequently 
virtus  had  lost  its  proper  meaning:  in  common 
use  it  denoted  only  violence  and  oppression, 
sometimes  even  libidinous  outrage.  This  corrupt 
state  of  things  affected  the  clergy  equally  wTith 
the  laity.  Their  owm  advowees  had  made  them¬ 
selves  masters  of  the  ecclesiastical  estates  in¬ 
trusted  to  their  keeping,  and  lived  on  them  quite 
at  their  own  pleasure,  restricting  the  monks  and 
clergy  to  a  scanty  pittance.  Monasteries  that  re¬ 
fused  to  accept  advowees  were  compelled  to  do 
so ;  the  neighbouring  lords  taking  the  office  upon 
themselves  or  giving  it  to  their  sons.  Only  bish¬ 
ops  and  abbots  maintained  themselves  in  pos¬ 
session,  being  able  to  protect  themselves  partly 
by  their  owm  powder,  partly  by  means  of  their 
retainers;  since  they  wrere,  for  the  most  part,  of 
noble  families. 

The  bishoprics  being  secular  fiefs,  their  oc¬ 
cupants  were  bound  to  the  performance  of  im¬ 
perial  and  feudal  service.  The  investiture  of  the 
bishops  belonged  to  the  sovereigns,  and  it  wras 
their  interest  that  these  ecclesiastics  should  be 
attached  to  them.  Whoever  desired  a  bishopric, 
therefore,  had  to  make  application  to  the  king; 
and  thus  a  regular  trade  wras  carried  on  in  bish¬ 
oprics  and  abbacies.  Usurers  wTho  had  lent 
money  to  the  sovereign  received  compensation 
by  the  bestowml  of  the  dignities  in  question;  the 
w7orst  of  men  thus  came  into  possession  of  spir¬ 
itual  offices.  There  could  be  no  question  that  the 
clergy  ought  to  have  been  chosen  by  the  reli¬ 
gious  community,  and  there  wrnre  ahvays  influen¬ 
tial  persons  wfio  had  the  right  of  electing  them ; 
but  the  king  compelled  them  to  yield  to  his  or¬ 
ders.  Nor  did  the  papal  dignity  fare  any  better. 
Through  a  long  course  of  years  the  counts  of 
Tusculum  near  Rome  conferred  it  on  members 
of  their  owm  family,  or  on  persons  to  wThom  they 
had  sold  it  for  large  sums  of  money.  The  state  of 
things  became  at  last  so  intolerable,  that  lay¬ 
men  as  wTell  as  ecclesiastics  of  energetic  char¬ 
acter  opposed  its  continuance.  The  Emperor 
Henry  III  put  an  end  to  the  strife  of  factions 
by  nominating  the  Popes  himself  and  support¬ 
ing  them  by  his  authority  in  defiance  of  the  op¬ 
position  of  the  Roman  nobility.  Pope  Nicholas 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD 


II  decided  that  the  Popes  should  be  chosen  by 
the  cardinals ;  but  as  the  latter  partly  belonged 
to  dominant  families,  similar  contests  of  fac¬ 
tions  continued  to  accompany  their  election. 
Oregon'  VII  (already  famous  as  Cardinal  Hil¬ 
debrand)  sought  to  secure  the  independence  of 
the  Church  in  this  frightful  condition  of  things, 
bv  two  measures  especially.  First ,  he  enforced 
the  celibacy  oj  the  clergy.  From  the  earliest 
times,  it  must  be  observed.  the  opinion  had  pre¬ 
vailed  that  it  w'as  commendable  and  desirable 
for  the  clergy  to  remain  unmarried.  Yet  the  an¬ 
nalists  and  chroniclers  inform  us  that  this  re¬ 
quirement  was  but  indifferently  complied  with. 
Nicholas  II  had  indeed  pronounced  the  married 
clergy  to  be  a  new  sect;  but  Gregory  VII  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  enforce  the  restriction  with  extra  or¬ 
dinary  energy,  excommunicating  all  the  married 
clergy  and  all  laymen  w'ho  should  hear  Mass 
when  they  officiated.  In  this  way  the  ecclesiasti¬ 
cal  body  w'as  shut  up  within  itself  and  excluded 
from  the  morality  of  the  state.  His  second 
measure  w'as  directed  against  simony ,  i.e the 
sale  of  or  arbitrary  appointment  to  bishoprics 
and  to  the  Papal  See  itself.  Ecclesiastical  offices 
were  thenceforth  to  be  filled  by  the  clergy,  who 
were  capable  of  administering  them:  an  arrange¬ 
ment  w'hich  necessarily  brought  the  ecclesiasti¬ 
cal  body  into  violent  collision  with  secular 
seigneurs. 

These  were  the  two  grand  measures  by  winch 
Gregory'  purposed  to  emancipate  the  Church 
from  its  condition  of  dependence  and  exposure 
to  secular  violence.  But  Gregory  made  still  fur¬ 
ther  demands  on  the  secular  pow'er.  The  trans¬ 
ference  of  benefices  to  a  new'  incumbent  w'as  to 
receive  validity  simply  in  virtue  of  his  ordina¬ 
tion  by  his  ecclesiastical  superior,  and  the  Pope 
w'as  to  have  exclusive  control  over  the  vast 
property  of  the  ecclesiastical  community.  The 
Church  as  a  divinely  constituted  pow'er,  laid 
claim  to  supremacy  over  secular  authority — 
founding  that  claim  on  the  abstract  principle 
that  the  divine  is  superior  to  the  secular.  The 
Emperor  at  his  coronation,  a  ceremony  w'hich 
only  the  Pope  could  perform,  w'as  obliged  to 
promise  upon  oath  that  he  w'ould  alw'ays  be  obe¬ 
dient  to  the  Pope  and  the  Church.  Whole  coun¬ 
tries  and  states,  such  as  Naples,  Portugal,  Eng¬ 
land.  and  Ireland  came  into  a  formal  relation  of 
vassalage  to  the  papal  chair. 

Thus  the  Church  attained  an  independent  po¬ 
sition  :  the  bishops  convoked  synods  in  the  vari¬ 
ous  countries,  and  in  these  convocations  the 
clergy  found  a  permanent  centre  of  unity  and 
support.  In  this  w'ay  the  Church  attained  the 


most  influential  position  in  secular  affairs.  It  ar¬ 
rogated  to  itself  the  aw'ard  of  princely  crowrns, 
and  assumed  the  part  of  mediator  betw'een  sov¬ 
ereign  pow'ers  in  w'ar  and  peace.  The  contingen¬ 
cies  w'hich  particularly  favored  such  interven¬ 
tions  on  the  part  of  the  Church  w'ere  the  mar¬ 
riages  of  princes.  It  frequently  happened  that 
princes  wished  to  be  divorced  from  their  wives; 
but  for  such  a  step  they  needed  the  permission 
of  the  Church.  The  latter  did  not  let  slip  the  op¬ 
portunity  of  insisting  upon  the  fulfilment  of  de¬ 
mands  that  might  have  been  otherwise  urged  in 
vain,  and  thence  advanced  till  it  had  obtained 
universal  influence.  In  the  chaotic  state  of  the 
community  generally,  the  intervention  of  the 
authority  of  the  Church  w'as  felt  as  a  necessity. 
By  the  introduction  of  the  “Truce  of  God,” 
feuds  and  private  revenge  w'ere  suspended  for 
at  least  certain  days  in  the  week,  or  even  for  en¬ 
tire  weeks ;  and  the  Church  maintained  this  ar¬ 
mistice  by  the  use  of  all  its  ghostly  appliances  of 
excommunication,  interdict,  and  other  threats 
and  penalties.  The  secular  possessions  of  the 
Church  brought  it  how’ever  into  a  relation  to 
other  secular  princes  and  lords,  w'hich  w'as  alien 
to  its  proper  nature;  it  constituted  a  formidable 
secular  pow'er  in  contraposition  to  them,  and 
thus  formed  in  the  first  instance  a  centre  of  op¬ 
position  against  violence  and  arbitrary  wrong. 
It  withstood  especially  the  attacks  upon  the  ec¬ 
clesiastical  foundations — the  secular  lordships 
of  the  bishops;  and  on  occasion  of  opposition 
on  the  part  of  vassals  to  the  violence  and  caprice 
of  princes,  the  former  had  the  support  of  the 
Pope.  But  in  these  proceedings  the  Church 
brought  to  bear  against  opponents  only  a  force 
and  arbitrary'  resolve  of  the  same  kind  as  their 
own,  and  mixed  up  in  secular  interest  with  its 
interest  as  an  ecclesiastical,  i.e.,  a  divinely  sub¬ 
stantial  pow'er.  Sovereigns  and  peoples  were  by 
no  means  incapable  of  discriminating  between 
the  tw'o,  or  of  recognizing  the  worldly  aims  that 
were  apt  to  intrude  as  motives  for  ecclesiastical 
intervention.  They  therefore  stood  by  the  Church 
as  far  as  they  deemed  it  their  interest  to  do  so ; 
otherwise  they  show'ed  no  great  dread  of  excom¬ 
munication  or  other  ghostly  terrors.  Italy  was 
the  country  w'here  the  authority  of  the  Popes 
w'as  least  respected;  and  the  w'orst  usage  they 
experienced  was  from  the  Romans  themselves. 
Thus,  what  the  Popes  acquired  in  point  of  land 
and  wealth  and  direct  sovereignty,  they  lost  in 
influence  and  consideration. 

We  have  then  to  probe  to  its  depths  the  spir¬ 
itual  element  in  the  Church — the  form  of  its 
pow'er.  The  essence  of  the  Christian  principle 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


332 

has  already  been  unfolded;  it  is  the  principle  of 
mediation.  Man  realizes  his  spiritual  essence 
only  when  he  conquers  the  natural  that  attaches 
to  him.  This  conquest  is  possible  only  on  the 
supposition  that  the  human  and  the  divine  na¬ 
ture  are  essentially  one,  and  that  man,  so  far  as 
he  is  spirit,  also  possesses  the  essentiality  and 
substantiality  that  belong  to  the  idea  of  deity. 
The  condition  of  the  mediation  in  question  is 
the  consciousness  of  this  unity;  and  the  intui¬ 
tion  of  this  unity  was  given  to  man  in  Christ. 
The  object  to  be  attained  is  therefore,  that  man 
should  lay  hold  on  this  consciousness,  and  that 
it  should  be  continually  excited  in  him.  This  was 
the  design  of  the  Mass:  in  the  Host ,  Christ  is  set 
forth  as  actually  present;  the  piece  of  bread 
consecrated  by  the  priest  is  the  present  God, 
subjected  to  human  contemplation  and  ever  and 
anon  offered  up.  One  feature  of  this  representa¬ 
tion  is  correct,  inasmuch  as  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ  is  here  regarded  as  an  actual  and  eternal 
transaction,  Christ  being  not  a  mere  sensuous 
and  single,  but  a  completely  universal,  i.e.,  di¬ 
vine  individnum;  but  on  the  other  hand  it  in¬ 
volves  the  error  of  isolating  the  sensuous  phase; 
for  the  Host  is  adored  even  apart  from  its  being 
partaken  of  by  the  faithful,  and  the  presence  of 
Christ  is  not  exclusively  limited  mental  vision 
and  spirit.  Justly  therefore  did  the  Lutheran 
Reformation  make  this  dogma  an  especial  ob¬ 
ject  of  attack.  Luther  proclaimed  the  great  doc¬ 
trine  that  the  Host  had  spiritual  value  and 
Christ  was  received  only  on  the  condition  of 
faith  in  him;  apart  from  this,  the  Host,  he  af¬ 
firmed,  was  a  mere  external  thing,  possessed  of 
no  greater  value  than  any  other  thing.  But  the 
Catholic  falls  down  before  the  Host;  and  thus 
the  merely  outward  has  sanctity  ascribed  to  it. 
The  Holy  as  a  mere  thing  has  the  character  of 
externality;  thus  it  is  capable  of  being  taken 
possession  of  by  another  to  my  exclusion:  it 
may  come  into  an  alien  hand,  since  the  process 
of  appropriating  it  is  not  one  that  takes  place  in 
spirit,  but  is  conditioned  by  its  quality  as  an 
external  object.  The  highest  of  human  blessings 
is  in  the  hands  of  others.  Here  arises  ipso  facto 
a  separation  between  those  who  possess  this 
blessing  and  those  who  have  to  receive  it  from 
others — between  the  clergy  and  the  laity.  The 
laity  as  such  are  alien  to  the  divine.  This  is  the 
absolute  schism  in  which  the  Church  in  the  Mid¬ 
dle  Ages  was  involved:  it  arose  from  the  recog¬ 
nition  of  the  holy  as  something  external.  The 
clergy  imposed  certain  conditions,  to  which  the 
laity  must  conform  if  they  would  be  partakers 
of  the  holy.  The  entire  development  of  doctrine, 


spiritual  insight  and  the  knowledge  of  divine 
things,  belonged  exclusively  to  the  Church:  it 
has  to  ordain,  and  the  laity  have  simply  to  be¬ 
lieve:  obedience  is  their  duty — the  obedience 
of  faith,  without  insight  on  their  part.  This 
position  of  things  rendered  faith  a  matter  of 
external  legislation,  and  resulted  in  compulsion 
and  the  stake. 

The  generality  of  men  are  thus  cut  off  from 
the  Church;  and  on  the  same  principle  they  are 
severed  from  the  holy  in  every  form.  For  on 
the  same  principle  as  that  by  which  the  clergy 
are  the  medium  between  man  on  the  one  hand 
and  God  and  Christ  on  the  other  hand,  the  lay¬ 
man  cannot  directly  apply  to  the  divine  being 
in  his  prayers,  but  only  through  mediators — 
human  beings  who  conciliate  God  for  him,  the 
dead,  the  perfect — Saints .  Thus  originated  the 
adoration  of  the  Saints,  and  with  it  that  con¬ 
glomerate  of  fables  and  falsities  with  which  the 
Saints  and  their  biographies  have  been  invested. 
In  the  East  the  worship  of  images  had  early  be¬ 
come  popular,  and  after  a  lengthened  struggle 
had  triumphantly  established  itself :  an  image,  a 
picture,  though  sensuous,  still  appeals  rather  to 
the  imagination;  but  the  coarser  natures  of  the 
West  desired  something  more  immediate  as  the 
object  of  their  contemplation,  and  thus  arose 
the  worship  of  relics.  The  consequence  was  a 
formal  resurrection  of  the  dead  in  the  mediaeval 
period,  every  pious  Christian  wished  to  be  in 
possession  of  such  sacred  earthly  remains. 
Among  the  Saints  the  chief  object  of  adoration 
was  the  Virgin  Mary.  She  is  certainly  the  beauti¬ 
ful  concept  of  pure  love — a  mother’s  love;  but 
spirit  and  thought  stand  higher  than  even  this ; 
and  in  the  worship  of  this  conception  that  of 
God  in  spirit  was  lost,  and  Christ  himself  was 
set  aside.  The  element  of  mediation  between 
God  and  man  was  thus  apprehended  and  held  as 
something  external.  Thus  through  the  perversion 
of  the  principle  of  freedom,  absolute  slavery  be¬ 
came  the  established  law.  The  other  aspects  and 
relations  of  the  spiritual  life  of  Europe  during 
this  period  flow  from  this  principle.  Knowledge, 
comprehension  of  religious  doctrine,  is  some¬ 
thing  of  which  spirit  is  judged  incapable;  it  is 
the  exclusive  possession  of  a  class,  which  has  to 
determine  the  true.  For  man  may  not  presume 
to  stand  in  a  direct  relation  to  God;  so  that,  as 
we  said  before,  if  he  would  apply  to  Him,  he 
needs  a  mediator — a  saint.  This  view  imports 
the  denial  of  the  essential  unity  of  the  divine 
and  human;  since  man,  as  such,  is  declared  in¬ 
capable  of  recognizing  the  divine  and  of  ap¬ 
proaching  thereto.  And  while  humanity  is  thus 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  333 


separated  from  the  supreme  good,  no  change  of 
heart,  as  such,  is  insisted  upon — for  this  would 
suppose  that  the  unity  of  the  divine  and  the 
human  is  to  be  found  in  man  himself — but  the 
terrors  of  Hell  are  exhibited  to  man  in  the  most 
terrible  colours,  to  induce  him  to  escape  from 
them,  not  by  moral  amendment,  but  in  virtue 
of  something  external — the  “means  of  grace” 
These,  however,  are  an  arcanum  to  the  laity; 
another — the  “confessor,”  must  furnish  him 
with  them.  The  individual  has  to  confess,  is 
bound  to  expose  all  the  particulars  of  his  life 
and  conduct  to  the  view  of  the  confessor,  and 
then  is  informed  what  course  he  has  to  pursue 
to  attain  spiritual  safety.  Thus  the  Church  took 
the  place  of  conscience:  it  put  men  in  leading 
strings  like  children,  and  told  them  that  man 
could  not  be  freed  from  the  torments  which  his 
sins  had  merited  by  any  amendment  of  his  own 
moral  condition,  but  by  outward  actions,  opera 
operata— -actions  which  were  not  the  prompt¬ 
ings  of  his  own  good  will,  but  performed  by 
command  of  the  ministers  of  the  Church;  e.g., 
hearing  Mass,  doing  penance,  going  through  a 
certain  number  of  prayers,  undertaking  pilgrim¬ 
ages — actions  which  are  unspiritual,  stupefy 
the  soul,  and  which  are  not  only  mere  external 
ceremonies,  but  are  such  as  can  be  even  vicari¬ 
ously  performed.  The  supererogatory  works  as¬ 
cribed  to  the  Saints,  could  be  purchased,  and  the 
spiritual  advantage  which  they  merited,  secured 
to  the  purchaser.  Thus  was  produced  an  utter 
derangement  of  all  that  is  recognized  as  good 
and  moral  in  the  Christian  Church :  only  external 
requirements  are  insisted  upon,  and  these  can 
be  complied  with  in  a  merely  external  way.  A 
condition  the  very  reverse  of  freedom  is  in¬ 
truded  into  the  principle  of  freedom  itself. 

With  this  perversion  is  connected  the  abso¬ 
lute  separation  of  the  spiritual  from  the  secular 
principle  generally.  There  are  two  divine  king¬ 
doms — the  intellectual  in  the  heart  and  cogni¬ 
tive  faculty,  and  the  socially  ethical  whose  ele¬ 
ment  and  sphere  is  secular  existence.lt  is  science 
alone  that  can  comprehend  the  kingdom  of  God 
and  the  socially  moral  world  as  one  idea,  and 
that  recognizes  the  fact  that  the  course  of  time 
has  witnessed  a  process  ever  tending  to  the 
realization  of  this  unity.  But  piety  as  such  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  secular:  it  may  make 
its  appearance  in  that  sphere  on  a  mission  of 
mercy,  but  this  stops  short  of  a  strict  socially 
ethical  connection  with  it — does  not  come  up  to 
the  idea  of  freedom.  Religious  feeling  is  ex¬ 
traneous  to  history,  and  has  no  history;  for 
history  is  rather  the  empire  of  spirit  recognizing 


itself  in  its  subjective  freedom,  as  the  economy 
of  social  morality  in  the  state.  In  the  middle 
ages  that  embodying  of  the  divine  in  actual  life 
was  wanting;  the  antithesis  was  not  harmonized. 
Social  morality  was  represented  as  worthless, 
and  that  in  its  three  most  essential  particulars. 

One  phase  of  social  morality  is  that  connected 
with  love — with  the  emotions  called  forth  in  the 
marriage  relation.  It  is  not  proper  to  say  that 
celibacy  is  contrary  to  nature,  but  that  it  is  ad¬ 
verse  to  social  morality.  Marriage  was  indeed 
reckoned  by  the  Church  among  the  sacraments ; 
but  notwithstanding  the  position  thus  assigned 
it,  it  was  degraded,  inasmuch  as  celibacy  was 
reckoned  as  the  more  holy  state.  A  second  point 
of  social  morality  is  presented  in  activity — the 
workman  has  to  perform  for  his  subsistence. 
His  dignity  consists  in  his  depending  entirely  on 
his  diligence,  conduct,  and  intelligence,  for  the 
supply  of  his  wants.  In  direct  contravention  of 
this  principle,  pauperism,  laziness,  inactivity, 
was  regarded  as  nobler:  and  the  immoral  thus 
received  the  stamp  of  consecration.  A  third 
point  of  morality  is,  that  obedience  be  rendered 
to  the  moral  and  rational,  as  an  obedience  to 
laws  which  I  recognize  as  just;  that  it  be  not 
that  blind  and  unconditional  compliance  which 
does  not  know  what  it  is  doing,  and  whose 
course  of  action  is  a  mere  groping  about  with¬ 
out  clear  consciousness  or  intelligence.  But  it 
was  exactly  this  latter  kind  of  obedience  that 
passed  for  the  most  pleasing  to  God;  a  doctrine 
that  exalts  the  obedience  of  slavery,  imposed  by 
the  arbitrary  will  of  the  Church,  above  the  true 
obedience  of  freedom. 

In  this  way  the  three  vows  of  chastity,  pov¬ 
erty,  and  obedience  turned  out  the  very  opposite 
of  what  they  assumed  to  be,  and  in  them  all 
social  morality  was  degraded.  The  Church  was 
no  longer  a  spiritual  power,  but  an  ecclesiastical 
one;  and  the  relation  which  the  secular  world 
sustained  to  it  was  unspiritual,  automatic,  and 
destitute  of  independent  insight  and  conviction. 
As  the  consequence  of  this,  we  see  everywhere 
vice,  utter  absence  of  respect  for  conscience, 
shamelessness,  and  a  distracted  state  of  things, 
of  which  the  entire  history  of  the  period  is  the 
picture  in  detail. 

According  to  the  above,  the  Church  of  the 
Middle  Ages  exhibits  itself  as  a  manifold  self- 
contradiction.  For  subjective  spirit,  although 
testifying  of  the  absolute,  is  at  the  same  time 
limited  and  definitely  existing  spirit,  as  intelli¬ 
gence  and  will.  Its  limitation  begins  in  its  tak¬ 
ing  up  this  distinctive  position,  and  here  con¬ 
sentaneously  begins  its  contradictory  and  self- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


334 

alienated  phase;  for  that  intelligence  and  will 
are  not  imbued  with  the  truth,  which  appears  in 
relation  to  them  as  something  given .  This  ex¬ 
ternality  of  the  absolute  object  of  comprehen¬ 
sion  affects  the  consciousness  thus:  that  the  ab¬ 
solute  object  presents  itself  as  a  merely  sensu¬ 
ous,  external  thing — common  outward  existence 
— and  yet  claims  to  be  absolute :  in  the  mediae¬ 
val  view  of  things  this  absolute  demand  is  made 
upon  spirit.  The  second  form  of  the  contradic¬ 
tion  in  question  has  to  do  with  the  relation  which 
the  Church  itself  sustains.  The  true  spirit  exists 
in  man — is  his  spirit;  and  the  individual  gives 
himself  the  certainty  of  this  identity  with  the 
absolute,  in  worship — the  Church  sustaining 
merely  the  relation  of  a  teacher  and  directress 
of  this  worship  But  here,  on  the  contrary,  we 
have  an  ecclesiastical  body,  like  the  Brahmins 
in  India,  in  possession  of  the  truth — not  indeed 
by  birth,  but  in  virtue  of  knowledge,  teaching 
and  training — yet  with  the  proviso  that  this 
alone  is  not  sufficient,  an  external  form,  an  un¬ 
spiritual  title  being  judged  essential  to  actual 
possession.  This  outward  form  is  ordination, 
whose  nature  is  such  that  the  consecration  im¬ 
parted  inheres  essentially  like  a  sensuous  qual¬ 
ity  in  the  individual,  whatever  be  the  character 
of  his  soul — be  he  irreligious,  immoral,  or  abso¬ 
lutely  ignorant.  The  third  kind  of  contradiction 
is  the  Church  itself,  in  its  acquisition  as  an  out¬ 
ward  existence,  of  possessions  and  an  enormous 
property — a  state  of  things  which,  since  that 
church  despises  or  professes  to  despise  riches, 
is  none  other  than  a  lie. 

And  we  found  the  state,  during  the  mediaeval 
period,  similarly  involved  in  contradictions.  We 
spoke  above  of  an  imperial  rule,  recognized  as 
standing  by  the  side  of  the  church  and  consti¬ 
tuting  its  secular  arm.  But  the  power  thus  ac¬ 
knowledged  is  invalidated  by  the  fact  that  the 
imperial  dignity  in  question  is  an  empty  title, 
not  regarded  by  the  Emperor  himself  or  by  those 
who  wish  to  make  him  the  instrument  of  their 
ambitious  views,  as  conferring  solid  authority 
on  its  possessor;  for  passion  and  physical  force 
assume  an  independent  position,  and  own  no 
subjection  to  that  merely  abstract  conception. 
But  secondly ,  the  bond  of  union  which  holds  the 
mediaeval  state  together,  and  which  we  call 
fidelity,  is  left  to  the  arbitrary  choice  of  men’s 
disposition  which  recognizes  no  objective  duties. 
Consequently,  this  fidelity  is  the  most  unfaith¬ 
ful  thing  possible.  German  honour  in  the  Middle 
Ages  has  become  a  proverb ;  but  examined  more 
closely  as  history  exhibits  it  we  find  it  a  verita¬ 
ble  Punica  fides  or  Grceca  fides ;  for  the  princes 


and  vassals  of  the  Emperor  are  true  and  honour¬ 
able  only  to  their  selfish  aims,  individual  ad¬ 
vantage  and  passions,  but  utterly  untrue  to  the 
Empire  and  the  Emperor;  because  in  “fidelity” 
in  the  abstract,  their  subjective  caprice  receives 
a  sanction,  and  the  state  is  not  organized  as  a 
moral  totality.  A  third  contradiction  presents  it¬ 
self  in  the  character  of  individuals,  exhibiting, 
as  they  do,  on  the  one  hand,  piety — religious 
devotion,  the  most  beautiful  in  outward  aspect, 
and  springing  from  the  very  depths  of  sincerity 
— and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  barbarous  deficiency 
in  point  of  intelligence  and  will.  We  find  an  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  abstract  truth,  and  yet  the  most 
uncultured,  the  rudest  ideas  of  the  secular  and 
the  spiritual:  a  truculent  delirium  of  passion  and 
yet  a  Christian  sanctity  which  renounces  all  that 
is  worldly,  and  devotes  itself  entirely  to  holiness. 
So  self-contradictory,  so  deceptive  is  this  mediae¬ 
val  period:  and  the  polemical  zeal  with  which  its 
excellence  is  contended  for  is  one  of  the  absurd¬ 
ities  of  our  times.  Primitive  barbarism,  rudeness 
of  manners,  and  childish  fancy  are  not  revolting; 
they  simply  excite  our  pity.  But  the  highest 
purity  of  soul  defiled  by  the  most  horrible  bar¬ 
barity ;  the  truth,  of  which  a  knowledge  has  been 
acquired,  degraded  to  a  mere  tool  by  falsehood 
and  self-seeking;  that  which  is  most  irrational, 
coarse  and  vile,  established  and  strengthened  by 
the  religious  sentiment — this  is  the  most  disgust¬ 
ing  and  revolting  spectacle  that  was  ever  wit¬ 
nessed,  and  which  only  philosophy  can  compre¬ 
hend  and  so  justify.  For  such  an  antithesis  must 
arise  in  man’s  consciousness  of  the  holy  while 
this  consciousness  still  remains  primitive  and  im¬ 
mediate;  and  the  profounder  the  truth  to  which 
spirit  comes  into  an  implicit  relation,  while  it 
has  not  yet  become  aware  of  its  own  presence 
in  that  profound  truth,  so  much  the  more  alien 
is  it  to  itself  in  this  its  unknown  form:  but  only 
as  the  result  of  this  alienation  does  it  attain  its 
true  harmonization. 

We  have  then  contemplated  the  Church  as  the 
reaction  of  the  spiritual  against  the  secular  life 
of  the  time ;  but  this  reaction  is  so  conditioned 
that  it  only  subjects  to  itself  that  against 
which  it  reacts — does  not  reform  it.  While  the 
spiritual,  repudiating  its  proper  sphere  of  action, 
has  been  acquiring  secular  power,  a  secular  sov¬ 
ereignty  has  also  consolidated  itself  and  attained 
a  systematic  development — the  feudal  system. 
As  through  their  isolation,  men  are  reduced  to 
a  dependence  on  their  individual  power  and 
might,  every  point  in  the  world  on  which  a  hu¬ 
man  being  can  maintain  his  ground  becomes  an 
energetic  one.  While  the  individual  still  remains 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  335 


destitute  of  the  defence  of  laws  and  is  protected 
only  by  his  own  exertion,  life,  activity  and  ex¬ 
citement  everywhere  manifest  themselves.  As 
men  are  certain  of  eternal  salvation  through  the 
instrumentality  of  the  Church,  and  to  this  end 
are  bound  to  obey  it  only  in  its  spiritual  require¬ 
ments,  their  ardour  in  the  pursuit  of  worldly  en¬ 
joyment  increases,  on  the  other  hand,  in  inverse 
proportion  to  their  fear  of  its  producing  any 
detriment  to  their  spiritual  weal;  for  the  Church 
bestows  indulgences,  when  required,  for  oppres¬ 
sive,  violent,  and  vicious  actions  of  all  kinds. 

The  period  from  the  eleventh  to  the  thirteenth 
century  witnessed  the  rise  of  an  impulse  which 
developed  itself  in  various  forms.  The  inhabit¬ 
ants  of  various  districts  began  to  build  enor¬ 
mous  churches — cathedrals,  erected  to  contain 
the  whole  community.  Architecture  is  always  the 
first  art,  forming  the  inorganic  phase,  the  domi¬ 
ciliation  of  the  divinity;  not  till  this  is  accom¬ 
plished  does  art  attempt  to  exhibit  to  the  wor¬ 
shippers  the  divinity  himself — the  objective. 
Maritime  commerce  was  carried  on  with  vigour 
by  the  cities  on  the  Italian,  Spanish, and  Flemish 
coasts,  and  this  stimulated  the  productive  indus¬ 
try  of  their  citizens  at  home.  The  sciences  began 
in  some  degree  to  revive :  the  scholastic  philoso¬ 
phy  was  in  its  glory.  Schools  for  the  study  of  law 
were  founded  at  Bologna  and  other  places,  as 
also  for  that  of  medicine.  It  is  on  the  rise  and 
growing  importance  of  the  towns  that  all  these 
creations  depend  as  their  main  condition;  a 
favourite  subject  of  historical  treatment  in  mod¬ 
ern  times.  And  the  rise  of  such  communities  was 
greatly  desiderated.  For  the  towns,  like  the 
Church,  present  themselves  as  reactions  against 
feudal  violence — as  the  earliest  legally  and 
regularly  constituted  power.  Mention  has  al¬ 
ready  been  made  of  the  fact  that  the  possessors 
of  power  compelled  others  to  put  themselves 
under  their  protection.  Such  centres  of  safety 
were  castles,  churches,  and  monasteries,  round 
which  were  collected  those  who  needed  protec¬ 
tion.  These  now  became  burghers,  and  entered 
into  a  cliental  relation  to  the  lords  of  such  castles 
or  to  monastic  bodies.  Thus  a  firmly  established 
community  was  formed  in  many  places.  Many 
cities  and  fortified  places  still  existed  in  Italy,  in 
the  south  of  France,  and  in  Germany  on  the 
Rhine,  which  dated  their  existence  from  the 
ancient  Roman  times,  and  which  originally  pos¬ 
sessed  municipal  rights,  but  subsequently  lost 
them  under  the  rule  of  feudal  governors.  The 
citizens,  like  their  rural  neighbors,  had  been  re¬ 
duced  to  vassalage. 

The  principle  of  free  possession  however  be¬ 


gan  to  develop  itself  from  the  protective  rela¬ 
tion  of  feudal  protection;  i.e .,  freedom  origi¬ 
nated  in  its  direct  contrary.  The  feudal  lords 
or  great  barons  enjoyed,  properly  speaking,  no 
free  or  absolute  possession,  any  more  than  their 
dependents ;  they  had  unlimited  power  over  the 
latter,  but  at  the  same  time  they  also  were  vassals 
of  princes  higher  and  mightier  than  themselves, 
and  to  whom  they  were  under  engagements — 
which,  it  must  be  confessed,  they  did  not  fulfil 
except  under  compulsion.  The  ancient  Germans 
had  known  of  none  other  than  free  possession; 
but  this  principle  had  been  perverted  into  its 
complete  opposite,  and  now  for  the  first  time  we 
behold  the  few  feeble  commencements  of  a  re¬ 
viving  sense  of  freedom.  Individuals  brought  into 
closer  relation  by  the  soil  which  they  cultivated, 
formed  among  themselves  a  kind  of  union,  con¬ 
federation,  or  conjuratio.  They  agreed  to  be  and 
to  perform  on  their  own  behalf  that  which  they 
had  previously  been  and  performed  in  the  serv¬ 
ice  of  their  feudal  lord  alone.  Their  first  united 
undertaking  was  the  erection  of  a  tower  in  which 
a  bell  was  suspended:  the  ringing  of  the  bell  was 
a  signal  for  a  general  rendezvous,  and  the  object 
of  the  union  thus  appointed  was  the  formation 
of  a  kind  of  militia.  This  is  followed  by  the  in¬ 
stitution  of  a  municipal  government,  consisting 
of  magistrates,  jurors,  consuls, and  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  a  common  treasury,  the  imposition  of 
taxes,  tolls,  etc.  Trenches  are  dug  and  walls  built 
for  the  common  defence,  and  the  citizens  are  for¬ 
bidden  to  erect  fortresses  for  themselves  indi¬ 
vidually.  In  such  a  community,  handicrafts,  as 
distinguished  from  agriculture,  find  their  proper 
home.  Artisans  necessarily  soon  attained  a  supe¬ 
rior  position  to  that  of  the  tillers  of  the  ground, 
for  the  latter  were  forcibly  driven  to  work;  the 
former  displayed  activity  really  their  own,  and 
a  corresponding  diligence  and  interest  in  the  re¬ 
sult  of  their  labours.  Formerly  artisans  had  been 
obliged  to  get  permission  from  their  liege  lords 
to  sell  their  work,  and  thus  earn  something  for 
themselves :  they  were  obliged  to  pay  them  a  cer¬ 
tain  sum  for  this  privilege  of  market,  besides 
contributing  a  portion  of  their  gains  to  the 
baronial  exchequer.  Those  who  had  houses  of 
their  own  were  obliged  to  pay  a  considerable 
quit-rent  for  them;  on  all  that  was  imported  and 
exported,  the  nobility  imposed  large  tolls,  and 
for  the  security  afforded  to  travellers  they  ex¬ 
acted  safe-conduct  money.  When  at  a  later  date 
these  communities  became  stronger,  all  such 
feudal  rights  were  purchased  from  the  nobles, 
or  the  cession  of  them  compulsorily  extorted: 
by  degrees  the  towns  secured  an  independent 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


336 

jurisdiction  and  likewise  freed  themselves  from 
all  taxes,  tolls,  and  rents.  The  burden  which  con¬ 
tinued  the  longest  was  the  obligation  the  towns 
were  under  to  make  provision  for  the  Emperor 
and  his  whole  retinue  during  his  stay  within  their 
precincts,  as  also  for  seigneurs  of  inferior  rank 
under  the  same  circumstances.  The  trading  class 
subsequently  divided  itself  into  guilds,  to  each 
of  which  were  attached  particular  rights  and 
obligations.  The  factions  to  which  episcopal 
elections  and  other  contingencies  gave  rise,  very 
often  promoted  the  attainment  by  the  towns  of 
the  rights  above-mentioned.  As  it  would  not  in¬ 
frequently  happen  that  two  rival  bishops  were 
elected  to  the  same  see,  each  one  sought  to  draw 
the  citizens  into  his  own  interest,  by  granting 
them  privileges  and  freeing  them  from  burdens. 
Subsequently  arose  many  feuds  with  the  clergy, 
the  bishops  and  abbots.  In  some  towns  they 
mantained  their  position  as  lords  of  the  munic¬ 
ipality;  in  others  the  citizens  got  the  upper 
hand,  and  obtained  their  freedom.  Thus,  e.g., 
Cologne  threw  off  the  yoke  of  its  bishop;  May- 
ence  on  the  other  hand  remained  subject.  By  de¬ 
grees  cities  grew  to  be  independent  republics: 
first  and  foremost  in  Italy,  then  in  the  Nether¬ 
lands,  Germany,  and  France.  They  soon  come  to 
occupy  a  peculiar  position  with  respect  to  the 
nobility.  The  latter  united  itself  with  the  cor¬ 
porations  of  the  towns,  and  constituted  as,  e.g.f 
in  Berne,  a  particular  guild.lt  soon  assumed  spe¬ 
cial  powers  in  the  corporations  of  the  towns  and 
attained  a  dominant  position;  but  the  citizens 
resisted  the  usurpation  and  secured  the  govern¬ 
ment  to  themselves.  The  rich  citizens  ( populus 
crassus)  now  excluded  the  nobility  from  power. 
But  in  the  same  way  as  the  party  of  the  nobility 
was  divided  into  factions — especially  those  of 
Ghibellines  and  Guelfs,  of  which  the  former 
favored  the  Emperor,  the  latter  the  Pope — that 
of  the  citizens  also  was  rent  in  sunder  by  intes¬ 
tine  strife.  The  victorious  faction  was  accus¬ 
tomed  to  exclude  its  vanquished  opponents  from 
power.  The  patrician  nobility  which  supplanted 
the  feudal  aristocracy,  deprived  the  common 
people  of  all  share  in  the  conduct  of  the  state, 
and  thus  proved  itself  no  less  oppressive  than  the 
original  noblesse.  The  history  of  the  cities  pre¬ 
sents  us  with  a  continual  change  of  constitutions, 
according  as  one  party  among  the  citizens  or  the 
other,  this  faction  or  that,  got  the  upper  hand. 
Originally  a  select  body  of  citizens  chose  the 
magistrates ;  but  as  in  such  elections  the  victori¬ 
ous  faction  always  had  the  greatest  influence,  no 
other  means  of  securing  impartial  functionaries 
was  left,  but  the  election  of  foreigners  to  the 


office  of  judge  and  podesta.  It  also  frequently 
happened  that  the  cities  chose  foreign  princes  as 
supreme  seigneurs,  and  intrusted  them  with  the 
signoria.  But  all  of  these  arrangements  were  only 
of  short  continuance;  the  princes  soon  misused 
their  sovereignty  to  promote  their  own  ambi¬ 
tious  designs  and  to  gratify  their  passions,  and 
in  a  few  years  wrere  once  more  deprived  of  their 
supremacy. 

Thus  the  history  of  these  cities  presents  on 
the  one  hand,  in  individual  characters  marked 
by  the  most  terrible  or  the  most  admirable  fea¬ 
tures,  an  astonishingly  interesting  picture;  on  the 
other  hand,  it  repels  us  by  assuming,  as  it  un¬ 
avoidably  does,  the  aspect  of  mere  chronicles.  In 
contemplating  the  restless  and  ever-varying  im¬ 
pulses  that  agitate  the  very  heart  of  these  cities 
and  the  continuai  struggles  of  factions,  we  are 
astonished  to  see  on  the  other  side  industry, 
commerce  by  land  and  sea,  in  the  highest  degree 
prosperous.  It  is  the  same  principle  of  lively 
vigour,  which,  nourished  by  the  internal  excite¬ 
ment  in  question,  produces  this  phenomenon. 

We  have  contemplated  the  Church,  which  ex¬ 
tended  its  power  over  all  the  sovereignties  of  the 
time,  and  the  cities,  where  a  social  organization 
on  a  basis  of  right  was  first  resuscitated,  as  pow¬ 
ers  reacting  against  the  authority  of  princes  and 
feudal  lords.  Against  these  two  rising  powers, 
there  followed  a  reactionary  movement  of 
princely  authority;  the  Emperor  now  enters  on 
a  struggle  with  the  Pope  and  the  cities.  The  Em¬ 
peror  is  recognized  as  the  apex  of  Christian,  i.e., 
secular  power,  the  Pope  on  the  other  hand  as  that 
of  ecclesiastical  power,  which  had  now  however 
become  as  decidedly  a  secular  dominion.  In 
theory,  it  was  not  disputed  that  the  Roman  Em¬ 
peror  was  the  head  of  Christendom — that  he 
possessed  the  dominium  mundi — that  since  all 
Christian  states  belonged  to  the  Roman  Empire, 
their  princes  owed  him  allegiance  in  all  reason¬ 
able  and  equitable  requirements.  However  satis¬ 
fied  the  emperors  themselves  might  be  of  the 
validity  of  this  claim,  they  had  too  much  good 
sense  to  attempt  seriously  to  enforce  it :  but  the 
empty  title  of  Roman  Emperor  was  a  sufficient 
inducement  to  them  to  exert  themselves  to  the 
utmost  to  acquire  and  maintain  it  in  Italy.  The 
Othos  especially  cherished  the  idea  of  the  con¬ 
tinuation  of  the  old  Roman  Empire,  and  were 
ever  and  anon  summoning  the  German  princes 
to  join  them  in  an  expedition  to  Rome  with  a 
view  to  coronation  there;  an  undertaking  in 
which  they  were  often  deserted  by  them  and  had 
to  undergo  the  shame  of  a  retreat.  Equal  dis¬ 
appointment  was  experienced  by  those  Italians 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD 


who  hoped  for  deliverance  at  the  hands  of  the 
Emperor  from  the  ochlocracy  that  domineered 
over  the  cities,  or  from  the  violence  of  the  feudal 
nobility  in  the  country  at  large.  The  Italian 
princes  who  had  invoked  the  presence  of  the  Em¬ 
peror  and  had  promised  him  aid  in  asserting  his 
claims  drew  back  and  left  him  in  the  lurch;  and 
those  who  had  previously  expected  salvation  for 
their  country  then  broke  out  into  bitter  com¬ 
plaints  that  their  beautiful  country  was  devas¬ 
tated  by  barbarians,  their  superior  civilization 
trodden  under  foot,  and  that  right  and  liberty, 
deserted  by  the  Emperor,  must  also  perish.  Espe¬ 
cially  touching  and  deep  are  the  lamentations 
and  reproaches  which  Dante  addresses  to  the 
Emperors. 

The  second  complication  with  Italy  was  that 
struggle  which  contemporaneously  with  the 
former  was  sustained  chiefly  by  the  great  Swabi¬ 
ans,  the  house  of  Hohenstaufen ,  and  whose  ob¬ 
ject  was  to  bring  back  the  secular  power  of  the 
Church,  which  had  become  independent,  to  its 
original  dependence  on  the  state.  The  Papal  See 
was  also  a  secular  power  and  sovereignty,  and 
the  Emperor  asserted  the  superior  prerogative 
of  choosing  the  Pope  and  investing  him  with  his 
secular  sovereignty.  It  was  these  rights  of  the 
state  for  which  the  Emperors  contended.  But  to 
that  secular  power  which  they  withstood,  they 
were  at  the  same  time  subject,  in  virtue  of  its 
spiritual  pretensions:  thus  the  contest  was  an 
interminable  contradiction.  Contradictory  as  the 
varying  phases  of  the  contest,  in  which  recon¬ 
ciliation  was  ever  alternating  with  renewed  hos¬ 
tilities,  was  also  the  instrumentality  employed  in 
the  struggle.  For  the  power  with  which  the  Em¬ 
perors  made  head  against  their  enemy — the 
princes,  their  servants  and  subjects,  were  divided 
in  their  own  minds,  inasmuch  as  they  were 
bound  by  the  strongest  ties  of  allegiance  to  the 
Emperor  and  to  his  enemy  at  one  and  the  same 
time.  The  chief  interest  of  the  princes  lay  in 
that  very  assumption  of  independence  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  state,  against  which  on  the  part  of 
the  Papal  See  the  Emperor  was  contending;  so 
that  they  were  willing  to  stand  by  the  Emperor 
in  cases  where  the  empty  dignity  of  the  imperial 
crown  was  impugned,  or  on  some  particular  oc¬ 
casions — e.g.,  in  a  contest  with  the  cities — but 
abandoned  him  when  he  aimed  at  seriously 
asserting  his  authority  against  the  secular  power 
of  the  clergy,  or  against  other  princes. 

As,  on  the  one  hand,  the  German  Emperors 
sought  to  realize  their  title  in  Italy,  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  Italy  had  its  political  centre  in  Ger¬ 
many.  The  interests  of  the  two  countries  were 


thus  linked  together,  and  neither  could  gain 
political  consolidation  within  itself.  In  the  bril¬ 
liant  period  of  the  Hohenstaufen  dynasty,  in¬ 
dividuals  of  commanding  character  sustained 
the  dignity  of  the  throne;  sovereigns  like  Fred¬ 
erick  Barbarossa,  in  whom  the  imperial  power 
manifested  itself  in  its  greatest  majesty,  and  who 
by  his  personal  qualities  succeeded  in  attaching 
the  subject  princes  to  his  interests.  Yet  brilliant 
as  the  history  of  the  Hohenstaufen  dynasty  may 
appear,  and  stirring  as  might  have  been  the  con¬ 
test  with  the  Church,  the  former  presents  on  the 
whole  nothing  more  than  the  tragedy  of  this 
house  itself,  and  the  latter  had  no  important  re¬ 
sult  in  the  sphere  of  spirit.  The  cities  were  in¬ 
deed  compelled  to  acknowledge  the  imperial  au¬ 
thority,  and  their  deputies  swore  to  observe  the 
decisions  of  the  Roncalian  Diet ;  but  they  kept 
their  word  no  longer  than  they  were  compelled 
to  do  so.  Their  sense  of  obligation  depended  ex¬ 
clusively  on  the  direct  consciousness  of  a  supe¬ 
rior  power  ready  to  enforce  it.  It  is  said  that 
when  the  Emperor  Frederick  I  asked  the  depu¬ 
ties  of  the  cities  whether  they  had  not  sworn  to 
the  conditions  of  peace,  they  answered:  “Yes, 
but  not  that  we  would  observe  them.”  The  re¬ 
sult  was  that  Frederick  I  at  the  Peace  of  Con¬ 
stance  (1183)  was  obliged  to  concede  to  them  a 
virtual  independence;  although  he  appended  the 
stipulation  that  in  this  concession  their  feudal 
obligations  to  the  German  Empire  were  under¬ 
stood  to  be  reserved.  The  contest  between  the 
Emperors  and  the  Popes  regarding  investitures 
was  settled  at  the  close  of  1122  by  Henry  V  and 
Pope  Calixtus  II  on  these  terms:  the  Emperor 
was  to  invest  with  the  sceptre;  the  Pope  with 
the  ring  and  crosier;  the  chapter  were  to  elect 
the  bishops  in  the  presence  of  the  Emperor  or  of 
imperial  commissioners ;  then  the  Emperor  was 
to  invest  the  bishop  as  a  secular  feudatory  with 
the  temporalia,  while  the  ecclesiastical  investi¬ 
ture  was  reserved  for  the  Pope.  Thus  the  pro¬ 
tracted  contest  between  the  secular  and  spiritual 
powers  was  at  length  set  at  rest. 

Chapter  2.  The  Crusades 
The  Church  gained  the  victory  in  the  struggle 
referred  to  in  the  previous  chapter;  and  in  this 
way  secured  as  decided  a  supremacy  in  Ger¬ 
many,  as  she  did  in  the  other  states  of  Europe 
by  a  calmer  process.  She  made  herself  mistress 
of  all  the  relations  of  life,  and  of  science  and 
art;  and  she  was  the  permanent  repository  of 
spiritual  treasures.  Yet  notwithstanding  this  full 
and  complete  development  of  ecclesiastical  life, 
we  find  a  deficiency  and  consequent  craving 


33S  PHILOSOPHY 

manifesting  itself  in  Christendom,  and  which 
drove  it  out  of  itself.  To  understand  this  want, 
we  must  revert  to  the  nature  of  the  Christian  re¬ 
ligion  itself,  and  particularly  to  that  aspect  of  it 
by  which  it  has  a  footing  in  the  present  in  the 
consciousness  of  its  votaries. 

The  objective  doctrines  of  Christianity  had 
been  already  so  firmly  settled  by  the  councils  of 
the  Church,  that  neither  the  mediaeval  nor  any 
other  philosophy  could  develop  them  further, 
except  in  the  way  of  exalting  them  intellectually, 
so  that  they  might  be  satisfactory  as  presenting 
the  form  of  thought.  And  one  essential  point  in 
this  doctrine  was  the  recognition  of  the  divine 
nature  as  not  in  any  sense  an  other-world  exist¬ 
ence,  but  as  in  unity  with  human  nature  in  the 
present  and  actual.  But  this  presence  is  at  the 
same  time  exclusively  spiritual  presence.  Christ 
as  a  particular  human  personality  has  left  the 
world ;  his  temporal  existence  is  only  a  past  one 
— i.e.j  it  exists  only  in  mental  conception.  And 
since  the  divine  existence  on  earth  is  essentially 
of  a  spiritual  character,  it  cannot  appear  in  the 
form  of  a  Dalai  Lama.  The  Pope,  however  high 
his  position  as  Head  of  Christendom  and  Vicar 
of  Christ,  calls  himself  only  the  Servant  of 
Servants.  How  then  did  the  Church  realize  Christ 
as  a  definite  and  present  existence?  The  principal 
form  of  this  realization  was,  as  remarked  above, 
the  Holy  Supper,  in  the  form  it  presented  as  the 
Mass :  in  this  the  life,  suffering,  and  death  of  the 
actual  Christ  were  verily  present,  as  an  eternal 
and  daily  repeated  sacrifice.  Christ  appears  as  a 
definite  and  present  existence  in  a  sensuous  form 
as  the  Host,  consecrated  by  the  priest ;  so  far  all 
is  satisfactory:  that  is  to  say,  it  is  the  Church, 
the  spirit  of  Christ,  that  attains  in  this  ordinance 
direct  and  full  assurance.  But  the  most  promi¬ 
nent  feature  in  this  sacrament  is,  that  the  process 
by  which  deity  is  manifested,  is  conditioned  by 
the  limitations  of  particularity — that  the  Host, 
this  thing,  is  set  up  to  be  adored  as  God.  The 
Church  then  might  have  been  able  to  content  it¬ 
self  with  this  sensuous  presence  of  deity;  but 
when  it  is  once  granted  that  God  exists  in  exter¬ 
nal  phenomenal  presence,  this  external  manifes¬ 
tation  immediately  becomes  infinitely  varied; 
for  the  need  of  this  presence  is  infinite.  Thus  in¬ 
numerable  instances  will  occur  in  the  experience 
of  the  Church,  in  which  Christ  has  appeared  to 
one  and  another, in  various  places ;  and  still  more 
frequently  his  divine  Mother,  who  as  standing 
nearer  to  humanity,  is  a  second  mediator  be¬ 
tween  the  Mediator  and  man  (the  miracle-work¬ 
ing  images  of  the  Virgin  are  in  their  way  Hosts, 
since  they  supply  a  benign  and  gracious  presence 


OF  HISTORY 

of  God).  In  all  places, therefore, there  will  occur 
manifestations  of  the  heavenly,  in  specially  gra¬ 
cious  appearances,  the  stigmata  of  Christ’s  Pas¬ 
sion,  etc.;  and  the  divine  will  be  realized  in 
miracles  as  detached  and  isolated  phenomena. 
In  the  period  in  question  the  Church  presents 
the  aspect  of  a  world  of  miracle;  to  the  commun¬ 
ity  of  devout  and  pious  persons  natural  existence 
has  utterly  lost  its  stability  and  certainty: 
rather,  absolute  certainty  has  turned  against  it, 
and  the  divine  is  not  conceived  of  by  Christen¬ 
dom  under  conditions  of  universality  as  the  law 
and  nature  of  spirit,  but  reveals  itself  in  isolated 
and  detached  phenomena,  in  which  the  rational 
form  of  existence  is  utterly  perverted. 

In  this  complete  development  of  the  Church, 
we  may  find  a  deficiency:  but  what  can  be  felt 
as  a  want  by  it?  What  compels  it,  in  this  state 
of  perfect  satisfaction  and  enjoyment,  to  wish 
for  something  else  within  the  limits  of  its  own 
principles — without  apostatizing  from  itself? 
Those  miraculous  images,  places,  and  times,  are 
only  isolated  points,  momentary  appearances — 
are  not  an  embodiment  of  deity,  not  of  the  high¬ 
est  and  absolute  kind.  The  Host,  the  supreme 
manifestation,  is  to  be  found  indeed  in  innumer¬ 
able  churches;  Christ  is  therein  transubstan¬ 
tiated  to  a  present  and  particular  existence:  but 
this  itself  is  of  a  vague  and  general  character; 
it  is  not  his  actual  and  very  presence  as  particu¬ 
larized  in  space.  That  presence  has  passed  away, 
as  regards  time;  but  as  spatial  and  as  concrete  in 
space  it  has  a  mundane  permanence  in  this  par¬ 
ticular  spot,  this  particular  village,  etc.  It  is  then 
this  mundane  existence  which  Christendom  de¬ 
siderates,  which  it  is  resolved  on  attaining.  Pil¬ 
grims  in  crowds  had  indeed  been  able  to  enjoy 
it ;  but  the  approach  to  the  hallowed  localities  is 
in  the  hands  of  the  infidels,  and  it  is  a  reproach 
to  Christendom  that  the  holy  places  and  the 
Sepulchre  of  Christ  in  particular  are  not  in  pos¬ 
session  of  the  Church.  In  this  feeling  Christen¬ 
dom  was  united;  consequently  the  Crusades 
were  undertaken,  whose  object  was  not  the  fur¬ 
therance  of  any  special  interests  on  the  part  of 
the  several  states  that  engaged  in  them,  but  sim¬ 
ply  and  solely  the  conquest  of  the  Holy  Land. 

The  West  once  more  sallied  forth  in  hostile 
array  against  the  East.  As  in  the  expedition  of 
the  Greeks  against  Troy,  so  here,  the  invading 
hosts  were  entirely  composed  of  independent 
feudal  lords  and  knights;  though  they  were  not 
united  under  a  real  individuality,  as  were  the 
Greeks  under  Agamemnon  or  Alexander.  Chris¬ 
tendom,  on  the  contrary,  was  engaged  in  an  un¬ 
dertaking  whose  object  was  the  securing  of  the 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  339 


definite  and  present  existence — the  real  culmina¬ 
tion  of  individuality.  This  object  impelled  the 
West  against  the  East,  and  this  is  the  essential 
interest  of  the  Crusades. 

The  first  and  immediate  commencement  of 
the  Crusades  was  made  in  the  West  itself.  Many 
thousands  of  Jews  were  massacred,  and  their 
property  seized;  and  after  this  terrible  prelude 
Christendom  began  its  march.  The  monk,  Peter 
the  Hermit  of  Amiens,  led  the  way  with  an  im¬ 
mense  troop  of  rabble.  This  host  passed  in  the 
greatest  disorder  through  Hungary,  and  robbed 
and  plundered  as  they  went ;  but  their  numbers 
dwindled  away,  and  only  a  few  reached  Con¬ 
stantinople.  For  rational  considerations  were 
out  of  the  question;  the  mass  of  them  believed 
that  God  would  be  their  immediate  guide  and 
protector.  The  most  striking  proof  that  enthu¬ 
siasm  almost  robbed  the  nations  of  Europe  of 
their  senses  is  supplied  by  the  fact  that  at  a 
later  time  troops  of  children  ran  away  from  their 
parents  and  went  to  Marseilles,  there  to  take 
ship  for  the  Holy  Land.  Few  reached  it;  the 
rest  were  sold  by  the  merchants  to  the  Saracens 
as  slaves. 

At  last,  with  much  trouble  and  immense  loss, 
more  regular  armies  attained  the  desired  object; 
they  beheld  themselves  in  possession  of  all  the 
holy  places  of  note — Bethlehem,  Gethsemane, 
Golgotha,  and  even  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  In  the 
whole  expedition,  in  all  the  acts  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians,  appeared  that  enormous  contrast  (a  fea¬ 
ture  characteristic  of  the  age) — the  transition 
on  the  part  of  the  crusading  host  from  the  great¬ 
est  excesses  and  outrages  to  the  profoundest  con¬ 
trition  and  humiliation.  Still  dripping  with  the 
blood  of  the  slaughtered  inhabitants  of  Jeru¬ 
salem,  the  Christians  fell  down  on  their  faces 
at  the  tomb  of  the  Redeemer,  and  directed  their 
fervent  supplications  to  him. 

Thus  did  Christendom  come  into  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  its  highest  good.  Jerusalem  was  made  a 
kingdom,  and  the  entire  feudal  system  was  in¬ 
troduced  there — a  constitution  which,  in  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  Saracens,  was  certainly  the  worst 
that  could  be  adopted.  Another  Crusade  in  the 
year  1 204  resulted  in  the  conquest  of  Constan¬ 
tinople  and  the  establishment  of  a  Latin  Em¬ 
pire  there.  Christendom,  therefore,  had  appeased 
its  religious  craving;  it  could  now  veritably  walk 
unobstructed  in  the  footsteps  of  the  Saviour. 
Whole  shiploads  of  earth  were  brought  from 
the  Holy  Land  to  Europe.  Of  Christ  himself  no 
corporeal  relics  could  be  obtained,  for  he  was 
arisen :  the  Sacred  Handkerchief,  the  Cross,  and 
lastly  the  Sepulchre,  were  the  most  venerated 


memorials.  But  in  the  grave  is  found  the  real 
point  of  retroversion;  it  is  in  the  grave  that  all 
the  vanity  of  the  sensuous  perishes.  At  the  Holy 
Sepulchre  the  vanity  of  opinion  passes  away; 
there  all  is  seriousness.  In  the  negation  of  that 
definite  and  present  embodiment,  i.e.,  of  the 
sensuous,  it  is  that  the  turning-point  in  question 
is  found,  and  those  words  have  an  application : 
“Thou  wouldst  not  suffer  thy  Holy  One  to  see 
corruption.”  Christendom  was  not  to  find  its 
ultimatum  of  truth  in  the  grave.  At  this  sepul¬ 
chre  the  Christian  world  received  a  second  time 
the  response  given  to  the  disciples  when  they 
sought  the  body  of  the  Lord  there:  “Why  seek 
ye  the  living  among  the  dead?  He  is  not  here, 
but  is  risen?1  You  must  not  look  for  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  your  religion  in  the  sensuous,  in  the  grave 
among  the  dead,  but  in  the  living  spirit  in  your¬ 
selves.  We  have  seen  how  the  vast  idea  of  the 
union  of  the  finite  with  the  infinite  was  perverted 
to  such  a  degree  as  that  men  looked  for  a  definite 
embodiment  of  the  infinite  in  a  mere  isolated 
outward  object.  Christendom  found  the  empty 
Sepulchre,  but  not  the  union  of  the  secular  and 
the  eternal;  and  so  it  lost  the  Holy  Land.  It 
was  practically  undeceived;  and  the  result  which 
it  brought  back  with  it  was  of  a  negative  kind: 
viz.,  that  the  definite  embodiment  which  it  was 
seeking,  was  to  be  looked  for  in  subjective  con¬ 
sciousness  alone,  and  in  no  external  object;  that 
the  definite  form  in  question,  presenting  the 
union  of  the  secular  with  the  eternal,  is  the 
spiritual  self-cognizant  independence  of  the  in¬ 
dividual.  Thus  the  world  attains  the  conviction 
that  man  must  look  within  himself  for  that  def¬ 
inite  embodiment  of  being  which  is  of  a  divine 
nature:  subjectivity  thereby  receives  absolute 
authorization,  and  claims  to  determine  for  itself 
the  relation  to  the  divine.1  This  then  was  the 
absolute  result  of  the  Crusades,  and  from  them 
we  may  date  the  commencement  of  self-reliance 
and  spontaneous  activity.  The  West  bade  an 
eternal  farewell  to  the  East  at  the  Holy  Sepul¬ 
chre,  and  gained  a  comprehension  of  its  own 
principle  of  subjective  infinite  freedom.  Chris¬ 
tendom  never  appeared  again  on  the  scene  of 
history  as  one  body. 

Crusades  of  another  kind,  bearing  somewhat 
the  character  of  wars  with  a  view  to  mere  secular 
conquest,  but  which  involved  a  religious  inter¬ 
est  also,  were  the  contests  waged  by  Spain 
against  the  Saracens  in  the  peninsula  itself.  The 
Christians  had  been  shut  up  in  a  corner  by  the 

1  All  human  actions,  projects,  institutions,  etc.,  begin 
to  be  brought  to  the  bar  of  “principle” — the  sanctum 
of  subjectivity — for  absolute  decision  on  their  merits, 
instead  of  being  referred  to  an  extraneous  authority. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


340 

Arabs;  but  they  gained  upon  their  adversaries 
in  strength,  because  the  Saracens  in  Spain  and 
Africa  were  engaged  in  war  in  various  direc¬ 
tions,  and  were  divided  among  themselves.  The 
Spaniards,  united  with  Frank  knights,  undertook 
frequent  expeditions  against  the  Saracens;  and 
in  this  collision  of  the  Christians  with  the  chival¬ 
ry  of  the  East,  with  its  freedom  and  perfect  in¬ 
dependence  of  soul,  the  former  became  also  par¬ 
takers  in  this  freedom.  Spain  gives  us  the  fairest 
picture  of  the  knighthood  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
and  its  hero  is  the  Cid.  Several  Crusades,  the 
records  of  which  excite  our  unmixed  loathing 
and  detestation,  were  undertaken  against  the 
south  of  France  also.  There  an  aesthetic  culture 
had  developed  itself:  the  troubadours  had  in¬ 
troduced  a  freedom  of  manners  similar  to  that 
which  prevailed  under  the  Hohenstaufen  Em¬ 
perors  in  Germany;  but  with  this  difference, 
that  the  former  had  in  it  something  affected, 
while  the  latter  was  of  a  more  genuine  kind.  But 
as  in  upper  Italy,  so  also  in  the  south  of  France 
fanatical  ideas  of  purity  had  been  introduced;1 
a  Crusade  was  therefore  preached  against  that 
country  by  papal  authority.  St.  Dominic  entered 
it  with  a  vast  host  of  invaders,  who,  in  the  most 
barbarous  manner,  pillaged  and  murdered  the  in¬ 
nocent  and  the  guilty  indiscriminately,  and  utter¬ 
ly  laid  waste  the  fair  region  which  they  inhabited. 

Through  the  Crusades  the  Church  reached  the 
completion  of  its  authority:  it  had  achieved  the 
perversion  of  religion  and  of  the  divine  spirit; 
it  had  distorted  the  principle  of  Christian  free¬ 
dom  to  a  wrongful  and  immoral  slavery  of  men’s 
souls;  and  in  so  doing,  far  from  abolishing  law¬ 
less  caprice  and  violence  and  supplanting  them 
by  a  virtuous  rule  of  its  own,  it  had  even  enlisted 
them  in  the  service  of  ecclesiastical  authority. 
In  the  Crusades  the  Pope  stood  at  the  head  of 
the  secular  power:  the  Emperor  appeared  only 
in  a  subordinate  position,  like  the  other  princes, 
and  was  obliged  to  commit  both  the  initiative 
and  the  executive  to  the  Pope,  as  the  manifest 
generalissimo  of  the  expedition.  We  have  already 
seen  the  noble  house  of  Hohenstaufen  present¬ 
ing  the  aspect  of  chivalrous,  dignified  and  culti¬ 
vated  opponents  of  the  papal  power,  when  spirit 
had  given  up  the  contest.  We  have  seen  how  they 
were  ultimately  obliged  to  yield  to  the  Church, 
which,  elastic  enough  to  sustain  any  attack,  bore 
down  all  opposition  and  would  not  move  a  step 
towards  conciliation.  The  fall  of  the  Church  was 

1  The  term  “Cathari”  ( KaOapol ),  Purists,  was  one  of 
the  most  general  designations  of  the  dissident  sects  in 
question.  The  German  word  “Keizer”  =  heretic  is  by 
some  derived  from  it. 


not  to  be  effected  by  open  violence;  it  was  from 
within,  by  the  power  of  spirit  and  by  an  influ¬ 
ence  that  wrought  its  way  upwards,  that  ruin 
threatened  it.  Respect  for  the  papacy  could  not 
but  be  weakened  by  the  very  fact  that  the  lofty 
aim  of  the  Crusades,  the  satisfaction  expected 
from  the  enjoyment  of  the  sensuous  presence, 
was  not  attained.  As  little  did  the  Popes  succeed 
in  keeping  possession  of  the  Holy  Land.  Zeal 
for  the  holy  cause  was  exhausted  among  the 
princes  of  Europe.  Grieved  to  the  heart  by  the 
defeat  of  the  Christians,  the  Popes  again  and 
again  urged  them  to  advance  to  the  rescue ;  but 
lamentations  and  entreaties  were  vain,  and  they 
could  effect  nothing.  Spirit,  disappointed  with 
regard  to  its  craving  for  the  highest  form  of  the 
sensuous  presence  of  deity,  fell  back  upon  itself. 
A  rupture,  the  first  of  its  kind  and  profound  as 
it  was  novel,  took  place.  From  this  time  forward 
we  witness  religious  and  intellectual  movements 
in  which  spirit,  transcending  the  repulsive  and 
irrational  existence  by  which  it  is  surrounded, 
either  finds  its  sphere  of  exercise  within  itself, 
and  draws  upon  its  own  resources  for  satisfac¬ 
tion,  or  throws  its  energies  into  an  actual  world 
of  general  and  morally  justified  aims,  which 
are  therefore  aims  consonant  with  freedom.  The 
efforts  thus  originated  are  now  to  be  described: 
they  were  the  means  by  which  spirit  was  to  be 
prepared  to  comprehend  the  grand  purpose  of 
its  freedom  in  a  form  of  greater  purity  and 
moral  elevation. 

To  this  class  of  movements  belongs  in  the 
first  place  the  establishment  of  monastic  and 
chivalric  orders,  designed  to  carry  out  those 
rules  of  life  which  the  Church  had  distinctly  en¬ 
joined  upon  its  members.  That  renunciation  of 
property,  riches,  pleasures,  and  free  will,  which 
the  Church  had  designated  as  the  highest  of 
spiritual  attainments,  was  to  be  a  reality — not  a 
mere  profession.  The  existing  monastic  and 
other  institutions  that  had  adopted  this  vow  of 
renunciation  had  been  entirely  sunk  in  the  cor¬ 
ruption  of  worldliness.  But  now  spirit  sought  to 
realize  in  the  sphere  of  the  principle  of  negativ¬ 
ity,  purely  in  itself,  what  the  Church  had  de¬ 
manded.  The  more  immediate  occasion  of  this 
movement  was  the  rise  of  numerous  heresies  in 
the  south  of  France  and  Italy,  whose  tendency 
was  in  the  direction  of  enthusiasm;  and  the  un¬ 
belief  which  was  now  gaining  ground,  but  which 
the  Church  justly  deemed  not  so  dangerous  as 
those  heresies.  To  counteract  these  evils,  new 
monastic  orders  were  founded,  the  chief  of  which 
was  that  of  the  Franciscans,  or  Mendicant 
Friars,  whose  founder,  St.  Francis  of  Assisi,  a 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  341 


man  possessed  by  an  enthusiasm  and  ecstatic 
passion  that  passed  all  bounds,  spent  his  life  in 
continually  striving  for  the  loftiest  purity.  He 
gave  an  impulse  of  the  same  kind  to  his  order; 
the  greatest  fervour  of  devotion,  the  sacrifice  of 
all  pleasures  in  contravention  of  the  prevailing 
worldliness  of  the  Church,  continual  penances, 
the  severest  poverty  (the  Franciscans  lived  on 
daily  alms) — were  therefore  peculiarly  charac¬ 
teristic  of  it.  Contemporaneously  with  it  arose 
the  Dominican  order,  founded  by  St.  Dominic; 
its  special  business  was  preaching.  The  mendi¬ 
cant  friars  were  diffused  through  Christendom  to 
an  incredible  extent ;  they  were,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  standing  apostolic  army  of  the  Pope,  while, 
on  the  otherhand,  they  strongly  protestedagainst 
his  worldliness.  The  Franciscans  were  powerful 
allies  of  Louis  of  Bavaria  in  his  resistance  of  the 
papal  assumptions,  and  they  are  said  to  have 
been  the  authors  of  the  position,  that  a  general 
council  was  higher  authority  than  the  Pope ;  but 
subsequently  they  too  sank  down  into  a  torpid 
and  unintelligent  condition.  In  the  same  way  the 
ecclesiastical  Orders  of  Knighthood  contem¬ 
plated  the  attainment  of  purity  of  spirit.  We 
have  already  called  attention  to  the  peculiar  chiv- 
alric  spirit  which  had  been  developed  in  Spain 
through  the  struggle  with  the  Saracens:  the  same 
spirit  was  diffused  as  the  result  of  the  Crusades 
through  the  whole  of  Europe.  The  ferocity  and 
savage  valour  that  characterized  the  predatory 
life  of  the  barbarians — pacified  and  brought  to 
a  settled  state  by  possession,  and  restrained  by 
the  presence  of  equals — was  elevated  by  religion 
and  then  kindled  to  a  noble  enthusiasm  through 
contemplating  the  boundless  magnanimity  of 
oriental  prowess.  For  Christianity  also  contains 
the  element  of  boundless  abstraction  and  free¬ 
dom;  the  oriental  chivalric  spirit  found  there¬ 
fore  in  occidental  hearts  a  response  which  paved 
the  way  for  their  attaining  a  nobler  virtue  than 
they  had  previously  known.  Ecclesiastical  orders 
of  knighthood  were  instituted  on  a  basis  resem¬ 
bling  that  of  the  monastic  fraternities.  The  same 
conventual  vow  of  renunciation  was  imposed  on 
their  members — the  giving  up  of  all  that  was 
worldly.  But  at  the  same  time  they  undertook 
the  defence  of  the  pilgrims:  their  first  duty 
therefore  was  knightly  bravery ;  ultimately,  they 
were  also  pledged  to  the  sustenance  and  care  of 
the  poor  and  the  sick.  The  Orders  of  Knighthood 
were  divided  into  three:  that  of  St.  John,  that 
of  the  Temple,  and  the  Teutonic  Order.  These 
associations  are  essentially  distinguished  from 
the  self-seeking  principle  of  feudalism.  Their 
members  sacrificed  themselves  with  almost  sui¬ 


cidal  bravery  for  a  common  interest.  Thus  these 
orders  transcended  the  circle  of  their  immediate 
environment,  and  formed  a  network  of  fraternal 
coalition  over  the  whole  of  Europe.  But  their 
members  sank  down  to  the  level  of  vulgar  in¬ 
terests,  and  the  Orders  became  in  the  sequel  a 
provisional  institute  for  the  nobility  generally, 
rather  than  anything  else.  The  Order  of  the 
Temple  was  even  accused  of  forming  a  religion 
of  its  own,  and  of  having  renounced  Christ  in 
the  creed  which,  under  the  influence  of  the 
oriental  spirit,  it  had  adopted. 

A  second  impulsion,  having  a  similar  origin, 
was  that  in  the  direction  of  science .  The  develop¬ 
ment  of  thought,  the  abstractly  universal,  now 
had  its  commencement.  Those  fraternal  associa¬ 
tions  themselves,  having  a  common  object,  in 
whose  service  their  members  were  enlisted, 
point  to  the  fact  that  a  general  principle  was  be¬ 
ginning  to  be  recognized,  and  which  gradually 
became  conscious  of  its  power.  Thought  was  first 
directed  to  theology,  which  now  became  philos¬ 
ophy  under  the  name  of  scholastic  divinity.  For 
philosophy  and  theology  have  the  divine  as  their 
common  object;  and  although  the  theology  of 
the  Church  was  a  stereotyped  dogma,  the  im¬ 
pulse  now  arose  to  justify  this  body  of  doctrine 
in  the  view  of  thought.  “When  we  have  arrived 
at  faith,”  says  the  celebrated  scholastic,  Anselm, 
“it  is  a  piece  of  negligence  to  stop  short  of  con¬ 
vincing  ourselves,  by  the  aid  of  thought,  of  that 
to  which  we  have  given  credence.”  But  thus  con¬ 
ditioned  thought  was  not  free,  for  its  material 
was  already  posited  ab  extra;  it  was  to  the  proof 
of  this  material  that  philosophy  devoted  its  en¬ 
ergies.  But  thought  suggested  a  variety  of  ques¬ 
tions,  the  complete  answer  to  which  was  not 
given  directly  in  the  symbols  of  the  Church; 
and  since  the  Church  had  not  decided  respecting 
them,  they  were  legitimate  subjects  of  contro¬ 
versy.  Philosophy  was  indeed  called  an  ancilla 
fidei,  for  it  was  in  subjection  to  that  material  of 
the  Church’s  creed,  which  had  been  already  defi¬ 
nitely  settled;  but  yet  it  was  impossible  for  the 
opposition  between  thought  and  belief  not  to 
manifest  itself.  As  Europe  presented  the  specta¬ 
cle  of  chivalric  contests  generally,  passages  of 
arms  and  tournaments,  it  was  now  the  theatre 
for  intellectual  jousting  also.  It  is  incredible  to 
what  an  extent  the  abstract  forms  of  thought 
were  developed,  and  what  dexterity  was  ac¬ 
quired  in  the  use  of  them.  This  intellectual  tour¬ 
neying  for  the  sake  of  exhibiting  skill,  and  as  a 
diversion  (for  it  was  not  the  doctrines  them¬ 
selves,  but  only  the  forms  in  which  they  were 
couched  that  made  the  subject  of  debate),  was 


342  PHILOSOPHY 

chiefly  prosecuted  and  brought  to  perfection  in 
France.  France,  in  fact,  began  at  that  time  to  be 
regarded  as  the  centre  of  Christendom:  there 
the  scheme  of  the  first  Crusades  originated,  and 
French  armies  carried  it  out:  there  the  popes 
took  refuge  in  their  struggles  with  the  German 
emperors  and  with  the  Norman  princes  of 
Naples  and  Sicily,  and  there  for  a  time  they 
made  a  continuous  sojourn.  We  also  observe  in 
the  period  subsequent  to  the  Crusades,  com¬ 
mencements  of  art — of  painting,  viz.,  even  dur¬ 
ing  their  continuance  a  peculiar  kind  of  poetry 
had  made  its  appearance.  Spirit, unable  to  satisfy 
its  cravings,  created  for  itself  by  imagination 
fairer  forms  and  in  a  calmer  and  freer  manner 
than  the  actual  world  could  offer. 

Chapter  3.  The  Transition  from  Feudalism 
to  Monarchy 

The  moral  phenomena  above  mentioned,  tend¬ 
ing  in  the  direction  of  a  general  principle,  were 
partly  of  a  subjective,  partly  of  a  speculative 
order.  But  we  must  now  give  particular  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  practical  political  movements  of  the 
period.  The  advance  which  that  period  wit¬ 
nessed,  presents  a  negative  aspect  in  so  far  as  it 
involves  the  termination  of  the  sway  of  individ¬ 
ual  caprice  and  of  the  isolation  of  power.  Its 
affirmative  aspect  is  the  rise  of  a  supreme  au¬ 
thority  whose  dominion  embraces  all — a  politi¬ 
cal  power  properly  so  called,  whose  subjects  en¬ 
joy  an  equality  of  rights,  and  in  which  the  will 
of  the  individual  is  subordinated  to  that  com¬ 
mon  interest  which  underlies  the  whole.  This  is 
the  advance  from  feudalism  to  monarchy.  The 
principle  of  feudal  sovereignty  is  the  outward 
force  of  individuals — princes,  liege  lords;  it  is  a 
force  destitute  of  intrinsic  right.  The  subjects  of 
such  a  constitution  are  vassals  of  a  superior 
prince  or  seigneur,  to  whom  they  have  stipulated 
duties  to  perform:  but  whether  they  perform 
these  duties  or  not  depends  upon  the  seigneur’s 
being  able  to  induce  them  so  to  do,  by  force  of 
character  or  by  grant  of  favours :  conversely,  the 
recognition  of  those  feudal  claims  themselves 
was  extorted  by  violence  in  the  first  instance; 
and  the  fulfilment  of  the  corresponding  duties 
could  be  secured  only  by  the  constant  exercise 
of  the  power  which  was  the  sole  basis  of  the 
claims  in  question.  The  monarchical  principle 
also  implies  a  supreme  authority,  but  it  is  an 
authority  over  persons  possessing  no  independ¬ 
ent  power  to  support  their  individual  caprice; 
where  we  have  no  longer  caprice  opposed  to  ca¬ 
price;  for  the  supremacy  implied  in  monarchy  is 
essentially  a  power  emanating  from  a  political 


OF  HISTORY 

body,  and  is  pledged  to  the  furtherance  of  that 
equitable  purpose  on  which  the  constitution  of 
a  state  is  based.  Feudal  sovereignty  is  a  poly¬ 
archy:  we  see  nothing  but  lords  and  serfs;  in 
monarchy,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  one  lord  and 
no  serf,  for  servitude  is  abrogated  by  it,  and  in 
it  right  and  law  are  recognized;  it  is  the  source 
of  real  freedom.  Thus  in  monarchy  the  caprice 
of  individuals  is  kept  under,  and  a  common 
gubernatorial  interest  established.  In  the  sup¬ 
pression  of  those  isolated  powers,  as  also  in  the 
resistance  made  to  that  suppression,  it  seems 
doubtful  whether  the  desire  for  a  lawful  and 
equitable  state  of  things,  or  the  wish  to  indulge 
individual  caprice,  is  the  impelling  motive.  Re¬ 
sistance  to  kingly  authority  is  entitled  liberty, 
and  is  lauded  as  legitimate  and  noble  when  the 
idea  of  arbitrary  will  is  associated  with  that  au¬ 
thority.  But  by  the  arbitrary  will  of  an  individ¬ 
ual  exerting  itself  so  as  to  subjugate  a  whole 
body  of  men,  a  community  is  formed;  and  com¬ 
paring  this  state  of  things  with  that  in  which 
every  point  is  a  centre  of  capricious  violence, 
we  find  a  much  smaller  number  of  points  ex¬ 
posed  to  such  violence.  The  great  extent  of  such 
a  sovereignty  necessitates  general  arrangements 
for  the  purposes  of  organization,  and  those  who 
govern  in  accordance  with  those  arrangements 
are  at  the  same  time,  in  virtue  of  their  office  it¬ 
self,  obedient  to  the  state :  vassals  become  offi¬ 
cers  of  state,  whose  duty  it  is  to  execute  the  laws 
by  which  the  state  is  regulated.  But  since  this 
monarchy  is  developed  from  feudalism,  it  bears 
in  the  first  instance  the  stamp  of  the  system  from 
which  it  sprang.  Individuals  quit  their  isolated 
capacity  and  become  members  of  estates  and 
corporations ;  the  vassals  are  powerful  only  by 
combination  as  an  order;  in  contraposition  to 
them  the  cities  constitute  powers  in  virtue  of 
their  communal  existence.  Thus  the  authority 
of  the  sovereign  inevitably  ceases  to  be  mere 
arbitrary  sway.  The  consent  of  the  estates  and 
corporations  is  essential  to  its  maintenance;  and 
if  the  prince  wishes  to  have  that  consent,  he 
must  will  what  is  just  and  reasonable. 

We  now  see  a  constitution  embracing  various 
orders,  while  feudal  rule  knows  no  such  orders. 
We  observe  the  transition  from  feudalism  to 
monarchy  taking  place  in  three  ways : 

1.  Sometimes  the  lord  paramount  gains  a 
mastery  over  his  independent  vassals,  by  sub¬ 
jugating  their  individual  power — thus  making 
himself  sole  ruler. 

2.  Sometimes  the  princes  free  themselves  from 
the  feudal  relation  altogether,  and  become  the 
territorial  lords  of  certain  states. 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  343 


3.  Lastly,  the  lord  paramount  unites  the  par¬ 
ticular  lordships  that  own  him  as  their  superior 
with  his  own  particular  suzerainty,  in  a  more 
peaceful  way,  and  thus  becomes  master  of  the 
whole. 

These  processes  do  not  indeed  present  them¬ 
selves  in  history  in  that  pure  and  abstract  form 
in  which  they  are  exhibited  here:  often  we  find 
more  modes  than  one  appearing  contemporane¬ 
ously  ;  but  one  or  the  other  always  predominates. 
The  cardinal  consideration  is  that  the  basis  and 
essential  condition  of  such  a  political  formation 
is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  particular  nationalities 
in  which  it  had  its  birth.  Europe  presents  par¬ 
ticular  nations,  constituting  a  unity  in  their  very 
nature,  and  having  the  absolute  tendency  to 
form  a  state.  All  did  not  succeed  in  attaining  this 
political  unity:  we  have  now  to  consider  them 
severally  in  relation  to  the  change  thus  intro¬ 
duced. 

First,  as  regards  the  Roman  Empire,  the  con¬ 
nection  between  Germany  and  Italy  naturally 
results  from  the  idea  of  that  empire:  the  secular 
dominion  united  with  the  spiritual  was  to  con¬ 
stitute  one  whole;  but  this  state  of  things  was 
rather  the  object  of  constant  struggle  than  one 
actually  attained.  In  Germany  and  Italy  the 
transition  from  the  feudal  condition  to  monarchy 
involved  the  entire  abrogation  of  the  former: 
the  vassals  became  independent  monarchs. 

Germany  had  always  embraced  a  great  variety 
of  stocks:  Swabians,  Bavarians,  Franks,  Thu- 
ringians,  Saxons,  Burgundians:  to  these  must  be 
added  the  Slavs  of  Bohemia,  Germanized  Slavs 
in  Mecklenburg,  in  Brandenburg,  and  in  a  part 
of  Saxony  and  Austria;  so  that  no  such  combina¬ 
tion  as  took  place  in  France  was  possible.  Italy 
presented  a  similar  state  of  things.  The  Lom¬ 
bards  had  established  themselves  there,  while 
the  Greeks  still  possessed  the  Exarchate  and 
lower  Italy :  the  Normans  too  established  a  king¬ 
dom  of  their  own  in  lower  Italy,  and  the  Sara¬ 
cens  maintained  their  ground  for  a  time  in  Sicily. 
When  the  rule  of  the  house  of  Hohenstaufen 
was  terminated,  barbarism  got  the  upper  hand 
throughout  Germany;  the  country  being  broken 
up  into  several  sovereignties,  in  which  a  forceful 
despotism  prevailed.  It  was  the  maxim  of  the 
electoral  princes  to  raise  only  weak  princes  to 
the  imperial  throne ;  they  even  sold  the  imperial 
dignity  to  foreigners.  Thus  the  unity  of  the  state 
was  virtually  annulled.  A  number  of  centres  of 
power  were  formed,  each  of  which  was  a  preda¬ 
tory  state:  the  legal  constitution  recognized  by 
feudalism  was  dissolved,  and  gave  place  to  un¬ 
disguised  violence  and  plunder;  and  powerful 


princes  made  themselves  lords  of  the  country. 
After  the  interregnum,  the  Count  of  Hapsburg 
was  elected  Emperor,  and  the  House  of  Haps¬ 
burg  continued  to  fill  the  imperial  throne  with 
but  little  interruption.  These  emperors  were 
obliged  to  create  a  force  of  their  own,  as  the 
princes  would  not  grant  them  an  adequate  power 
attached  to  the  empire.  But  that  state  of  abso¬ 
lute  anarchy  was  at  last  put  an  end  to  by  as¬ 
sociations  having  general  aims  in  view.  In  the 
cities  themselves  we  see  associations  of  a  minor 
order;  but  now  confederations  of  cities  were 
formed  with  a  common  interest  in  the  suppres¬ 
sion  of  predatory  violence.  Of  this  kind  was  the 
Hanseatic  League  in  the  north,  the  Rhenish 
League  consisting  of  cities  lying  along  the  Rhine, 
and  the  Swabian  League.  The  aim  of  all  these 
confederations  was  resistance  to  the  feudal 
lords;  and  even  princes  united  with  the  cities, 
with  a  view  to  the  subversion  of  the  feudal  con¬ 
dition  and  the  restoration  of  a  peaceful  state  of 
things  throughout  the  country.  What  the  state 
of  society  was  under  feudal  sovereignty  is  evi¬ 
dent  from  the  notorious  association  formed  for 
executing  criminal  justice:  it  was  a  private  tri¬ 
bunal,  which,  under  the  name  of  the  Vehmgericht, 
held  secret  sittings;  its  chief  seat  was  the  north¬ 
west  of  Germany.  A  peculiar  peasant  associa¬ 
tion  was  also  formed.  In  Germany  the  peasants 
were  bondsmen;  many  of  them  took  refuge  in 
the  towns,  or  settled  down  as  freemen  in  the 
neighborhood  of  the  towns  ( Pfahlburger )  ;  but 
in  Switzerland  a  peasant  fraternity  was  estab¬ 
lished.  The  peasants  of  Uri,  Schwyz,  and  Unter- 
walden  were  under  imperial  governors;  for  the 
Swiss  governments  were  not  the  property  of 
private  possessors,  but  were  official  appoint¬ 
ments  of  the  empire.  These  the  sovereigns  of 
the  Hapsburg  line  wished  to  secure  to  their  own 
house.  The  peasants,  with  club  and  iron-studded 
mace,  returned  victorious  from  a  contest  with 
the  haughty  steel-clad  nobles,  armed  with  spear 
and  sword,  and  practised  in  the  chivalric  en¬ 
counters  of  the  tournament.  Another  invention 
also  tended  to  deprive  the  nobility  of  the  as¬ 
cendancy  which  they  owed  to  their  accoutre¬ 
ments — that  of  gunpowder.  Humanity  needed 
it,  and  it  made  its  appearance  forthwith.  It  was 
one  of  the  chief  instruments  in  freeing  the  world 
from  the  dominion  of  physical  force,  and  plac¬ 
ing  the  various  orders  of  society  on  a  level. 
With  the  distinction  between  the  weapons  they 
used,  vanished  also  that  between  lords  and  serfs. 
And  before  gunpowder  fortified  places  were  no 
longer  impregnable,  so  that  strongholds  and 
castles  now  lose  their  importance.  We  may 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


344 

indeed  be  led  to  lament  the  decay  or  the  depre¬ 
ciation  of  the  practical  value  of  personal  valour 
— the  bravest,  the  noblest  may  be  shot  down  by 
a  cowardly  wretch  at  safe  distance  in  an  obscure 
lurking-place ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  gunpow¬ 
der  has  made  a  rational,  considerate  bravery — 
spiritual  valour — the  essential  to  martial  suc¬ 
cess.  Only  through  this  instrumentality  could 
that  superior  order  of  valour  be  called  forth,  that 
valour  in  which  the  heat  of  personal  feeling  has 
no  share;  for  the  discharge  of  firearms  is  di¬ 
rected  against  a  body  of  men — an  abstract  en¬ 
emy,  not  individual  combatants.  The  warrior 
goes  to  meet  deadly  peril  calmly,  sacrificing 
himself  for  the  common  weal ;  and  the  valour  of 
cultivated  nations  is  characterized  by  the  very 
fact,  that  it  does  not  rely  on  the  strong  arm 
alone,  but  places  its  confidence  essentially  in  the 
intelligence,  the  generalship,  the  character  of  its 
commanders;  and,  as  was  the  case  among  the 
ancients,  in  a  firm  combination  and  unity  of 
spirit  on  the  part  of  the  forces  they  command. 

In  Italy ,  as  already  noticed,  we  behold  the 
same  spectacle  as  in  Germany — the  attainment 
of  an  independent  position  by  isolated  centres 
of  power.  In  that  country,  warfare  in  the  hands 
of  the  condottieri  became  a  regular  business. 
The  towns  were  obliged  to  attend  to  their  trad¬ 
ing  concerns,  and  therefore  employed  merce¬ 
nary  troops,  whose  leaders  often  became  feudal 
lords;  Francis  Sforza  even  made  himself  Duke 
of  Milan.  In  Florence,  the  Medici,  a  family  of 
merchants,  rose  to  power.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  larger  cities  of  Italy  reduced  under  their 
sway  several  smaller  ones  and  many  feudal 
chiefs.  A  papal  territory  was  likewise  formed. 
There,  also,  a  very  large  number  of  feudal  lords 
had  made  themselves  independent;  by  degrees 
they  all  became  subject  to  the  one  sovereignty 
of  the  Pope.  How  thoroughly  equitable  in  the 
view  of  social  morality  such  a  subjugation  was 
is  evident  from  Machiavelli’s  celebrated  work, 
The  Prince.  This  book  has  often  been  thrown 
aside  in  disgust,  as  replete  with  the  maxims  of 
the  most  revolting  tyranny;  but  nothing  worse 
can  be  urged  against  it  than  that  the  writer,  hav¬ 
ing  the  profound  consciousness  of  the  necessity 
for  the  formation  of  a  state,  has  here  exhibited 
the  principles  on  which  alone  states  could  be 
founded  in  the  circumstances  of  the  times.  The 
chiefs  who  asserted  an  isolated  independence, 
and  the  power  they  arrogated,  must  be  entirely 
subdued;  and  though  we  cannot  reconcile  with 
our  idea  of  freedom,  the  means  which  he  pro¬ 
poses  as  the  only  efficient  ones,  and  regards  as 
perfectly  justifiable — inasmuch  as  they  involve 


the  most  reckless  violence,  all  kinds  of  decep¬ 
tion,  assassination,  and  so  forth — we  must  nev¬ 
ertheless  confess  that  the  feudal  nobility,  whose 
power  was  to  be  subdued,  were  assailable  in  no 
other  way,  since  an  indomitable  contempt  for 
principle,  and  an  utter  depravity  of  morals,  were 
thoroughly  engrained  in  them. 

In  France  we  find  the  converse  of  that  which 
occurred  in  Germany  and  Italy.  For  many  cen¬ 
turies  the  kings  of  France  possessed  only  a  very 
small  domain,  so  that  many  of  their  vassals  were 
more  powerful  than  themselves:  but  it  was  a 
great  advantage  to  the  royal  dignity  in  France, 
that  the  principle  of  hereditary  monarchy  was 
firmly  established  there.  The  consideration  it 
enjoyed  was  increased  by  the  circumstance  that 
the  corporations  and  cities  had  their  rights  and 
privileges  confirmed  by  the  king,  and  that  the 
appeals  to  the  supreme  feudal  tribunal — the 
Court  of  Peers,  consisting  of  twelve  members 
enjoying  that  dignity — became  increasingly  fre¬ 
quent.  The  king’s  influence  was  extended  by  his 
affording  that  protection  which  only  the  throne 
could  give.  But  that  which  essentially  secured 
respect  for  royalty,  even  among  the  powerful 
vassals,  was  the  increasing  personal  power  of 
the  sovereign.  In  various  ways,  by  inheritance, 
by  marriage,  by  force  of  arms,  etc.,  the  kings 
had  come  into  possession  of  many  earldoms  and 
several  duchies.  The  dukes  of  Normandy  had, 
however,  become  kings  of  England;  and  thus  a 
formidable  power  confronted  France,  whose  in¬ 
terior  lay  open  to  it  by  way  of  Normandy.  Be¬ 
sides  this  there  were  powerful  duchies  still  re¬ 
maining  ;  nevertheless,  the  king  was  not  a  mere 
feudal  suzerain  like  the  German  emperors,  but 
had  become  a  territorial  possessor:  he  had  a 
number  of  barons  and  cities  under  him,  who 
were  subject  to  his  immediate  jurisdiction;  and 
Louis  IX  succeeded  in  rendering  appeals  to  the 
royal  tribunal  common  throughout  his  kingdom. 
The  towns  attained  a  position  of  greater  im¬ 
portance  in  the  state.  For  when  the  king  needed 
money,  and  all  his  usual  resources — such  as 
taxes  and  forced  contributions  of  all  kinds — - 
were  exhausted,  he  made  application  to  the 
towns  and  entered  into  separate  negotiations 
with  them.  It  was  Philip  the  Fair  who,  in  the 
year  1302,  first  convoked  the  deputies  of  the 
towns  as  a  Third  Estate  in  conjunction  with  the 
clergy  and  the  barons.  All  indeed  that  they  were 
in  the  first  instance  concerned  with  was  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  sovereign  as  the  power  that  had 
convoked  them,  and  the  raising  of  taxes  as  the 
object  of  their  convocation;  but  the  states  nev¬ 
ertheless  secured  an  importance  and  weight  in 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  345 

the  kingdom  and,  as  the  natural  result,  an  in-  sensions  and  contests  that  accompanied  such  in¬ 
fluence  on  legislation  also.  A  fact  which  is  par-  corporations.  We  have  only  to  add  that  the 


ticularly  remarkable  is  the  proclamation  issued 
by  the  kings  of  France,  giving  permission  to  the 
bondsmen  on  the  crown  lands  to  purchase  their 
freedom  at  a  moderate  price.  In  the  way  we 
have  indicated  the  kings  of  France  very  soon 
attained  great  power ;  while  the  flourishing  state 
of  the  poetic  art  in  the  hands  of  the  troubadours, 
and  the  growth  of  the  scholastic  theology, whose 
especial  centre  was  Paris,  gave  France  a  culture 
superior  to  that  of  the  other  European  states, 
and  which  secured  the  respect  of  foreign  na¬ 
tions. 

England,  as  we  have  already  had  occasion  to 
mention,  was  subjugated  by  William  the  Con¬ 
queror,  Duke  of  Normandy.  William  introduced 
the  feudal  system  into  it,  and  divided  the  king¬ 
dom  into  fiefs,  which  he  granted  almost  exclu¬ 
sively  to  his  Norman  followers.  He  himself  re¬ 
tained  considerable  crown  possessions;  the  vas¬ 
sals  were  under  obligation  to  perform  service  in 
the  field,  and  to  aid  in  administering  justice:  the 
king  was  the  guardian  of  all  vassals  under  age; 
they  could  not  marry  without  his  consent.  Only 
by  degrees  did  the  barons  and  the  towns  attain 
a  position  of  importance.  It  was  especially  in 
the  disputes  and  struggles  for  the  throne  that 
they  acquired  considerable  weight.  When  the 
oppressive  rule  and  fiscal  exactions  of  the  kings 
became  intolerable,  contentions  and  even  war 
ensued:  the  barons  compelled  King  John  to 
swear  to  Magna  Charta,  the  basis  of  English 
liberty,  i.e.,  more  particularly  of  the  privileges 
of  the  nobility.  Among  the  liberties  thus  secured, 
that  which  concerns  the  administration  of  jus¬ 
tice  was  the  chief :  no  Englishman  was  to  be  de¬ 
prived  of  personal  freedom,  property,  or  life 
without  the  judicial  verdict  of  his  peers.  Every 
one,  moreover,  was  to  be  entitled  to  the  free  dis¬ 
position  of  his  property.  Further,  the  king  was 
to  impose  no  taxes  without  the  consent  of  the 
archbishops,  bishops,  earls,  and  barons.  The 
towns,  also,  favoured  by  the  kings  in  opposition 
to  the  barons,  soon  elevated  themselves  into  a 
Third  Estate  and  to  representation  in  the  Com¬ 
mons’  House  of  Parliament.  Yet  the  king  was 
always  very  powerful,  if  he  possessed  strength 
of  character:  his  crown  estates  procured  for  him 
due  consideration ;  in  later  times,  however,  these 
were  gradually  alienated,  given  away,  so  that 
the  king  was  reduced  to  apply  for  subsidies  to 
the  Parliament. 

We  shall  not  pursue  the  minute  and  specifi¬ 
cally  historic  details  that  concern  the  incorpo¬ 
ration  of  principalities  with  states,  or  the  dis- 


kings,  when  by  weakening  the  feudal  constitu¬ 
tion,  they  had  attained  a  higher  degree  of  power, 
began  to  use  that  power  against  each  other  in 
the  undisguised  interest  of  their  own  dominion. 
Thus  France  and  England  carried  on  wars  with 
each  other  for  a  century.  The  kings  were  always 
endeavouring  to  make  foreign  conquests;  the 
towns,  which  had  the  largest  share  of  the  bur¬ 
dens  and  expenses  of  such  wars,  were  opposed 
to  them,  and  in  order  to  placate  them  the  kings 
granted  them  important  privileges. 

The  P opes  endeavoured  to  make  the  disturbed 
state  of  society  to  which  each  of  these  changes 
gave  rise  an  occasion  for  the  intervention  of 
their  authority;  but  the  interest  of  the  growth 
of  states  was  too  firmly  established  to  allow 
them  to  make  their  own  interest  of  absolute  au¬ 
thority  valid  against  it.  Princes  and  peoples  were 
indifferent  to  papal  clamour  urging  them  to  new 
Crusades.  The  Emperor  Louis  set  to  work  to 
deduce  from  Aristotle,  the  Bible,  and  the  Ro¬ 
man  Law  a  refutation  of  the  assumptions  of  the 
Papal  See ;  and  the  electors  declared  at  the  diet 
held  at  Rense  in  1338,  and  afterwards  still  more 
decidedly  at  the  Imperial  Diet  held  at  Frank¬ 
fort,  that  they  would  defend  the  liberties  and 
hereditary  rights  of  the  empire,  and  that  to 
make  the  choice  of  a  Roman  Emperor  or  king 
valid,  no  papal  confirmation  was  needed.  So,  at 
an  earlier  date,  1302,  on  occasion  of  a  contest 
between  Pope  Boniface  and  Philip  the  Fair,  the 
Assembly  of  the  States  convoked  by  the  latter 
had  offered  opposition  to  the  Pope.  For  states 
and  communities  had  arrived  at  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  independent  moral  worth.  Various  causes 
had  united  to  weaken  the  papal  authority:  the 
Great  Schism  of  the  Church,  which  led  men  to 
doubt  the  Pope’s  infallibility,  gave  occasion  to 
the  decisions  of  the  Councils  of  Constance  and 
Basle,  which  assumed  an  authority  superior  to 
that  of  the  Pope,  and  therefore  deposed  and  ap¬ 
pointed  Popes.  The  numerous  attempts  directed 
against  the  ecclesiastical  system  confirmed  the 
necessity  of  a  reformation.  Arnold  of  Brescia, 
Wickliffe,  and  Huss  met  with  sympathy  in  con¬ 
tending  against  the  dogma  of  the  papal  vice- 
gerency  of  Christ,  and  the  gross  abuses  that  dis¬ 
graced  the  hierarchy.  These  attempts  were, 
however,  only  partial  in  their  scope.  On  the  one 
hand,  the  time  was  not  yet  ripe  for  a  more  com¬ 
prehensive  onslaught;  on  the  other  hand,  the 
assailants  in  question  did  not  strike  at  the  heart 
of  the  matter,  but  (especially  the  two  latter) 
attacked  the  teaching  of  the  Church  chiefly  with 


s46  philosophy 

the  weapons  of  erudition,  and  consequently 
failed  to  excite  a  deep  interest  among  the  people 
at  large. 

But  the  ecclesiastical  principle  had  a  more 
dangerous  foe  in  the  incipient  formation  of  po¬ 
litical  organizations,  than  in  the  antagonists 
above  referred  to.  A  common  object,  an  aim  in¬ 
trinsically  possessed  of  perfect  moral  validity,1 
presented  itself  to  secularity  in  the  formation  of 
states;  and  to  this  aim  of  community  the  will, 
the  desire,  the  caprice  of  the  individual  submit¬ 
ted  themselves.  The  hardness  characteristic  of 
the  self-seeking  quality  of  “heart,”  maintaining 
its  position  of  isolation,  the  knotty  heart  of  oak 
underlying  the  national  temperament  of  the 
Germans,  was  broken  down  and  mellowed  by 
the  terrible  discipline  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The 
two  iron  rods  which  were  the  instruments  of  this 
discipline  were  the  Church  and  serfdom.  The 
Church  drove  the  “heart”  to  desperation — made 
spirit  pass  through  the  severest  bondage,  so  that 
the  soul  was  no  longer  its  own;  but  it  did  not 
degrade  it  to  Hindu  torpor,  for  Christianity  is 
an  intrinsically  spiritual  principle  and,  as  such, 
has  a  boundless  elasticity.  In  the  same  way  serf¬ 
dom,  which  made  a  man’s  body  not  his  own  but 
the  property  of  another,  dragged  humanity 
through  all  the  barbarism  of  slavery  and  unbri¬ 
dled  desire,  and  the  latter  was  destroyed  by  its 
own  violence.  It  was  not  so  much  from  slavery 
as  through  slavery  that  humanity  was  emanci¬ 
pated.  For  barbarism,  lust,  injustice  constitute 
evil:  man,  bound  fast  in  its  fetters,  is  unfit  for 
morality  and  religiousness;  and  it  is  from  this 
intemperate  and  ungovernable  state  of  volition 
that  the  discipline  in  question  emancipated  him. 
The  Church  fought  the  battle  with  the  violence 
of  rude  sensuality  in  a  temper  equally  wild  and 
terroristic  with  that  of  its  antagonist:  it  pros¬ 
trated  the  latter  by  dint  of  the  terrors  of  hell, 
and  held  it  in  perpetual  subjection,  in  order  to 
break  down  the  spirit  of  barbarism  and  to  tame 
it  into  repose.  Theology  declares  that  every  man 
has  this  struggle  to  pass  through,  since  he  is  by 
nature  evil,  and  only  by  passing  through  a  state 
of  mental  laceration  arrives  at  the  certainty  of 
reconciliation.  But  granting  this,  it  must  on  the 
other  hand  be  maintained,  that  the  form  of  the 
contest  is  very  much  altered  when  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  its  commencement  are  different,  and 
when  that  reconciliation  has  had  an  actual  reali¬ 
zation.  The  path  of  torturous  discipline  is  in 
that  case  dispensed  with  (it  does  indeed  make 

1  That  is,  not  a  personal  aim,  whose  self-seeking  char¬ 
acter  is  its  condemnation,  but  a  general  and  liberal,  con¬ 
sequently  a  moral  aim. 


OF  HISTORY 

its  appearance  at  a  later  date,  but  in  a  quite  dif¬ 
ferent  form),  for  the  waking  up  of  conscious¬ 
ness  finds  man  surrounded  by  the  element  of  a 
moral  state  of  society.  The  phase  of  negation  is, 
indeed,  a  necessary  element  in  human  develop¬ 
ment,  but  it  has  now  assumed  the  tranquil  form 
of  education,  so  that  all  the  terrible  characteris¬ 
tics  of  that  inward  struggle  vanish. 

Humanity  has  now  attained  the  consciousness 
of  a  real  internal  harmonization  of  spirit,  and  a 
good  conscience  in  regard  to  actuality — to  secu¬ 
lar  existence.  The  human  spirit  has  come  to 
stand  on  its  own  basis.  In  the  self-consciousness 
to  which  man  has  thus  advanced,  there  is  no 
revolt  against  the  divine,  but  a  manifestation 
of  that  better  subjectivity,  which  recognizes  the 
divine  in  its  own  being;  which  is  imbued  with 
the  good  and  true,  and  which  directs  its  activi¬ 
ties  to  general  and  liberal  objects  bearing  the 
stamp  of  rationality  and  beauty. 

Art  and  Science  as  Putting  a  Period  to  the 
Middle  Ages 

Humanity  beholds  its  spiritual  firmament  re¬ 
stored  to  serenity.  With  that  tranquil  settling 
down  of  the  world  into  political  order,  which 
we  have  been  contemplating,  was  conjoined  an 
exaltation  of  spirit  to  a  nobler  grade  of  human¬ 
ity  in  a  sphere  involving  more  comprehensive 
and  concrete  interests  than  that  with  which  po¬ 
litical  existence  is  concerned.  The  sepulchre, 
that  caput  mortuum  of  spirit,  and  the  ultra¬ 
mundane  cease  to  absorb  human  attention.  The 
principle  of  a  specific  and  definite  embodiment 
of  the  infinite,  that  desideratum  which  urged  the 
world  to  the  Crusades,  now  developed  itself  in 
a  quite  different  direction,  viz.,  in  secular  exist¬ 
ence  asserting  an  independent  ground:  spirit 
made  its  embodiment  an  outward  one  and  found 
a  congenial  sphere  in  the  secular  life  thus  origi¬ 
nated.  The  Church,  however,  maintained  its 
former  position,  and  retained  the  principle  in 
question  in  its  original  form.  Yet  even  in  this 
case,  that  principle  ceased  to  be  limited  to  a 
bare  outward  existence  [a  sacred  thing,  the 
Host,  e.g .]  :  it  was  transformed  and  elevated  by 
art.  Art  spiritualizes,  animates  the  mere  out¬ 
ward  and  material  object  of  adoration  with  a 
form  which  expresses  soul,  sentiment,  spirit;  so 
that  piety  has  not  a  bare  sensuous  embodiment 
of  the  infinite  to  contemplate,  and  does  not 
lavish  its  devotion  on  a  mere  thing,  but  on  the 
higher  element  with  which  the  material  object  is 
imbued — that  expressive  form  with  which  Spirit 
has  invested  it. 

It  is  one  thing  for  the  mind  to  have  before 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  347 


it  a  mere  thing — such  as  the  Host  per  se,  a  piece 
of  stone  or  wood,  or  a  wretched  daub ;  quite  an¬ 
other  thing  for  it  to  contemplate  a  painting, 
rich  in  thought  and  sentiment,  or  a  beautiful 
work  of  sculpture,  in  looking  at  which,  soul 
holds  converse  with  soul  and  spirit  with  spirit. 
In  the  former  case,  spirit  is  torn  from  its  proper 
element,  bound  down  to  something  utterly  alien 
to  it — the  sensuous,  the  nonspiritual.  In  the 
latter,  on  the  contrary,  the  sensuous  object  is  a 
beautiful  one,  and  the  spiritual  form  with  which 
it  is  endued  gives  it  a  soul  and  contains  truth  in 
itself.  But  on  the  one  hand,  this  element  of 
truth  as  thus  exhibited  is  manifested  only  in  a 
sensuous  mode,  not  in  its  appropriate  form ;  on 
the  other  hand,  while  religion  normally  involves 
independence  of  that  which  is  essentially  a  mere 
outward  and  material  object — a  mere  thing — 
that  kind  of  religion  which  is  now  under  con¬ 
sideration  finds  no  satisfaction  in  being  brought 
into  connection  with  the  beautiful:  the  coarsest, 
ugliest,  poorest  representations  will  suit  its  pur¬ 
pose  equally  well — perhaps  better.  Accordingly 
real  masterpieces,  e.g.,  Raphael’s  Madonnas,  do 
not  enjoy  distinguished  veneration,  or  elicit  a 
multitude  of  offerings:  inferior  pictures  seem, 
on  the  contrary,  to  be  especial  favourites  and  to 
be  made  the  object  of  the  warmest  devotion 
and  the  most  generous  liberality.  Piety  passes  by 
the  former  for  this  very  reason,  that  were  it  to 
linger  in  their  vicinity  it  would  feel  an  inward 
stimulus  and  attraction ;  an  excitement  of  a  kind 
which  cannot  but  be  felt  to  be  alien,  where  all 
that  is  desiderated  is  a  sense  of  mental  bondage 
in  which  self  is  lost — the  stupor  of  abject  de¬ 
pendence.  Thus  art  in  its  very  nature  trans¬ 
cended  the  principle  of  the  Church.  But  as  the 
former  manifests  itself  only  under  sensuous 
limitations,  it  is  at  first  regarded  as  a  harmless 
and  indifferent  matter.  The  Church,  therefore, 
continued  to  follow  it ;  but  as  soon  as  the  free 
spirit  in  which  art  originated  advanced  to 
thought  and  science,  a  separation  ensued. 

For  art  received  a  further  support  and  experi¬ 
enced  an  elevating  influence  as  the  result  of  the 
study  of  antiquity;  (the  name  humaniora  is 
very  expressive,  for  in  those  works  of  antiquity 
honour  is  done  to  the  human  and  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  humanity)  :  through  this  study  the  West 
became  acquainted  with  the  true  and  eternal 
element  in  the  activity  of  man.  The  outward  oc¬ 
casion  of  this  revival  of  science  was  the  fall  of 
the  Byzantine  Empire.  Large  numbers  of  Greeks 
took  refuge  in  the  west  and  introduced  Greek 
literature  there;  and  they  brought  with  them 
not  only  the  knowledge  of  the  Greek  language 


but  also  the  treasures  to  which  that  knowledge 
was  the  key.  Very  little  of  Greek  literature  had 
been  preserved  in  the  convents, and  an  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  the  language  could  scarcely  be  said 
to  exist  at  all.  With  the  Roman  literature  it  was 
otherwise;  in  regard  to  that,  ancient  traditions 
still  lingered:  Virgil  was  thought  to  be  a  great 
magician  (in  Dante  he  appears  as  the  guide  in 
Hell  and  Purgatory).  Through  the  influence  of 
the  Greeks,  then,  attention  was  again  directed 
to  the  ancient  Greek  literature ;  the  West  had  be¬ 
come  capable  of  enjoying  and  appreciating  it; 
quite  other  ideals  and  a  different  order  of  virtue 
from  that  with  which  mediaeval  Europe  was  fa¬ 
miliar  were  here  presented;  an  altogether  novel 
standard  for  judging  of  what  was  to  be  hon¬ 
oured,  commended,  and  imitated  was  set  up.  The 
Greeks  in  their  works  exhibited  quite  other 
moral  commands  than  those  with  which  the 
West  was  acquainted;  scholastic  formalism  had 
to  make  way  for  a  body  of  speculative  thought 
of  a  widely  different  complexion :  Plato  became 
known  in  the  West,  and  in  him  a  new  human 
world  presented  itself.  These  novel  ideas  met 
with  a  principal  organ  of  diffusion  in  the  newly 
discovered  art  of  printing ,  which,  like  the  use 
of  gunpowder,  corresponds  with  modern  char¬ 
acter,  and  supplied  the  desideratum  of  the  age 
in  which  it  was  invented,  by  tending  to  enable 
men  to  stand  in  an  ideal  connection  with  each 
other.  So  far  as  the  study  of  the  ancients  mani¬ 
fested  an  interest  in  human  deeds  and  virtues, 
the  Church  continued  to  tolerate  it,  not  observ¬ 
ing  that  in  those  alien  works  an  altogether  alien 
spirit  was  advancing  to  confront  it. 

As  a  third  leading  feature  demanding  our 
notice  in  determining  the  character  of  the  pe¬ 
riod,  might  be  mentioned  that  urging  of  spirit 
outwards — that  desire  on  the  part  of  man  to  be¬ 
come  acquainted  with  his  world.  The  chivalrous 
spirit  of  the  maritime  heroes  of  Portugal  and 
Spain  opened  a  new  way  to  the  East  Indies  and 
discovered  America.  This  progressive  step  also, 
involved  no  transgression  of  the  limits  of  eccle¬ 
siastical  principles  or  feeling.  The  aim  of  Co¬ 
lumbus  was  by  no  means  a  merely  secular  one : 
it  presented  also  a  distinctly  religious  aspect; 
the  treasures  of  those  rich  Indian  lands  which 
awaited  his  discovery  were  destined  in  his  in¬ 
tention  to  be  expended  in  a  new  Crusade,  and 
the  heathen  inhabitants  of  the  countries  them¬ 
selves  were  to  be  converted  to  Christianity.  The 
recognition  of  the  spherical  figure  of  the  earth 
led  man  to  perceive  that  it  offered  him  a  definite 
and  limited  object,  and  navigation  had  been 
benefited  by  the  new  found  instrumentality  of 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


348 

the  magnet,  enabling  it  to  be  something  better 
than  mere  coasting:  thus  technical  appliances 
make  their  appearance  when  a  need  for  them  is 
experienced. 

These  three  events — the  so-called  Revival  of 
Learning,  the  flourishing  of  the  fine  arts,  and  the 
discovery  of  America  and  of  the  passage  to  In¬ 
dia  by  the  Cape — may  be  compared  with  that 
blush  of  dawn,  which  after  long  storms  first  be¬ 
tokens  the  return  of  a  bright  and  glorious  day. 
This  day  is  the  day  of  universality,  which  breaks 
upon  the  world  after  the  long,  eventful,  and 
terrible  night  of  the  Middle  Ages— a  day  which 
is  distinguished  by  science,  art,  and  inventive 
impulse— that  is,  by  the  noblest  and  highest,  and 
which  humanity,  rendered  free  by  Christianity 
and  emancipated  through  the  instrumentality  of 
the  Church,  exhibits  as  the  eternal  and  veritable 
substance  of  its  being. 

Section  III 

THE  MODERN  TIME 

We  have  now  arrived  at  the  third  period  of  the 
German  world,  and  thus  enter  upon  the  period 
of  spirit  conscious  that  it  is  free,  inasmuch  as  it 
wills  the  true,  the  eternal — that  which  is  in  and 
for  itself  universal. 

In  this  third  period  also,  three  divisions  pre¬ 
sent  themselves.  First,  we  have  to  consider  the 
Reformation  in  itself — the  all-enlightening  sun, 
following  on  that  blush  of  dawn  which  we  ob¬ 
served  at  the  termination  of  the  mediaeval  pe¬ 
riod;  next,  the  unfolding  of  that  state  of  things 
which  succeeded  the  Reformation;  and  lastly, 
the  modern  times,  dating  from  the  end  of  the 
last  century. 

Chapter  1.  The  Reformation 
The  reformation  resulted  from  the  corruption 
of  the  Church.  That  corruption  was  not  an  ac¬ 
cidental  phenomenon;  it  was  not  the  mere  abuse 
of  power  and  dominion.  A  corrupt  state  of 
things  is  very  frequently  represented  as  an 
“abuse”;  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  founda¬ 
tion  was  good — the  system,  the  institution  itself 
faultless — but  that  the  passion,  the  subjective 
interest,  in  short,  the  arbitrary  volition  of  men 
has  made  use  of  that  which  in  itself  was  good  to 
further  its  own  selfish  ends,  and  that  all  that  is 
required  to  be  done  is  to  remove  these  adventi¬ 
tious  elements.  On  this  showing  the  institute  in 
question  escapes  obloquy,  and  the  evil  that  dis¬ 
figures  it  appears  something  foreign  to  it.  But 
when  accidental  abuse  of  a  good  thing  really  oc¬ 


curs,  it  is  limited  to  particularity.  A  great  and 
general  corruption  affecting  a  body  of  such  large 
and  comprehensive  scope  as  a  church,  is  quite 
another  thing.  The  corruption  of  the  Church  was 
a  native  growth;  the  principle  of  that  corrup¬ 
tion  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  fact  that  the 
specific  and  definite  embodiment  of  deity  which 
it  recognizes,  is  sensuous — that  the  external  in 
a  coarse  material  form,  is  enshrined  in  its  in¬ 
most  being.  (The  refining  transformation  which 
art  supplied  was  not  sufficient.)  The  higher 
spirit,  that  of  the  world,  has  already  expelled 
the  spiritual  from  it;  it  finds  nothing  to  interest 
it  in  the  spiritual  or  in  occupation  with  it ;  thus 
it  retains  that  specific  and  definite  embodiment; 
i.e.,  we  have  the  sensuous  immediate  subjectiv¬ 
ity,  not  refined  by  it  to  spiritual  subjectivity. 
Henceforth  it  occupies  a  position  of  inferiority 
to  the  world-spirit ;  the  latter  has  already  trans¬ 
cended  it,  for  it  has  become  capable  of  recogniz¬ 
ing  the  sensuous  as  sensuous,  the  merely  out¬ 
ward  as  merely  outward;  it  has  learned  to 
occupy  itself  with  the  finite  in  a  finite  way,  and 
in  this  very  activity  to  maintain  an  independent 
and  confident  position  as  a  valid  and  rightful 
subjectivity.1 

The  element  in  question  which  is  innate  in 
the  ecclesiastical  principle  only  reveals  itself  as 
a  corrupting  one  when  the  Church  has  no  longer 
any  opposition  to  contend  with — when  it  has 
become  firmly  established.  Then  its  elements 
are  free  to  display  their  tendencies  without  let 
or  hindrance.  Thus  it  is  that  externality  in  the 
Church  itself  which  becomes  evil  and  corruption, 
and  develops  itself  as  a  negative  principle  in  its 
own  bosom.  The  forms  which  this  corruption  as¬ 
sumes  are  coextensive  with  the  relations  which 
the  Church  itself  sustains,  into  which  conse¬ 
quently  this  vitiating  element  enters. 

The  ecclesiastical  piety  of  the  period  displays 
the  very  essence  of  superstition — the  fettering 
of  the  mind  to  a  sensuous  object,  a  mere  thing 
— in  the  most  various  forms:  slavish  deference 
to  authority;  for  spirit,  having  renounced  its 
proper  nature  in  its  most  essential  quality,  has 
lost  its  freedom,  and  is  held  in  adamantine  bond¬ 
age  to  what  is  alien  to  itself ;  a  credulity  of  the 
most  absurd  and  childish  character  in  regard  to 
miracles,  for  the  divine  is  supposed  to  manifest 

1  The  Church,  in  its  devotion  to  mere  ceremonial  ob¬ 
servances,  supposes  itself  to  be  engaged  with  the  spirit¬ 
ual,  while  it  is  really  occupied  with  the  sensuous.  The 
world  towards  the  close  of  the  mediaeval  period,  is  equal- 
ly  devoted  to  the  sensuous,  but  labours  under  no  such 
hallucination  as  to  the  character  of  its  activity;  and  it 
has  ceased  to  feel  compunction  at  the  merely  secular  na¬ 
ture  of  its  aims  and  actions,  such  as  it  might  have  felt, 
e.g.,  in  the  eleventh  century. 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  349 


itself  in  a  perfectly  disconnected  and  limited 
way,  for  purely  finite  and  particular  purposes ; 
lastly,  lust  of  power,  riotous  debauchery,  all  the 
forms  of  barbarous  and  vulgar  corruption,  hy¬ 
pocrisy,  and  deception — all  this  manifests  itself 
in  the  Church;  for  in  fact  the  sensuous  in  it  is 
not  subjugated  and  trained  by  the  understand¬ 
ing  ;  it  has  become  free,  but  only  in  a  rough  and 
barbarous  way.  On  the  other  hand,  the  virtue 
which  the  Church  presents,  since  it  is  negative 
only  in  opposition  to  sensual  appetite,  is  but 
abstractly  negative;  it  does  not  know  how  to 
exercise  a  moral  restraint  in  the  indulgence  of 
the  senses ;  in  actual  life  nothing  is  left  for  it  but 
avoidance,  renunciation,  inactivity. 

These  contrasts  which  the  Church  exhibits — 
of  barbarous  vice  and  lust,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
an  elevation  of  soul  that  is  ready  to  renounce 
all  worldly  things,  on  the  other  hand — became 
still  wider  in  consequence  of  the  energetic  posi¬ 
tion  which  man  is  sensible  of  occupying  in  his 
subjective  power  over  outward  and  material 
things  in  the  natural  world,  in  which  he  feels 
himself  free,  and  so  gains  for  himself  an  abso¬ 
lute  right.  The  Church  whose  office  it  is  to  save 
souls  from  perdition,  makes  this  salvation  itself 
a  mere  external  appliance,  and  is  now  degraded 
so  far  as  to  perform  this  office  in  a  merely  ex¬ 
ternal  fashion.  The  remission  of  sins — the  high¬ 
est  satisfaction  which  the  soul  craves,  the  cer¬ 
tainty  of  its  peace  with  God,  that  which  con¬ 
cerns  man’s  deepest  and  inmost  nature — is  of¬ 
fered  to  man  in  the  most  grossly  superficial  and 
trivial  fashion,  to  be  purchased  for  mere  money; 
while  the  object  of  this  sale  is  to  procure  means 
for  dissolute  excess.  One  of  the  objects  of  this 
sale  was  indeed  the  building  of  St.  Peter’s,  that 
magnificent  chef-d’oeuvre  of  Christian  fabrics 
erected  in  the  metropolis  of  religion.  But,  as  that 
paragon  of  works  of  art,  the  Athene  and  her 
temple-citadel  at  Athens,  was  built  with  the 
money  of  the  allies  and  issued  in  the  loss  of 
both  allies  and  power;  so  the  completion  of  this 
church  of  St.  Peter  and  Michael  Angelo’s  Last 
Judgment  in  the  Sistine  Chapel,  were  the 
doomsday  and  the  ruin  of  this  proud  spiritual 
edifice. 

The  time-honoured  and  cherished  sincerity  of 
the  German  people  is  destined  to  effect  this  rev¬ 
olution  out  of  the  honest  truth  and  simplicity  of 
its  heart.  While  the  rest  of  the  world  are  urging 
their  way  to  India,  to  America — straining  every 
nerve  to  gain  wealth  and  to  acquire  a  secular 
dominion  which  shall  encompass  the  globe,  and 
on  which  the  sun  shall  never  set — we  find  a 
simple  monk  looking  for  that  specific  embodi¬ 


ment  of  deity  which  Christendom  had  formerly 
sought  in  an  earthly  sepulchre  of  stone,  rather 
in  the  deeper  abyss  of  the  absolute  ideality  of 
all  that  is  sensuous  and  external — in  the  spirit 
and  the  heart — the  heart,  which,  wounded  un¬ 
speakably  by  the  offer  of  the  most  trivial  and 
superficial  appliances  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of 
that  which  is  inmost  and  deepest,  now  detects 
the  perversion  of  the  absolute  relation  of  truth 
in  its  minutest  features,  and  pursues  it  to  an¬ 
nihilation.  Luther’s  simple  doctrine  is  that  the 
specific  embodiment  of  deity — infinite  subjec¬ 
tivity,  that  is  true  spirituality,  Christ — is  in  no 
way  present  and  actual  in  an  outward  form,  but 
as  essentially  spiritual  is  obtained  only  in  being 
reconciled  to  God,  in  faith  and  spiritual  enjoy¬ 
ment.  These  two  words  express  everything.  That 
which  this  doctrine  desiderates  is  not  the  recog¬ 
nition  of  a  sensuous  object  as  God,  nor  even  of 
something  merely  conceived,  and  which  is  not 
actual  and  present,  but  of  a  reality  that  is  not 
sensuous.  This  abrogation  of  externality  imports 
the  reconstruction  of  all  the  doctrines,  and  the 
reform  of  all  the  superstition  into  which  the 
Church  consistently  wandered,  and  in  which  its 
spiritual  life  was  dissipated.  This  change  es¬ 
pecially  affects  the  doctrine  of  works;  for  works 
include  what  may  be  performed  under  any  men¬ 
tal  conditions — not  necessarily  in  faith,  in  one’s 
own  soul,  but  as  mere  external  observances  pre¬ 
scribed  by  authority.  Faith  is  by  no  means  a 
bare  assurance  respecting  mere  finite  things,  an 
assurance  which  belongs  only  to  limited  mind, 
as,  e.g.,  the  belief  that  such  or  such  a  person 
existed  and  said  this  or  that;  or  that  the  Chil¬ 
dren  of  Israel  passed  dry-shod  through  the  Red 
Sea,  or  that  the  trumpets  before  the  walls  of 
Jericho  produced  as  powerful  an  impression  as 
our  cannons ;  for  although  nothing  of  all  this  had 
been  related  to  us,  our  knowledge  of  God  would 
not  be  the  less  complete.  In  fact  it  is  not  a  belief 
in  something  that  is  absent,  past,  and  gone,  but 
the  subjective  assurance  of  the  eternal,  of  abso¬ 
lute  truth,  the  truth  of  God.  Concerning  this  as¬ 
surance,  the  Lutheran  Church  affirms  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  alone  produces  it — i.e.,  that  it  is  an 
assurance  which  the  individual  attains,  not  in 
virtue  of  his  particular  idiosyncrasy,  but  of  his 
essential  being.  The  Lutheran  doctrine  there¬ 
fore  involves  the  entire  substance  of  Catholi¬ 
cism,  with  the  exception  of  all  that  results  from 
the  element  of  externality — as  far  as  the  Cath¬ 
olic  Church  insists  upon  that  externality.  Luther 
therefore  could  not  do  otherwise  than  refuse  to 
yield  an  iota  in  regard  to  that  doctrine  of  the 
Eucharist  in  which  the  whole  question  is  con- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


350 

centrated.  Nor  could  he  concede  to  the  Re¬ 
formed  Church,  that  Christ  is  a  mere  commem¬ 
oration,  a  mere  reminiscence :  in  this  respect  his 
view  was  rather  in  accordance  with  that  of  the 
Catholic  Church,  viz.,  that  Christ  is  an  actual 
presence,  though  only  in  faith  and  in  spirit.  He 
maintained  that  the  spirit  of  Christ  really  fills 
the  human  heart — that  Christ  therefore  is  not 
to  be  regarded  as  merely  a  historical  person,  but 
that  man  sustains  an  immediate  relation  to  him 
in  spirit. 

While,  then,  the  individual  knows  that  he  is 
filled  with  the  divine  spirit,  all  the  relations  that 
spring  from  that  vitiating  element  of  external¬ 
ity  which  we  examined  above  are  ipso  facto 
abrogated:  there  is  no  longer  a  distinction  be¬ 
tween  priests  and  laymen ;  we  no  longer  find  one 
class  in  possession  of  the  substance  of  the  truth, 
as  of  all  the  spiritual  and  temporal  treasures  of 
the  Church;  but  the  heart,  the  emotional  part  of 
man’s  spiritual  nature,  is  recognized  as  that 
which  can  and  ought  to  come  into  possession  of 
the  truth;  and  this  subjectivity  is  the  common 
property  of  all  mankind.  Each  has  to  accom¬ 
plish  the  work  of  reconciliation  in  his  own  soul. 
Subjective  spirit  has  to  receive  the  spirit  of 
truth  into  itself,  and  give  it  a  dwelling  place 
there.  Thus  that  absolute  inwardness  of  soul 
which  pertains  to  religion  itself  and  freedom  in 
the  Church  are  both  secured.  Subjectivity  there¬ 
fore  makes  the  objective  purport  of  Christian¬ 
ity,  i.e.,  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  its  own.  In 
the  Lutheran  Church  the  subjective  feeling  and 
the  conviction  of  the  individual  is  regarded  as 
equally  necessary  with  the  objective  side  of 
truth.  Truth  with  Lutherans  is  not  a  finished  and 
completed  thing;  the  subject  himself  must  be 
imbued  with  truth,  surrendering  his  particular 
being  in  exchange  for  the  substantial  truth,  and 
making  that  truth  his  own.  Thus  subjective 
spirit  gains  emancipation  in  the  truth,  abnegates 
its  particularity,  and  comes  to  itself  in  realizing 
the  truth  of  its  being.  Thus  Christian  freedom 
is  actualized.  If  subjectivity  be  placed  in  feel¬ 
ing  only,  without  that  objective  side,  we  have 
the  standpoint  of  the  merely  natural  will. 

In  the  proclamation  of  these  principles  is  un¬ 
furled  the  new,  the  latest  standard  round  which 
the  peoples  rally — the  banner  of  free  spirit,  in¬ 
dependent,  though  finding  its  life  in  the  truth, 
and  enjoying  independence  only  in  it.  This  is  the 
banner  under  which  we  serve,  and  which  we 
bear.  Time,  since  that  epoch,  has  had  no  other 
work  to  do  than  the  formal  imbuing  of  the  world 
with  this  principle,  in  bringing  the  reconcilia¬ 
tion  implicit  into  objective  and  explicit  realiza¬ 


tion.  Culture  is  essentially  concerned  with  form ; 
the  work  of  Culture  is  the  production  of  the 
form  of  universality,  which  is  none  other  than 
thought.1  Consequently  law,  property,  social 
morality,  government,  constitutions,  etc.,  must 
be  conformed  to  general  principles,  in  order  that 
they  may  accord  with  the  idea  of  free  will  and 
be  rational.  Thus  only  can  the  spirit  of  truth 
manifest  itself  in  subjective  will — in  the  partic¬ 
ular  shapes  which  the  activity  of  the  will  as¬ 
sumes.  In  virtue  of  that  degree  of  intensity 
which  subjective  free  spirit  has  attained,  elevat¬ 
ing  it  to  the  form  of  universality,  objective 
spirit  attains  manifestation.  This  is  the  sense  in 
which  we  must  understand  the  state  to  be  based 
on  religion.  States  and  laws  are  nothing  else 
than  religion  manifesting  itself  in  the  relations 
of  the  actual  world. 

This  is  the  essence  of  the  Reformation:  man 
is  in  his  very  nature  destined  to  be  free. 

At  its  commencement,  the  Reformation  con¬ 
cerned  itself  only  with  particular  aspects  of  the 
Catholic  Church:  Luther  wished  to  act  in  union 
with  the  whole  Catholic  world  and  expressed  a 
desire  that  councils  should  be  convened.  His 
theses  found  supporters  in  every  country.  In  an¬ 
swer  to  the  charge  brought  against  Luther  and 
the  Protestants,  of  exaggeration,  nay,  even  of 
calumnious  misrepresentation  in  their  descrip¬ 
tions  of  the  corruption  of  the  Church,  we  may 
refer  to  the  statements  of  Catholics  themselves, 
bearing  upon  this  point,  and  particularly  to 
those  contained  in  the  official  documents  of  ec¬ 
clesiastical  councils.  But  Luther’s  onslaught, 
which  was  at  first  limited  to  particular  points, 
was  soon  extended  to  the  doctrines  of  the 
Church;  and  leaving  individuals,  he  attacked 
institutions  at  large — conventual  life,  the  secu¬ 
lar  lordships  of  the  bishops,  etc.  His  writings 
now  controverted  not  merely  isolated  dicta  of 
the  Pope  and  the  councils,  but  the  very  princi¬ 
ple  on  which  such  a  mode  of  deciding  points  in 
dispute  was  based — in  fact,  the  authority  of  the 
Church.  Luther  repudiated  that  authority,  and 
set  up  in  its  stead  the  Bible  and  the  testimony  of 
the  human  spirit.  And  it  is  a  fact  of  the  weigh¬ 
tiest  import  that  the  Bible  has  become  the  basis 
of  the  Christian  Church:  henceforth  each  indi- 

1  The  community  of  principle  which  really  links  to¬ 
gether  individuals  of  the  same  class,  and  in  virtue  of 
which  they  are  similarly  related  to  other  existences,  as¬ 
sumes  a  form  in  human  consciousness;  and  that  form  is 
the  thought  or  idea  which  summarily  comprehends  the 
constituents  of  generic  character.  The  primary  meaning 
of  the  word  idea  and  of  the  related  terms  eldos  and  spe¬ 
cies,  is  “form.”  Every  “universal”  in  thought  has  a  cor¬ 
responding  generic  principle  in  reality,  to  which  it  gives 
intellectual  expression  or  form. 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  351 


vidual  enjoys  the  right  of  deriving  instruction 
for  himself  from  it,  and  of  directing  his  con¬ 
science  in  accordance  with  it.  We  see  a  vast 
change  in  the  principle  by  which  man’s  religious 
life  is  guided:  the  whole  system  of  tradition, 
the  whole  fabric  of  the  Church  becomes  prob¬ 
lematical,  and  its  authority  is  subverted.  Lu¬ 
ther’s  translation  of  the  Bible  has  been  of  in¬ 
calculable  value  to  the  German  people.  It  has 
supplied  them  with  a  people’s  book,  such  as  no 
nation  in  the  Catholic  world  can  boast;  for 
though  the  latter  have  a  vast  number  of  minor 
productions  in  the  shape  of  prayer-books,  they 
have  no  generally  recognized  and  classical  book 
for  popular  instruction.  In  spite  of  this  it  has 
been  made  a  question  in  modern  times  whether 
it  is  judicious  to  place  the  Bible  in  the  hands  of 
the  people.  Yet  the  few  disadvantages  thus  en¬ 
tailed  are  far  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the 
incalculable  benefits  thence  accruing:  narra¬ 
tives,  which  in  their  external  shape  might  be 
repellent  to  the  heart  and  understanding,  can  be 
discriminatingly  treated  by  the  religious  sense, 
which,  holding  fast  the  substantial  truth,  easily 
vanquishes  any  such  difficulties.  And  even  if  the 
books  which  have  pretensions  to  the  character 
of  people’s  books  were  not  so  superficial  as  they 
are,  they  would  certainly  fail  in  securing  that 
respect  which  a  book  claiming  such  a  title  ought 
to  inspire  in  individuals.  But  to  obviate  this  dif¬ 
ficulty  is  no  easy  matter,  for  even  should  a  book 
adapted  to  the  purpose  in  every  other  respect 
be  produced,  every  country  parson  would  have 
some  fault  to  find  with  it,  and  think  to  better 
it.  In  France  the  need  of  such  a  book  has  been 
very  much  felt;  great  premiums  have  been  of¬ 
fered  with  a  view  to  obtaining  one,  but,  from  the 
reason  stated,  without  success.  Moreover,  the 
existence  of  a  people’s  book  presupposes  as  its 
primary  condition  an  ability  to  read  on  the  part 
of  the  people ;  an  ability  which  in  Catholic  coun¬ 
tries  is  not  very  commonly  to  be  met  with. 

The  denial  of  the  authority  of  the  Church 
necessarily  led  to  a  separation.  The  Council  of 
Trent  stereotyped  the  principles  of  Catholicism, 
and  made  the  restoration  of  concord  impossible. 
Leibnitz  at  a  later  time  discussed  with  Bishop 
Bossuet  the  question  of  the  union  of  the 
churches ;  but  the  Council  of  Trent  remains  the 
insurmountable  obstacle.  The  churches  became 
hostile  parties ,  for  even  in  respect  to  secular  ar¬ 
rangements  a  striking  difference  manifested  it¬ 
self.  In  the  non-Catholic  countries  the  conven¬ 
tual  establishments  and  episcopal  foundations 
were  broken  up,  and  the  rights  of  the  then  pro¬ 
prietors  ignored.  Educational  arrangements  were 


altered;  the  fast  and  holy  days  were  abolished. 
Thus  there  was  also  a  secular  reform — a  change 
affecting  the  state  of  things  outside  the  sphere 
of  ecclesiastical  relations :  in  many  places  a  re¬ 
bellion  was  raised  against  the  temporal  authori¬ 
ties.  In  Munster  the  Anabaptists  expelled  the 
bishop  and  established  a  government  of  their 
own;  and  the  peasants  rose  en  masse  to  emanci¬ 
pate  themselves  from  the  yoke  of  serfdom.  But 
the  world  was  not  yet  ripe  for  a  transformation 
of  its  political  condition  as  a  consequence  of  ec¬ 
clesiastical  reformation. 

The  Catholic  Church  also  was  essentially  in¬ 
fluenced  by  the  Reformation :  the  reins  of  dis¬ 
cipline  were  drawn  tighter,  and  the  greatest  oc¬ 
casions  of  scandal,  the  most  crying  abuses  were 
abated.  Much  of  the  intellectual  life  of  the  age 
that  lay  outside  its  sphere,  but  with  which  it  had 
previously  maintained  friendly  relations,  it  now 
repudiated.  The  Church  came  to  a  dead  stop — 
“hitherto  and  no  farther !”  It  severed  itself  from 
advancing  science,  from  philosophy  and  human¬ 
istic  literature;  and  an  occasion  was  soon  offered 
of  declaring  its  enmity  to  the  scientific  pursuits 
of  the  period.  The  celebrated  Copernicus  had 
discovered  that  the  earth  and  the  planets  re¬ 
volve  round  the  sun,  but  the  Church  declared 
against  this  addition  to  human  knowledge.  Gali¬ 
leo,  who  had  published  a  statement  in  the  form 
of  a  dialogue  of  the  evidence  for  and  against  the 
Copernican  discovery  (declaring  indeed  his  own 
conviction  of  its  truth),  was  obliged  to  crave 
pardon  for  the  offence  on  his  knees.  The  Greek 
literature  was  not  made  the  basis  of  culture; 
education  was  intrusted  to  the  Jesuits.  Thus 
does  the  spirit  of  the  Catholic  world  in  general 
sink  behind  the  spirit  of  the  age. 

Here  an  important  question  solicits  investiga¬ 
tion:  why  the  Reformation  was  limited  to  cer¬ 
tain  nations, and  why  it  did  not  permeate  the 
whole  Catholic  world.  The  Reformation  origi¬ 
nated  in  Germany,  and  struck  firm  root  only  in 
the  purely  German  nations ;  outside  of  Germany 
itself  it  established  itself  in  Scandinavia  and 
England.  But  the  Romanic  and  Slavonic  nations 
kept  decidedly  aloof  from  it.  Even  south  Ger¬ 
many  has  only  partially  adopted  the  Reforma¬ 
tion — a  fact  which  is  consistent  with  the  min¬ 
gling  of  elements  which  is  the  general  character¬ 
istic  of  its  nationality.  In  Swabia,  Franconia, 
and  the  Rhine  countries  there  were  many  con¬ 
vents  and  bishoprics,  as  also  many  free  imperial 
towns;  and  the  reception  or  rejection  of  the 
Reformation  very  much  depended  on  the  influ¬ 
ences  which  these  ecclesiastical  and  civil  bodies 
respectively  exercised;  for  we  have  already  no- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


352 

ticed  that  the  Reformation  was  a  change  influ¬ 
encing  the  political  life  of  the  age  as  well  as  its 
religious  and  intellectual  condition.  We  must 
further  observe,  that  authority  has  much  greater 
weight  in  determining  men’s  opinions  than  peo¬ 
ple  are  inclined  to  believe.  There  are  certain 
fundamental  principles  which  men  are  in  the 
habit  of  receiving  on  the  strength  of  authority ; 
and  it  was  mere  authority  which  in  the  case  of 
many  countries  decided  for  or  against  the  adop¬ 
tion  of  the  Reformation.  In  Austria,  in  Bavaria, 
in  Bohemia,  the  Reformation  had  already  made 
great  progress;  and  though  it  is  commonly  said 
that  when  truth  has  once  penetrated  men’s  souls, 
it  cannot  be  rooted  out  again,  it  was  indisputa¬ 
bly  stifled  in  the  countries  in  question,  by  force 
of  arms,  by  stratagem  or  persuasion.  The  Sla¬ 
vonic  nations  wTere  agricultural.  This  condition 
of  life  brings  with  it  the  relation  of  lord  and 
serf.  In  agriculture  the  agency  of  nature  pre¬ 
dominates;  human  industry  and  subjective  ac¬ 
tivity  are  on  the  whole  less  brought  into  play  in 
this  department  of  labour  than  elsewhere.  The 
Slavonians  therefore  did  not  attain  so  quickly 
or  readily  as  other  nations  the  fundamental 
sense  of  pure  individuality — the  consciousness 
of  universality — that  which  we  designated 
above  as  “political  power,”  and  could  not  share 
the  benefits  of  dawning  freedom.  But  the  Ro¬ 
manic  nations  also — Italy,  Spain,  Portugal,  and 
in  part  France — were  not  imbued  with  the  Re¬ 
formed  doctrines.  Physical  force  perhaps  did 
much  to  repress  them;  yet  this  alone  would  not 
be  sufficient  to  explain  the  fact,  for  when  the 
spirit  of  a  nation  craves  anything  no  force  can 
prevent  its  attaining  the  desired  object:  nor 
can  it  be  said  that  these  nations  were  deficient 
in  culture;  on  the  contrary,  they  were  in  ad¬ 
vance  of  the  Germans  in  this  respect.  It  was 
rather  owing  to  the  fundamental  character  of 
these  nations,  that  they  did  not  adopt  the  Ref¬ 
ormation.  But  what  is  this  peculiarity  of  char¬ 
acter  which  hindered  the  attainment  of  spiritual 
freedom?  We  answer:  the  pure  inwardness  of 
the  German  nation  was  the  proper  soil  for  the 
emancipation  of  spirit;  the  Romanic  nations,  on 
the  contrary,  have  maintained  in  the  very  depth 
of  their  soul — in  their  spiritual  consciousness — 
the  principle  of  disharmony: 1  they  are  a  prod¬ 
uct  of  the  fusion  of  Roman  and  German  blood, 
and  still  retain  the  heterogeneity  thence  result¬ 
ing.  The  German  cannot  deny  that  the  French, 

1  The  acknowledgment  of  an  external  power  author¬ 
ized  to  command  the  entire  soul  of  man  was  not  sup¬ 
planted  in  their  case  by  a  deference  to  conscience  and 
subjective  principle  ( i .  e.,  the  union  of  objective  and 
subjective  freedom)  as  the  supreme  authority. 


the  Italians,  the  Spaniards,  possess  more  de¬ 
termination  of  character,  that  they  pursue  a 
settled  aim  (even  though  it  have  a  fixed  idea  for 
its  object)  with  perfectly  clear  consciousness 
and  the  greatest  attention,  that  they  carry  out 
a  plan  with  great  circumspection,  and  exhibit 
the  greatest  decision  in  regard  to  specific  ob¬ 
jects.  The  French  call  the  Germans  entiers,  “en¬ 
tire,”  i.e.,  stubborn;  they  are  also  strangers  to 
the  whimsical  originality  of  the  English.  The 
Englishman  attaches  his  idea  of  liberty  to  the 
special;  he  does  not  trouble  himself  about  the 
understanding,  but  on  the  contrary  feels  him¬ 
self  so  much  the  more  at  liberty,  the  more  his 
course  of  action  or  his  license  to  act  contravenes 
the  understanding,  i.e.,  runs  counter  to  general 
principles.  On  the  other  hand,  among  the  Ro¬ 
manic  peoples  we  immediately  encounter  that 
internal  schism,  that  holding  fast  by  an  abstract 
principle,  and,  as  the  counterpart  of  this,  an 
absence  of  the  totality  of  spirit  and  sentiment 
which  we  call  “heart”;  there  is  not  that  medita¬ 
tive  introversion  of  the  soul  upon  itself ;  in  their 
inmost  being  they  may  be  said  to  be  alienated 
from  themselves.  With  them  the  inner  life  is  a 
region  whose  depth  they  do  not  appreciate ;  for 
it  is  given  over  “bodily”  to  particular  interests, 
and  the  infinity  that  belongs  to  spirit  is  not  to 
be  looked  for  there.  Their  inmost  being  is  not 
their  own.  They  leave  it  as  an  alien  and  indif¬ 
ferent  matter,  and  are  glad  to  have  its  concerns 
settled  for  them  by  another.  That  other  to  which 
they  leave  it  is  the  Church.  They  have  indeed 
something  to  do  with  it  themselves;  but  since 
that  which  they  have  to  do  is  not  self-originated 
and  self-prescribed,  not  their  very  own,  they  are 
content  to  leave  tjie  affair  to  be  settled  in  a 
superficial  way.  “Eh  bien,”  said  Napoleon,  “we 
shall  go  to  Mass  again,  and  my  good  fellows  will 
say:  ‘That  is  the  word  of  command!’  ”  This  is 
the  leading  feature  in  the  character  of  these  na¬ 
tions — the  separation  of  the  religious  from  the 
secular  interest,  i.e.,  from  the  special  interest  of 
individuality;  and  the  ground  of  this  separation 
lies  in  their  inmost  soul,  which  has  lost  its  inde¬ 
pendent  entireness  of  being,  its  profoundest 
unity.  Catholicism  does  not  claim  the  essential 
direction  of  the  secular;  religion  remains  an  in¬ 
different  matter  on  the  one  side,  while  the  other 
side  of  life  is  dissociated  from  it,  and  occupies  a 
sphere  exclusively  its  own.  Cultivated  French¬ 
men  therefore  feel  an  antipathy  to  Protestant¬ 
ism  because  it  seems  to  them  something  pedan¬ 
tic,  dull,  minutely  captious  in  its  morality;  since 
it  requires  that  spirit  and  thought  should  be 
directly  engaged  in  religion:  in  attending  Mass 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  353 


and  other  ceremonies,  on  the  contrary,  no  exer¬ 
tion  of  thought  is  required,  but  an  imposing 
sensuous  spectacle  is  presented  to  the  eye,  which 
does  not  make  such  a  demand  on  one’s  attention 
as  entirely  to  exclude  a  little  chat,  while  yet  the 
duties  of  the  occasion  are  not  neglected. 

We  spoke  above  of  the  relation  which  the  new 
doctrine  sustained  to  secular  life ,  and  now  we 
have  only  to  exhibit  that  relation  in  detail.  The 
development  and  advance  of  spirit  from  the 
time  of  the  Reformation  onwards  consist  in  this, 
that  spirit,  having  now  gained  the  consciousness 
of  its  Freedom,  through  that  process  of  media¬ 
tion  which  takes  place  between  man  and  God — 
that  is,  in  the  full  recognition  of  the  objective 
process  as  the  existence  [the  positive  and  defi¬ 
nite  manifestation]  of  the  divine  essence — now 
takes  it  up  and  follows  it  out  in  building  up  the 
edifice  of  secular  relations.  That  harmony  which 
has  resulted  from  the  painful  struggles  of  his¬ 
tory,  involves  the  recognition  of  the  secular  as 
capable  of  being  an  embodiment  of  truth; 
whereas  it  had  been  formerly  regarded  as  evil 
only,  as  incapable  of  good — the  latter  being  con¬ 
sidered  essentially  ultramundane.  It  is  now  per¬ 
ceived  that  morality  and  justice  in  the  state  are 
also  divine  and  commanded  by  God,  and  that  in 
point  of  substance  there  is  nothing  higher  or 
more  sacred.  One  inference  is  that  marriage  is 
no  longer  deemed  less  holy  than  celibacy.  Lu¬ 
ther  took  a  wife  to  show  that  he  respected  mar¬ 
riage,  defying  the  calumnies  to  which  he  ex¬ 
posed  himself  by  such  a  step.  It  was  his  duty  to 
do  so,  as  it  was  also  to  eat  meat  on  Fridays;  to 
prove  that  such  things  are  lawful  and  right,  in 
opposition  to  the  imagined  superiority  of  absti¬ 
nence.  The  family  introduces  man  to  commu¬ 
nity — to  the  relation  of  interdependence  in  so¬ 
ciety;  and  this  union  is  a  moral  one:  while,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  monks,  separated  from  the 
sphere  of  social  morality,  formed  as  it  were  the 
standing  army  of  the  Pope,  as  the  janizaries 
formed  the  basis  of  the  Turkish  power.  The 
marriage  of  the  priests  entails  the  disappearance 
of  the  outward  distinction  between  laity  and 
clergy. 

Moreover,  the  repudiation  of  work  no  longer 
earned  the  reputation  of  sanctity;  it  was  ac¬ 
knowledged  to  be  more  commendable  for  men 
to  rise  from  a  state  of  dependence  by  activity, 
intelligence,  and  industry,  and  make  themselves 
independent.  It  is  more  consonant  with  justice 
that  he  who  has  money  should  spend  it  even  in 
luxuries,  than  that  he  should  give  it  away  to 
idlers  and  beggars ;  for  he  bestows  it  on  an  equal 
number  of  persons  by  so  doing,  and  these  must 


at  any  rate  have  worked  diligently  for  it.  In¬ 
dustry,  crafts,  and  trades  now  have  their  moral 
validity  recognized,  and  the  obstacles  to  their 
prosperity  which  originated  with  the  Church, 
have  vanished.  For  the  Church  had  pronounced 
it  a  sin  to  lend  money  on  interest :  but  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  so  doing  led  to  the  direct  violation  of 
her  injunctions.  The  Lombards  (a  fact  which 
accounts  for  the  use  of  the  term  lombard  in 
French  to  denote  a  loan-office),  and  particularly 
the  House  of  Medici,  advanced  money  to  princes 
in  every  part  of  Europe.  The  third  point  of 
sanctity  in  the  Catholic  Church — blind  obedi¬ 
ence,  was  likewise  denuded  of  its  false  preten¬ 
sions.  Obedience  to  the  laws  of  the  state,  as  the 
rational  element  in  volition  and  action,  was 
made  the  principle  of  human  conduct.  In  this 
obedience  man  is  free,  for  all  that  is  demanded 
is  that  the  particular  should  yield  to  the  gen¬ 
eral.  Man  himself  has  a  conscience;  conse¬ 
quently  the  subjection  required  of  him  is  a  free 
allegiance.  This  involves  the  possibility  of  a  de¬ 
velopment  of  reason  and  freedom,  and  of  their 
introduction  into  human  relations;  and  reason 
and  the  divine  commands  are  now  synonymous. 
The  rational  no  longer  meets  with  contradiction 
on  the  part  of  the  religious  conscience ;  it  is  per¬ 
mitted  to  develop  itself  in  its  own  sphere  with¬ 
out  disturbance,  without  being  compelled  to 
resort  to  force  in  defending  itself  against  an 
adverse  power.  But  in  the  Catholic  Church,  that 
adverse  element  is  unconditionally  sanctioned. 
Where  the  Reformed  doctrine  prevails,  princes 
may  still  be  bad  governors,  but  they  are  no 
longer  sanctioned  and  solicited  thereto  by  the 
promptings  of  their  religious  conscience.  In  the 
Catholic  Church,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  nothing 
singular  for  the  conscience  to  be  found  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  laws  of  the  state.  Assassinations 
of  sovereigns,  conspiracies  against  the  state,  and 
the  like,  have  often  been  supported  and  carried 
into  execution  by  the  priests. 

This  harmony  between  the  state  and  the 
church  has  now  attained  immediate  realization.1 
We  have,  as  yet,  no  reconstruction  of  the  state, 
of  the  system  of  jurisprudence,  etc.,  for  thought 
must  first  discover  the  essential  principle  of 
right.  The  laws  of  freedom  had  first  to  be  ex¬ 
panded  to  a  system  as  deduced  from  an  absolute 
principle  of  right.  Spirit  does  not  assume  this 
complete  form  immediately  after  the  Reforma¬ 
tion;  it  limits  itself  at  first  to  direct  and  simple 
changes,  as,  e.g., the  doing  away  with  conventual 

1  That  is,  the  harmony  in  question  simply  exists;  its 
development  and  results  have  not  yet  manifested  them¬ 
selves. 


354  PHILOSOPHY 

establishments  and  episcopal  jurisdiction,  etc. 
The  reconciliation  between  God  and  the  world 
was  limited  in  the  first  instance  to  an  abstract 
form;  it  was  not  yet  expanded  into  a  system  by 
which  the  moral  world  could  be  regulated. 

In  the  first  instance  this  reconciliation  must 
take  place  in  the  individual  soul,  must  be  real¬ 
ized  by  feeling;  the  individual  must  gain  the 
assurance  that  the  spirit  dwells  in  him — that,  in 
the  language  of  the  Church,  a  brokenness  of 
heart  has  been  experienced,  and  that  divine 
grace  has  entered  into  the  heart  thus  broken.  By 
nature  man  is  not  what  he  ought  to  be;  only 
through  a  transforming  process  does  he  arrive 
at  truth.  The  general  and  speculative  aspect  of 
the  matter  is  just  this — that  the  human  heart  is 
not  what  it  should  be.  It  was  then  required  of 
the  individual  that  he  should  know  what  he  is  in 
himself ;  that  is,  the  teaching  of  the  Church  in¬ 
sisted  upon  man’s  becoming  conscious  that  he 
is  evil.  But  the  individual  is  evil  only  when  the 
natural  manifests  itself  in  mere  sensual  desire — 
when  an  unrighteous  will  presents  itself  in  its 
untamed,  untrained,  violent  shape;  and  yet  it  is 
required  that  such  a  person  should  know  that 
he  is  depraved  and  that  the  good  spirit  dwells 
in  him;  in  fact,  he  is  required  to  have  a  direct 
consciousness  of  and  to  “experience”  that  which 
was  presented  to  him  as  a  speculative  and  im¬ 
plicit  truth.  The  reconciliation  having,  then,  as¬ 
sumed  this  abstract  form,  men  tormented  them¬ 
selves  with  a  view  to  force  upon  their  souls  the 
consciousness  of  their  sinfulness  and  to  know 
themselves  as  evil.  The  most  simple  souls,  the 
most  innocent  natures  were  accustomed  in  pain¬ 
ful  introspection  to  observe  the  most  secret 
workings  of  the  heart,  with  a  view  to  a  rigid  ex¬ 
amination  of  them.  With  this  duty  was  con¬ 
joined  that  of  an  entirely  opposite  description; 
it  was  required  that  man  should  attain  the  con¬ 
sciousness  that  the  good  spirit  dwells  in  him — 
that  divine  grace  has  found  an  entrance  into  his 
soul.  In  fact,  the  important  distinction  between 
the  knowledge  of  abstract  truth  and  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  what  has  actual  existence  was  left  out 
of  sight.  Men  became  the  victims  of  a  torment¬ 
ing  uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  good  spirit  has 
an  abode  in  them,  and  it  was  deemed  indispen¬ 
sable  that  the  entire  process  of  spiritual  trans¬ 
formation  should  become  perceptible  to  the  in¬ 
dividual  himself.  An  echo  of  this  self -torment¬ 
ing  process  may  still  be  traced  in  much  of  the 
religious  poetry  of  that  time;  the  Psalms  of 
David  which  exhibit  a  similar  character  were 
then  introduced  as  hymns  into  the  ritual  of 
Protestant  Churches.  Protestantism  took  this 


OF  HISTORY 

turn  of  minute  and  painful  introspection,  pos¬ 
sessed  with  the  conviction  of  the  importance  of 
the  exercise,  and  was  for  a  long  time  character¬ 
ized  by  a  self-tormenting  disposition  and  an 
aspect  of  spiritual  wretchedness;  which,  in  the 
present  day,  has  induced  many  persons  to  enter 
the  Catholic  pale,  that  they  might  exchange  this 
inward  uncertainty  for  a  formal  broad  certainty 
based  on  the  imposing  totality  of  the  Church.  A 
more  refined  order  of  reflection  upon  the  char¬ 
acter  of  human  actions  was  introduced  into  the 
Catholic  Church  also.  The  Jesuits  analysed  the 
first  rudiments  of  volition  ( velleitas )  with  as 
painful  minuteness  as  was  displayed  in  the  pious 
exercises  of  Protestantism;  but  they  had  a 
science  of  casuistry  which  enabled  them  to  dis¬ 
cover  a  good  reason  for  everything,  and  so  get 
rid  of  the  burden  of  guilt  which  this  rigid  inves¬ 
tigation  seemed  to  aggravate. 

With  this  was  connected  another  remarkable 
phenomenon,  common  to  the  Catholic  with  the 
Protestant  world.  The  human  mind  was  driven 
into  the  inward,  the  abstract,  and  the  religious 
element  was  regarded  as  utterly  alien  to  the 
secular.  That  lively  consciousness  of  his  subjec¬ 
tive  life  and  of  the  inward  origin  of  his  volition 
that  had  been  awakened  in  man,  brought  with 
it  the  belief  in  evil,  as  a  vast  power  the  sphere 
of  whose  malign  dominion  is  the  secular.  This 
belief  presents  a  parallelism  with  the  view  in 
which  the  sale  of  indulgences  originated:  for  as 
eternal  salvation  could  be  secured  for  money,  so 
by  paying  the  price  of  one’s  salvation  through  a 
compact  made  with  the  Devil,  the  riches  of  the 
world  and  the  unlimited  gratification  of  desires 
and  passions  could  be  secured.  Thus  arose  that 
famous  legend  of  Faust,  who  in  disgust  at  the 
unsatisfactory  character  of  speculative  science, 
is  said  to  have  plunged  into  the  world  and 
purchased  all  its  glory  at  the  expense  of  his 
salvation. 

Faust,  if  we  may  trust  the  poet,  had  the  en¬ 
joyment  of  all  that  the  world  could  give,  in  ex¬ 
change  for  his  soul’s  weal;  but  those  poor  women 
who  were  called  witches  were  reputed  to  get 
nothing  more  by  the  bargain  than  the  gratifica¬ 
tion  of  a  petty  revenge  by  making  a  neighbour’s 
cow  go  dry  or  giving  a  child  the  measles.  But  in 
awarding  punishment  it  was  not  the  magnitude 
of  the  injury  in  the  loss  of  the  milk  or  the  sick¬ 
ness  of  the  child  that  was  considered;  it  was  the 
abstract  power  of  the  Evil  One  in  them  that  was 
attacked.  The  belief  in  this  abstract,  special 
power  whose  dominion  is  the  world — in  the 
Devil  and  his  devices — occasioned  an  incalcu¬ 
lable  number  of  trials  for  witchcraft  both  in 


355 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD 


Catholic  and  Protestant  countries.  It  was  im¬ 
possible  to  prove  the  guilt  of  the  accused;  they 
were  only  suspected:  it  was  therefore  only  a 
direct  knowledge  on  which  this  fury  against  the 
evil  principle  professed  to  be  based.  It  was  in¬ 
deed  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  evidence, but 
the  basis  of  these  judicial  processes  was  simply 
the  belief  that  certain  individuals  were  possessed 
by  the  power  of  the  Evil  One.  This  delusion 
raged  among  the  nations  in  the  sixteenth  cen¬ 
tury  with  the  fury  of  a  pestilence.  The  main  im¬ 
pulse  was  suspicion.  The  principle  of  suspicion 
assumes  a  similarly  terrible  shape  during  the 
sway  of  the  Roman  emperors,  and  under  Robes¬ 
pierre’s  Reign  of  Terror;  when  mere  disposition, 
unaccompanied  by  any  overt  act  or  expression, 
was  made  an  object  of  punishment.  Among  the 
Catholics,  it  was  the  Dominicans  to  whom  (as 
was  the  Inquisition  in  all  its  branches)  the  trials 
for  witchcraft  were  intrusted.  Father  Spee,  a 
noble  Jesuit,  wrote  a  treatise  against  them  (he 
is  also  the  author  of  a  collection  of  fine  poems 
bearing  the  title  of  Trutznachtigall),  givinga  full 
exposure  of  the  terrible  character  of  criminal 
justice  in  proceedings  of  this  kind.  Torture, 
which  was  only  to  be  applied  once,  was  continued 
until  a  confession  was  extorted.  If  the  accused 
fainted  under  the  torture  it  was  averred  that  the 
Devil  was  giving  them  sleep:  if  convulsions 
supervened,  it  was  said  that  the  Devil  was  laugh¬ 
ing  in  them;  if  they  held  out  steadfastly,  the 
Devil  was  supposed  to  give  them  power.  These 
persecutions  spread  like  an  epidemic  sickness 
through  Italy,  France,  Spain,  and  Germany.  The 
earnest  remonstrances  of  enlightened  men,  such 
as  Spee  and  others, already  produced  a  consider¬ 
able  effect.  But  it  was  Thomasius,  a  professor  of 
Halle,  who  first  opposed  this  prevalent  supersti¬ 
tion  with  very  decided  success.  The  entire  phe¬ 
nomenon  is  in  itself  most  remarkable  when  we 
reflect  that  we  have  not  long  been  quit  of  this 
frightful  barbarity  (even  as  late  as  the  year  1780 
a  witch  was  publicly  burned  at  Glarus  in 
Switzerland).  Among  the  Catholics  persecution 
was  directed  against  heretics  as  well  as  against 
witches:  we  might  say  indeed  that  they  were 
placed  in  one  category;  the  unbelief  of  the  here¬ 
tics  was  regarded  as  none  other  than  the  indwell¬ 
ing  principle  of  evil — a  possession  similar  to  the 
other. 

Leaving  this  abstract  form  of  subjectiveness 
we  have  now  to  consider  the  secular  side,  the 
constitution  of  the  state  and  the  advance  of  uni¬ 
versality,  the  recognition  of  the  universal  laws 
of  freedom.  This  is  the  second  and  the  essential 
point. 


Chapter  2.  Influence  of  the  Reformation 
on  Political  Development 
In  tracing  the  course  of  the  political  devel¬ 
opment  of  the  period,  we  observe  in  the  first 
place  the  consolidation  of  monarchy,  and  the 
monarch  invested  with  an  authority  emanating 
from  the  state.  The  incipient  stage  in  the  rise 
of  royal  power,  and  the  commencement  of  that 
unity  which  the  states  of  Europe  attained,  be¬ 
long  to  a  still  earlier  period.  While  these  changes 
were  going  forward,  the  entire  body  of  private 
obligations  and  rights  which  had  been  handed 
down  from  the  middle  age,  still  retained  validity. 
Infinitely  important  is  this  form  of  private 
rights,  which  the  organic  constituents  of  the  exec¬ 
utive  power  of  the  state  have  assumed.  At  their 
apex  we  find  a  fixed  and  positive  principle — the 
exclusive  right  of  one  family  to  the  possession 
of  the  throne,  and  the  hereditary  succession  of 
sovereigns  further  restricted  by  the  law  of  pri¬ 
mogeniture.  This  gives  the  state  an  immovable 
centre.  The  fact  that  Germany  was  an  elective 
empire  prevented  its  being  consolidated  into  one 
state;  and  for  the  same  reason  Poland  has  van¬ 
ished  from  the  circle  of  independent  states.  The 
state  must  have  a  final  decisive  will:  but  if  an 
individual  is  to  be  the  final  deciding  power,  he 
must  be  so  in  a  direct  and  natural  way,  not  as 
determined  by  choice  and  theoretic  views,  etc. 
Even  among  the  free  Greeks  the  oracle  was  the 
external  power  which  decided  their  policy  on 
critical  occasions;  here  birth  is  the  oracle — 
something  independent  of  any  arbitrary  volition. 
But  the  circumstance  that  the  highest  station  in 
a  monarchy  is  assigned  to  a  family  seems  to  in¬ 
dicate  that  the  sovereignty  is  the  private  prop¬ 
erty  of  that  family.  As  such,  that  sovereignty 
would  seem  to  be  divisible ;  but  since  the  idea  of 
division  of  power  is  opposed  to  the  principle  of 
the  state,  the  rights  of  the  monarch  and  his 
family  required  to  be  more  strictly  defined. 
Sovereign  possession  is  not  a  peculium  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  ruler,  but  is  consigned  to  the  dynastic 
family  as  a  trust;  and  the  estates  of  the  realm 
possess  security  that  that  trust  shall  be  faith¬ 
fully  discharged,  for  they  have  to  guard  the  unity 
of  the  body  politic.  Thus,  then,  royal  possession 
no  longer  denotes  a  kind  of  private  property, 
private  possession  of  estates,  demesnes,  juris¬ 
diction,  etc.,  but  has  become  a  state-property — 
a  function  pertaining  to  and  involved  with  the 
state. 

Equally  important,  and  connected  with  that 
just  noticed,  is  the  change  of  executive  powers, 
functions,  duties,  and  rights,  which  naturally  be- 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


356 

long  to  the  state,  but  which  had  become  private 
property  and  private  contracts  or  obligations — 
into  possession  conferredby  the  state.  The  rights 
of  seigneurs  and  barons  were  annulled,  and  they 
were  obliged  to  content  themselves  with  official 
positions  in  the  state.  This  transformation  of 
the  rights  of  vassals  into  official  functions  took 
place  in  the  several  kingdoms  in  various  ways. 
In  France,  e.g.,  the  great  barons,  who  were  gov¬ 
ernors  of  provinces,  who  could  claim  such  offices 
as  a  matter  of  right,  and  who,  like  the  Turkish 
pashas,  maintained  a  body  of  troops  with  the 
revenues  thence  derived — troops  which  they 
might  at  any  moment  bring  into  the  field  against 
the  king — were  reduced  to  the  position  of  mere 
landed  proprietors  or  court  nobility,  and  those 
pashalics  became  offices  held  under  the  govern¬ 
ment  ;  or  the  nobility  were  employed  as  officers 
— generals  of  the  army,  an  army  belonging  to 
the  state .  In  this  aspect  the  origination  of  stand¬ 
ing  armies  is  so  important  an  event;  for  they 
supply  the  monarchy  with  an  independent  force 
and  are  as  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  cen¬ 
tral  authority  against  the  rebellion  of  the  subject 
individuals  as  for  the  defence  of  the  state  against 
foreign  enemies.  The  fiscal  system  indeed  had 
not  as  yet  assumed  a  systematic  character — the 
revenue  being  derived  from  customs,  taxes  and 
tolls  in  countless  variety,  besides  the  subsidies 
and  contributions  paid  by  the  estates  of  the 
realm;  in  return  for  which  the  right  of  presenting 
a  statement  of  grievances  was  conceded  to  them, 
as  is  now  the  case  in  Hungary. 

In  Spain  the  spirit  of  chivalry  had  assumed  a 
very  beautiful  and  noble  form.  This  chivalric 
spirit,  this  knightly  dignity,  degraded  to  a  mere 
inactive  sentiment  of  honour,  has  attained  noto¬ 
riety  as  the  Spanish  grandezza .  The  grandees 
were  no  longer  allowed  to  maintain  troops  of 
their  own,  and  were  also  withdrawn  from  the 
command  of  the  armies ;  destitute  of  power  they 
had  to  content  themselves  as  private  persons  with 
an  empty  title.  But  the  means  by  which  the  royal 
power  in  Spain  was  consolidated,  was  the  Inquisi¬ 
tion.  This,  which  was  established  for  the  persecu¬ 
tion  of  those  who  secretly  adhered  to  Judaism, 
and  of  Moors  and  heretics,  soon  assumed  a  polit¬ 
ical  character, being  directed  against  the  enemies 
of  the  state.  Thus  the  Inquisition  confirmed  the 
despotic  power  of  the  king :  it  claimed  suprem¬ 
acy  even  over  bishops  and  archbishops,  and  could 
cite  them  before  its  tribunal.  The  frequent  con¬ 
fiscation  of  property,  one  of  the  most  customary 
penalties,  tended  to  enrich  the  treasury  of  the 
state.  Moreover,  the  Inquisition  was  a  tribunal 
which  took  cognizance  of  mere  suspicion;  and 


while  it  consequently  exercised  a  fearful  au¬ 
thority  over  the  clergy,  it  had  a  peculiar  support 
in  the  national  pride.  For  every  Spaniard  wished 
to  be  considered  Christian  by  descent,  and  this 
species  of  vanity  fell  in  with  the  views  and  tend¬ 
ency  of  the  Inquisition.  Particular  provinces 
of  the  Spanish  monarchy,  as,  e.g.,  Aragon,  still 
retained  many  peculiar  rights  and  privileges; 
but  the  Spanish  kings  from  Philip  II  downwards 
proceeded  to  suppress  them  altogether. 

It  would  lead  us  too  far  to  pursue  in  detail  the 
process  of  the  depression  of  the  aristocracy  in 
the  several  states  of  Europe.  The  main  scope  of 
this  depressing  process  was,  as  already  stated, 
the  curtailment  of  the  private  rights  of  the 
feudal  nobility,  and  the  transformation  of  their 
seigneurial  authority  into  an  official  position  in 
connection  with  the  state.  This  change  was  in 
the  interest  of  both  the  king  and  the  people.  The 
powerful  barons  seemed  to  constitute  an  inter¬ 
mediate  body  charged  with  the  defence  of  lib¬ 
erty;  but  properly  speaking,  it  was  only  their 
own  privileges  which  they  maintained  against 
the  royal  power  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  citizens 
on  the  other  hand.  The  barons  of  England  ex¬ 
torted  Magna  Charta  from  the  king;  but  the 
citizens  gained  nothing  by  it,  on  the  contrary 
they  remained  in  their  former  condition.  Polish 
liberty  too,  meant  nothing  more  than  the  free¬ 
dom  of  the  barons  in  contraposition  to  the  king, 
the  nation  being  reduced  to  a  state  of  absolute 
serfdom.  When  liberty  is  mentioned,  we  must 
always  be  careful  to  observe  whether  it  is  not 
really  the  assertion  of  private  interests  which 
is  thereby  designated.  For  although  the  nobility 
were  deprived  of  their  sovereign  power,  the  peo¬ 
ple  were  still  oppressed  in  consequence  of  their 
absolute  dependence,  their  serfdom,  and  sub¬ 
jection  to  aristocratic  jurisdiction;  and  they 
were  partly  declared  utterly  incapable  of  pos¬ 
sessing  property,  partly  subjected  to  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  bond-service  which  did  not  permit  of 
their  freely  selling  the  products  of  their  indus¬ 
try.  The  supreme  interest  of  emancipation  from 
this  condition  concerned  the  power  of  the  state 
as  well  as  the  subjects — that  emancipation  which 
now  gave  them  as  citizens  the  character  of  free 
individuals,  and  determined  that  what  was  to  be 
performed  for  the  commonwealth  should  be  a 
matter  of  just  allotment,  not  of  mere  chance. 
The  aristocracy  of  possession  maintains  that 
possession  against  both,  viz.,  against  the  power 
of  the  state  at  large  and  against  individuals.  But 
the  aristocracy  have  a  position  assigned  them, 
as  the  support  of  the  throne,  as  occupied  and  ac¬ 
tive  on  behalf  of  the  state  and  the  common 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  357 


weal,  and  at  the  same  time  as  maintaining  the 
freedom  of  the  citizens.  This  in  fact  is  the  pre¬ 
rogative  of  that  class  which  forms  the  link  be¬ 
tween  the  sovereign  and  the  people — to  under¬ 
take  to  discern  and  to  give  the  first  impulse  to 
that  which  is  intrinsically  rational  and  univer¬ 
sal;  and  this  recognition  of  and  occupation  with 
the  universal  must  take  the  place  of  positive 
personal  right.  This  subjection  to  the  head  of 
the  state  of  that  intermediate  power  which  laid 
claim  to  positive  authority  was  now  accom¬ 
plished,  but  this  did  not  involve  the  emancipa¬ 
tion  of  the  subject  class.  This  took  place  only  at 
a  later  date,  when  the  idea  of  right  in  and  for  it¬ 
self  arose  in  men’s  minds.  Then  the  sovereigns 
relying  on  their  respective  peoples,  vanquished 
the  caste  of  unrighteousness;  but  where  they 
united  with  the  barons,  or  where  the  latter 
maintained  their  freedom  against  the  kings, 
those  positive  rights  or  rather  wrongs  continued. 

We  observe  also  as  an  essential  feature  now 
first  presenting  itself  in  the  political  aspect  of 
the  time,  a  connected  system  of  states  and  a  re¬ 
lation  of  states  to  each  other.  They  became  in¬ 
volved  in  various  wars:  the  kings  having  en¬ 
larged  their  political  authority,  now  turn  their 
attention  to  foreign  lands,  insisting  upon  claims 
of  all  kinds.  The  aim  and  real  interest  of  the 
wars  of  the  period  is  invariably  conquest. 

Italy  especially  had  become  such  an  object  of 
desire,  and  was  a  prey  to  the  rapacity  of  the 
French,  the  Spaniards,  and  at  a  later  date,  of  the 
Austrians.  In  fact,  absolute  disintegration  and 
dismemberment  has  always  been  an  essential 
feature  in  the  national  character  of  the  inhabit¬ 
ants  of  Italy,  in  ancient  as  well  as  in  modem 
times.  Their  stubborn  individuality  was  ex¬ 
changed  for  a  union  the  result  of  force,  under 
the  Roman  dominion;  but  as  soon  as  this  bond 
was  broken,  the  original  character  reappeared 
in  full  strength.  In  later  times,  as  if  find¬ 
ing  in  them  a  bond  of  union  otherwise  impossi¬ 
ble,  after  having  escaped  from  a  selfishness  of 
the  most  monstrous  order  and  which  displayed 
its  perverse  nature  in  crimes  of  every  descrip¬ 
tion,  the  Italians  attained  a  taste  for  the  fine 
arts:  thus  their  civilization,  the  mitigation  of 
their  selfishness,  reached  only  the  grade  of 
beauty,  not  that  of  rationality — the  higher  unity 
of  thought.  Consequently,  even  in  poetry  and 
song  the  Italian  nature  is  different  from  ours. 
Improvisation  characterizes  the  genius  of  the 
Italians;  they  pour  out  their  very  souls  in  art 
and  the  ecstatic  enjoyment  of  it.  Enjoying  a 
naturel  so  imbued  with  art,  the  state  must  be  an 
affair  of  comparative  indifference,  a  merely  cas¬ 


ual  matter  to  the  Italians.  But  we  have  to  ob¬ 
serve  also  that  the  wars  in  which  Germany  en¬ 
gaged,  were  not  particularly  honourable  to  it :  it 
allowed  Burgundy,  Lorraine,  Alsace,  and  other 
parts  of  the  empire  to  be  wrested  from  it.  From 
these  wars  between  the  various  political  powers 
there  arose  common  interests,  and  the  object  of 
that  community  of  interest  was  the  maintenance 
of  severalty — the  preservation  to  the  several 
states  of  their  independence — in  fact,  the  “bal¬ 
ance  of  power”  The  motive  to  this  was  of  a  de¬ 
cidedly  “practical”  kind,  viz.,  the  protection  of 
the  several  states  from  conquest.  The  union  of 
the  states  of  Europe  as  the  means  of  shielding 
individual  states  from  the  violence  of  the  power¬ 
ful — the  preservation  of  the  balance  of  power, 
had  now  taken  the  place  of  that  general  aim  of 
the  elder  time,  the  defence  of  Christendom, 
whose  centre  was  the  papacy.  This  new  political 
motive  was  necessarily  accompanied  by  a  diplo¬ 
matic  condition — one  in  which  all  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  great  European  system,  however 
distant,  felt  an  interest  in  that  which  happened 
to  any  one  of  them.  Diplomatic  policy  had  been 
brought  to  the  greatest  refinement  in  Italy,  and 
was  thence  transmitted  to  Europe  at  large. 
Several  princes  in  succession  seemed  to  threaten 
the  stability  of  the  balance  of  power  in  Europe. 
When  this  combination  of  states  was  just  com¬ 
mencing,  Charles  V  was  aiming  at  universal 
monarchy ;  for  he  was  Emperor  of  Germany  and 
King  of  Spain  to  boot:  the  Netherlands  and 
Italy  acknowledged  his  sway,  and  the  whole 
wealth  of  America  flowed  into  his  coffers.  With 
this  enormous  power,  which,  like  the  contin¬ 
gencies  of  fortune  in  the  case  of  private  prop¬ 
erty,  had  been  accumulated  by  the  most  felici¬ 
tous  combinations  of  political  dexterity,  among 
other  things  by  marriage,  but  which  was  desti¬ 
tute  of  an  internal  and  reliable  bond,  he  was 
nevertheless  unable  to  gain  any  advantage  over 
France,  or  even  over  the  German  princes;  nay 
he  was  even  compelled  to  a  peace  by  Maurice 
of  Saxony.  His  whole  life  was  spent  in  suppress¬ 
ing  disturbances  in  all  parts  of  his  empire  and 
in  conducting  foreign  wars.  The  balance  of  power 
in  Europe  was  similarly  threatened  by  Louis 
XIV.  Through  that  depression  of  the  grandees 
of  his  kingdom  which  Richelieu  and  after  him 
Mazarin  had  accomplished,  he  had  become  an 
absolute  sovereign.  France,  too,  had  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  its  intellectual  superiority  in  a  re¬ 
finement  of  culture  surpassing  anything  of  which 
the  rest  of  Europe  could  boast.  The  pretensions 
of  Louis  were  founded  not  on  extent  of  domin¬ 
ion  (as  was  the  case  with  Charles  V)  so  much 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


358 

as  on  that  culture  which  distinguished  his  peo¬ 
ple,  and  which  at  that  time  made  its  way  every¬ 
where  with  the  language  that  embodied  it,  and 
was  the  object  of  universal  admiration:  they 
could  therefore  plead  a  higher  justification  than 
those  of  the  German  Emperor.  But  the  very  rock 
on  which  the  vast  military  resources  of  Philip  II 
had  already  foundered,  the  heroic  resistance  of 
the  Dutch,  proved  fatal  also  to  the  ambitious 
schemes  of  Louis.  Charles  XII  also  presented  a 
remarkably  menacing  aspect;  but  his  ambition 
had  a  quixotic  tinge  and  was  less  sustained  by 
intrinsic  vigour.  Through  all  these  storms  the 
nations  of  Europe  succeeded  in  maintaining 
their  individuality  and  independence. 

An  external  relation  in  which  the  states  of 
Europe  had  an  interest  in  common,  was  that  sus¬ 
tained  to  the  Turks — the  terrible  power  which 
threatened  to  overwhelm  Europe  from  the  east. 
The  Turks  of  that  day  had  still  a  sound  and 
vigorous  nationality,  whose  power  was  based  on 
conquest,  and  which  was  therefore  engaged  in 
constant  warfare,  or  at  least  admitted  only  a 
temporary  suspension  of  arms.  As  was  the  case 
among  the  Franks,  the  conquered  territories 
were  divided  among  their  warriors  as  personal, 
not  heritable  possessions;  when  in  later  times 
the  principle  of  hereditary  succession  was 
adopted,  the  national  vigour  was  shattered.  The 
flower  of  the  Osman  force,  the  Janizaries,  were 
the  terror  of  the  Europeans.  Their  ranks  were 
recruited  from  a  body  of  Christian  boys  of  hand¬ 
some  and  vigorous  proportions,  brought  together 
chiefly  by  means  of  annual  conscriptions  among 
the  Greek  subjects  of  the  Porte,  strictly  educated 
in  the  Moslem  faith,  and  exercised  in  arms  from 
early  youth.  Without  parents,  without  brothers 
or  sisters,  without  wives,  they  were,  like  the 
monks,  an  altogether  isolated  and  terrible  corps. 
The  eastern  European  powers  were  obliged  to 
make  common  cause  against  the  Turks — viz., 
Austria,  Hungary,  Venice,  and  Poland.  The  bat¬ 
tle  of  Lepanto  saved  Italy,  and  perhaps  all  Eu¬ 
rope,  from  a  barbarian  inundation. 

An  event  of  special  importance  following  in 
the  train  of  the  Reformation  was  the  struggle 
of  the  Protestant  Church  for  political  existence. 
The  Protestant  Church,  even  in  its  original  as¬ 
pect,  was  too  intimately  connected  with  secular 
interests  not  to  occasion  secular  complications 
and  political  contentions  respectingpolitical  pos¬ 
session.  The  subjects  of  Catholic  princes  become 
Protestant  have  and  make  claims  to  ecclesiasti¬ 
cal  property,  change  the  nature  of  the  tenure, 
and  repudiate  or  decline  the  discharge  of  those 
ecclesiastical  functions  to  whose  due  perform¬ 


ance  the  emoluments  are  attached  ( jura  stolce). 
Moreover  a  Catholic  government  is  bound  to  be 
the  brachium  seculare  of  the  Church;  the  Inqui¬ 
sition,  e.g.,  never  put  a  man  to  death,  but  simply 
declared  him  a  heretic,  as  a  kind  of  jury;  he  was 
then  punished  according  to  civil  laws.  Again, 
innumerable  occasions  of  offence  and  irritation 
originated  with  processions  and  feasts,  the  carry¬ 
ing  of  the  Host  through  the  streets,  withdrawals 
from  convents,  etc.  Still  more  excitement  would 
be  felt  when  an  Archbishop  of  Cologne  attempted 
to  make  his  archiepiscopate  a  secular  prince¬ 
dom  for  himself  and  his  family.  Their  confessors 
made  it  a  matter  of  conscience  with  Catholic 
princes  to  wrest  estates  that  had  been  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  the  Church  out  of  the  hands  of  the  here¬ 
tics.  In  Germany,  however,  the  condition  of 
things  was  favorable  to  Protestantism  in  as  far 
as  the  several  territories  which  had  been  imperial 
fiefs,  had  become  independent  principalities.  But 
in  countries  like  Austria,  the  princes  were  indif¬ 
ferent  to  Protestants,  or  even  hostile  to  them; 
and  in  France  they  were  not  safe  in  the  exercise 
of  their  religion  except  as  protected  by  fort¬ 
resses.  War  was  the  indispensable  preliminary  to 
the  security  of  Protestants;  for  the  question  was 
not  one  of  simple  conscience,  but  involved  de¬ 
cisions  respecting  public  and  private  property 
which  had  been  taken  possession  of  in  contra¬ 
vention  of  the  rights  of  the  Church,  and  whose 
restitution  it  demanded.  A  condition  of  absolute 
mistrust  supervened;  absolute,  because  mistrust 
bound  up  with  the  religious  conscience  was  its 
root.  The  Protestant  princes  and  towns  formed 
at  that  time  a  feeble  union,  and  the  defensive 
operations  they  conducted  were  much  feebler 
still.  After  they  had  been  worsted,  Maurice,  the 
Elector  of  Saxony,  by  an  utterly  unexpected  and 
adventurous  piece  of  daring,  extorted  a  peace, 
itself  of  doubtful  interpretation,  and  which  left 
the  real  sources  of  embitterment  altogether  un¬ 
touched.  It  was  necessary  to  fight  out  the  battle 
from  the  very  beginning.  This  took  place  in  the 
Thirty  Years’  War,  in  which  first  Denmark  and 
then  Sweden  undertook  the  cause  of  freedom. 
The  former  was  compelled  to  quit  the  field,  but 
the  latter  under  Gustavus  Adolphus,  that  hero 
of  the  north  of  glorious  memory,  played  a  part 
which  was  so  much  the  more  brilliant  inasmuch 
as  it  began  to  wage  war  with  the  vast  force  of 
the  Catholics,  alone — without  the  help  of  the 
Protestant  states  of  the  empire.  The  powers  of 
Europe,  with  a  few  exceptions,  precipitate  them¬ 
selves  on  Germany — flowing  back  towards  it  as 
to  the  fountain  from  which  they  had  original¬ 
ly  issued,  and  where  now  the  right  of  inwardness 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  359 


that  has  come  to  manifest  itself  in  the  sphere  of 
religion,  and  that  of  internal  independence  and 
severalty  is  to  be  fought  out.  The  struggle  ends 
without  an  ideal  result — without  having  attained 
the  consciousness  of  a  principle  as  an  intellectual 
concept — in  the  exhaustion  of  all  parties,  in  a 
scene  of  utter  desolation,  where  all  the  contend¬ 
ing  forces  have  been  wrecked;  it  issues  in  letting 
parties  simply  take  their  course  and  maintain 
their  existence  on  the  basis  of  external  power. 
The  issue  is  in  fact  exclusively  of  a  political 
nature. 

In  England  also,  war  was  indispensable  to  the 
establishment  of  the  Protestant  Church:  the 
struggle  was  in  this  case  directed  against  the 
sovereigns,  who  were  secretly  attached  to  Ca¬ 
tholicism  because  they  found  the  principle  of  ab¬ 
solute  sway  confirmedby  its  doctrines.  The  fanat- 
icized  people  rebelled  against  the  assumption 
of  absolute  sovereign  power,  importing  that 
kings  are  responsible  to  God  alone  {i.e.,  to  the 
Father  Confessor),  and  in  opposition  to  Catholic 
externality,  unfurled  the  banner  of  extreme  sub¬ 
jectivity  in  Puritanism — a  principle  which,  de¬ 
veloping  itself  in  the  real  world,  presents  an 
aspect  partly  of  enthusiastic  elevation,  partly  of 
ridiculous  incongruity.  The  enthusiasts  of  Eng¬ 
land,  like  those  of  Munster,  were  for  having 
the  state  governed  directly  by  the  fear  of  God; 
the  soldiery  sharing  the  same  fanatical  views 
prayed  while  they  fought  for  the  cause  they  had 
espoused.  But  a  military  leader  now  has  the 
physical  force  of  the  country  and  consequently 
the  government  in  his  hands:  for  in  the  state 
there  must  be  government,  and  Cromwell  knew 
what  governing  is.  He,  therefore,  made  himself 
ruler  and  sent  that  praying  parliament  about 
their  business.  With  his  death  however  his  right 
to  authority  vanished  also,  and  the  old  dynasty 
regained  possession  of  the  throne.  Catholicism, 
we  may  observe,  is  commended  to  the  support 
of  princes  as  promoting  the  security  of  their 
government — a  position  supposed  to  be  particu¬ 
larly  manifest  if  the  Inquisition  be  connected 
with  the  government;  the  former  constituting 
the  bulwark  of  the  latter.  But  such  a  security  is 
based  on  a  slavish  religious  obedience,  and  is 
limited  to  those  grades  of  human  development  in 
which  the  political  constitution  and  the  whole 
legal  system  still  rest  on  the  basis  of  actual  posi¬ 
tive  possession ;  but  if  the  constitution  and  laws 
are  to  be  founded  on  a  veritable  eternal  right, 
then  security  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  Protes¬ 
tant  religion,  in  whose  principle  rational  sub¬ 
jective  freedom  also  attains  development.  The 
Dutch  too  offered  a  vigorous  opposition  to  the 


Catholic  principle  as  bound  up  with  the  Spanish 
sovereignty.  Belgium  was  still  attached  to  the 
Catholic  religion  and  remained  subject  to  Spain: 
on  the  contrary,  the  northern  part  of  the  Nether¬ 
lands — Holland — stood  its  ground  with  heroic 
valor  against  its  oppressors.  The  trading  class, 
the  guilds,  and  companies  of  marksmen  formed 
a  militia  whose  heroic  courage  was  more  than  a 
match  for  the  then  famous  Spanish  infantry. 
Just  as  the  Swiss  peasants  had  resisted  the  chiv¬ 
alry  of  Austria,  so  here  the  trading  cities  held 
out  against  disciplined  troops.  During  this  strug¬ 
gle  on  the  continent  itself,  the  Dutch  fitted  out 
fleets  and  deprived  the  Spaniards  of  part  of  their 
colonial  possessions,  from  which  all  their  wealth 
was  derived.  As  independence  was  secured  to 
Holland  in  its  holding  to  the  Protestant  princi¬ 
ple,  so  that  of  Poland  was  lost  through  its  en¬ 
deavor  to  suppress  that  principle  in  the  case  of 
dissidents. 

Through  the  Peace  of  Westphalia  the  Protes¬ 
tant  Church  had  been  acknowledged  as  an  inde¬ 
pendent  one,  to  the  great  confusion  and  humilia¬ 
tion  of  Catholicism.  This  peace  has  often  passed 
for  the  palladium  of  Germany,  as  having  estab¬ 
lished  its  political  constitution.  But  this  consti¬ 
tution  was  in  fact  a  confirmation  of  the  particu¬ 
lar  rights  of  the  countries  into  which  Germany 
had  been  broken  up.  It  involves  no  thought,  no 
conception  of  the  proper  aim  of  a  state.  We 
should  consult  Hippolytus  a  lapide  (a  book 
which,  written  before  the  conclusion  of  the 
peace,  had  a  great  influence  on  the  condition  of 
the  empire),  if  we  would  become  acquainted  with 
the  character  of  that  German  freedom  of  which 
so  much  is  made.  In  the  peace  in  question  the 
establishment  of  a  complete  particularity,  the 
determination  of  all  relations  on  the  principle  of 
private  right  is  the  object  manifestly  contem¬ 
plated — a  constituted  anarchy,  such  as  the  world 
had  never  before  seen;  i.e.,  the  position  that  an 
empire  is  properly  a  unity,  a  totality,  a  state, 
while  yet  all  relations  are  determined  so  exclu¬ 
sively  on  the  principle  of  private  right  that  the 
privilege  of  all  the  constituent  parts  of  that 
empire  to  act  for  themselves  contrarily  to  the 
interest  of  the  whole,  or  to  neglect  that  which 
its  interest  demands  and  which  is  even  required 
by  law — is  guaranteed  and  secured  by  the  most 
inviolable  sanctions.  Immediately  after  this 
settlement,  it  was  shown  what  the  German  Em¬ 
pire  was  as  a  state  in  relation  to  other  states:  it 
waged  ignominious  wars  with  the  Turks,  for  de¬ 
liverance  from  whom  Vienna  was  indebted  to 
Poland.  Still  more  ignominious  was  its  relation 
to  France,  which  took  possession  in  time  of  peace 


36o  PHILOSOPHY 

of  free  cities,  the  bulwarks  of  Germany,  and  of 
flourishing  provinces,  and  retained  them  undis¬ 
turbed. 

This  constitution,  which  completely  termi¬ 
nated  the  career  of  Germany  as  an  empire,  was 
chiefly  the  work  of  Richelieu,  by  whose  assist¬ 
ance — Romish  cardinal  though  he  was — reli¬ 
gious  freedom  in  Germany  was  preserved.  Riche¬ 
lieu,  with  a  view  to  further  the  interests  of  the 
state  whose  affairs  he  superintended,  adopted 
the  exact  opposite  of  that  policy  which  he  pro¬ 
moted  in  the  case  of  its  enemies;  for  he  reduced 
the  latter  to  political  impotence  by  ratifying  the 
political  independence  of  the  several  parts  of  the 
empire,  while  at  home  he  destroyed  the  inde¬ 
pendence  of  the  Protestant  party.  His  fate  has 
consequently  resembled  that  of  many  great 
statesmen,  inasmuch  as  he  has  been  cursed  by 
his  countrymen,  while  his  enemies  have  looked 
upon  the  work  by  which  he  ruined  them  as  the 
most  sacred  goal  of  their  desires — the  consum¬ 
mation  of  their  rights  and  liberties. 

The  result  of  the  struggle,  therefore,  was  the 
forcibly  achieved  and  now  politically  ratified 
coexistence  of  religious  parties,  forming  political 
communities  whose  relations  are  determined  ac¬ 
cording  to  prescriptive  principles  of  civil  or 
of  private  right. 

The  Protestant  Church  increased  and  so  per¬ 
fected  the  stability  of  its  political  existence  by 
the  fact  that  one  of  the  states  which  had  adopted 
the  principles  of  the  Reformation  raised  itself 
to  the  position  of  an  independent  European 
power.  This  power  was  destined  to  start  into  a 
new  life  with  Protestantism :  Prussia, viz.,  which, 
making  its  appearance  at  the  end  of  the  seven¬ 
teenth  century,  was  indebted,  if  not  for  origina¬ 
tion  yet  certainly  for  the  consolidation  of  its 
strength,  to  Frederick  the  Great;  and  the  Seven 
Years’  War  was  the  struggle  by  which  that  con¬ 
solidation  was  accomplished.  Frederick  II  dem¬ 
onstrated  the  independent  vigour  of  his  power 
by  resisting  that  of  almost  all  Europe — the  union 
of  its  leading  states.  He  appeared  as  the  hero  of 
Protestantism,  and  that  not  individually  mere¬ 
ly,  like  Gustavus  Adolphus,  but  as  the  ruler  of  a 
state.  The  Seven  Years’  War  was  indeed  in  it¬ 
self  not  a  war  of  religion ;  but  it  was  so  in  view 
of  its  ultimate  issues,  and  in  the  disposition  of 
the  soldiers  as  well  as  of  the  potentates  under 
whose  banner  they  fought.  The  Pope  consecrated 
the  sword  of  Field  Marshal  Daun,  and  the  chief 
object  which  the  allied  powers  proposed  to 
themselves  was  the  crushing  of  Prussia  as  the 
bulwark  of  the  Protestant  Church.  But  Fred¬ 
erick  the  Great  not  only  made  Prussia  one  of 


OF  HISTORY 

the  great  powers  of  Europe  as  a  Protestant 
power,  but  was  also  a  philosophical  king — an 
altogether  peculiar  and  unique  phenomenon  in 
modern  times.  There  had  been  English  kings 
who  were  subtle  theologians,  contending  for  the 
principle  of  absolutism:  Frederick,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  took  up  the  Protestant  principle  in  its  sec¬ 
ular  aspect;  and  though  he  was  by  no  means 
favorable  to  religious  controversies  and  did  not 
side  with  one  party  or  the  other,  he  had  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  universality,  which  is  the  pro- 
foundest  depth  to  which  spirit  can  attain,  and  is 
thought  conscious  of  its  own  inherent  power. 

Chapter  3.  The  Eclaircissement  and 
Revolution 

Protestantism  had  introduced  the  principle  of 
subjectivity,  importing  religious  emancipation 
and  inward  harmony,  but  accompanying  this 
with  the  belief  in  subjectivity  as  evil,  and  in  a 
power  whose  embodiment  is  “the  world.”  With¬ 
in  the  Catholic  pale  also,  the  casuistry  of  the 
Jesuits  brought  into  vogue  interminable  inves¬ 
tigations,  as  tedious  and  wire-drawn  as  those  in 
which  the  scholastic  theology  delighted,  respect¬ 
ing  the  subjective  spring  of  the  will  and  the  mo¬ 
tives  that  affect  it.  This  dialectic,  which  un¬ 
settles  all  particular  judgments  and  opinions, 
transmuting  the  evil  into  good  and  good  into 
evil,  left  at  last  nothing  remaining  but  the  mere 
action  of  subjectivity  itself,  the  abstractum  of 
spirit — thought.  Thought  contemplates  every¬ 
thing  under  the  form  of  universality  and  is  con¬ 
sequently  the  impulsion  towards  and  production 
of  the  universal.  In  that  elder  scholastic  theol¬ 
ogy,  the  real  subject-matter  of  investigation,  the 
doctrine  of  the  church,  remained  an  ultramun¬ 
dane  affair;  in  the  Protestant  theology  also  spirit 
still  sustained  a  relation  to  the  ultramundane; 
for,  on  the  one  side,  we  have  the  will  of  the  in¬ 
dividual — the  spirit  of  man — I  myself,  and,  on 
the  other,  the  grace  of  God,  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and 
so  in  the  wicked,  the  Devil.  But  in  thought,  self 
moves  within  the  limits  of  its  own  sphere;  that 
with  which  it  is  occupied — its  objects  are  as  ab¬ 
solutely  present  to  it;  for  in  thinking  I  must  ele¬ 
vate  the  object  to  universality.  This  is  utter  and 
absolute  freedom,  for  the  pure  ego,  like  pure 
light,  is  with  itself  alone;  thus,  that  which  is 
diverse  from  itself,  sensuous  or  spiritual,  no 
longer  presents  an  object  of  dread,  for  in  con¬ 
templating  such  diversity  it  is  inwardly  free 
and  can  freely  confront  it.  A  practical  interest 
makes  use  of,  consumes  the  objects  offered  to  it : 
a  theoretical  interest  calmly  contemplates  them, 
assured  that  in  themselves  they  present  no  alien 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  361 


element.  Consequently,  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  in¬ 
wardness,  of  subjectiveness,  is  thought.  Man  is 
not  free,  when  he  is  not  thinking;  for  except  when 
thus  engaged  he  sustains  a  relation  to  the  world 
around  him  as  to  another,  an  alien,  form  of  being. 
This  comprehension,  the  penetration  of  the  ego 
into  and  beyond  other  forms  of  being  with  the 
most  profound  self-certainty  directly  involves 
the  harmonization  of  Being:  for  it  must  be  ob¬ 
served  that  the  unity  of  thought  with  its  object 
is  already  implicitly  present,  for  reason  is  the 
substantial  basis  of  consciousness  as  well  as  of 
the  external  and  natural.  Thus  that  which  pre¬ 
sents  itself  as  the  object  of  thought  is  no  longer 
an  absolutely  distinct  form  of  existence,  not  of  an 
alien  and  grossly  substantial  nature. 

Thought  is  the  grade  to  which  spirit  has  now 
advanced.  It  involves  the  harmony  of  Being  in 
its  purest  essence,  challenging  the  external  world 
to  exhibit  the  same  reason  which  subject  pos¬ 
sesses.  Spirit  perceives  that  nature — the  world 
— must  also  be  an  embodiment  of  reason,  for 
God  created  it  on  principles  of  reason.  An  in¬ 
terest  in  the  contemplation  and  comprehension 
of  the  present  world  became  universal.  Nature 
embodies  universality,  inasmuch  as  it  is  nothing 
other  than  sorts,  genera,  power,  gravitation, 
etc.,  phenomenally  presented.  Thus  experimental 
science  became  the  science  of  the  world;  for  ex¬ 
perimental  science  involves,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  observation  of  phenomena,  on  the  other 
hand,  also,  the  discovery  of  the  Law,  the  essen¬ 
tial  being,  the  hidden  force  that  causes  those 
phenomena — thus  reducing  the  data  supplied  by 
observation  to  their  simple  principles.  Intellec¬ 
tual  consciousness  was  first  extricated  from  that 
sophistry  of  thought,  which  unsettles  every¬ 
thing,  by  Descartes.  As  it  was  the  purely  Ger¬ 
man  nations  among  whom  the  principle  of  spirit 
first  manifested  itself,  so  it  was  by  the  Romanic 
nations  that  the  abstract  idea  (to  which  the  char¬ 
acter  assigned  them  above,  viz.,  that  of  internal 
schism,  more  readily  conducted  them)  was  first 
comprehended.  Experimental  science  therefore 
very  soon  made  its  way  among  them  (in  com¬ 
mon  with  the  Protestant  English),  but  especially 
among  the  Italians.  It  seemed  to  men  as  if  God 
had  but  just  created  the  moon  and  stars,  plants 
and  animals,  as  if  the  laws  of  the  universe  were 
now  established  for  the  first  time;  for  only  then 
did  they  feel  a  real  interest  in  the  universe,  when 
they  recognized  their  own  reason  in  the  reason 
which  pervades  it.  The  human  eye  became  clear, 
perception  quick,  thought  active  and  interpreta¬ 
tive.  The  discovery  of  the  laws  of  nature  enabled 
men  to  contend  against  the  monstrous  supersti¬ 


tion  of  the  time,  as  also  against  all  notions  of 
mighty  alien  powers  which  magic  alone  could 
conquer.  The  assertion  was  even  ventured  on, 
and  that  by  Catholics  not  less  than  by  Protes¬ 
tants,  that  the  external,  with  which  the  church 
insisted  upon  associating  superhuman  virtue, 
was  external  and  material,  and  nothing  more — 
that  the  Host  was  simply  dough,  the  relics  of  the 
saints  mere  bones.  The  independent  authority 
of  subjectivity  was  maintained  against  belief 
founded  on  authority,  and  the  laws  of  nature 
were  recognized  as  the  only  bond  connecting 
phenomena  with  phenomena.  Thus  all  miracles 
were  disallowed:  for  nature  is  a  system  of  known 
and  recognized  laws ;  man  is  at  home  in  it,  and 
that  only  passes  for  truth  in  which  he  finds  him¬ 
self  at  home;  he  is  free  through  the  acquaintance 
he  has  gained  with  nature.  Nor  was  thought  less 
vigorously  directed  to  the  spiritual  side  of  things: 
right  and  morality  came  to  be  looked  upon  as 
having  their  foundation  in  the  actual  present 
will  of  man,  whereas  formerly  it  was  referred 
only  to  the  command  of  God  enjoined  ab  extra, 
written  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  or  ap¬ 
pearing  in  the  form  of  particular  right  in  old 
parchments,  as  privilegia,  or  in  international 
compacts.  What  the  nations  acknowledge  as  in¬ 
ternational  right  was  deduced  empirically  from 
observation  (as  in  the  work  of  Grotius) ;  then, 
the  source  of  the  existing  civil  and  political  law 
was  looked  for,  after  Cicero’s  fashion,  in  those 
instincts  of  men  which  nature  has  planted  in 
their  hearts,  e.g.,  the  social  instinct;  next,  the 
principle  of  security  for  the  person  and  property 
of  the  citizens,  and  of  the  advantage  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth — that  which  belongs  to  the  class  of 
“reasons  of  state.”  On  these  principles  private 
rights  were,  on  the  one  hand,  despotically  con¬ 
travened,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  such  contra¬ 
vention  was  the  instrument  of  carrying  out  the 
general  objects  of  the  state  in  opposition  to  mere 
positive  or  prescriptive  claims.  Frederick  II  may 
be  mentioned  as  the  ruler  who  inaugurated  the 
new  epoch  in  the  sphere  of  practical  life — that 
epoch  in  which  practical  political  interest  at¬ 
tains  universality,  and  receives  an  absolute  sanc¬ 
tion.  Frederick  II  merits  especial  notice  as  hav¬ 
ing  comprehended  the  general  object  of  the 
state,  and  as  having  been  the  first  sovereign  who 
kept  the  general  interest  of  the  state  steadily  in 
view,  ceasing  to  pay  any  respect  to  particular 
interests  when  they  stood  in  the  way  of  the  com¬ 
mon  weal.  His  immortal  work  is  a  domestic  code, 
the  Prussian  municipal  law.  How  the  head  of  a 
household  energetically  provides  and  governs 
with  a  view  to  the  weal  of  that  household  and 


362  PHILOSOPHY 

of  his  dependents — of  this  he  has  given  a  unique 
specimen. 

These  general  conceptions,  deduced  from  ac¬ 
tual  and  present  consciousness,  the  laws  of  na¬ 
ture  and  the  substance  of  what  is  right  and  good, 
have  received  the  name  of  reason.  The  recogni¬ 
tion  of  the  validity  of  these  laws  was  designated 
by  the  term  e clair cissement  (Aufklarung) .From 
France  it  passed  over  into  Germany  and  created 
a  new  world  of  ideas.  The  absolute  criterion,  tak¬ 
ing  the  place  of  all  authority  based  on  religious 
belief  and  positive  laws  of  right  (especially 
political  right),  is  the  verdict  passed  by  spirit 
itself  on  the  character  of  that  which  is  to  be  be¬ 
lieved  or  obeyed.  After  a  free  investigation  in 
open  day.  Luther  had  secured  to  mankind  spirit¬ 
ual  freedom  and  the  reconciliation  in  the  con¬ 
crete:  he  triumphantly  established  the  position 
that  man’s  eternal  destiny  must  be  wrought  out 
in  himself.  But  the  import  of  that  which  is  to 
take  place  in  him,  what  truth  is  to  become  vital 
in  him, was  taken  for  grantedby  Luther  as  some¬ 
thing  already  given,  something  revealed  by  re¬ 
ligion.  Now ,  the  principle  was  set  up  that  this 
import  must  be  capable  of  actual  investigation, 
something  of  which  I  can  gain  an  inward  con¬ 
viction,  and  that  to  this  basis  of  inward  demon¬ 
stration  every  dogma  must  be  referred. 

This  principle  of  thought  makes  its  appear¬ 
ance  in  the  first  instance  in  a  general  and  ab¬ 
stract  form;  and  is  based  on  the  axiom  of  contra¬ 
diction  and  identity.  The  results  of  thought  are 
thus  posited  as  finite,  and  the  eclair  cissement 
utterly  banished  and  extirpated  all  that  was 
speculative  from  things  human  and  divine.  Al¬ 
though  it  is  of  incalculable  importance  that  the 
multiform  complex  of  things  should  be  reduced 
to  its  simplest  conditions  and  brought  into  the 
form  of  universality,  yet  this  still  abstract  prin¬ 
ciple  does  not  satisfy  the  living  spirit,  the  con¬ 
crete  human  soul. 

This  formally  absolute  principle  brings  us  to 
the  last  stage  in  history,  our  world,  our  own  time. 

Secular  life  is  the  positive  and  definite  em¬ 
bodiment  of  the  spiritual  kingdom — the  king¬ 
dom  of  the  will  manifesting  itself  in  outward 
existence.  Mere  impulses  are  also  forms  in  which 
the  inner  life  realizes  itself ;  but  these  are  tran¬ 
sient  and  disconnected;  they  are  the  ever-chang¬ 
ing  applications  of  volition.  But  that  which  is 
just  and  moral  belongs  to  the  essential,  inde¬ 
pendent,  intrinsically  universal  will;  and  if  we 
would  know  what  right  really  is,  we  must  ab¬ 
stract  from  inclination,  impulse,  and  desire  as 
the  particular;  i.e.,  we  must  know  what  the 
will  is  in  itself.  For  benevolent,  charitable,  so- 


OF  HISTORY 

cial  impulses  are  nothing  more  than  impulses — 
to  which  others  of  a  different  class  are  opposed. 
What  the  will  is  in  itself  can  be  known  only 
when  these  specific  and  contradictory  forms  of 
volition  have  been  eliminated.  Then  will  appears 
as  will,  in  its  abstract  essence.  The  will  is  free 
only  when  it  does  not  will  anything  alien,  ex¬ 
trinsic,  foreign  to  itself  (for  as  long  as  it  does  so, 
it  is  dependent),  but  wills  itself  alone — wills  the 
will.  This  is  absolute  will — the  volition  to  be 
free.  Will  making  itself  its  own  object  is  the 
basis  of  all  right  and  obligation — consequently 
of  all  statutory  determinations  of  right, categor¬ 
ical  imperatives,  and  enjoined  obligations.  The 
freedom  of  the  will  per  se,  is  the  principle  and 
substantial  basis  of  all  right — is  itself  absolute, 
inherently  eternal  right,  and  the  supreme  right 
in  comparison  with  other  specific  rights;  nay,  it 
is  even  that  by  which  man  becomes  man,  and  is 
therefore  the  fundamental  principle  of  spirit. 
But  the  next  question  is :  how  does  will  assume  a 
definite  form?  For  in  willing  itself,  it  is  nothing 
but  an  identical  reference  to  itself ;  but,  in  point 
of  fact,  it  wills  something  specific:  there  are, 
we  know,  distinct  and  special  duties  and  rights. 
A  particular  application,  a  definite  form  of  will, 
is  desiderated;  for  pure  will  is  its  own  object,  its 
own  application,  which,  as  far  as  this  showing 
goes,  is  no  object,  no  application.  In  fact,  in  this 
form  it  is  nothing  more  than  formal  will.  But 
the  metaphysical  process  by  which  this  abstract 
will  develops  itself,  so  as  to  attain  a  definite 
form  of  freedom,  and  how  rights  and  duties  are 
evolved  therefrom,  this  is  not  the  place  to  dis¬ 
cuss.  It  may  however  be  remarked  that  the  same 
principle  obtained  speculative  recognition  in 
Germany,  in  the  Kantian  philosophy.  According 
to  it  the  simple  unity  of  self-consciousness,  the 
ego,  constitutes  the  absolutely  independent  free¬ 
dom,  and  is  the  fountain  of  all  general  concep¬ 
tions,  i.e.,  all  conceptions  elaborated  by  thought 
— theoretical  reason ;  and  likewise  of  the  highest 
of  all  practical  determinations — practical  rea¬ 
son,  as  free  and  pure  will ;  and  rationality  of  will 
is  none  other  than  the  maintaining  one’s  self  in 
pure  freedom — willing  this  and  this  alone — right 
purely  for  the  sake  of  right,  duty  purely  for  the 
sake  of  duty.  Among  the  Germans  this  view 
assumed  no  other  form  than  that  of  tranquil 
theory;  but  the  French  wished  to  give  it  prac¬ 
tical  effect.  Two  questions,  therefore,  suggest 
themselves:  Why  did  this  principle  of  freedom 
remain  merely  formal?  and  why  did  the  French 
alone,  and  not  the  Germans,  set  about  realiz¬ 
ing  it? 

With  the  formal  principle  more  significant 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  363 

categories  were  indeed  connected:  one  of  the  virtue  of  their  being  “the  Lord’s  anointed,”  is 
chief  of  these  (for  instance)  was  society,  and  divine  and  holy:  on  the  contrary,  their  will  is 
that  which  is  advantageous  for  society :  but  the  regarded  as  deserving  of  respect  only  so  far  as 


aim  of  society  is  itself  political — that  of  the 
State  (vid.,  Droits  de  Vhomme  et  du  citoyen, 
1791) — the  conservation  of  natural  rights;  but 
natural  right  is  freedom,  and,  as  further  deter¬ 
mined,  it  is  equality  of  rights  before  the  law.  A 
direct  connection  is  manifest  here,  for  equality, 
parity ,  is  the  result  of  the  comparison  of  many ; 
the  “many”  in  question  being  human  beings, 
whose  essential  characteristic  is  the  same,  viz., 
freedom.  That  principle  remains  formal,  because 
it  originated  with  abstract  thought — with  the 
understanding,  which  is  primarily  the  self-con¬ 
sciousness  of  pure  reason,  and  as  direct  is  ab¬ 
stract.  As  yet,  nothing  further  is  developed  from 
it,  for  it  still  maintains  an  adverse  position  to 
religion,  i.e.,  to  the  concrete  absolute  substance 
of  the  universe. 

As  respects  the  second  question — why  the 
French  immediately  passed  over  from  the  theo¬ 
retical  to  the  practical,  while  the  Germans  con¬ 
tented  themselves  with  theoretical  abstraction, 
it  might  be  said:  the  French  are  hot-headed;  but 
this  is  a  superficial  solution:  the  fact  is  that  the 
formal  principle  of  philosophy  in  Germany  en¬ 
counters  a  concrete  real  world  in  which  spirit 
finds  inward  satisfaction  and  in  which  conscience 
is  at  rest.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  it  was  the  Prot¬ 
estant  world  itself  which  advanced  so  far  in 
thought  as  to  realize  the  absolute  culmination 
of  self-consciousness;  on  the  other  hand,  Prot¬ 
estantism  enjoys,  with  respect  to  the  moral  and 
legal  relations  of  the  real  world,  a  tranquil  con¬ 
fidence  in  the  disposition  of  men — a  sentiment, 
which,  constituting  one  and  the  same  thing  with 
religion,  is  the  fountain  of  all  the  equitable  ar¬ 
rangements  that  prevail  with  regard  to  private 
right  and  the  constitution  of  the  state.  In  Ger¬ 
many  the  e clair cissement  was  conducted  in  the 
interest  of  theology:  in  France  it  immediately 
took  up  a  position  of  hostility  to  the  Church.  In 
Germany  the  entire  compass  of  secular  relations 
had  already  undergone  a  change  for  the  better; 
those  pernicious  ecclesiastical  institutes  of  celi¬ 
bacy,  voluntary  pauperism,  and  laziness,  had 
been  already  done  away  with ;  there  was  no  dead 
weight  of  enormous  wealth  attached  to  the 
church,  and  no  constraint  put  upon  morality — 
a  constraint  which  is  the  source  and  occasion  of 
vices;  there  was  not  that  unspeakably  hurtful 
form  of  iniquity  which  arises  from  the  interfer¬ 
ence  of  spiritual  power  with  secular  law,  nor  that 
other  of  the  Divine  Right  of  Kings,  i.e.,  the 
doctrine  that  the  arbitrary  will  of  princes,  in 


in  association  with  reason,  it  wisely  contemplates 
right,  justice,  and  the  weal  of  the  community. 
The  principle  of  thought,  therefore,  had  been 
so  far  conciliated  already;  moreover,  the  Prot¬ 
estant  world  had  a  conviction  that  in  the  har¬ 
monization  which  had  previously  been  evolved 
the  principle  which  would  result  in  a  further  de¬ 
velopment  of  equity  in  the  political  sphere  was 
already  present. 

Consciousness  that  has  received  an  abstract 
culture,  and  whose  sphere  is  the  understanding, 
can  be  indifferent  to  religion,  but  religion  is  the 
general  form  in  which  truth  exists  for  non¬ 
abstract  consciousness.  And  the  Protestant  reli¬ 
gion  does  not  admit  of  two  kinds  of  consciences, 
while  in  the  Catholic  world  the  holy  stands  on 
the  one  side  and  on  the  other  side  abstraction 
opposed  to  religion,  that  is,  to  its  superstition 
and  its  truth.  That  formal,  individual  will  is  in 
virtue  of  the  abstract  position  just  mentioned 
made  the  basis  of  political  theories ;  right  in  so¬ 
ciety  is  that  which  the  law  wills,  and  the  will  in 
question  appears  as  an  isolated  individual  will ; 
thus  the  state,  as  an  aggregrate  of  many  individ¬ 
uals,  is  not  an  independently  substantial  unity, 
and  the  truth  and  essence  of  right  in  and  for  it¬ 
self — to  which  the  will  of  its  individual  mem¬ 
bers  ought  to  be  conformed  in  order  to  be  true, 
free  will;  but  the  volitional  atoms  are  made  the 
starting  point,  and  each  will  is  represented  as 
absolute. 

An  intellectual  principle  was  thus  discovered 
to  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  state — one  which  does 
not,  like  previous  principles,  belong  to  the 
sphere  of  opinion,  such  as  the  social  impulse, 
the  desire  of  security  for  property,  etc.,  nor 
owe  its  origin  to  the  religious  sentiment,  as  does 
that  of  the  divine  appointment  of  the  govern¬ 
ing  power — but  the  principle  of  certainty,  which 
is  identity  with  my  self-consciousness,  stopping 
short  however  of  that  of  truth,  which  needs  to 
be  distinguished  from  it.  This  is  a  vast  discovery 
in  regard  to  the  profoundest  depths  of  being  and 
freedom.  The  consciousness  of  the  spiritual  is 
now  the  essential  basis  of  the  political  fabric, 
and  philosophy  has  thereby  become  dominant. 
It  has  been  said  that  the  French  Revolution  re¬ 
sulted  from  philosophy,  and  it  is  not  without 
reason  that  philosophy  has  been  called  “Welt- 
weisheit” ;  for  it  is  not  only  truth  in  and  for  itself, 
as  the  pure  essence  of  things,  but  also  truth  in  its 
living  form  as  exhibited  in  the  affairs  of  the 
world.  We  should  not,  therefore,  contradict  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


364 

assertion  that  the  Revolution  received  its  first 
impulse  from  philosophy.  But  this  philosophy  is, 
in  the  first  instance,  only  abstract  thought,  not 
the  concrete  comprehension  of  absolute  truth — 
intellectual  positions  between  which  there  is  an 
immeasurable  chasm. 

The  principle  of  the  freedom  of  the  will, 
therefore,  asserted  itself  against  existing  right. 
Before  the  French  Revolution,  it  must  be  al¬ 
lowed,  the  power  of  the  grandees  had  been  di¬ 
minished  by  Richelieu,  and  they  had  been  de¬ 
prived  of  privileges;  but,  like  the  clergy,  they 
retained  all  the  prerogatives  which  gave  them 
an  advantage  over  the  lower  class.  The  political 
condition  of  France  at  that  time  presents  noth¬ 
ing  but  a  confused  mass  of  privileges  altogether 
contravening  thought  and  reason — an  utterly 
irrational  state  of  things,  and  one  with  which  the 
greatest  corruption  of  morals,  of  spirit  was  as¬ 
sociated — an  empire  characterized  by  destitu¬ 
tion  of  right,  and  which,  when  its  real  state  be¬ 
gins  to  be  recognized,  becomes  shameless  desti¬ 
tution  of  right.  The  fearfully  heavy  burdens  that 
pressed  upon  the  people,  the  embarrassment  of 
the  government  to  procure  for  the  court  the 
means  of  supporting  luxury  and  extravagance, 
gave  the  first  impulse  to  discontent.  The  new 
spirit  began  to  agitate  men’s  minds :  oppression 
drove  men  to  investigation.  It  was  perceived 
that  the  sums  extorted  from  the  people  were  not 
expended  in  furthering  the  objects  of  the  state, 
but  were  lavished  in  the  most  unreasonable  fash¬ 
ion.  The  entire  political  system  appeared  one 
mass  of  injustice.  The  change  was  necessarily 
violent,  because  the  work  of  transformation  was 
not  undertaken  by  the  government.  And  the  rea¬ 
son  why  the  government  did  not  undertake  it 
was  that  the  court,  the  clergy,  the  nobility,  the 
parliaments  themselves,  were  unwilling  to  sur¬ 
render  the  privileges  they  possessed,  either  for 
the  sake  of  expediency  or  that  of  abstract  right ; 
moreover,  because  the  government  as  the  con¬ 
crete  centre  of  the  power  of  the  state,  could  not 
adopt  as  its  principle  abstract  individual  wills, 
and  reconstruct  the  state  on  this  basis;  lastly, 
because  it  was  Catholic,  and  therefore  the  idea 
of  freedom — reason  embodied  in  laws — did  not 
pass  for  the  final  absolute  obligation,  since  the 
holy  and  the  religious  conscience  are  separated 
from  them.  The  conception,  the  idea  of  right  as¬ 
serted  its  authority  all  at  once,  and  the  old 
framework  of  injustice  could  offer  no  resistance 
to  its  onslaught.  A  constitution,  therefore,  was 
established  in  harmony  with  the  conception  of 
right,  and  on  this  foundation  all  future  legisla¬ 
tion  was  to  be  based.  Never  since  the  sun  had 


stood  in  the  firmament  and  the  planets  revolved 
around  him  had  it  been  perceived  that  man’s 
existence  centres  in  his  head,  i.e.,  in  thought,  in¬ 
spired  by  which  he  builds  up  the  world  of  real¬ 
ity.  Anaxagoras  had  been  the  first  to  say  that 
»'oiw  governs  the  world;  but  not  until  now  had 
man  advanced  to  the  recognition  of  the  princi¬ 
ple  that  thought  ought  to  govern  spiritual  real¬ 
ity.  This  was  accordingly  a  glorious  mental 
dawn.  All  thinking  beings  shared  in  the  jubila¬ 
tion  of  this  epoch.  Emotions  of  a  lofty  character 
stirred  men’s  minds  at  that  time;  a  spiritual  en¬ 
thusiasm  thrilled  through  the  world,  as  if  the 
reconciliation  between  the  divine  and  the  secu¬ 
lar  was  now  first  accomplished. 

The  two  following  points  must  now  occupy 
our  attention:  1st.  The  course  which  the  revolu¬ 
tion  in  France  took;  2d.  How  that  revolution 
became  world-historical. 

1.  Freedom  presents  two  aspects:  the  one  con¬ 
cerns  its  substance  and  purport — its  objectivity 
— the  thing  itself;  the  other  relates  to  the  form 
of  freedom,  involving  the  consciousness  of  his 
activity  on  the  part  of  the  individual;  for  free¬ 
dom  demands  that  the  individual  recognize  him¬ 
self  in  such  acts,  that  they  should  be  veritably 
his,  it  being  his  interest  that  the  result  in  ques¬ 
tion  should  be  attained.  The  three  elements  and 
powers  of  the  state  in  actual  working  must  be 
contemplated  according  to  the  above  analysis, 
their  examination  in  detail  being  referred  to  the 
Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  Right. 

( 1 )  Laws  of  rationality — of  intrinsic  right — 
objective  or  real  freedom:  to  this  category  be¬ 
long  freedom  of  property  and  freedom  of  per¬ 
son.  Those  relics  of  that  condition  of  servitude 
which  the  feudal  relation  had  introduced  are 
hereby  swept  away,  and  all  those  fiscal  ordi¬ 
nances  which  were  the  bequest  of  the  feudal 
law,  its  tithes  and  dues,  are  abrogated.  Real  lib¬ 
erty  requires,  moreover,  freedom  in  regard  to 
trades  and  professions,  the  permission  to  every 
one  to  use  his  abilities  without  restriction,  and 
the  free  admission  to  all  offices  of  state.  This 
is  a  summary  of  the  elements  of  real  freedom, 
and  which  are  not  based  on  feeling,  for  feel¬ 
ing  allows  of  the  continuance  even  of  serf¬ 
dom  and  slavery,  but  on  the  thought  and  self- 
consciousness  of  man  recognizing  the  spiritual 
character  of  his  existence. 

(2)  But  the  agency  which  gives  the  laws 
practical  effect  is  the  government  generally. 
Government  is  primarily  the  formal  execution 
of  the  laws  and  the  maintenance  of  their  au¬ 
thority:  in  respect  to  foreign  relations  it  prose¬ 
cutes  the  interest  of  the  state;  that  is,  it  assists 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  365 


the  independence  of  the  nation  as  an  individual¬ 
ity  against  other  nations;  lastly,  it  has  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  the  internal  weal  of  the  state  and  all  its 
classes — what  is  called  administration:  for  it  is 
not  enough  that  the  citizen  is  allowed  to  pursue 
a  trade  or  calling,  it  must  also  be  a  source  of 
gain  to  him;  it  is  not  enough  that  men  are  per¬ 
mitted  to  use  their  powers,  they  must  also  find 
an  opportunity  of  applying  them  to  purpose. 
Thus  the  state  involves  a  body  of  abstract  prin¬ 
ciples  and  a  practical  application  of  them.  This 
application  must  be  the  work  of  a  subjective 
will,  a  will  which  resolves  and  decides.  Legisla¬ 
tion  itself,  the  invention  and  positive  enactment 
of  these  statutory  arrangements,  is  an  applica¬ 
tion  of  such  general  principles.  The  next  step, 
then,  consists  in  determination  and  execution. 
Here  then  the  question  presents  itself :  what  is 
the  decisive  will  to  be?  The  ultimate  decision  is 
the  prerogative  of  the  monarch:  but  if  the  state 
is  based  on  liberty,  the  many  wills  of  individuals 
also  desire  to  have  a  share  in  political  decisions. 
But  the  many  are  all;  and  it  seems  but  a  poor 
expedient,  rather  a  monstrous  inconsistency,  to 
allow  only  a  few  to  take  part  in  those  decisions, 
since  each  wishes  that  his  volition  should  have 
a  share  in  determining  what  is  to  be  law  for  him. 
The  few  assume  to  be  the  deputies,  but  they  are 
often  only  the  despoilers  of  the  many.  Nor  is 
the  sway  of  the  majority  over  the  minority  a 
less  palpable  inconsistency. 

(3)  This  collision  of  subjective  wills  leads 
therefore  to  the  consideration  of  a  third  point, 
that  of  disposition — an  ex  animo  acquiescence 
in  the  laws;  not  the  mere  customary  observance 
of  them,  but  the  cordial  recognition  of  laws  and 
the  constitution  as  in  principle  fixed  and  im¬ 
mutable,  and  of  the  supreme  obligation  of  indi¬ 
viduals  to  subject  their  particular  wills  to  them. 
There  may  be  various  opinions  and  views  re¬ 
specting  laws,  constitution,  and  government,  but 
there  must  be  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  the 
citizens  to  regard  all  these  opinions  as  subordi¬ 
nate  to  the  substantial  interest  of  the  state,  and 
to  insist  upon  them  no  further  than  that  inter¬ 
est  will  allow;  moreover,  nothing  must  be  con¬ 
sidered  higher  and  more  sacred  than  good  will 
towards  the  state ;  or,  if  religion  be  looked  upon 
as  higher  and  more  sacred,  it  must  involve  noth¬ 
ing  really  alien  or  opposed  to  the  constitution. 
It  is,  indeed,  regarded  as  a  maxim  of  the  pro- 
foundest  wisdom  entirely  to  separate  the  laws 
and  constitution  of  the  state  from  religion,  since 
bigotry  and  hypocrisy  are  to  be  feared  as  the 
results  of  a  state  religion.  But  although  the  as¬ 
pects  of  religion  and  the  state  are  different,  they 


are  radically  one;  and  the  laws  find  their  highest 
confirmation  in  religion. 

Here  it  must  be  frankly  stated  that  with  the 
Catholic  religion  no  rational  constitution  is  pos¬ 
sible;  for  government  and  people  must  recipro¬ 
cate  that  final  guarantee  of  disposition,  and  can 
have  it  only  in  a  religion  that  is  not  opposed  to 
a  rational  political  constitution. 

Plato  in  his  Republic  makes  everything  de¬ 
pend  upon  the  government,  and  makes  disposi¬ 
tion  the  principle  of  the  state;  on  which  ac¬ 
count  he  lays  the  chief  stress  on  education.  The 
modern  theory  is  diametrically  opposed  to  this, 
referring  everything  to  the  individual  will.  But 
here  we  have  no  guarantee  that  the  will  in  ques¬ 
tion  has  that  right  disposition  which  is  essential 
to  the  stability  of  the  state. 

In  view  then  of  these  leading  considerations 
we  have  to  trace  the  course  of  the  French  Revo¬ 
lution  and  the  remodelling  of  the  state  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  idea  of  right.  In  the  first  in¬ 
stance  purely  abstract  philosophical  principles 
were  set  up:  disposition  and  religion  were  not 
taken  into  account.  The  first  constitutional  form 
of  government  in  France  was  one  which  recog¬ 
nized  royalty;  the  monarch  was  to  stand  at  the 
head  of  the  state,  and  on  him,  in  conjunction 
with  his  ministers,  was  to  devolve  the  executive 
power;  the  legislative  body,  on  the  other  hand, 
was  to  make  the  laws.  But  this  constitution  in¬ 
volved  from  the  very  first  an  internal  contra¬ 
diction;  for  the  legislature  absorbed  the  whole 
power  of  the  administration:  the  budget,  affairs 
of  war  and  peace,  and  the  levying  of  the  armed 
force  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Legislative 
Chamber.  Everything  was  brought  under  the 
head  of  law.  The  budget  however  is  in  its  nature 
something  diverse  from  law,  for  it  is  annually 
renewed,  and  the  power  to  which  it  properly  be¬ 
longs  is  that  of  the  government.  With  this,  more¬ 
over,  is  connected  the  indirect  nomination  of 
the  ministry  and  officers  of  state,  etc.  The  gov¬ 
ernment  was  thus  transferred  to  the  Legislative 
Chamber,  as  in  England  to  the  Parliament.  This 
constitution  was  also  vitiated  by  the  existence 
of  absolute  mistrust;  the  dynasty  lay  under  sus¬ 
picion,  because  it  had  lost  the  power  it  formerly 
enjoyed,  and  the  priests  refused  the  oath.  Nei¬ 
ther  government  nor  constitution  could  be  main¬ 
tained  on  this  footing,  and  the  ruin  of  both  was 
the  result.  A  government  of  some  kind  however 
is  always  in  existence.  The  question  presents  it¬ 
self  then,  whence  did  it  emanate?  Theoretically, 
it  proceeded  from  the  people;  really  and  truly 
from  the  National  Convention  and  its  Commit¬ 
tees.  The  forces  now  dominant  are  the  abstract 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


366 

principles — freedom,  and,  as  it  exists  within  the 
limits  of  the  subjective  will — virtue.  This  vir¬ 
tue  has  now  to  conduct  the  government  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  many,  whom  their  corruption 
and  attachment  to  old  interests,  or  a  liberty  that 
has  degenerated  into  license,  and  the  violence 
of  their  passions,  render  unfaithful  to  virtue. 
Virtue  is  here  a  simple  abstract  principle  and 
distinguishes  the  citizens  into  two  classes  only 
— those  who  are  favorably  disposed  and  those 
who  are  not.  But  disposition  can  only  be  rec¬ 
ognized  and  judged  of  by  disposition.  Suspi¬ 
cion  therefore  is  in  the  ascendant;  but  virtue, 
as  soon  as  it  becomes  liable  to  suspicion,  is  al¬ 
ready  condemned.  Suspicion  attained  a  terrible 
power  and  brought  to  the  scaffold  the  monarch, 
whose  subjective  will  was  in  fact  the  religious 
conscience  of  a  Catholic.  Robespierre  set  up  the 
principle  of  virtue  as  supreme,  and  it  may  be 
said  that  with  this  man  virtue  was  an  earnest 
matter.  Virtue  and  terror  are  the  order  of  the 
day;  for  subjective  virtue,  whose  sway  is  based 
on  disposition  only,  brings  with  it  the  most  fear¬ 
ful  tyranny.  It  exercises  its  power  without  legal 
formalities,  and  the  punishment  it  inflicts  is 
equally  simple — death.  This  tyranny  could  not 
last;  for  all  inclinations,  all  interests,  reason  it¬ 
self  revolted  against  this  terribly  consistent  lib¬ 
erty,  which  in  its  concentrated  intensity  exhib¬ 
ited  so  fanatical  a  shape.  An  organized  govern¬ 
ment  is  introduced,  analogous  to  the  one  that 
had  been  displaced;  only  that  its  chief  and  mon¬ 
arch  is  now  a  mutable  Directory  of  Five,  who 
may  form  a  moral,  but  have  not  an  individual 
unity;  under  them  also  suspicion  was  in  the  as¬ 
cendant,  and  the  government  was  in  the  hands 
of  the  legislative  assemblies;  this  constitution 
therefore  experienced  the  same  fate  as  its  prede¬ 
cessor,  for  it  had  proved  to  itself  the  absolute 
necessity  of  a  governmental  power.  Napoleon 
restored  it  as  a  military  power,  and  followed  up 
this  step  by  establishing  himself  as  an  individual 
will  at  the  head  of  the  state:  he  knew  how  to 
rule,  and  soon  settled  the  internal  affairs  of 
France.  The  avocats,  idealogues,  and  abstract- 
principle  men  who  ventured  to  show  themselves 
he  sent  “to  the  right  about,”  and  the  sway  of 
mistrust  was  exchanged  for  that  of  respect  and 
fear.  He  then,  with  the  vast  might  of  his  char¬ 
acter,  turned  his  attention  to  foreign  relations, 
subjected  all  Europe,  and  diffused  his  liberal  in¬ 
stitutions  in  every  quarter.  Greater  victories 
were  never  gained,  expeditions  displaying  great¬ 
er  genius  were  never  conducted :  but  never  was 
the  powerlessness  of  victory  exhibited  in  a 
clearer  light  than  then.  The  disposition  of  the 


peoples,  i.e.y  their  religious  disposition  and  that 
of  their  nationality,  ultimately  precipitated  this 
colossus;  and  in  France  constitutional  mon¬ 
archy,  with  the  Charte  as  its  basis,  was  restored. 
But  here  again  the  antithesis  of  disposition  and 
mistrust  made  its  appearance.  The  French  stood 
in  a  mendacious  position  to  each  other,  when 
they  issued  addresses  full  of  devotion  and  love 
to  the  monarchy,  and  loading  it  with  benedic¬ 
tion.  A  fifteen  years’  farce  was  played.  For  al¬ 
though  the  Charte  was  the  standard  under  which 
all  were  enrolled,  and  though  both  parties  had 
sworn  to  it,  yet,  on  the  one  side,  the  ruling  dis¬ 
position  was  a  Catholic  one,  which  regarded  it 
as  a  matter  of  conscience  to  destroy  the  exist¬ 
ing  institutions.  Another  breach,  therefore,  took 
place,  and  the  government  was  overturned.  At 
length,  after  forty  years  of  war  and  confusion 
indescribable,  a  weary  heart  might  fain  con¬ 
gratulate  itself  on  seeing  a  termination  and 
tranquillization  of  all  these  disturbances.  But 
although  one  main  point  is  set  at  rest,  there  re¬ 
mains,  on  the  one  hand,  that  rupture  which  the 
Catholic  principle  inevitably  occasions;  on  the 
other  hand,  that  which  has  to  do  with  men’s  sub¬ 
jective  will.  In  regard  to  the  latter,  the  main 
feature  of  incompatibility  still  presents  itself, 
in  the  requirement  that  the  ideal  general  will 
should  also  be  the  empirically  general — i.e.y  that 
the  units  of  the  state,  in  their  individual  capac¬ 
ity,  should  rule,  or  at  any  rate  take  part  in  the 
government.  Not  satisfied  with  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  rational  rights,  with  freedom  of  person 
and  property,  with  the  existence  of  a  political 
organization  in  which  are  to  be  found  various 
circles  of  civil  life  each  having  its  own  func¬ 
tions  to  perform,  and  with  that  influence  over 
the  people  which  is  exercised  by  the  intelligent 
members  of  the  community,  and  the  confidence 
that  is  felt  in  them,  “Liberalism”  sets  up  in  op¬ 
position  to  all  this  the  atomistic  principle,  that 
which  insists  upon  the  sway  of  individual  wills; 
maintaining  that  all  government  should  emanate 
from  their  express  power  and  have  their  express 
sanction.  Asserting  this  formal  side  of  freedom 
— this  abstraction — the  party  in  question  allows 
no  political  organization  to  be  firmly  established. 
The  particular  arrangements  of  the  government 
are  forthwith  opposed  by  the  advocates  of  lib¬ 
erty  as  the  mandates  of  a  particular  will,  and 
branded  as  displays  of  arbitrary  power.  The  will 
of  the  many  expels  the  ministry  from  power, 
and  those  who  had  formed  the  opposition  fill  the 
vacant  places;  but  the  latter  having  now  be¬ 
come  the  government,  meet  with  hostility  from 
the  many,  and  share  the  same  fate.  Thus  agita- 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD  367 


tion  and  unrest  are  perpetuated.  This  collision, 
this  nodus,  this  problem  is  that  with  which  his¬ 
tory  is  now  occupied,  and  whose  solution  it  has 
to  work  out  in  the  future. 

2.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  French  Revo¬ 
lution  in  its  organic  connection  with  the  history 
of  the  world;  for  in  its  substantial  import  that 
event  is  world-historical,  and  that  contest  of 
formalism  which  we  discussed  in  the  last  para¬ 
graph  must  be  properly  distinguished  from  its 
wider  bearings.  As  regards  outward  diffusion,  its 
principle  gained  access  to  almost  all  modern 
states,  either  through  conquest  or  by  express  in¬ 
troduction  into  their  political  life.  Particularly 
all  the  Romanic  nations,  and  the  Roman  Catho¬ 
lic  world  in  special — France,  Italy,  Spain — were 
subjected  to  the  dominion  of  Liberalism.  But 
it  became  bankrupt  everywhere;  first,  the  grand 
firm  in  France,  then  its  branches  in  Spain  and 
Italy;  twice,  in  fact,  in  the  states  into  which  it 
had  been  introduced.  This  was  the  case  in  Spain, 
where  it  was  first  brought  in  by  the  Napoleonic 
constitution,  then  by  that  which  the  Cortes 
adopted — in  Piedmont,  first  when  it  was  incor¬ 
porated  with  the  French  Empire,  and  a  second 
time  as  the  result  of  internal  insurrection ;  so  in 
Rome  and  in  Naples  it  was  twice  set  up.  Thus 
Liberalism  as  an  abstraction,  emanating  from 
France,  traversed  the  Roman  world;  but  reli¬ 
gious  slavery  held  that  world  in  the  fetters  of 
political  servitude.  For  it  is  a  false  principle  that 
the  fetters  which  bind  right  and  freedom  can  be 
broken  without  the  emancipation  of  conscience 
— that  there  can  be  a  revolution  without  a  refor¬ 
mation.  These  countries,  therefore,  sank  back 
into  their  old  condition — in  Italy  with  some 
modifications  of  the  outward  political  condition. 
Venice  and  Genoa,  those  ancient  aristocracies, 
which  could  at  least  boast  of  legitimacy,  van¬ 
ished  as  rotten  despotisms.  Material  superiority 
in  power  can  achieve  no  enduring  results:  Na¬ 
poleon  could  not  coerce  Spain  into  freedom  any 
more  than  Philip  II  could  force  Holland  into 
slavery. 

Contrasted  with  these  Romanic  nations  we 
observe  the  other  powers  of  Europe,  and  espe¬ 
cially  the  Protestant  nations.  Austria  and  Eng¬ 
land  were  not  drawn  within  the  vortex  of  in¬ 
ternal  agitation,  and  exhibited  great,  immense 
proofs  of  their  internal  solidity.  Austria  is  not  a 
kingdom,  but  an  empire,  i.e.,  an  aggregate  of 
many  political  organizations.  The  inhabitants  of 
its  chief  provinces  are  not  German  in  origin  and 
character,  and  have  remained  unaffected  by 
“ideas.”  Elevated  neither  by  education  nor  re¬ 
ligion,  the  lower  classes  in  some  districts  have 


remained  in  a  condition  of  serfdom,  and  the  no¬ 
bility  have  been  kept  down,  as  in  Bohemia;  in 
other  quarters,  while  the  former  have  continued 
the  same,  the  barons  have  maintained  their  des¬ 
potism,  as  in  Hungary.  Austria  has  surrendered 
that  more  intimate  connection  with  Germany 
which  was  derived  from  the  imperial  dignity, 
and  renounced  its  numerous  possessions  and 
rights  in  Germany  and  the  Netherlands.  It  now 
takes  its  place  in  Europe  as  a  distinct  power,  in¬ 
volved  with  no  other.  England,  with  great  exer¬ 
tions,  maintained  itself  on  its  old  foundations; 
the  English  Constitution  kept  its  ground  amid 
the  general  convulsion,  though  it  seemed  so 
much  the  more  liable  to  be  affected  by  it,  as  a 
public  Parliament,  that  habit  of  assembling  in 
public  meeting  which  was  common  to  all  orders 
of  the  state,  and  a  free  press,  offered  singular 
facilities  for  introducing  the  French  principles 
of  liberty  and  equality  among  all  classes  of  the 
people.  Was  the  English  nation  too  backward  in 
point  of  culture  to  apprehend  these  general  prin¬ 
ciples?  Yet  in  no  country  has  the  question  of 
liberty  been  more  frequently  a  subject  of  reflec¬ 
tion  and  public  discussion.  Or  was  the  English 
constitution  so  entirely  a  free  constitution,  had 
those  principles  been  already  so  completely  real¬ 
ized  in  it,  that  they  could  no  longer  excite  op¬ 
position  or  even  interest?  The  English  nation 
may  be  said  to  have  approved  of  the  emancipa¬ 
tion  of  France;  but  it  was  proudly  reliant  on  its 
own  constitution  and  freedom,  and  instead  of 
imitating  the  example  of  the  foreigner,  it  dis¬ 
played  its  ancient  hostility  to  its  rival,  and  was 
soon  involved  in  a  popular  war  with  France. 

The  Constitution  of  England  is  a  complex  of 
mere  particular  rights  and  particular  privileges : 
the  government  is  essentially  administrative — 
that  is,  conservative  of  the  interests  of  all  par¬ 
ticular  orders  and  classes;  and  each  particular 
church,  parochial  district,  county,  society,  takes 
care  of  itself,  so  that  the  government,  strictly 
speaking,  has  nowhere  less  to  do  than  in  Eng¬ 
land.  This  is  the  leading  feature  of  what  Eng¬ 
lishmen  call  their  liberty,  and  is  the  very  anti¬ 
thesis  of  such  a  centralized  administration  as 
exists  in  France,  where  down  to  the  least  village 
the  maire  is  named  by  the  Ministry  or  their 
agents.  Nowhere  can  people  less  tolerate  free  ac¬ 
tion  on  the  part  of  others  than  in  France:  there 
the  Ministry  combines  in  itself  all  administra¬ 
tive  power,  to  which,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies  lays  claim.  In  England, 
on  the  contrary,  every  parish,  every  subordinate 
division  and  association  has  a  part  of  its  own  to 
perform.  Thus  the  common  interest  is  concrete, 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  HISTORY 


368 

and  particular  interests  are  taken  cognizance  of 
and  determined  in  view  of  that  common  interest. 
These  arrangements,  based  on  particular  inter¬ 
ests,  render  a  general  system  impossible.  Conse¬ 
quently,  abstract  and  general  principles  have  no 
attraction  for  Englishmen,  are  addressed  in  their 
case  to  inattentive  ears.  The  particular  interests 
above  referred  to  have  positive  rights  attached 
to  them,  which  date  from  the  antique  times  of 
feudal  law,  and  have  been  preserved  in  England 
more  than  in  any  other  country.  By  an  incon¬ 
sistency  of  the  most  startling  kind,  we  find  them 
contravening  equity  most  grossly;  and  of  insti¬ 
tutions  characterized  by  real  freedom  there  are 
nowhere  fewer  than  in  England.  In  point  of 
private  right  and  freedom  of  possession  they 
present  an  incredible  deficiency:  sufficient  proof 
of  which  is  afforded  in  the  rights  of  primogeni¬ 
ture,  involving  the  necessity  of  purchasing  or 
otherwise  providing  military  or  ecclesiastical 
appointments  for  the  younger  sons  of  the  aris¬ 
tocracy. 

The  Parliament  governs,  although  English¬ 
men  are  unwilling  to  allow  that  such  is  the  case. 
It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  what  has  been  al¬ 
ways  regarded  as  the  period  of  the  corruption  of 
a  republican  people  presents  itself  here;  viz., 
election  to  seats  in  Parliament  by  means  of 
bribery.  But  this  also  they  call  freedom — the 
power  to  sell  one’s  vote,  and  to  purchase  a  seat 
in  Parliament. 

But  this  utterly  inconsistent  and  corrupt  state 
of  things  has  nevertheless  one  advantage,  that  it 
provides  for  the  possibility  of  a  government — 
that  it  introduces  a  majority  of  men  into  Parlia¬ 
ment  who  are  statesmen,  who  from  their  very 
youth  have  devoted  themselves  to  political  busi¬ 
ness  and  have  worked  and  lived  in  it.  And  the 
nation  has  the  correct  conviction  and  perception 
that  there  must  be  a  government,  and  is  there¬ 
fore  willing  to  give  its  confidence  to  a  body  of 
men  who  have  had  experience  in  governing;  for 
a  general  sense  of  particularity  involves  also  a 
recognition  of  that  form  of  particularity  which 
is  a  distinguishing  feature  of  one  class  of  the 
community — that  knowledge,  experience,  and 
facility  acquired  by  practice,  which  the  aristoc¬ 
racy  who  devote  themselves  to  such  interests 
exclusively  possess.  This  is  quite  opposed  to  the 
appreciation  of  principles  and  abstract  views 
which  everyone  can  understand  at  once,  and 
which  are  besides  to  be  found  in  all  constitu¬ 
tions  and  charters.  It  is  a  question  whether  the 
reform  in  Parliament  now  on  the  tapis,  consist¬ 
ently  carried  out,  will  leave  the  possibility  of  a 
government. 


The  material  existence  of  England  is  based  on 
commerce  and  industry,  and  the  English  have 
undertaken  the  weighty  responsibility  of  being 
the  missionaries  of  civilization  to  the  world;  for 
their  commercial  spirit  urges  them  to  traverse 
every  sea  and  land,  to  form  connections  with 
barbarous  peoples,  to  create  wants  and  stimulate 
industry,  and  first  and  foremost  to  establish 
among  them  the  conditions  necessary  to  com¬ 
merce,  viz.,  the  relinquishment  of  a  life  of  law¬ 
less  violence,  respect  for  property,  and  civility 
to  strangers. 

Germany  was  traversed  by  the  victorious 
French  hosts,  but  German  nationality  delivered 
it  from  this  yoke.  One  of  the  leading  features  in 
the  political  condition  of  Germany  is  that  code 
of  rights  which  was  certainly  occasioned  by 
French  oppression,  since  this  was  the  especial 
means  of  bringing  to  light  the  deficiencies  of  the 
old  system.  The  fiction  of  an  empire  has  utterly 
vanished.  It  is  broken  up  into  sovereign  states. 
Feudal  obligations  are  abolished,  for  freedom  of 
property  and  of  person  have  been  recognized  as 
fundamental  principles.  Offices  of  state  are  open 
to  every  citizen,  talent  and  adaptation  being  of 
course  the  necessary  conditions.  The  govern¬ 
ment  rests  with  the  official  world,  and  the  per¬ 
sonal  decision  of  the  monarch  constitutes  its 
apex;  for  a  final  decision  is,  as  was  remarked 
above,  absolutely  necessary.  Yet  with  firmly  es¬ 
tablished  laws,  and  a  settled  organization  of  the 
state,  what  is  left  to  the  sole  arbitrament  of  the 
monarch  is,  in  point  of  substance,  no  great  mat¬ 
ter.  It  is  certainly  a  very  fortunate  circum¬ 
stance  for  a  nation,  when  a  sovereign  of  noble 
character  falls  to  its  lot;  yet  in  a  great  state  even 
this  is  of  small  moment,  since  its  strength  lies  in 
the  reason  incorporated  in  it.  Minor  states  have 
their  existence  and  tranquillity  secured  to  them 
more  or  less  by  their  neighbours :  they  are  there¬ 
fore,  properly  speaking,  not  independent,  and 
have  not  the  fiery  trial  of  war  to  endure.  As  has 
been  remarked,  a  share  in  the  government  may 
be  obtained  by  every  one  who  has  a  competent 
knowledge,  experience,  and  a  morally  regulated 
will.  Those  who  know  ought  to  govern — ot 
apivToi,  not  ignorance  and  the  presumptuous 
conceit  of  “knowing  better.”  Lastly,  as  to  dis¬ 
position,  we  have  already  remarked  that  in  the 
Protestant  Church  the  reconciliation  of  religion 
with  legal  right  has  taken  place.  In  the  Protes¬ 
tant  world  there  is  no  sacred,  no  religious  con¬ 
science  in  a  state  of  separation  from,  or  perhaps, 
even  hostility  to,  secular  right. 

This  is  the  point  which  consciousness  has  at¬ 
tained,  and  these  are  the  principal  phases  of  that 


THE  GERMAN  WORLD 


form  in  which  the  principle  of  freedom  has  real¬ 
ized  itself ;  for  the  history  of  the  world  is  noth¬ 
ing  but  the  development  of  the  idea  of  freedom. 
But  objective  freedom — the  laws  of  real  free¬ 
dom — demand  the  subjugation  of  the  mere  con¬ 
tingent  will,  for  this  is  in  its  nature  formal.  If 
the  objective  is  in  itself  rational,  human  insight 
and  conviction  must  correspond  with  the  rea¬ 
son  which  it  embodies,  and  then  we  have  the 
other  essential  element — subjective  freedom — 
also  realized.  We  have  confined  ourselves  to  the 
consideration  of  that  progress  of  the  idea  and 
have  been  obliged  to  forego  the  pleasure  of  giv¬ 
ing  a  detailed  picture  of  the  prosperity,  the  pe¬ 
riods  of  glory  that  have  distinguished  the  career 
of  peoples,  the  beauty  and  grandeur  of  the  char¬ 
acter  of  individuals,  and  the  interest  attaching 
to  their  fate  in  weal  or  woe.  Philosophy  concerns 


369 

itself  only  with  the  glory  of  the  idea  mirroring 
itself  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Philosophy  es¬ 
capes  from  the  weary  strife  of  passions  that  agi¬ 
tate  the  surface  of  society  into  the  calm  region 
of  contemplation ;  that  which  interests  it  is  the 
recognition  of  the  process  of  development  which 
the  idea  has  passed  through  in  realizing  itself — 
£.e.,the  idea  of  freedom,  whose  reality  is  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  freedom  and  nothing  short  of  it. 

That  the  history  of  the  world,  with  all  the 
changing  scenes  which  its  annals  present,  is  this 
process  of  development  and  the  realization  of 
spirit — this  is  the  true  Theodiccea,  the  justifica¬ 
tion  of  God  in  history.  Only  this  insight  can  rec¬ 
oncile  spirit  with  the  history  of  the  world — viz., 
that  what  has  happened,  and  is  happening  every 
day,  is  not  only  not  “without  God,”  but  is  es¬ 
sentially  His  work. 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.  S.  A. 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


