55  great  books  of  the  western  world 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 


4.  HOMER 

5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 

6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 

17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 


7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 

11.  EUCLID 
ARCHIMEDES 
APOLLONIUS 
NICOMACHUS 


21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 

23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


I 


^ 

& 

i? 


Ef 

^ip- 


;^- 

^£- 


;^- 


^P* 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  ggi? 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 

50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2010 


http://www.archive.org/details/greatbooksofwest43hutc 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS ,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


43- 

AMERICAN  STATE  PAPERS 
THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


AMERICAN  STATE  PAPERS 


THE  FEDERALIST 

BY 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON,  JAMES  MADISON,  JOHN  JAY 


ON  LIBERTY  •  REPRESENTATIVE 
GOVERNMENT  -  UTILITARIANISM 

BY 

JOHN  STUART  MILL 


William  Benton,  Publisher 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  ■  SYDNEY  •  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  (his  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopsing,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

1952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10341* 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 

AMERICAN  STATE  PAPERS,  Page  1 

THE  FEDERALIST,  Page  29 
By  Alexander  Hamilton,  James  Madison,  John  Jay 

ON  LIBERTY,  Page  267 
REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT,  Page  327 
UTILITARIANISM,  Page  445 
By  John  Stuart  Mill 


CONTENTS: 


DECLARATION  OF  INDEPENDENCE,  i 
ARTICLES  OF  CONFEDERATION,  5 
THE  CONSTITUTION,  11 


THE 

DECLARATION  OF  INDEPENDENCE 

[THOMAS  JEFFERSON] 


A  Declaration  by  the  Representatives  of  the  United  States 
of  America  in  Congress  assembled,  July  4,  1776 


When,  in  the  course  of  human  events,  it  becomes  necessary  for  one  people 
to  dissolve  the  political  bands  which  have  connected  them  with  another,  and 
to  assume,  among  the  powers  of  the  earth,  the  separate  and  equal  station  to 
which  the  laws  of  nature  and  of  nature’s  God  entitle  them,  a  decent  respect 
to  the  opinions  of  mankind  requires  that  they  should  declare  the  causes  5 
which  impel  them  to  the  separation. 

We  hold  these  truths  to  be  self-evident,  that  all  men  are  created  equal; 
that  they  are  endowed  by  their  Creator  with  certain  unalienable  rights; 
that  among  these  are  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness.  That,  to  se¬ 
cure  these  rights,  governments  are  instituted  among  men,  deriving  their  just  10 
powers  from  the  consent  of  the  governed;  that,  whenever  any  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment  becomes  destructive  of  these  ends,  it  is  the  right  of  the  people 
to  alter  or  to  abolish  it,  and  to  institute  a  new  government,  laying  its 
foundation  on  such  principles,  and  organizing  its  powers  in  such  form,  as 
to  them  shall  seem  most  likely  to  effect  their  safety  and  happiness.  Prudence,  15 
indeed,  will  dictate  that  governments  long  established  should  not  be 
changed  for  light  and  transient  causes;  and,  accordingly,  all  experience  hath 
shown,  that  mankind  are  more  disposed  to  suffer,  while  evils  are  sufferable, 
than  to  right  themselves  by  abolishing  the  forms  to  which  they  are  ac¬ 
customed.  But,  when  a  long  train  of  abuses  and  usurpations,  pursuing  in-  20 
variably  the  same  object,  evinces  a  design  to  reduce  them  under  absolute 
despotism,  it  is  their  right,  it  is  their  duty,  to  throw  off  such  government,  and 
to  provide  new  guards  for  their  future  security.  Such  has  been  the  patient 
sufferance  of  these  colonies,  and  such  is  now  the  necessity  which  constrains 
them  to  alter  their  former  systems  of  government.  The  history  of  the  present  25 
King  of  Great  Britain  is  a  history  of  repeated  injuries  and  usurpations,  all 
having,  in  direct  object,  the  establishment  of  an  absolute  tyranny  over  these 
states.  To  prove  this,  let  facts  be  submitted  to  a  candid  world: 

He  has  refused  his  assent  to  laws  the  most  wholesome  and  necessary  for 
the  public  good.  3° 

He  has  forbidden  his  governors  to  pass  laws  of  immediate  and  pressing 
importance,  unless  suspended  in  their  operation  till  his  assent  should  be 
obtained;  and,  when  so  suspended,  he  has  utterly  neglected  to  attend  to 
them. 

He  has  refused  to  pass  other  laws  for  the  accommodation  of  large  districts  of  35 
people,  unless  those  people  would  relinquish  the  right  of  representation  in 


1 


2 


AMERICAN  STATE  PAPERS 

the  legislature;  a  right  inestimable  to  them,  and  formidable  to  tyrants  only. 

He  has  called  together  legislative  bodies  at  places  unusual,  uncomfort¬ 
able,  and  distant  from  the  depository  of  their  public  records,  for  the  sole 
40  purpose  of  fatiguing  them  into  compliance  with  his  measures. 

He  has  dissolved  representative  houses  repeatedly,  for  opposing,  with 
manly  firmness,  his  invasions  on  the  rights  of  the  people. 

He  has  refused,  for  a  long  time  after  such  dissolutions,  to  cause  others  to 
be  elected;  whereby  the  legislative  powers,  incapable  of  annihilation,  have 
45  returned  to  the  people  at  large  for  their  exercise;  the  state  remaining,  in  the 
meantime,  exposed  to  all  the  danger  of  invasion  from  without,  and  con¬ 
vulsions  within. 

He  has  endeavored  to  prevent  the  population  of  these  States;  for  that  pur¬ 
pose,  obstructing  the  laws  for  naturalization  of  foreigners,  refusing  to  pass 
50  others  to  encourage  their  migration  hither,  and  raising  the  conditions  of 
new  appropriations  of  lands. 

He  has  obstructed  the  administration  of  justice,  by  refusing  his  assent  to 
laws  for  establishing  judiciary  powers. 

He  has  made  judges  dependent  on  his  will  alone,  for  the  tenure  of  their 
55  offices,  and  the  amount  and  payment  of  their  salaries. 

He  has  erected  a  multitude  of  new  offices,  and  sent  hither  swarms  of  of¬ 
ficers  to  harass  our  people,  and  eat  out  their  substance. 

He  has  kept  among  11s,  in  time  of  peace,  standing  armies,  without  the 
consent  of  our  legislatures. 

60  He  has  affected  to  render  the  military  independent  of,  and  superior  to, 
the  civil  power. 

He  has  combined,  with  others,  to  subject  us  to  a  jurisdiction  foreign  to 
our  Constitution,  and  unacknowledged  by  our  laws;  giving  his  assent  to 
their  acts  of  pretended  legislation: 

65  For  quartering  large  bodies  of  armed  troops  among  us: 

For  protecting  them  by  a  mock  trial,  from  punishment,  for  any  murders 
which  they  should  commit  on  the  inhabitants  of  these  States: 

For  cutting  olf  our  trade  with  all  parts  of  the  world: 

for  imposing  taxes  on  us  without  our  consent: 

70  For  depriving  us,  in  many  cases,  of  the  benefit  of  trial  by  jury: 

For  transporting  us  beyond  seas  to  be  tried  for  pretended  offenses: 

For  abolishing  the  free  system  of  English  laws  in  a  neighboring  province, 
establishing  therein  an  arbitrary  government,  and  enlarging  its  boundaries, 
so  as  to  render  it  at  once  an  example  and  fit  instrument  for  introducing  the 
75  same  absolute  rule  into  these  colonies: 

For  taking  away  our  charters,  abolishing  our  most  valuable  laws,  and  al¬ 
tering  fundamentally  the  forms  of  our  governments: 

For  suspending  our  own  legislatures,  and  declaring  themselves  invested 
with  power  to  legislate  for  us  in  all  cases  whatsoever. 

80  1  le  has  abdicated  government  here,  by  declaring  us  out  of  his  protection, 

and  waging  war  against  us. 

He  has  plundered  our  seas,  ravaged  our  coasts,  burnt  our  towns,  and  de¬ 
stroyed  the  lives  of  our  people. 

Hr  is.  at  this  time,  transporting  large  armies  of  foreign  mercenaries  to 
85  complete  the  works  of  death,  desolation,  and  uranny,  already  begun,  with 
circumstances  of  cruelly  and  perfidy  scarcely  paralleled  in  the  most  barba¬ 
rous  ages,  and  totally  unworthy  the  head  of  a  civilized  nation. 


DECLARATION  OF  INDEPENDENCE  3 

He  has  constrained  our  fellow-citizens,  taken  captive  on  the  high  seas, 
to  bear  arms  against  their  country,  to  become  the  executioners  of  their 
friends  and  brethren,  or  to  fall  themselves  by  their  hands.  90 

He  has  excited  domestic  insurrections  amongst  us,  and  has  endeavored 
to  bring  on  the  inhabitants  of  our  frontiers,  the  merciless  Indian  savages, 
whose  known  rule  of  warfare  is  an  undistinguished  destruction  of  all  ages, 
sexes,  and  conditions. 

In  every  stage  of  these  oppressions,  we  have  petitioned  for  redress,  in  the  95 
most  humble  terms;  our  repeated  petitions  have  been  answered  only  by  re¬ 
peated  injury.  A  prince,  whose  character  is  thus  marked  by  every  act  which 
may  define  a  tyrant,  is  unfit  to  be  the  ruler  of  a  free  people. 

Nor  have  we  been  wanting  in  attention  to  our  British  brethren.  We  have 
warned  them,  from  time  to  time,  of  attempts  by  their  legislature  to  100 
extend  an  unwarrantable  jurisdiction  over  us.  We  have  reminded  them  of 
the  circumstances  of  our  emigration  and  settlement  here  .We  have  appealed 
to  their  native  justice  and  magnanimity,  and  we  have  conjured  them,  by 
the  ties  of  our  common  kindred,  to  disavow  these  usurpations,  which  would 
inevitably  interrupt  our  connections  and  correspondence.  They,  too,  have  105 
been  deaf  to  the  voice  of  justice  and  consanguinity.  We  must,  therefore, 
acquiesce  in  the  necessity  which  denounces  our  separation,  and  hold  them, 
as  we  hold  the  rest  of  mankind,  enemies  in  war,  in  peace,  friends. 

We,  therefore,  the  representatives  of  the  United  States  of  America,  in 
general  Congress  assembled,  appealing  to  the  Supreme  Judge  of  the  world  no 
for  the  rectitude  of  our  intentions,  do,  in  the  name,  and  by  the  authority 
of  the  good  people  of  these  colonies,  solemnly  publish  and  declare,  that 
these  united  colonies  are,  and  of  right  ought  to  be,  free  and  independent 
states;  that  they  are  absolved  from  all  allegiance  to  the  British  Crown,  and 
that  all  political  connection  between  them  and  the  state  of  Great  Britain  115 
is,  and  ought  to  be,  totally  dissolved;  and  that,  as  free  and  independent 
states,  they  have  full  power  to  levy  war,  conclude  peace,  contract  alliances, 
establish  commerce,  and  to  do  all  other  acts  and  things  which  independent 
states  may  of  right  do.  And,  for  the  support  of  this  declaration,  with  a  firm 
reliance  on  the  protection  of  Divine  Providence,  we  mutually  pledge  to  each  120 
other  our  lives,  our  fortunes,  and  our  sacred  honour. 


ARTICLES 

OF  CONFEDERATION 


Articles  of  Confederation  and  perpetual  Union  between 
the  States  of  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts  Bay,  Rhode 
Island  and  Providence  Plantations,  Connecticut,  New 
York,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Delaware,  Maryland, 
Virginia,  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  and  Georgia. 


Article  One 

The  style  of  this  Confederacy  shall  be  “The 
United  States  of  America.” 

Article  Two 

Each  State  retains  its  sovereignty,  freedom, 
and  independence,  and  every  power,  jurisdic¬ 
tion,  and  right,  which  is  not  by  this  Confeder¬ 
ation  expressly  delegated  to  the  United  States 
in  Congress  assembled. 

Article  Three 

The  said  States  hereby  severally  enter  into  a 
firm  league  of  friendship  with  each  other,  for 
10  their  common  defence,  the  security  of  their 
liberties,  and  their  mutual  and  general  wel¬ 
fare,  binding  themselves  to  assist  each  other 
against  all  force  offered  to,  or  attacks  made 
upon  them,  or  any  of  them,  on  account  of  re- 
15  ligion,  sovereignty,  trade,  or  any  other  pre¬ 
tence  whatever. 

Article  Four 

The  better  to  secure  and  perpetuate  mutual 
friendship  and  intercourse  among  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  the  different  States  in  this  Union,  the 
20  free  inhabitants  of  each  of  these  States,  pau¬ 
pers,  vagabonds,  and  fugitives  from  justice  ex¬ 
cepted,  shall  be  entitled  to  all  the  privileges 
and  immunities  of  free  citizens  in  the  several 
States,  and  the  people  of  each  State  shall  have 
25  free  ingress  and  regress  to  and  from  any  other 


State,  and  shall  enjoy  therein  all  the  privileges 
of  trade  and  commerce,  subject  to  the  same 
duties,  impositions,  and  restrictions  as  the  in¬ 
habitants  thereof  respectively,  provided  that 
such  restrictions  shall  not  extend  so  far  as  to  gc 
prevent  the  removal  of  property  imported 
into  any  State,  to  any  other  State  of  which 
the  owner  is  an  inhabitant;  provided  also, 
that  no  imposition,  duties,  or  restriction  shall 
be  laid  by  any  State,  on  the  property  of  the  gp 
United  States,  or  either  of  them. 

If  any  person  guilty  of  or  charged  with  trea¬ 
son,  felony,  or  other  high  misdemeanor  in 
any  State,  shall  flee  from  justice,  and  be  found 
in  any  of  the  United  States,  he  shall,  upon  4c 
demand  of  the  governor  or  executive  power 
of  the  State  from  which  he  fled,  be  delivered 
up  and  removed  to  the  State  having  jurisdic¬ 
tion  of  his  offence. 

Full  faith  and  credit  shall  be  given  in  each  ^ 
of  these  States  to  the  records,  acts,  and  judicial 
proceedings  of  the  courts  and  magistrates  of 
every  other  State. 

Article  Five 

For  the  more  convenient  management  of  the 
general  interests  of  the  United  States,  dele- 
gates  shall  be  annually  appointed  in  such 
manner  as  the  legislature  of  each  State  shall 
direct,  to  meet  in  Congress  on  the  first  Mon¬ 
day  in  November,  in  every  year,  with  a  power 
reserved  to  each  State  to  recall  its  delegates,  or  5* 
any  of  them,  at  any  time  within  the  year,  and 
to  send  others  in  their  stead,  for  the  remain¬ 
der  of  the  year. 


5 


6 


AMERICAS’  STATE  PAPERS 


No  State  shall  be  represented  in  Congress 
60  by  less  than  two,  nor  by  more  than  seven  mem¬ 
bers:  and  no  person  shall  be  capable  of  being 
a  delegate  for  more  than  three  years  in  any 
term  of  six  years,  nor  shall  anv  person,  being 
a  delegate,  be  capable  of  holding  any  office 
65  under  the  United  States  for  which  he  or  an¬ 
other  for  his  benefit  receives  any  salary,  fees, 
or  emolument  of  anv  kind. 

Each  State  shall  maintain  its  own  delegates 
in  a  meeting  of  the  States,  and  while  they  act 
70  a>  members  of  t lie  committee  of  the  Slates. 

In  determining  questions  in  the  United 
States,  in  Congress  assembled,  each  State  shall 
have  one  vote. 

Freedom  of  speech  and  debate  in  Congress 
75  shall  not  be  impeached  or  questioned  in  any 
court  or  place  out  of  Congress,  and  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  Congress  shall  be  protected  in  their 
persons  from  arrests  and  imprisonments,  dur¬ 
ing  the  time  of  their  going  to  or  from,  and 
80  attendance  on.  Congress,  except  for  treason, 
felony,  or  breach  of  the  peace. 

Article  Six 

No  State,  without  the  consent  of  the  United 
States  in  Congress  assembled,  shall  send  any 
embassy  to,  or  receive  any  embassy  from,  or 
85  (liter  into  any  conference,  agreement,  alli¬ 
ance,  or  treaty  with,  any  king,  prince,  or  state; 
nor  shall  any  person  holding  any  office  of 
profit  or  trust  under  the  United  States,  or  any 
of  them,  accept  of  any  present,  emolument, 
90  office,  or  title  of  any  kind  whatever  from  any 
king,  prince,  or  foieign  state;  nor  shall  the 
United  States  in  Congress  assembled,  or  any 
of  them,  grant  any  title  of  nobility. 

No  two  or  more  States  shall  enter  into  any 
95  treaty,  confederation,  or  alliance  whatever  be¬ 
tween  them,  without  the  consent  of  the  United 
States  in  Congress  assembled,  specifying  accu- 
ratelv  the  purposes  for  which  the  same*  is  to  be 
enteted  into,  and  how  long  it  shall  continue. 
100  No  State*  shall  lay  any  imposts  or  duties, 
which  may  interfere  with  any  stipulations  in 
tteaties  entered  into  by  the  United  States  in 
Congress  assembled,  with  any  king,  prince,  or 
state,  in  pursuance*  of  any  treaties  already 
105  ptoposed  by  Congress,  to  the  courts  of  France 
and  Spain. 

No  vessels  of  war  shall  be  kept  in  time  of 
peace*  by  any  State,  except  sue  h  number  only 
as  shall  be  deemed  neeessatv  bv  the  l  iiiicel 
1  10  State  s  in  Congress  assembled,  lot  the  deb  nee 
of  such  State  or  its  trade;  nor  shall  any  hodv 


of  forces  be  kept  up  by  any  State,  in  time  of 
peace,  except  such  number  only  as  in  the 
judgment  of  the  United  States  in  Congress 
assembled  shall  be  deemed  requisite  to  gar-  115 
rison  the  forts  necessary  for  the  defence  of 
such  State;  but  every  State  shall  always  keep 
up  a  well  regulated  and  disciplined  militia, 
sufficiently  armed  and  accoutred,  and  shall 
provide  and  constantly  have  ready  for  use,  120 
in  public  stores,  a  due  number  of  field-pieces 
and  tents,  and  a  proper  quantity  of  arms,  am¬ 
munition.  and  camp  equipage. 

No  State  shall  engage  in  any  war  without 
the  consent  of  the  United  States  in  Congress  125 
assembled,  unless  such  State  be  actually  in¬ 
vaded  by  enemies,  or  shall  have  receiv  ed  cer¬ 
tain  advice  of  a  resolution  being  formed  by 
some  nation  of  Indians  to  invade  such  State, 
and  the  danger  is  so  imminent  as  not  to  admit  130 
of  a  delay  till  the  United  States  in  Congress  as¬ 
sembled  can  be  consulted;  nor  shall  any  State 
grant  commissions  to  any  ships  or  vessels  of 
war,  nor  letters  of  marque  or  reprisal,  except 
it  be  after  a  declaration  of  war  by  the  United  135 
States  in  Congress  assembled,  and  then  only 
against  the  kingdom  or  state,  and  the  subjects 
thereof,  against  which  war  has  been  so  de¬ 
clared.  and  under  such  regulations  as  shall  be 
established  by  the  United  States  in  Congress  140 
assembled,  unless  such  State  be  infested  by 
pirates,  in  which  case  vessels  of  war  may  be 
fitted  out  for  that  occasion,  and  kept  so  long 
as  the  danger  shall  continue,  or  until  the 
United  States  in  Congress  assembled  shall  de-  145 
terniine  otherwise. 

Article  Seven 

Win  \  land  forces  are  raised  by  any  State 
for  the  (oiDinon  defense,  all  olfu  ers  of  or  under 
the  rank  of  colonel  shall  be  appointed  by  the 
legislature  of  each  State  respectively  ,  by  whom  150 
such  forces  shall  be  raised,  or  in  such  manner 
as  smb  Stale  shall  direct;  and  all  vacancies 
shall  be  filled  up  by  tin*  State  which  first  made 
the  appointment. 

Article  Eight 

\i  1  (barges  of  war  and  all  other  expenses  155 
that  shall  be  in<  lined  lor  the  common  de- 
feme  or  general  welfare,  and  allowed  by  the 
United  States  in  Congress  assembled,  shall  be 
deleaved  out  ol  .1  common  treasury,  which 
shall  be  supplied  by  the  several  States,  in  pro-  1G0 
portion  to  die  value  ol  all  land  within  each 


ARTICLES  OF  CONFEDERATION  7 


State,  granted  to  or  surveyed  for  any  person, 
and  such  land  and  the  buildings  and  improve¬ 
ments  thereon  shall  be  estimated  according  to 
165  such  mode  as  the  United  States  in  Congress 
assembled  shall  from  time  to  time  direct  and 
appoint. 

The  taxes  for  paying  that  proportion  shall  be 
laid  and  levied  by  the  authority  and  direction 
170  of  the  legislatures  of  the  several  States  within 
the  time  agreed  upon  by  the  United  States  in 
Congress  assembled. 

Article  Nine 

The  United  States  in  Congress  assembled 
shall  have  the  sole  and  exclusive  right  and 
175  power  of  determining  on  peace  and  war,  ex¬ 
cept  in  the  cases  mentioned  in  the  sixth  ar¬ 
ticle— of  sending  and  receiving  ambassadors— 
entering  into  treaties  and  alliances,  provided 
that  no  treaty  of  commerce  shall  be  made 
180  whereby  the  legislative  power  of  the  respec¬ 
tive  States  shall  be  restrained  from  imposing 
such  imposts  and  duties  on  foreigners  as  their 
own  people  are  subjected  to,  or  from  prohib¬ 
iting  the  exportation  or  importation  of  any 
185  species  of  goods  or  commodities  whatsoever— 
of  establishing  rules  for  deciding,  in  all  cases, 
what  captures  on  land  or  water  shall  be  legal, 
and  in  what  manner  prizes  taken  by  land  or 
naval  forces  in  the  service  of  the  United  States 
190  shall  be  divided  or  appropriated— of  granting 
letters  of  marque  and  reprisal  in  times  of  peace 
—appointing  courts  for  the  trial  of  piracies 
and  felonies  committed  on  the  high  seas,  and 
establishing  courts  for  receiving  and  deter- 
195  mining  finally  appeals  in  all  cases  of  captures, 
provided  that  no  member  of  Congress  shall  be 
appointed  a  judge  of  any  of  the  said  courts. 

The  United  States  in  Congress  assembled 
shall  also  be  the  last  resort  on  appeal  in  all 
200  disputes  and  differences  now  subsisting  or 
that  hereafter  may  arise  between  two  or  more 
States  concerning  boundary,  jurisdiction,  or 
any  other  cause  whatever;  which  authority 
shall  always  be  exercised  in  the  manner  fol- 
205  lowing:— Whenever  the  legislative  or  execu¬ 
tive  authority  or  lawful  agent  of  any  State  in 
controversy  with  another  shall  present  a  peti¬ 
tion  to  Congress  stating  the  matter  in  ques¬ 
tion  and  praying  for  a  hearing,  notice  thereof 
210  shall  be  given  by  order  of  Congress  to  the 
legislative  or  executive  authority  of  the  other 
State  in  controversy,  and  a  day  assigned  for 
the  appearance  of  the  parties  by  their  lawful 
agents,  who  shall  then  be  directed  to  appoint, 


by  joint  consent,  commissioners  or  judges  to  215 
constitute  a  court  for  hearing  and  determin¬ 
ing  the  matter  in  question;  but  if  they  cannot 
agree,  Congress  shall  name  three  persons  out 
of  each  of  the  United  States,  and  from  the  list 
of  such  persons  each  party  shall  alternately  220 
strike  out  one,  the  petitioners  beginning,  un¬ 
til  the  number  shall  be  reduced  to  thirteen; 
and  from  that  number  not  less  than  seven  nor 
more  than  nine  names,  as  Congress  shall  di¬ 
rect,  shall,  in  the  presence  of  Congress,  be  225 
drawn  out  by  lot,  and  the  persons  whose 
names  shall  be  so  drawn,  or  any  five  of  them, 
shall  be  commissioners  or  judges,  to  hear  and 
finally  determine  the  controversy,  so  always 
as  a  major  part  of  the  judges  who  shall  hear  230 
the  cause  shall  agree  in  the  determination; 
and  if  either  party  shall  neglect  to  attend  at 
the  day  appointed,  without  showing  reasons, 
which  Congress  shall  judge  sufficient,  or,  be¬ 
ing  present,  shall  refuse  to  strike,  the  Con-  235 
gress  shall  proceed  to  nominate  three  persons 
out  of  each  State,  and  the  Secretary  of  Con¬ 
gress  shall  strike  in  behalf  of  such  party  absent 
or  refusing;  and  the  judgment  and  sentence 
of  the  court  to  be  appointed,  in  the  manner  240 
before  prescribed,  shall  be  final  and  conclu¬ 
sive;  and  if  any  of  the  parties  shall  refuse  to 
submit  to  the  authority  of  such  court,  or  to 
appear  or  defend  their  claim  or  cause,  the 
court  shall  nevertheless  proceed  to  pronounce  245 
sentence  or  judgment,  which  shall  in  like  man¬ 
ner  be  final  and  decisive,  the  judgment  or  sen¬ 
tence  and  other  proceedings  being  in  either 
case  transmitted  to  Congress,  and  lodged  among 
the  acts  of  Congress  for  the  security  of  the  250 
parties  concerned:  provided  that  every  com¬ 
missioner,  before  he  sits  in  judgment,  shall 
take  an  oath,  to  be  administered  by  one  of  the 
judges  of  the  Supreme  or  Superior  Court  of 
the  State  where  the  cause  shall  be  tried,  " well  255 
and  truly  to  hear  and  determine  the  matter 
in  question  according  to  the  best  of  his  judg¬ 
ment, ,  without  favor ,  affection ,  or  hope  of  re¬ 
ward provided  also  that  no  State  shall  be 
deprived  territory  for  the  benefit  of  the  United  260 
States. 

All  controversies  concerning  the  private 
right  of  soil,  claimed  under  different  grants  of 
two  or  more  States,  whose  jurisdictions  as  they 
may  respect  such  lands  and  the  States  which  265 
passed  such  grants  are  adjusted,  the  said  grants 
or  either  of  them  being  at  the  same  time 
claimed  to  have  originated  antecedent  to  such 
settlement  of  jurisdiction,  shall,  on  the  peti¬ 
tion  of  either  party  to  the  Congress  of  the  270 


8  AMERICAN  S 

United  States,  be  finally  determined  as  near 
as  may  be  in  the  same  manner  as  is  before 
prescribed  fordeciding  disputes  respecting  ter¬ 
ritorial  jurisdiction  between  different  States. 
275  The  United  Slates  in  Congress  assembled 
shall  also  have  the  sole  and  exclusive  right 
and  power  of  regulating  the  alloy  and  value 
of  coin  struck  by  their  own  authority,  or  by 
that  of  the  respective  States— fixing  the  stand- 
280  ard  of  weights  and  measures  throughout  the 
United  States— regulating  the  trade  and  man¬ 
aging  all  affairs  with  the  Indians,  not  mem¬ 
bers  of  any  of  the  Stales,  provided  that  the 
legislative  right  of  any  State  within  its  own 
285  limits  be  not  infringed  or  violated— establish¬ 
ing  and  regulating  post-offices  from  one  State 
to  another,  throughout  all  the  United  States, 
and  exacting  such  postage  on  the  papers  pass¬ 
ing  through  the  same  as  may  be  requisite  to 
290  defray  the  expenses  of  the  said  office— appoint¬ 
ing  all  officers  of  the  land  forces  in  the  service 
of  the  United  States,  excepting  regimental 
officers— appointing  all  the  officers  of  the  naval 
forces,  and  commissioning  all  officers  what- 
295  ever  in  the  service  of  the  United  States— 
making  rules  for  the  government  and  regula¬ 
tion  of  the  said  land  and  naval  forces,  and 
directing  their  operations. 

The  United  States  in  Congress  assembled 
300  shall  have  authority  to  appoint  a  committee, 
to  sit  in  the  recess  of  Congress,  to  be  de¬ 
nominated  “  \  Committee  of  the  States,”  and 
to  consist  of  one  delegate  from  each  State;  to 
appoint  such  other  committees  and  civil  of- 
305  ficers  as  may  be  necessary  for  managing  the 
general  affairs  of  the  United  States  under 
their  direction;  and  to  appoint  one  of  their 
number  to  preside,  provided  that  no  person 
be  allowed  to  serve  in  the  office  of  president 
310  more  than  one  year  in  any  term  of  three  years 
—to  ascertain  the*  necessary  sums  of  money  to 
be  raised  for  the  service  of  the  United  States, 
and  to  appropriate  and  apply  the  same  for  de¬ 
basing  the  public  expenses— to  borrow  money, 
315  or  emit  bills  on  the  c  led  it  of  the  United  States, 
transmitting  every  half  year  to  the  respective 
States  an  arc  mint  of  the  sums  of  money  so  bor¬ 
rowed  or  emitted  — to  build  and  equip  a  navy 
-to  agiee  upon  the  number  of  land  forces, 
320  and  to  make  requisitions  from  each  State  for 
its  quota,  m  proportion  to  the  number  of 
while  inhabitants  in  such  Slate;  which  requi¬ 
sition  shall  he  binding,  and  theieupon  the 
legislature  of  each  State  shall  appoint  the*  reg- 
325  iinetiial  officers,  raise  the*  men,  and  clothe, 
arm,  and  equip  them  in  a  soldier  like*  man 


ATE  PAPERS 

ner,  at  the  expense  of  the  United  States,  and 
the  officers  and  men  so  clothed,  armed,  and 
equipped  shall  inarch  to  the  place  appointed, 
and  within  the  time  agreed  on  by  the  United  330 
States  in  Congress  assembled;  but  if  the  United 
States  in  Congress  assembled  shall,  on  con¬ 
sideration  of  circumstances,  judge  proper  that 
any  State  should  not  raise  men,  or  should 
raise  a  smaller  number  than  its  quota,  and  335 
that  any  other  State  should  raise  a  greater 
number  of  men  than  the  quota  thereof,  such 
extra  number  shall  be  raised,  officered, clothed, 
armed,  and  equipped  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  quota  of  such  State,  unless  the  legislature  340 
of  such  State  shall  judge  that  such  extra  num¬ 
ber  cannot  be  safely  spared  out  of  the  same, 
in  which  case  they  shall  raise,  officer,  clothe, 
arm,  and  equip  as  many  of  such  extra  num¬ 
ber  as  they  judge  can  be  safely  spared;  and  345 
the  officers  and  men,  so  clothed,  armed,  and 
equipped  shall  march  to  the  place  appointed, 
and  within  the  time  agreed  on,  by  the  United 
States  in  Congress  assembled. 

The  United  States  in  Congress  assembled  350 
shall  never  engage  in  a  war,  nor  grant  letters 
of  marque  and  reprisal  in  time  of  peace,  nor 
enter  into  any  treaties  or  alliances,  nor  coin 
money,  nor  regulate  the  value  (hereof,  nor 
ascertain  the  sums  and  expenses  necessary  for  355 
the  defence  and  welfare  of  the  United  States, 
or  any  of  them,  nor  emit  bills,  nor  borrow 
money  on  the  credit  of  the  United  States,  nor 
appropriate  money,  nor  agree  upon  the  num¬ 
ber  of  vessels  of  war  to  be  built  or  purchased,  360 
or  the  number  of  land  or  sea  forces  to  be 
raised,  nor  appoint  a  commander-in-chief  of 
the  army  or  navy,  unless  nine  States  assent  to 
the  same;  nor  shall  a  question  on  any  other 
point,  except  for  adjourning  from  day  to  day,  365 
be  dctci mined,  unless  by  the  votes  of  a  major¬ 
ity  of  the*  United  States  in  Congress  assembled. 

Hie  Congress  of  the  United  Slates  shall 
have  power  to  adjourn  to  any  time  within  the 
year,  and  to  any  place  within  the  United  370 
States,  so  that  no  period  of  adjournment  be 
for  a  longer  duration  than  the  space  of  six 
months,  and  shall  publish  the  journal  of 
their  proceedings  monthly,  except  suc  h  parts 
thereof  relating  to  treaties,  alliances,  or  mill  375 
tary  operations,  as  in  their  judgment  require 
sec  t  c  c  y,  and  the  )eas  and  nays  of  the  delegates 
of  c  m  h  State  on  any  question  shall  be  entered 
on  the*  journal,  when  it  is  fleshed  by  any  dele¬ 
gate;  and  the  delegates  of  a  State,  or  any  of  380 
them,  at  his  or  their  request,  shall  be  fur¬ 
nished  with  a  transcript  of  the  said  journal, 


ARTICLES  OF  CONFEDERATION 


9 


except  such  parts  as  are  above  excepted  to  lay 
before  the  legislatures  of  the  several  States. 

Article  Ten 

385  The  Committee  of  the  States,  or  any  nine 
of  them,  shall  be  authorized  to  execute,  in  the 
recess  of  Congress,  such  of  the  powers  of  Con¬ 
gress  as  the  United  States  in  Congress  assem¬ 
bled,  by  the  consent  of  nine  States,  shall  from 
390  time  to  time  think  expedient  to  vest  them 
with:  provided  that  no  power  be  delegated  to 
the  said  Committee,  for  the  exercise  of  which, 
by  the  Articles  of  Confederation,  the  voice  of 
nine  States  in  the  Congress  of  the  United 
395  States  assembled  is  requisite. 

Article  Eleven 

Canada,  acceding  to  this  Confederation,  and 
joining  in  the  measures  of  the  United  States, 
shall  be  admitted  into  and  entitled  to  all  the 
advantages  of  this  Union;  but  no  other  colony 
400  shall  be  admitted  into  the  same,  unless  such 
admission  be  agreed  to  by  nine  States. 

Article  Twelve 

All  bills  of  credit  emitted,  moneys  borrowed, 
and  debts  contracted  by  or  under  the  author¬ 
ity  of  Congress,  before  the  assembling  of  the 
405  United  States  in  pursuance  of  the  present 
Confederation,  shall  be  deemed  and  consid¬ 
ered  as  a  charge  against  the  United  States, 
for  payment  and  satisfaction  whereof  the  said 
United  States  and  the  public  faith  are  hereby 
410  solemnly  pledged. 


Article  Thirteen 

Every  State  shall  abide  by  the  determina¬ 
tions  of  the  United  States  in  Congress  as¬ 
sembled,  on  all  questions  which  by  this  Con¬ 
federation  are  submitted  to  them.  And  the 
Articles  of  this  Confederation  shall  be  invio-  415 
lably  observed  by  every  State,  and  the  Union 
shall  be  perpetual;  nor  shall  any  alteration 
at  any  time  hereafter  be  made  in  any  of  them, 
unless  such  alteration  be  agreed  to  in  a  Con¬ 
gress  of  the  United  States,  and  be  afterwards  420 
confirmed  by  the  legislatures  of  every  State. 

AND  WHEREAS  it  hath  pleased  the  Great 
Governor  of  the  world  to  incline  the  hearts 
of  the  legislatures  we  respectfully  represent  in 
Congress  to  approve  of  and  to  authorize  us  to  425 
ratify  the  said  Articles  of  Confederation  and 
perpetual  Union,  Know  Ye,  That  we,  the  un¬ 
dersigned  delegates,  by  virtue  of  the  power 
and  authority  to  us  given  for  that  purpose,  do 
by  these  presents,  in  the  name  and  in  behalf  430 
of  our  respective  constituents,  fully  and  en¬ 
tirely  ratify  and  confirm  each  and  every  of  the 
said  Articles  of  Confederation  and  perpetual 
Union,  and  all  and  singular  the  matters  and 
things  therein  contained:  and  we  do  further  435 
solemnly  plight  and  engage  the  faith  of  our 
respective  constituents  that  they  shall  abide 
by  the  determinations  of  the  United  States  in 
Congress  assembled,  on  all  questions  which 
by  the  said  Confederation  are  submitted  to  440 
them.  And  that  the  Articles  thereof  shall  be 
inviolably  observed  by  the  States  we  respec¬ 
tively  represent,  and  the  Union  shall  be  per¬ 
petual. 


George  Washington 


THE  CONSTITUTION 
OF  THE  UNITED  STATES 
OF  AMERICA 


SEPTEMBER  17,  1787 

We,  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,  IN  ORDER  TO  FORM  A 
MORE  PERFECT  UNION,  ESTABLISH  JUSTICE,  INSURE  DOMESTIC 
TRANQUILLITY,  PROVIDE  FOR  THE  COMMON  DEFENSE.  PROMOTE 
THE  GENERAL  WELFARE,  AND  SECURE  THE  BLESSINGS  OF  LIBERTY 
TO  OURSELVES  AND  OUR  POSTERITY,  DO  ORDAIN  AND  ESTABLISH 

this  Constitution  for  the  United  States  of  America. 


Article  One 

Section  i.  All  legislative  powers  herein 
granted  shall  be  vested  in  a  Congress  of  the 
United  States,  which  shall  consist  of  a  Senate 
and  House  of  Representatives. 

5  Section  2.  The  House  of  Representatives 
shall  be  composed  of  members  chosen  every 
second  year  by  the  people  of  the  several  States, 
and  the  electors  in  each  State  shall  have  the 
qualifications  requisite  for  electors  of  the  most 
10  numerous  branch  of  the  State  legislature. 

No  person  shall  be  a  Representative  who 
shall  not  have  attained  to  the  age  of  twenty 
five  years,  and  been  seven  years  a  citizen  of 
the  United  States,  and  who  shall  not,  when 
15  elected,  be  an  inhabitant  of  that  State  in 
which  he  shall  be  chosen. 

Representatives  and  direct  taxes  shall  be 
apportioned  among  the  several  States  which 
may  be  included  within  this  Union,  accord- 
20  ing  to  their  respective  numbers,  which  shall 
be  determined  by  adding  to  the  whole  num¬ 
ber  of  free  persons,  including  those  bound  to 
service  for  a  term  of  years,  and  excluding  In¬ 
dians  not  taxed,  three-fifths  of  all  other  per- 
25  sons.  The  actual  enumeration  shall  be  made 
within  three  years  after  the  first  meeting  of 
the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  and  within 
every  subsequent  term  of  ten  years,  in  such 
manner  as  they  shall  by  law  direct.  The  num¬ 


ber  of  Representatives  shall  not  exceed  one  30 
for  every  thirty  thousand,  but  each  State  shall 
have  at  least  one  Representative;  and  until 
such  enumeration  shall  be  made,  the  State  of 
New  Hampshire  shall  be  entitled  to  choose 
three,  Massachusetts  eight,  Rhode  Island  and  35 
Providence  Plantations  one,  Connecticut  five. 
New  York  six.  New  Jersey  four,  Pennsylvania 
eight,  Delaware  one,  Maryland  six,  Virginia 
ten,  North  Carolina  five,  South  Carolina  five, 
and  Georgia  three.  40 

When  vacancies  happen  in  the  representa¬ 
tion  from  any  State,  the  executive  authority 
thereof  shall  issue  writs  of  election  to  fill  such 
vacancies. 

The  House  of  Representatives  shall  choose  45 
their  Speaker  and  other  officers,  and  shall 
have  the  sole  power  of  impeachment. 

Section  3.  The  Senate  of  the  United  States 
shall  be  composed  of  two  Senators  from  each 
State,  chosen  by  the  legislature  thereof,  for  six  50 
years;  and  each  Senator  shall  have  one  vote. 

Immediately  after  they  shall  be  assembled 
in  consequence  of  the  first  election,  they  shall 
be  divided  as  equally  as  may  be  into  three 
classes.  The  seats  of  the  Senators  of  the  first  55 
class  shall  be  vacated  at  the  expiration  of  the 
second  year;  of  the  second  class,  at  the  expira¬ 
tion  of  the  fourth  year,  and  of  the  third  class, 
at  the  expiration  of  the  sixth  year,  so  that 
one-third  may  be  chosen  every  second  year;  60 


AMERICAN  STATE  PATERS 


1  2 

and  if  vacancies  happen  by  resignation  or 
otherwise  during  the  recess  of  the  legislature 
of  any  State,  the  executive  thereof  may  make 
temporary  appointments  until  the  next  meet- 
65  ing  of  the  legislature,  which  shall  then  fill 
such  vacancies. 

No  person  shall  be  a  Senator  who  shall  not 
have  attained  to  the  age  of  thirty  years,  and 
been  nine  years  a  citizen  of  the  United  Stales, 
70  and  who  shall  not.  when  elected,  be  an  in¬ 
habitant  of  that  State  for  which  he  shall  be 
c  hoscn. 

The  Vice-President  of  the  United  States 
shall  be  President  of  the  Senate,  but  shall 
75  ha\e  no  vote,  unless  they  be  equally  divided. 

7  he  Senate  shall  choose  their  other  officers, 
and  also  a  President  pro  tempore  in  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  the  Vice-President,  or  when  he  shall 
exercise  the  office  of  President  of  the  United 
80  States. 

The  Senate  shall  have  the  sole  power  to  tr\ 
all  impeachments.  When  silting  for  that  pur¬ 
pose.  the\  shall  be  on  oath  or  affirmation. 
When  the  President  of  the  United  States  is 
85  tried,  the  Chief  Justice  shall  preside:  and  no 
person  shall  be  convicted  without  the  con¬ 
currence  of  two-thirds  of  the  members  present. 

Judgment  in  cases  of  impeachment  shall 
not  extend  further  than  to  removal  trom  of- 
90  fue,  and  disqualification  to  hold  and  enjoy 
am  office  of  honor,  trust,  or  profit  under  the 
United  States:  but  the  party  convicted  shall, 
nevertheless,  be  liable  and  subject  to  indict¬ 
ment.  trial,  judgment,  and  punishment,  ac- 
95  cording  to  law. 

Sic  1  ion  The  times,  places,  and  manner 
of  holding  elections  for  Senators  and  Repre¬ 
sentatives  shall  be  preset  ibed  in  each  State 
by  the  legislature  thereof:  but  the  Congress 
100  may  at  am  time  by  law  make  or  alter  such 
regulations,  except  as  to  the  plates  of  choos¬ 
ing  Senators. 

I  he  Congress  shall  assemble  at  least  once 
in  every  sear,  and  such  meeting  shall  be  on 
105  the  fust  Monday  in  December,  unless  they 
shall  bv  law  appoint  .1  diflerent  day. 

M  c  1  ion  5.  I  a<  h  house  shall  be  the  judge  of 
the  elections,  returns,  and  qualifications  of 
its  own  members,  and  a  majority  of  each  shall 
110  constitute  a  quotum  to  do  business:  but  a 
smaller  number  may  adjourn  from  day  to 
dav.  and  may  be  authorized  to  compel  the 
attendance  of  absent  members,  in  such  man¬ 
ner,  and  under  such  penalties,  as  each  house* 
115  mav  ptovide. 

Kith  house  may  determine  the  rule's  of  its 


proceedings,  punish  its  members  for  disorderly 
behavior,  and,  with  the  concurrence  of  two- 
thirds,  expel  a  member. 

Each  house  shall  keep  a  journal  of  its  pro-  120 
ceedings,  and  from  time  to  time  publish  the 
same,  excepting  such  parts  as  may  in  their 
judgment  require  secrecy,  and  the  yeas  and 
nays  of  the  members  of  either  bouse  on  any 
question  shall,  at  the  desire  of  one-fifth  ol  125 
those  present,  be  entered  on  the  journal. 

Neither  house,  during  the  session  of  Con¬ 
gress,  shall,  without  the  consent  of  the  other, 
adjourn  for  more  than  three  days,  nor  to  any 
other  place  than  that  in  which  the  two  houses  130 
shall  he  sitting. 

Siction  G.  The  Senators  and  Representa¬ 
tives  shall  receive  a  compensation  for  their 
services,  to  be  ascertained  by  law  and  paid  out 
of  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States.  They  135 
shall,  in  all  cases  except  treason,  felony,  and 
breach  of  the  peace,  be  privileged  from  arrest 
during  their  attendance  at  the  session  of  their 
respective  houses,  and  in  going  to  and  return¬ 
ing  from  t he  same;  and  lor  any  speech  or  de-  140 
bate  in  either  house  they  shall  not  be  ques¬ 
tioned  in  any  other  place. 

No  Senator  or  Representative  shall,  during 
the  time  for  which  he  was  elected,  be  ap¬ 
pointed  to  any  civil  office  under  the  author-  1.15 
it y  of  the  United  Slates,  which  shall  have  been 
t  rcated,  or  the  emoluments  whereof  shall  have 
been  increased  during  such  time;  and  no  per¬ 
son  holding  any  office  under  the  United  States 
shall  he  a  member  of  either  house  during  his  150 
<  ontinuaiK  e  in  ollic e. 

Si  ction  7.  All  hills  for  raising  revenue  shall 
originate  in  the  House  of  Representatives: 
hut  the  Senate  may  propose  or  concur  with 
amendments  as  on  other  hills.  155 

Every  hill  whic  h  shall  have  passed  the  House 
ol  Representatives  and  the  Senate  shall,  be¬ 
fore  it  becomes  a  law.  he  presented  to  the 
President  of  the  United  States;  il  he  approve 
he*  dull  sign  it,  hut  if  not  he  shall  tettirn  it.  160 
with  his  objections,  to  that  house  in  which  it 
shall  have  originated,  who  shall  enter  the  ob¬ 
jections  at  large  on  their  journal  and  proceed 
to  reconsider  it  If  after  such  reconsideration 
two  thirds  of  that  house  shall  agree  to  pass  the  165 
bill,  it  shall  be  sent,  together  with  the  objec¬ 
tions,  to  lire  other  house,  bv  which  it  shall 
likewise  be  rec onsideied,  and  if  approved  by 
two  thirds  of  that  house  it  shall  become  a  law. 

But  in  all  such  case’s  the  votes  of  both  houses  170 
shall  he  clctei mined  by  yeas  and  nays,  and  the 
names  of  the  persons  voting  for  and  against 


THE  CONSTITUTION 


*3 


the  bill  shall  be  entered  on  the  journal  of 
each  house  respectively.  If  any  bill  shall  not 
175  oe  returned  by  the  President  within  ten  days 
(Sundays  excepted)  after  it  shall  have  been 
presented  to  him,  the  same  shall  be  a  law,  in 
like  manner  as  if  he  had  signed  it,  unless  the 
Congress  by  their  adjournment  prevent  its  re- 
180  turn,  in  which  case  it  shall  not  be  a  law. 

Every  order,  resolution,  or  vote  to  which 
the  concurrence  of  the  Senate  and  House  of 
Representatives  may  be  necessary  (except  on 
a  question  of  adjournment)  shall  be  presented 
185  to  the  President  of  the  United  States;  and  be¬ 
fore  the  same  shall  take  effect,  shall  be  ap¬ 
proved  by  him,  or  being  disapproved  by  him, 
shall  be  repassed  by  two-thirds  of  the  Senate 
and  House  of  Representatives,  according  to  the 
iqo  rules  and  limitations  prescribed  in  the  case  of 
a  bill. 

Section  8.  The  Congress  shall  have  power 
to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and 
excises,  to  pay  the  debts  and  provide  for  the 
195  common  defense  and  general  welfare  of  the 
United  States;  but  all  duties,  imposts,  and  ex¬ 
cises  shall  be  uniform  throughout  the  United 
States; 

To  borrow  money  on  the  credit  of  the 
200  United  States; 

To  regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations 
and  among  the  several  States,  and  with  the 
Indian  tribes; 

To  establish  an  uniform  rule  of  naturaliza- 
205  lion,  and  uniform  laws  on  the  subject  of  bank¬ 
ruptcies  throughout  the  United  States; 

To  coin  money,  regulate  the  value  thereof, 
and  of  foreign  coin,  and  fix  the  standard  of 
weights  and  measures; 

210  To  provide  for  the  punishment  of  counter¬ 
feiting  the  securities  and  current  coin  of  the 
United  States; 

To  establish  post-offices  and  post-roads; 

To  promote  the  progress  of  science  and  use- 
215  ful  arts  by  securing  for  limited  times  to  au¬ 
thors  and  inventors  the  exclusive  right  to 
their  respective  writings  and  discoveries; 

To  constitute  tribunals  inferior  to  the  Su¬ 
preme  Court; 

220  To  define  and  punish  piracies  and  felonies 
committed  on  the  high  seas  and  offenses  against 
the  law  of  nations; 

To  declare  war,  grant  letters  of  marque  and 
reprisal,  and  make  rules  concerning  captures 
225  on  land  and  water; 

To  raise  and  support  armies,  but  no  ap¬ 
propriation  of  money  to  that  use  shall  be  for 
a  longer  term  than  two  years; 


To  provide  and  maintain  a  navy; 

To  make  rules  for  the  government  and  reg-  230 
ulation  of  the  land  and  naval  forces; 

To  provide  lor  calling  forth  the  militia  to 
execute  the  laws  of  the  Union,  suppress  insur¬ 
rections,  and  repel  invasions; 

To  provide  for  organizing,  arming,  and  dis-  235 
ciplining  the  militia,  and  for  governing  such 
part  of  them  as  may  be  employed  in  the  serv¬ 
ice  of  the  United  States,  reserving  to  the  States 
respectively  the  appointment  of  the  officers, 
and  the  authority  of  training  the  militia  ac-  240 
cording  to  the  discipline  prescribed  by  Con¬ 
gress; 

To  exercise  exclusive  legislation  in  all  cases 
whatsoever  over  such  district  (not  exceeding 
ten  miles  square)  as  may,  by  cession  of  partic-  245 
ular  States  and  the  acceptance  of  Congress, 
become  the  seat  of  the  Government  of  the 
United  States,  and  to  exercise  like  authority 
over  all  places  purchased  by  the  consent  of 
the  legislature  of  the  State  in  which  the  250 
same  shall  be,  for  the  erection  of  forts,  maga¬ 
zines,  arsenals,  dockyards,  and  other  need¬ 
ful  buildings;  and 

To  make  all  laws  which  shall  be  necessary 
and  proper  for  carrying  into  execution  the  255 
foregoing  powers,  and  all  other  powers  vested 
by  this  Constitution  in  the  Government  of  the 
United  States,  or  in  any  department  or  officer 
thereof. 

Section  9.  The  migration  or  importation  of  260 
such  persons  as  any  of  the  States  now  existing 
shall  think  proper  to  admit  shall  not  be  pro¬ 
hibited  by  the  Congress  prior  to  the  year  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  eight,  but  a  tax 
or  duty  may  be  imposed  on  such  importation,  265 
not  exceeding  ten  dollars  for  each  person. 

The  privilege  of  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus 
shall  not  be  suspended,  unless  when  in  cases 
of  rebellion  or  invasion  the  public  safety  may 
require  it.  270 

No  bill  of  attainder  or  ex  post  facto  law 
shall  be  passed. 

No  capitation  or  other  direct  tax  shall  be 
laid,  unless  in  proportion  to  the  census  or  enu¬ 
meration  hereinbefore  directed  to  be  taken.  275 

No  tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid  on  articles  ex¬ 
ported  from  any  State. 

No  preference  shall  be  given  by  any  regula¬ 
tion  of  commerce  or  revenue  to  the  ports  of 
one  State  over  those  of  another;  nor  shall  ves-  280 
sels  bound  to  or  from  one  State  be  obliged  to 
enter,  clear,  or  pay  duties  in  another. 

No  money  shall  be  drawn  from  the  Treas¬ 
ury  but  in  consequence  of  appropriations 


AMERICAN  STATE  PAPERS 


14 

285  made  by  law;  and  a  regular  statement  and  ac¬ 
count  of  the  receipts  and  expenditures  of  all 
public  money  shall  he  published  from  time  to 
time. 

No  title  of  nobility  shall  be  granted  by  the 
290  United  States;  and  no  person  holding  any  of¬ 
fice  of  profit  or  trust  under  them  shall,  with¬ 
out  the  consent  of  the  Congress,  accept  of  any 
present,  emolument,  office,  or  title,  of  any  kind 
whatever,  from  any  king,  prince,  or  foreign 
295  State. 

Section  10.  Xo  State  shall  enter  into  any 
treaty,  alliance,  or  confederation;  grant  let¬ 
ters  of  marque  and  reprisal;  coin  money;  emit 
bills  of  credit;  make  anything  but  gold  and 
300  silver  coin  a  tender  in  payment  of  debts;  pass 
any  bill  of  attainder,  cx  post  facto  law,  or  law 
impairing  the  obligation  of  contracts,  or  grant 
any  title  of  nobility. 

Xo  State  shall,  without  the  consent  of  Con- 
305  gress,  lay  any  imposts  or  duties  on  imports 
or  exports,  except  what  may  be  absolutely 
necessary  for  executing  its  inspection  laws; 
and  the  net  produce  of  all  duties  and  im¬ 
posts,  laid  by  any  State  on  imports  or  ex- 
310  ports,  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  Treasury 
of  the  United  States;  and  all  such  laws 
shall  be  subject  to  the  revision  and  control 
of  the  Congress. 

Xo  State  shall,  without  the  consent  of  Con- 
315  gress,  lay  any  duty  of  tonnage,  keep  troops  or 
ships  of  war  in  time  of  peace,  enter  into  any 
agreement  or  compact  with  another  State  or 
with  a  foreign  power,  or  engage  in  war,  unless 
actually  invaded  or  in  such  imminent  danger 
320  as  will  not  admit  of  delay. 

Article  Two 

Section  i.  The  executive  power  shall  be 
vested  in  a  President  of  the  United  States  of 
America,  lie  shall  hold  his  olfice  during  the 
te  rm  of  four  years,  and  together  with  the  Vue- 
325  President. chosen  for  the  same  term, be  elec  ted 
as  follows: 

Kach  State  shall  appoint,  in  such  manner 
as  tlu-  legislature  thereof  may  direct,  a  number 
of  electors,  equal  to  1  he  whole  number  of  Sen- 
330  aiors  and  Repiesentatives  to  which  the  State 
ma\  be  entitled  in  the  Congress;  but  no  Sena¬ 
tor  or  Repi eseutati\ <\  or  person  holding  an 
of  Ik  r  of  trust  01  piohi  nuclei  the  United  States, 
shall  be  appointed  an  elector. 

335  [  Pile  electors  shall  meet  in  their  respective 

States  and  vote*  bv  ballot  for  two  persons,  of 
whom  otic  at  least  shall  not  be  an  inhabitant 


of  the  same  State  with  themselves.  And  they 
shall  make  a  list  of  all  the  persons  voted  for, 
and  of  the  number  of  votes  for  each;  which  list  340 
they  shall  sign  and  certify,  and  transmit  sealed 
to  the  seat  of  the  government  of  the  United 
States,  directed  to  the  President  of  the  Senate. 

The  President  of  the  Senate  shall,  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representa-  345 
tives,  open  all  the  certificates,  and  the  votes 
shall  then  be  counted.  The  person  having  the 
greatest  number  of  votes  shall  be  the  Presi¬ 
dent,  if  such  number  be  a  majority  of  the 
whole  number  of  electors  appoinied;  and  if  350 
there  be  more  than  one  who  have  such  major¬ 
ity,  and  have  an  equal  number  of  votes,  then 
the  House  of  Representatives  shall  immedi¬ 
ately  choose  by  ballot  one  of  them  for  Presi¬ 
dent;  and  if  no  person  have  a  majority,  then  355 
from  the  five  highest  on  the  list  the  said  House 
shall  in  like  manner  choose  the  President. 

But  in  choosing  the  President  the  voles  shall 
be  taken  by  States,  the  representation  from 
each  State  having  one  vote;  a  quorum  for  this  360 
purpose  shall  consist  of  a  member  or  mem¬ 
bers  from  two-thirds  of  the  Slates,  and  a  ma¬ 
jority  of  all  the  States  shall  be  necessary  to  a 
choice.  In  every  case,  after  the  choice  of  the 
President,  the  person  having  the  greatest  mini-  365 
her  of  votes  of  the  electors  shall  be  the  Vice- 
President.  But  if  there  should  remain  two  or 
more  who  have  equal  votes,  the  Senate  shall 
choose  from  them  by  ballot  the  Vice-Presi¬ 
dent.]*  370 

The  Congress  may  determine  the  time  of 
choosing  the  electors  and  the  day  on  which 
they  shall  give  their  votes,  which  clay  shall  be 
the  same  throughout  the  United  States. 

Xo  person  except  a  natural-born  citizen,  or  375 
a  citizen  of  the  United  States  at  the  time  of 
the  adoption  of  this  Constitution,  shall  be 
eligible  to  the  oliic  c  of  President;  neither  shall 
an\  person  be  eligible  to  that  olfice  who  shall 
not  have  attained  to  the  age  of  thirty  five  years,  380 
and  been  font  teen  years  a  resident  within  the 
United  States. 

In  case  of  the  removal  of  the  President  from 
olfice,  or  of  his  death,  resignation,  or  inability 
to  discharge  the'  powers  and  duties  of  the  said  385 
olfice,  the  same  shall  devolve  on  the  Vice- 
President,  and  the  Congress  may  by  law  pro- 
side*  for  the  case  of  removal,  death,  resigna¬ 
tion,  or  inability  both  of  the  President  and 
Vice-President,  declaring  what  olficer  shall  390 
then  ac  t  as  President,  and  sue  h  oliic  er  shall  act 

•  Phis  pincf'chirr  was  changed  !>\  the  Twelfth 
VuiencJineui 


THE  CONSTITUTION 


accordingly  until  the  disability  be  removed  or 
a  President  shall  be  elected. 

The  President  shall,  at  stated  times,  receive 
395  for  his  services  a  compensation,  which  shall 
neither  be  increased  nor  diminished  during 
the  period  for  which  he  shall  have  been  elected, 
and  he  shall  not  receive  within  that  period 
any  other  emolument  from  the  United  States 
400  or  any  of  them. 

Before  he  enter  on  the  execution  of  his  of¬ 
fice  he  shall  take  the  following  oath  or  affirma¬ 
tion: 

“I  do  solemnly  swear  (or  affirm)  that  I  will 
405  faithfully  execute  the  office  of  President  of 
the  United  States,  and  will  to  the  best  of  my 
ability  preserve,  protect,  and  defend  the  Con¬ 
stitution  of  the  United  States.” 

Section  2.  The  President  shall  be  Com- 
410  mander-in-chief  of  the  Army  and  Navy  of  the 
United  States,  and  of  the  militia  of  the  sev¬ 
eral  States  when  called  into  the  actual  service 
of  the  United  States;  he  may  require  the 
opinion,  in  writing,  of  the  principal  officer 
415  in  each  of  the  executive  departments,  upon 
any  subject  relating  to  the  duties  of  their  re¬ 
spective  offices,  and  he  shall  have  power  to 
grant  reprieves  and  pardons  for  offenses  against 
the  United  States,  except  in  cases  of  impeach- 
420  ment. 

He  shall  have  power,  by  and  with  the  ad¬ 
vice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  to  make  trea¬ 
ties,  provided  two-thirdsof  the  Senators  present 
concur;  and  he  shall  nominate,  and,  by  and 
425  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate, 
shall  appoint  ambassadors,  other  public  min¬ 
isters  and  consuls,  judges  of  the  Supreme 
Court,  and  all  other  officers  of  the  United 
States,  whose  appointments  are  not  herein 
430  otherwise  provided  for,  and  which  shall  be 
established  by  law;  but  the  Congress  may  by 
law  vest  the  appointment  of  such  inferior  of¬ 
ficers,  as  they  think  proper,  in  the  President 
alone,  in  the  courts  of  law,  or  in  the  heads  of 
435  departments. 

The  President  shall  have  power  to  fill  up  all 
vacancies  that  may  happen  during  the  recess 
of  the  Senate,  by  granting  commissions  which 
shall  expire  at  the  end  of  their  next  session. 

1 440  Section  3.  He  shall  from  time  to  time  give 
to  the  Congress  information  of  the  state  of 
the  Union,  and  recommend  to  their  consid¬ 
eration  such  measures  as  he  shall  judge  neces¬ 
sary  and  expedient;  he  may,  on  extraordinary 
445  occasions,  convene  both  houses,  or  either  of 
them,  and  in  case  of  disagreement  between 
them  with  respect  to  the  time  of  adjourn¬ 

1 


*5 

ment,  he  may  adjourn  them  to  such  time  as 
he  shall  think  proper;  he  shall  receive  ambas¬ 
sadors  andotherpublicministers;  he  shall  take  450 
care  that  the  laws  be  faithfully  executed,  and 
shall  commission  all  the  officers  of  the  United 
States. 

Section  4.  The  President,  Vice-President, 
and  all  civil  officers  of  the  United  States  shall  455 
be  removed  from  office  on  impeachment  for 
and  conviction  of  treason,  bribery,  or  other 
high  crimes  and  misdemeanors. 

Article  Three 

Section  1.  The  judicial  power  of  the  United 
States  shall  be  vested  in  one  Supreme  Court,  460 
and  in  such  inferior  courts  as  the  Congress 
may  from  time  to  time  ordain  and  establish. 

The  judges,  both  of  the  supreme  and  inferior 
courts,  shall  hold  their  offices  during  good  be¬ 
havior,  and  shall,  at  stated  times,  receive  for  465 
their  services  a  compensation  which  shall  not 
be  diminished  during  their  continuance  in 
office. 

Section  2.  The  judicial  power  shall  extend 
to  all  cases,  in  law  and  equity,  arising  under  470 
this  Constitution,  the  laws  of  the  United 
States,  and  treaties  made,  or  which  shall  be 
made,  under  their  authority;  to  all  cases  af¬ 
fecting  ambassadors,  other  public  ministers, 
and  consuls;  to  all  cases  of  admiralty  and  mar-  475 
itime  jurisdiction;  to  controversies  to  which 
the  United  States  shall  be  a  party;  to  con¬ 
troversies  between  two  or  more  States;  be¬ 
tween  a  State  and  citizens  of  another  State; 
between  citizens  of  different  States;  between  480 
citizens  of  the  same  State  claiming  lands  under 
grants  of  different  States,  and  between  a  State, 
or  the  citizens  thereof,  and  foreign  States,  citi¬ 
zens,  or  subjects. 

In  all  cases  affecting  ambassadors,  other  pub-  485 
lie  ministers  and  consuls,  and  those  in  which 
a  State  shall  be  a  party,  the  Supreme  Court 
shall  haveoriginal  jurisdiction.  Inall  the  other 
cases  before  mentioned  the  Supreme  Court 
shall  have  appellate  jurisdiction,  both  as  to  490 
law  and  fact,  with  such  exceptions  and  under 
such  regulations  as  the  Congress  shall  make. 

The  trial  of  all  crimes,  except  in  cases  of 
impeachment,  shall  be  by  jury;  and  such  trial 
shall  be  held  in  the  State  where  the  said  495 
crimes  shall  have  been  committed;  but  when 
not  committed  within  any  State,  the  trial  shall 
be  at  such  place  or  places  as  the  Congress 
may  by  law  have  directed. 

Section  3.  Treason  against  the  United  States  500 


AM  ERIC  AX  STATE  PAPERS 


16 

shall  consist  only  in  levying  war  against  them, 
or  in  adhering  to  their  enemies,  giving  them 
aid  and  comfort.  No  person  shall  be  convicted 
of  treason  unless  on  the  testimony  of  two  wit- 
505  nesses  to  the  same  overt  act.  or  on  confession 
in  open  court. 

The  Congress  shall  have  power  to  declare 
the  punishment  of  treason,  but  no  attainder 
of  treason  shall  work  corruption  of  blood  or 
510  forfeiture  except  during  the  life  of  the  person 
attainted. 

Article  Four 

Sktion  ).  Full  faith  and  credit  shall  he 
given  in  each  State  to  the  public  acts,  records, 
and  judicial  proceedings  of  every  other  State. 
515  And  the  Congress  ma\  by  general  laws  pre¬ 
scribe  the  manner  in  which  such  acts,  records, 
and  proceedings  shall  be  proved,  and  the  ef¬ 
fect  thereof. 

St c.'i  ion  2.  The  citizens  of  each  State  shall 
520  he  entitled  to  all  privileges  and  immunities 
of  citizens  in  the  several  States. 

\  person  charged  in  anv  State  with  treason, 
felony,  or  other  crime,  who  shall  lice  from 
justice,  and  he  found  in  another  State,  shall, 
525  on  demand  of  the  executive  authority  of  the 
State  from  which  he  fled,  be  delivered  up.  to 
be  removed  to  the  State  has  ing  jurisdiction  of 
the  c  rime. 

No  person  held  to  service  or  labor  in  one 
550  State,  under  the  laws  thereof,  escaping  into 
another,  shall,  in  consequence  of  any  law  or 
regulation  therein,  be  discharged  from  such 
service  or  labor,  but  shall  be  delivered  up  on 
claim  of  the  party  to  whom  such  service  or 
535  labor  mav  be  due. 

Sk  i  ion  3.  New  States  mav  be*  admitted  by 
the*  Cougiess  into  this  Union;  but  no  new 
State  shall  be  formed  or  erected  within  the 
jurisdic t ion  of  anv  oilier  State:  nor  any  State 
540  be  formed  by  the  junction  of  two  or  more 
State's  01  parts  of  Stales,  without  the*  consent 
of  the*  legislat  111  es  of  the  Stales  concerned  as 
we  ll  as  of  the  ( .ongress. 

I  he  ( a mgi ess  shall  have  power  lo  dispose 
545  of  and  make  all  needful  rules  and  regulations 
respecting  1  lie  tciiitniy  01  other  piopeitv  be¬ 
longing  to  the*  l  lined  Slates;  and  nothing  in 
this  ( .oiistitut  1011  shall  be  so  construed  as  to 
prejudice*  anv  claims  of  the  United  Stales  or 
550  of  anv  pat  tic  ular  State. 

Sic  i  ion  j.  I  he  l  nitecl  Stale  s  shall  guaran¬ 
tee  to  eveiy  Stale  in  this  Union  a  republican 
form  cjf  government,  and  shall  pioteet  each 


of  them  against  invasion,  and  on  application 
of  the  legislature,  or  of  the  executive  (when  555 
the  legislature  cannot  he  convened),  against 
domestic  violence. 

Article  Five 

The  Congress,  whenever  two-thirds  of  both 
houses  shall  deem  it  necessary,  shall  propose 
amendments  to  this  Constitution,  or.  on  the  560 
application  of  the  Legislatures  of  two-thirds 
of  the  several  States,  shall  call  a  convention 
for  proposing  amendments,  which,  in  either 
case,  shall  he  valid  to  all  intents  and  pur¬ 
poses,  as  part  of  this  Constitution,  when  565 
ratified  hv  t he  Legislatures  of  three-fourths 
of  the  several  States,  or  by  conventions  in 
three-fourths  thereof,  as  the  one  or  the  other 
mode  of  ratification  may  he  proposed  by 
the  Congress;  |>rovided  that  no  amend-  570 
mem  which  may  he  made  prior  to  the  Year 
One  thousand  eight  hundred  and  eight 
shall  in  any  manner  all ec  t  the  first  and  fourth 
Clauses  in  the  Ninth  Section  of  the  first 
Article;  and  that  no  State,  without  its  575 
consent,  shall  he  deprived  of  its  ecpial  sullrage 
in  the  Senate. 

Article  Six 

\  1  1  debts  contracted  and  engagements  en¬ 
tered  into,  before  the  adoption  of  this  Con¬ 
stitution.  shall  he  as  valid  against  the  United  580 
States  under  this  Constitution,  as  under  the 
Confederation. 

rhisConstitutionand  thelawsof  the  United 
States  whit  h  shall  be  made  in  pursuance  thereof 
and  all  treaties  made,  or  which  shall  he  made.  585 
under  the  authority  of  the  l 1  nitecl  States,  shall 
he  the  supreme  law  of  the  land;  and  the 
judges  in  every  State  shall  he  hound  thereby, 
anything  in  the  Constitution  or  laws  of  any 
State  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  5<jo 

I  he  Senators  and  Repi esentat iv es  before 
mentioned,  and  the*  members  of  the  several 
State*  Legislatures,  and  all  executive  and  ju¬ 
dicial  ollieers,  both  of  the  United  States  and 
of  the  several  States,  shall  lie  hound  hv  oath  5^5 
or  . illu maiion,  m  support  this  Constitution; 
hut  no  religious  test  shall  ever  he  required  as 
a  qualification  to  anv  ollice  or  public  mist 
nuclei  1  he  l  nitecl  States. 

A  rticle  Seven 

I  in  ratification  of  (he  Conventions  of  nine  (loo 


THE  CONSTITUTION 


States  shall  be  sufficient  for  the  establishment 
of  this  Constitution  between  the  States  so 
ratifying  the  same. 

Done  in  convention  by  the  unanimous  con- 
605  sent  of  the  States  present  the  seventeenth  day 
of  September  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one 


*7 

thousand  seven  hundred  and  eighty-seven 
and  of  the  independence  of  the  United  States 
of  America  the  twelfth,  in  witness  whereof 
we  have  hereunto  subscribed  our  names.  610 

G°  Washington— Presidi 
and  deputy  from  Virginia 

Attest 

William  Jackson  Secretary 


AMENDMENTS 


Article  One 

615  Congress  shall  make  no  law  respecting  an  es¬ 
tablishment  of  religion,  or  prohibiting  the  free 
exercise  thereof;  or  abridging  the  freedom  of 
speech,  or  of  the  press;  or  the  right  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  peaceably  to  assemble,  and  to  petition  the 
620  Government  for  a  redress  of  grievances. 

Article  Two 

A  well-regulated  militia  being  necessary  to  the 
security  of  a  free  State,  the  right  of  the  people 
to  keep  and  bear  arms  shall  not  be  infringed. 

Article  Three 

No  soldier  shall,  in  time  of  peace,  be  quar- 
625  tered  in  any  house,  without  the  consent  of 
the  owner,  nor  in  time  of  war  but  in  a  man¬ 
ner  to  be  prescribed  by  law. 

Article  Four 

The  right  of  the  people  to  be  secure  in  their 
persons,  houses,  papers,  and  effects,  against  un- 
630  reasonable  searches  and  seizures,  shall  not  be 
violated,  and  no  warrants  shall  issue,  but  upon 
probable  cause,  supported  by  oath  or  affirma¬ 
tion,  and  particularly  describing  the  place  to 
be  searched,  and  the  persons  or  things  to  be 
635  seized. 

Article  Five 

No  person  shall  be  held  to  answer  for  a  capital, 
or  otherwise  infamous  crime,  unless  on  a  pre¬ 
sentment  or  indictment  of  a  Grand  Jury,  ex¬ 
cept  in  cases  arising  in  the  land  or  naval  forces, 
640  or  in  the  militia,  when  in  actual  service  in 
time  of  war  or  public  danger;  nor  shall  any 
person  be  subject  for  the  same  offense  to  be 
twice  put  in  jeopardy  of  life  or  limb;  nor  shall 
be  compelled  in  any  criminal  case  to  be  a 
645  witness  against  himself,  nor  be  deprived  of 
life,  liberty,  or  property,  without  due  process 


of  law;  nor  shall  private  property  be  taken 
for  public  use,  without  just  compensation. 

Article  Six 

In  all  criminal  prosecutions  the  accused  shall 
enjoy  the  right  to  a  speedy  and  public  trial,  650 
by  an  impartial  jury  of  the  State  and  district 
wherein  the  crime  shall  have  been  commit¬ 
ted,  which  district  shall  have  been  previously 
ascertained  by  law,  and  to  be  informed  of  the 
nature  and  cause  of  the  accusation;  to  be  con-  655 
fronted  with  the  witnesses  against  him;  tohave 
compulsory  process  for  obtaining  witnesses  in 
his  favor,  and  to  have  the  assistance  of  counsel 
for  his  defense. 

Article  Seven 

In  suits  at  common  law,  where  the  value  of  660 
controversy  shall  exceed  twenty  dollars,  the 
right  of  trial  by  jury  shall  be  preserved,  and 
no  fact  tried  by  a  jury  shall  be  otherwise  re¬ 
examined  in  any  court  of  the  United  States, 
than  according  to  the  rules  of  the  common  665 
law. 

Article  Eight 

Excessive  bail  shall  not  be  required,  nor  ex¬ 
cessive  fines  imposed,  nor  cruel  and  unusual 
punishments  inflicted. 

Article  Nine 

The  enumeration  in  the  Constitution  of  cer-  670 
tain  rights  shall  not  be  construed  to  deny  or 
disparage  others  retained  by  the  people. 

Article  Ten 

The  powers  not  delegated  to  the  United 
States  by  the  Constitution,  nor  prohibited  by 
it  to  the  States,  are  reserved  to  the  States  re-  675 
spectively  or  to  the  people. 


AM  ERIC  AX  STATE  PARERS 


18 

Article  Eleven 

The  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  shall 
not  be  construed  to  extend  to  am  suit  in  law 
or  equity,  commenced  or  prosecuted  against 
680  one  of  the  United  States  bv  citizens  of  another 
State,  or  by  citizens  or  subjects  of  any  foreign 
State. 

Article  Twelve 

The  Electors  shall  meet  in  their  respective 
States,  and  vote  by  ballot  for  President  and 
685  Vice-President,  one  of  whom,  at  least,  shall 
not  be  an  inhabitant  of  the  same  State  with 
themselves;  they  shall  name  in  their  ballots 
the  person  voted  for  as  President,  and  in  dis¬ 
tinct  ballots  the  person  voted  for  as  Yice- 
690  President,  and  they  shall  make  distinct  lists 
of  all  persons  voted  for  as  President  and  of  all 
persons  voted  for  as  Vice-President,  and  of 
the  number  of  \otes  for  each,  which  lists  they 
shall  sign  and  certify,  and  transmit  sealed  to 
695  the  scat  of  the  Government  of  the  United 
States,  directed  to  the  President  of  the  Senate; 
the  President  of  the  Senate  shall,  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representa¬ 
tives,  open  all  the  certificates  and  the  votes 
700  shall  then  be  counted;  the  person  having  the 
greatest  number  of  votes  for  President  shall 
be  the  President,  if  such  number  be  a  ma¬ 
jority  of  the  whole  number  of  Electors  ap¬ 
pointed;  and  if  no  person  have  such  majoiitv, 
705  then  from  the  persons  having  the  highest 
numbers  not  exceeding  three  on  the  list  of 
those  voted  for  as  President,  the  House  of 
Representatives  shall  choose  immediately,  by 
ballot,  the  President.  Hut  in  choosing  the 
710  President  the  votes  shall  be  taken  by  Slates, 
the  representation  from  each  State  havingone 
vote;  a  quorum  lor  this  purpose  shall  consist 
of  a  member  or  members  from  two  thirds  of 
the  States,  and  a  uia  jot  ity  of  all  the1  States  shall 
715  be  neeessaiy  to  a  choice.  \nd  if  the  House  of 
Reprc.sentati\es  shall  not  choose  a  Ptesident 
whenever  the  right  of  choice  shall  devolve 
upon  them,  hefoie  the  fourth  dav  of  March 
next  following,  then  the  Vice-President  shall 
720  a<  t  as  President,  as  in  the  c  ase  of  the  death  or 
other  constitutional  disability  of  the  Presi¬ 
dent  1  he  pet  son  has  ing  the  greatest  number 
of  \otes  as  Vic e-Ptesident  shall  be  the  Vice- 
Piesidcnt,  if  such  numhci  be  a  majoritN  of  the’ 
725  whole  number  of  Hectors  appointed,  and  if 
110  person  have  a  majoiits,  then  hoiu  the 
two  highest  numbers  on  the’  list,  the  Senate* 


shall  choose  the  Vice-President;  a  quorum  for 
the  purjrose  shall  consist  of  two-thirds  of  the 
whole  number  of  Senators,  and  a  majority  of  730 
the  whole  number  shall  be  necessary  to  a 
choice.  But  no  person  constitutionally  ineligi¬ 
ble  to  the  office  of  President  shall  be  eligible 
to  that  of  Vice-President  of  the  United  States. 

Article  Thirteen 

Section  1.  Neither  slavery  nor  involuntary  735 
servitude,  except  as  a  punishment  for  crime 
whereof  the  party  shall  have  been  duly  con¬ 
victed,  shall  exist  within  the  United  States,  or 
any  place  subject  to  their  jurisdiction. 

Section  2.  Congress  shall  have  power  to  740 
enforce  this  article  by  appropriate  legislation. 

Article  Fourteen 

Section  1.  All  persons  born  or  naturalized 
in  the  United  States,  and  subject  to  the  juris¬ 
diction  thereof,  are  citizens  of  the  United 
Slates  and  of  the  State  wherein  they  reside.  No  74- 
State  shall  make  or  enforce  any  law  which 
shall  abridge  the  privileges  or  immunities  of 
citizens  of  the  United  States;  nor  shall  any 
State  deprive  any  person  of  life,  liberty,  or 
property,  without  due  process  of  law:  nor  750 
deny  to  any  person  within  its  jurisdiction  the 
equal  protec  tion  of  the  laws. 

Section  2.  Representatives  shall  be  appor¬ 
tioned  among  the  several  Slates  according  to 
their  respective  numbers,  counting  the  whole  755 
number  of  persons  in  each  State,  excluding 
Indians  not  taxed.  Hut  when  the  right  to  vote 
at  any  election  for  the  choice  of  Electors  for 
President  and  Vice-President  of  the  United 
States,  Representatives  in  Congress,  the  ex-  760 
ecutivc  and  judicial  olhcers  of  a  State,  or  the 
members  of  the  Legislature  thereof,  is  denied 
to  any  of  the*  male  inhabitants  of  such  State, 
being  twenty-one  vears  of  age,  and  citizens  of 
the  United  States,  or  in  any  way  abridged,  ex-  765 
cept  for  panic  ipation  in  rebellion,  or  other 
crime,  the  basis  of  representation  therein  shall 
be  reduced  in  the  proportion  which  the  num¬ 
ber  of  such  male  citizens  shall  bear  to  the 
whole  number  of  male*  citizens  twenty-one  770 
years  of  ,cge  in  sue  h  State. 

Si  c.  1  ion  3.  No  person  shall  be  a  Senator  or 
Representative  in  Congress, or  Elec  torol  Presi¬ 
dent  and  Vice-President,  or  hold  any  ollue. 
civil  or  military,  under  the  United  States,  or  775 
under  anv  State,  who,  having  previous!)  taken 
an  oath  as  a  memhei  of  Congress,  or  as  an 
olliee  r  o!  the*  United  States,  01  as  a  member  of 


THE  CONSTITUTION  i 


any  State  Legislature,  or  as  an  executive  or 
780  judicial  officer  of  any  State,  to  support  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States,  shall  have 
engaged  in  insurrection  or  rebellion  against 
the  same,  or  given  aid  or  comfort  to  the  ene¬ 
mies  thereof.  But  Congress  may,  by  a  vote  of 
785  two-thirds  of  each  House,  remove  such  dis¬ 
ability. 

Section  4.  The  validity  of  the  public  debt 
of  the  United  States,  authorized  by  law,  in¬ 
cluding  debts  incurred  for  payment  of  pen- 
^go  sions  and  bounties  for  services  in  suppressing 
insurrection  or  rebellion,  shall  not  be  ques¬ 
tioned.  But  neither  the  United  States  nor  any 
State  shall  assume  or  pay  any  debt  or  obliga¬ 
tion  incurred  in  aid  of  insurrection  or  rebel- 
tjgS  lion  against  the  United  States,  or  any  claim  for 
the  loss  or  emancipation  of  any  slave;  but  all 
such  debts,  obligations  and  claims  shall  be 
held  illegal  and  void. 

Section  5.  The  Congress  shall  have  power 
800  to  enforce,  by  appropriate  legislation,  the  pro¬ 
visions  of  this  article. 

Article  Fifteen 

Section  i.  The  right  of  citizens  of  the  United 
States  to  vote  shall  not  be  denied  or  abridged 
by  the  United  States  or  by  any  State  on  ac- 
805  count  of  race,  color,  or  previous  condition  of 
servitude. 

Section  2.  The  Congress  shall  have  power  to 
enforce  this  article  by  appropriate  legislation. 

Article  Sixteen 

The  Congress  shall  have  power  to  lay  and 
8 10  collect  taxes  on  incomes,  from  whatever  source 
derived,  without  apportionment  among  the 
several  States,  and  without  regard  to  any  cen¬ 
sus  or  enumeration. 

Article  Seventeen 

The  Senate  of  the  United  States  shall  be 
815  composed  of  two  Senators  from  each  State, 
elected  by  the  people  thereof,  for  six  years; 
and  each  Senator  shall  have  one  vote.  The 
electors  in  each  State  shall  have  the  qualifica¬ 
tions  requisite  for  electors  of  the  most  nu- 
820  merous  branch  of  the  State  legislatures. 

When  vacancies  happen  in  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  any  State  in  the  Senate,  the  executive 
authority  of  such  State  shall  issue  writs  of  elec¬ 
tion  to  fill  such  vacancies:  Provided ,  That  the 
825  Legislature  of  any  State  may  empower  the  ex¬ 
ecutive  thereof  to  make  temporary  appoint¬ 


ments  until  the  people  fill  the  vacancies  by 
election  as  the  legislature  may  direct. 

This  amendment  shall  not  be  so  construed 
as  to  affect  the  election  or  term  of  any  Sen-  830 
ator  chosen  before  it  becomes  valid  as  part  of 
the  Constitution. 

Article  Eighteen 

Section  1.  After  one  year  from  the  ratifica¬ 
tion  of  this  article  the  manufacture,  sale,  or 
transportation  of  intoxicating  liquors  within,  835 
the  importation  thereof  into,  or  the  exporta¬ 
tion  thereof  from  the  United  States  and  all 
territory  subject  to  the  jurisdicion  thereof 
for  beverage  purposes  is  hereby  prohibited. 

Section  2.  The  Congress  and  the  several  840 
States  shall  have  concurrent  power  to  enforce 
this  article  by  appropriate  legislation. 

Section  3.  This  article  shall  be  inoperative 
unless  it  shall  have  been  ratified  as  an  amend¬ 
ment  to  the  Constitution  by  the  legislatures  845 
of  the  several  States,  as  provided  in  the  Con¬ 
stitution,  within  seven  years  from  the  date  of 
the  submission  hereof  to  the  States  by  the 
Congress. 

Article  Nineteen 

The  right  of  citizens  of  the  United  States  to  850 
vote  shall  not  be  denied  or  abridged  by  the 
U  nited  States  or  by  any  State  on  account  of  sex. 

Congress  shall  have  power  to  enforce  this 
article  by  appropriate  legislation. 

Article  Twenty 

Section  1.  The  terms  of  the  President  and  855 
Vice-President  shall  end  at  noon  on  the  twen¬ 
tieth  day  of  January,  and  the  terms  of  Senators 
and  Representatives  at  noon  on  the  third  day 
of  January,  of  the  years  in  which  such  terms 
would  have  ended  if  this  article  had  not  been  860 
ratified;  and  the  terms  of  their  successors  shall 
then  begin. 

Section  2.  The  Congress  shall  assemble  at 
least  once  in  every  year,  and  such  meeting 
shall  begin  at  noon  on  the  third  day  of  Jan-  865 
uary,  unless  they  shall  by  law  appoint  a  dif¬ 
ferent  day. 

Section  3.  If,  at  the  time  fixed  for  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  term  of  the  President,  the 
President  elect  shall  have  died,  the  Vice-  870 
President  elect  shall  become  President.  If  a 
President  shall  not  have  been  chosen  before 
the  time  fixed  for  the  beginning  of  his  term, 
or  if  the  President  elect  shall  have  failed  to 


AMERICAN  STATE  PAPERS 


875  qualify,  then  the  Vice-President  elect  shall 
act  as  President  until  a  President  shall  have 
qualified;  and  the  Congress  may  by  law  pro¬ 
vide  for  the  case  wherein  neither  a  President 
elect  nor  a  Vice-President  elect  shall  have 
880  qualified,  declaring  who  shall  then  act  as 
President,  or  the  manner  in  which  one  who 
is  to  act  shall  be  selected,  and  such  person 
shall  act  accordingly  until  a  President  or 
Vice-President  shall  have  qualified. 

885  Suction  4.  The  Congress  may  by  law  pro¬ 
vide  for  the  case  of  the  death  of  any  of  the 
persons  from  whom  the  House  of  Represent¬ 
atives  may  choose  a  President  whenever  the 
right  of  choice  shall  have  devolved  upon 
890  them,  and  for  the  case  of  the  death  of  any 
of  the  persons  from  whom  the  Senate  may 
choose  a  Vice-President  whenever  the  right 
of  choice  shall  have  devolved  upon  them. 

Section  5.  Sections  1  and  2  shall  take  ef- 
895  feet  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  October  following 
the  ratification  of  this  article. 

Section  f>.  This  article  shall  be  inoperative 
unless  it  shall  have  been  ratified  as  an  amend¬ 
ment  to  the  Constitution  by  the  legislatures 
y()()  of  three-fourths  of  the  several  States  within 
seven  years  from  the  date  of  its  submission. 

A  rticle  T wenty-one 

Section  1.  'The  eighteenth  article  of  amend¬ 
ment  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States 
is  hereby  repealed. 

f|Q-  Section  2.  The  transportation  or  impor¬ 
tation  into  any  State,  Territory,  or  possession 
of  the  United  States  for  delivery  or  use 
therein  of  intoxicating  liquors,  in  violation 
of  the  laws  thereof,  is  hereby  prohibited. 

(jio  Section  3.  Phis  article  shall  be  inopera¬ 
tive  unless  it  shall  have  been  ratified  as  an 
amendment  to  the  Constitution  by  conven¬ 
tions  in  the  several  Stales,  as  provided  in  the 
Constitution,  within  seven  years  from  the 
iji-  date  of  the  submission  hereof  to  the  States 
by  the  Congress. 

Article  Twenty-two 

Sr c  i ion  1.  No  person  shall  be  elected  to  the 
office  of  the  President  moie  than  twice,  and 
no  prrvm  who  has  held  the  oilier  of  Presi 
920  dent,  or  acini  as  President,  for  more  than 
two  years  of  a  term  to  which  some  other  per¬ 


son  was  elected  President  shall  be  elected  to 
the  offi.e  of  the  President  more  than  once. 

But  this  Article  shall  not  apply  to  any  per¬ 
son  holding  the  office  of  President  when  this  925 
Article  was  proposed  by  the  Congress,  and 
shall  not  prevent  any  person  who  may  be 
holding  the  office  of  President,  or  acting  as 
President,  during  the  term  within  which  this 
Article  becomes  operative  from  holding  the  930 
office  of  President  or  acting  as  President  dur¬ 
ing  the  remainder  of  such  term. 

Section  2.  This  article  shall  be  inopera¬ 
tive  unless  it  shall  have  been  ratified  as  an 
amendment  to  the  Constitution  by  the  legis-  935 
latures  of  three-fourths  of  the  several  States 
within  seven  years  from  the  date  of  its  sub¬ 
mission  to  the  States  by  the  Congress. 

Article  Twenty -three 

Section  1.  The  District  constituting  the  seat 
of  Government  of  the  United  States  shall  940 
appoint  in  such  manner  as  the  Congress  may 
direct: 

A  number  of  electors  of  President  and 
Vice-President  equal  to  the  whole  number  of 
Senators  and  Representatives  in  Congress  to  945 
which  the  District  would  be  entitled  if  it 
were  a  State,  but  in  no  event  more  than  the 
least  populous  State;  they  shall  be  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  those  appointed  by  the  States,  but 
they  shall  be  considered,  for  the  purposes  of  9501 
the  election  of  President  and  Vice-President, 
to  be  electors  appointed  by  a  State;  and  they 
shall  meet  in  the  District  anti  perform  such 
duties  as  provided  by  the  twelfth  article  of 
amendment.  955 

Section  2.  The  Congress  shall  have  power 
to  enforce  this  article  by  appropriate  legisla¬ 
tion. 

Article  Twenty -four 

Section  i.  Phe  right  of  titi/ens  of  the 
United  States  to  vote  in  any  primary  or  9 fit) 
other  elec  lion  for  President  or  Vice-President, 
for  electors  for  President  or  Vice-President, 
or  for  Senator  or  Representative*  in  Congress, 
shall  not  be  denied  or  abridged  by  the 
United  States  or  any  State  by  reason  of  fail-  ejfij 
urr  to  pay  any  poll  lax  or  other  tax. 

Si  c. 1  ion  2.  I  he*  Congress  shall  have  power 
to  enforce  this  article  by  appropriate  legisla¬ 
tion. 


THE  CONSTITUTION 


si 


Article  Twenty-Jive 

970  Section  1.  In  case  of  the  removal  of  the 
President  from  office  or  of  his  death  or 
resignation,  the  Vice-President  shall  be¬ 
come  President. 

Section  2.  Whenever  there  is  a  vacancy 
975  in  the  office  of  the  Vice-President,  the 
President  shall  nominate  a  Vice-President 
who  shall  take  office  upon  confirmation  by  a 
majority  vote  of  both  Houses  of  Congress. 

Section  3.  Whenever  the  President  trans- 
980  mits  to  the  President  pro  tempore  of  the 
Senate  and  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  his  written  declaration 
that  he  is  unable  to  discharge  the  powers 
and  duties  of  his  office,  and  until  he  trans- 
985  mits  to  them  a  written  declaration  to  the 
contrary,  such  powers  and  duties  shall  be 
discharged  by  the  Vice-President  as  Acting 
President. 

Section  4.  Whenever  the  Vice-President 
990  and  a  majority  of  either  the  principal  offi¬ 
cers  of  the  executive  departments  or  of 
such  other  body  as  Congress  may  by  law 
provide,  transmit  to  the  President  pro  tem¬ 
pore  of  the  Senate  and  the  Speaker  of  the 
995  House  of  Representatives  their  written 
declaration  that  the  President  is  unable 
to  discharge  the  powers  and  duties  of  his 
office,  the  Vice-President  shall  immedi¬ 


ately  assume  the  powers  and  duties  of  the 
office  as  Acting  President.  1000 

Thereafter,  when  the  President  trans¬ 
mits  to  the  President  pro  tempore  of  the 
Senate  and  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  his  written  declaration  that 
no  inability  exists,  he  shall  resume  the  1005 
powers  and  duties  of  his  office  unless  the 
Vice-President  and  a  majority  of  either  the 
principal  officers  of  the  executive  depart¬ 
ments  or  of  such  other  body  as  Congress 
may  by  law  provide,  transmit  within  four  1010 
days  to  the  President  pro  tempore  of  the 
Senate  and  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  their  written  declaration 
that  the  President  is  unable  to  discharge 
the  powers  and  duties  of  his  office.  There-  1015 
upon  Congress  shall  decide  the  issue,  as¬ 
sembling  within  forty-eight  hours  for  that 
purpose  if  not  in  session.  If  the  Congress, 
within  twenty-one  days  after  receipt  of  the 
latter  written  declaration,  or,  if  Congress  1020 
is  not  in  session,  within  twenty-one  days 
after  Congress  is  required  to  assemble,  de¬ 
termines  by  two-thirds  vote  of  both  Houses 
that  the  President  is  unable  to  discharge 
the  powers  and  duties  of  his  office,  the  Vice-  1025 
President  shall  continue  to  discharge  the 
same  as  Acting  President;  otherwise,  the 
President  shall  resume  the  powers  and 
duties  of  his  office. 


I 


■ 


THE  FEDERALIST 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


Alexander  Hamilton,  1757-1804  James  Madison,  1751-1836 
John  Jay,  1745-1829 


The  task  for  the  Federalist  authors  was  marked 
out  for  them  the  day  the  new  Constitution  for 
the  United  States  was  made  known  to  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  New  York  State.  On  the  same  day  it  was 
published,  and  immediately  beside  it  in  the 
papers,  appeared  an  attack  upon  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  signed  by  Cato,  who  was  known  to  be 
Governor  Clinton.  Thereafter,  many  of  the 
most  powerful  figures  in  New  York  political 
life,  writing  under  the  name  of  renowned 
Romans,  came  out  in  opposition  to  the  new 
instrument  of  government. 

Alexander  Hamilton,  although  only  thirty 
years  old  and  an  immigrant,  was  the  natural 
leader  for  the  New  York  supporters  of  the 
new  Constitution.  Born  illegitimately,  of 
Scotch  and  French  Huguenot  stock,  on  the 
British  Island  of  Nevis  in  the  West  Indies,  his 
youthful  talents  at  writing  and  commerce  were 
so  unusual  that  friends  took  up  a  collection 
and  sent  him  to  America  in  1772  to  complete 
his  education.  He  used  his  writing  talents  to 
defend  the  cause  of  the  Colonies  during  the 
events  leading  up  to  the  Revolution,  so  success¬ 
fully,  in  fact,  that  two  of  his  pamphlets  were 
thought  to  be  the  work  of  Jay.  With  a  thirst 
for  military  glory  that  was  to  remain  with  him 
throughout  his  life,  he  took  part  in  the  New 
York  campaign  as  an  artillery  captain  and  won 
a  place  on  Washington’s  staff.  Washington 
employed  him,  however,  for  his  power  with 
the  pen,  and  for  four  years  he  was  the  Gen¬ 
eral’s  private  secretary.  In  this  position  he  be¬ 
came  acquainted  with  many  of  the  most  influ¬ 
ential  men  in  the  states  and  learned  at  first 
hand  the  weakness  of  the  Confederation.  As 
early  as  1780  he  was  writing  men  of  influence 
and  urging  the  calling  of  a  convention  to  form 
a  new  government.  As  a  lawyer  in  New  York 
City,  he  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  events 
that  finally  resulted  in  the  Constitutional  Con¬ 
vention.  One  of  the  three  New  York  delegates 
to  the  Convention,  he  argued  for  the  establish¬ 


ment  of  a  strong  national  government  based 
on  the  British  model.  He  was  the  only  New 
York  member  to  sign  the  Constitution. 

In  the  New  York  fight  for  ratification  Hamil¬ 
ton  at  first  took  it  upon  himself  to  answer 
Clinton.  Under  the  name  of  Caesar  he  wrote 
two  articles,  bitterly  personal  and  scornful  of 
Cato’s  appeal  to  the  “majesty  of  the  multi¬ 
tude.”  But  persuaded  that  such  tactics  would 
not  win  support  for  the  new  Constitution,  he 
abandoned  them.  His  next  effort,  written  while 
returning  on  a  Hudson  sloop  from  legal  duties 
in  Albany,  appeared  under  the  signature  of 
Publius.  It  was  the  first  number  of  the  Fed¬ 
eralist.  From  late  October  1787  until  the  fol¬ 
lowing  April  a  continuing  stream  of  articles 
from  the  pen  of  Publius  poured  forth,  some¬ 
times  as  many  as  four  in  one  week.  They  were 
printed  by  the  newspapers  throughout  the 
states  and  issued  in  book  form  even  before  all 
the  numbers  had  appeared  in  the  papers.  Al¬ 
though  the  articles  appeared  under  the  signa¬ 
ture  of  Publius  which  Hamilton  had  used  once 
before,  they  were  soon  known  to  be  the  work 
of  several  men.  Their  genesis  as  a  joint  work, 
however,  is  uncertain.  Madison  later  reported 
that  both  Hamilton  and  Jay  were  agreed  upon 
the  work  when  Hamilton  asked  him  to  make  a 
third  in  the  undertaking.  The  combination 
was  the  strongest  to  be  found  in  New  York 
for  an  intellectual  defense  of  the  new  Consti¬ 
tution. 

James  Madison  was  a  representative  of  the 
Southern  aristocracy,  the  eldest  son  of  a 
Virginia  planter.  He  gained  his  first  political 
experience  during  the  Revolution  as  a  dele¬ 
gate  to  the  Virginia  Convention,  which  drew 
up  a  new  state  Constitution.  After  its  establish 
ment,  he  was  a  member  of  the  Privy  Council 
which  advised  the  governor.  In  this  capacity 
he  served  as  Governor  Patrick  Henry’s  private 
secretary.  Later  as  a  delegate  to  the  Conti¬ 
nental  Congress,  he  became  acquainted  with 


23 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


24 

Hamilton  and  Jay  and  with  them  was  part  of 
the  group  seeking  to  strengthen  ihe  national 
government.  He  was  active  in  promoting  the 
developments  that  led  to  the  Constitutional 
Convention  and,  in  the  months  immediately 
preceding  the  meeting,  devoted  his  efforts  to 
preparing  for  the  establishment  of  a  new  gov¬ 
ernment.  He  wrote  an  essay  on  the  “V  ices 
of  the  Political  System  of  the  United  States/* 
made  an extensivestudvof  ancientand  modern 
confederacies,  and  drew  up  an  outline  for  a 
new  system  of  government.  This  was  the  basis 
for  the  Virginia  plan  which  at  Philadelphia 
led  to  the  formation  of  the  Constitution.  \V  ith 
james  W  ilson  of  Pennsylvania,  he  shared  the 
honors  of  being  most  responsible  for  its  final 
form.  September  1787  found  him  in  New  York 
serving  for  the  second  time  as  the  \  irginia 
Delegate  to  the  Continental  Congress. 

John  Jay.  at  the  time  the  Federalist  ap¬ 
peared.  enjoyed  the  greatest  prestige  of  any  of 
the  three  men.  By  some  he  was  considered  as 
second  only  to  Washington  in  service  to  his 
country.  The  oldest  of  the  three,  he  came  from 
a  well-to-do  New  York  merchant  family  of 
Huguenot  extraction.  He  served  on  the  Con¬ 
tinental  Congress  from  its  inception  in  1774 
and  was  later  its  president.  In  his  own  state  he 
took  a  leading  part  in  the  Re\  olutionary  politi¬ 
cal  developments.  He  was  the  author  of  the 
first  New  York  Constitution  and, after  itsestab 
lishmcnt,  its  first  Chief  Justice.  His  greatest 
fame  at  the  time,  however,  came  to  him  as  a 
result  of  his  role  as  a  diplomat.  His  first  ven¬ 
ture  into  European  diplomacy  was  to  obtain 
a  treatv  with  Spain.  T  hat  proving  a  failure, 
he  was  sent  011  to  Paris  to  act  with  John  \dams 
and  Franklin  in  negotiating  the  terms  of  peace 
with  Circa t  Britain.  Described  by  Adams  as 
“the  Washington  of  the  negotiations,”  he  was 
instrumental  in  obtaining  recognition  of  the 
independent  eof  the  United  States  which  ended 
the  Revolutionary  Whir.  He  was  rewarded  for 
Ins  role  bv being  made theSccietai y  of  foreign 
Allans  for  the  Continental  Congress,  a  post  he 
continued  to  fill  until  Jefferson  took  over  as 
Secretary  of  State  under  the  new  government. 
Because  ol  his  strongly  national  views,  he  was 
tinned  down  is  a  delegate  to  the  Constitu 
tinii.il  Convention. 

Ml  tin ee  I  edrr n list  collaborators,  in  addi 
non  to  theii  wide  practical  experience,  were 
men  ol  high  intellectual  ciilmre,  along  very 
similar  lines.  Fad)  began  his  schooling  under 
a  Christian  minister  and  completed  it  with  a 
college  education.  1  lamilton  and  Jay  attended 


King's  College  (now  Columbia),  Madison  the 
College  of  New  Jersey  (now  Princeton).  They 
followed  the  standard  curriculum  of  the  time: 
the  liberal  arts  program  divided  between  the 
trivium  and  quadrivium  and  based  on  the  an¬ 
cient  classics  with  considerable  practice  in 
scholastic  disputation.  The  whole  program  was 
infused  with  religion  and  politics  which  were 
the  primary  ends  of  the  program.  The  em¬ 
phasis  upon  religion  and  politics  is  illustrated 
by  the  commencement  exercises  held  at  New 
Jersey  while  Madison  was  there  in  1 770.  Among 
the  many  disputations  there  was  a  Latin  syl¬ 
logistic  debateonthe  thesis:  “Omnes  Homines, 
Jure  Nature,  liberi  sunt”  (all  men  by  the  law 
of  nature  are  free),  and  another  in  English  on 
the  topic:  “The  Different  Religious  Professions 
in  any  State  if  Maintained  in  their  Liberty 
Serve  it  by  Supplying  the  Place  of  a  Censor 
Morum.”  Both  Madison  and  Jay  after  com¬ 
pleting  their  undergraduate  course  went  on 
to  do  graduate  work,  thus  beingamong  the  first 
graduate  students  in  America.  Jay  received  his 
master's  degree  in  1 7^7  a  discourse  on 

“The  Usefulness  of  the  Passions”  and  a  debate 
on  “Whether  a  man  ought  to  engage  in  War 
without  being  persuaded  of  the  Justness  ol  his 
Cause.”  Madison  remained  an  extra  year  at 
New  Jersey,  reading  particularly  in  theology 
and  Hebrew.  Hamilton's  college  work  was  in¬ 
terrupted  by  the  war,  but  he  continued  after 
the  war  to  perfect  himself  in  law,  as  had  his 
other  two  collaborators.  Hamilton,  unlike 
them,  depended  upon  the  practice  of  law  for 
his  living,  and,  while  not  holding  down  a  po¬ 
litical  office,  earned  the  reputation  of  being 
the  most  brilliant  lawyer  in  New  \ork.  Madi¬ 
son  never  practised  law.  nor  did  Jay  except 
for  the  few  years  before  lie  embarked  upon  his 
public  life. 

The  actual  writing  of  the  Federalist  and  the 
authorship  of  the  particulai  papers  have  been 
a  matter  of  long  and  sometimes  bitter  dispute. 
They  were  done  in  a  great  hurry, and,  as  Madi 
son  later  remarked,  they  often  went  directly 
from  the  writer  to  the  printer  without  being 
seen  by  the  other  collaborators.  One  reason 
that  Jay  did  so  lew  is  thought  to  be  that  he  suf¬ 
fered  from  a  serious  illncsssoon after  the  series 
was  begun.  Hamilton  was  the  busiest  of  the 
three  men  at  the  time.  He  was  carrying  011  a 
full  legal  practice,  attending  the  sessions  of  the 
stale  supreme  court,  and  campaigning  for 
election  to  the  Continental  Congress.  Madison 
was  (ailed  home  before  the  papers  were  com¬ 
pleted  to  take  part  in  the  battle  lor  ratification 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


in  Virginia,  which  looked  as  bad  for  the  Fed¬ 
eralist  cause  as  it  did  in  New  York. 

The  intellectual  defense  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  was  put  to  practical  use  by  the  three  col¬ 
laborators  in  their  state  ratifying  conventions. 
Madison  led  the  Federalist  forces  in  Virginia, 
and  Hamilton  and  Jay  in  New  York.  Against 
what  seemed  hopeless  odds,  they  won  their 
fight,  but  not,  in  fact,  until  the  new  Constitu¬ 
tion  had  already  been  ratified  by  the  required 
nine  states.  Virginia  was  the  tenth  state  to 
ratify  and  New  York  the  eleventh,  a  month 
later. 

The  partnership  which  resulted  in  the  Fed¬ 
eralist  was  dissolved  in  the  efforts  to  translate 
the  Constitution  from  a  paper  document  into 
a  functioning  government.  Although  all  three 
men  had  expressed  dissatisfaction  with  the 
Constitution  as  not  providing  a  sufficiently 
strong  national  government,  Madison  parted 
company  with  Hamilton  and  Jay  over  the 
measures  which  they  advocated  for  secur¬ 
ing  the  supremacy  of  the  national  govern¬ 
ment. 

Hamilton,  as  the  first  Secretary  of  the  Treas¬ 
ury,  had  the  task  of  placing  the  new  govern¬ 
ment  on  a  sound  financial  basis.  He  initiated 
this  work  by  a  series  of  three  reports  submitted 
to  Congress.  The  first,  on  public  credit,  called 
for  the  full  assumption  by  the  national  gov¬ 
ernment  of  the  war  debts  of  the  old  Confedera¬ 
tion  and  the  states.  The  second  provided  for 
the  establishment  of  a  national  bank.  The 
third,  on  manufactures,  called  for  government 
protection  of  manufactures  by  means  of  duties. 
Although  this  last  proposal  was  defeated  by 
Congress,  it  has  been  called  the  “first  great  re¬ 
volt  from  Adam  Smith.” 

Madison,  elected  a  member  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  became  the  leader  of  the 
opposition  in  Congress  against  Hamilton’s 
proposals.  He  led  the  move  for  a  Bill  of  Rights, 
the  lack  of  which  had  been  one  of  the  main 
issues  in  the  fight  for  ratification.  With  his 
friend,  Jefferson,  who  had  been  appointed  the 
first  Secretary  of  State,  he  advised  the  President 
that  Hamilton’s  measures  could  not  be  recon¬ 
ciled  with  the  Constitution.  Difference  over 
the  interpretation  of  the  Constitution  was  in¬ 
tensified  by  the  conflict  over  foreign  affairs 
that  arose  with  the  outbreak  of  war  between 
England  and  Revolutionary  France.  Hamilton, 
in  a  series  of  letters  published  in  the  papers 
under  the  signature  of  Pacificus,  defended 
England  and  the  American  policy  of  neutral¬ 
ity.  Madison,  at  the  instigation  of  Jefferson, 


countered  with  a  series  of  letters  signed 
Helvidius. 

Jay’s  activities  during  the  opening  years 
of  the  new  government  further  embittered  the 
relations  of  the  former  collaborators.  As  the 
first  Chief  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court,  he 
passed  down  decisions  strongly  supporting 
Hamilton’s  view  of  the  national  government. 
The  decision  in  his  greatest  case,  Chisolm  vs. 
Georgia ,  caused  a  revolt  in  Congress  over  its 
emphasis  on  the  supremacy  of  the  national 
government  over  that  of  the  states.  This  re¬ 
sulted  in  the  passing  of  the  eleventh  amend¬ 
ment  to  the  Constitution,  asserting  the  sover¬ 
eign  irresponsibility  of  the  states  as  regards 
private  suits  by  citizens  of  another  state.  How¬ 
ever,  the  greatest  cause  of  division  proved  to 
be  the  treaty  he  negotiated  with  England 
which  has  since  gone  under  his  name.  It  was 
so  bitterly  attacked  by  the  Jefferson  and  Madi¬ 
son  groups,  known  as  “Republicans,”  that  in 
many  places  Jay  was  burnt  in  effigy.  In  defense 
of  the  treaty,  Hamilton  wrote  his  Camillus 
letters.  Although  Jefferson  again  appealed  to 
Madison  as  theonlyoneable  tocopewith  Ham¬ 
ilton  in  debate,  Madison  did  not  respond. 

The  three  Federalist  authors,  although  di¬ 
vided  by  partisan  strife,  were  brought  to¬ 
gether  once  again  in  Washington’s  Farewell 
Address.  Washington  appealed  to  all  three  for 
advice,  and  their  suggestions,  with  most  from 
Hamilton,  went  into  the  final  draft  of  the 
message. 

Hamilton’s  last  years  were  rent  by  political 
strife.  After  retiring  to  the  private  practice  of 
law,  he  continued  to  be  the  active  leader  of 
the  Federalist  Party.  His  influence  was  so  great 
during  the  Adams  administration  that  Cab¬ 
inet  members  often  consulted  with  him  about 
official  policy,  even  behind  the  President’s 
back.  This  led  to  a  break  between  the  two  men. 
Hamilton  made  the  break  irreparable  by  writ¬ 
ing  a  pamphlet  attacking  Adams,  which  split 
the  Federalist  Party  and  led  to  its  disintegra¬ 
tion.  His  partisan  battles  reached  a  climax 
when  he  was  challenged  to  a  duel  by  Aaron 
Burr,  then  Vice  President,  with  whom  Hamil¬ 
ton  had  long  been  in  political  competition  in 
the  municipal,  state,  and  national  field. 
Hamilton  died  as  a  result  of  a  shot  received 
from  Burr’s  pistol. 

Jay,  following  the  negotiation  of  the  treaty 
with  England,  served  two  terms  as  governor  of 
New  York.  His  administration  is  noted  among 
other  things  for  the  lawcommandingthe  grad 
ual  abolition  of  slavery  in  New  York.  (All 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


three  men  looked  upon  slavery  as  a  tragedy 
for  America.  Jay  and  Hamilton  were  acti\e 
in  the  New  York  Society  for  the  Manumission 
of  Slaves,  while  Madison  took  a  leading  part 
in  the  movement  for  the  colonization  of 
negroes.)  Jay,  after  completing  his  terms  as 
governor,  retired  from  public  life  to  his  farm 
in  Bedford.  He  was  often  consulted  for  the 
early  history  of  the  Republic;  his  occasional 
reminiscences  among  other  things,  furnished 
Cooper  with  the  material  for  his  novel,  The 
Spy.  Known  for  his  knowledge  of  the  Bible, 
he  was  often  asked  by  ministers  for  his  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  prophecies  and  for  the  last 
years  of  his  life  was  president  of  the  American 
Bible  Society. 

Madison  was  Jefferson’s  Secretary  of  State 
for  two  terms  and,  as  the  chosen  successor,  fol¬ 
lowed  him  in  the  Presidency.  He  served  for  two 


terms  and  then,  in  1817,  retired  to  his  home 
in  Montpelier.  His  last  years  were  spent  in 
agricultural  and  literary  pursuits.  With  Jef¬ 
ferson  he  gave  much  of  his  attention  to  the 
University  of  Virginia.  At  Jefferson’s  request, 
for  instance,  he  prepared  a  list  of  theological 
works  for  the  library,  including,  in  addition  to 
the  Reformation  theologians,  the  great  Scho¬ 
lastics,  Aquinas, Duns  Scotus,  Bellarmine.  One 
of  their  last  acts  was  to  prescribe  the  curriculum 
in  political  philosophy  with  Locke  and  Sidney 
for  political  theory  and  the  Federalist  for  the 
Constitution.  He  devoted  much  time  to  the 
preparation  of  his  papers  on  Constitutional 
questions  and  to  the  editing  of  his  monu¬ 
mental  series  of  notes  on  the  debates  at  the 
Federal  Convention,  the  publication  of  which 
confirmed  his  fame  as  “Father  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion.” 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note  23 

Number  page 

1.  Introductory:  the  union  and  its  new 

CONSTITUTION  2g 

2.  Concerning  dangers  from  foreign 

FORCE  AND  INFLUENCE  31 

3.  Foreign  dangers,  Continued  33 

4.  Foreign  dangers,  Continued  35 

5.  Foreign  dangers,  Continued  37 

6.  Concerning  dangers  from  war  be¬ 

tween  the  states  38 

7.  Dangers  from  within,  Continued  41 

8.  The  consequences  of  hostilities  be¬ 

tween  the  states  44 

9.  The  union  as  a  safeguard  againsF 

domestic  faction  and  insurrection  47 

10.  The  union  as  a  safeguard,  Con  tinued  49 


11.  The  utility  of  the  union  in  respect 
to  commercial  relations  and  a 


navy  53 

12.  The  utility  of  the  union  in  respect 

TO  REVENUE  56 

13.  Advantage  of  the  union  in  respect 

to  economy  in  government  59 

14.  Objections  to  the  proposed  consti¬ 

tution  from  extent  of  territory 

ANSWERED  60 

15.  The  insufficiency  of  the  present 

CONFEDERATION  TO  PRESERVE  THE 
UNION  62 

16.  The  insufficiency  of  the  present 

confederation,  Continued  66 

17.  The  insufficiency  of  the  present 

confederation,  Continued  69 

18.  The  insufficiency  of  the  present 

confederation,  Continued  71 

19.  The  insufficiency  of  the  present 

confederation,  Continued  73 

20.  The  insufficiency  of  the  present 

confederation,  Continued  76 

2 1 .  Other  defects  of  the  present  confed¬ 

eration  78 

22.  Other  defects,  Continued  80 

23.  The  necessity  of  a  government  as 

energetic  as  the  one  proposed  to 
the  preservation  of  the  union  85 


Number  page 


24.  The  powers  necessary  to  the  com¬ 

mon  defence  further  considered  87 

25.  Powers  necessary  to  the  common  de¬ 

fence,  Continued  89 

26.  The  idea  of  restraining  the  legisla¬ 

tive  authority  in  regard  to  the 

COMMON  DEFENCE  CONSIDERED  92 

27.  Restraining  the  legislative  author¬ 

ity,  Continued  94 

28.  Restraining  the  legislative  author¬ 

ity,  Continued  96 

29.  Concerning  the  militia  98 

30.  Concerning  the  general  power  of 

TAXATION  IOI 

31.  General  power  of  taxation, 

Continued  103 

32.  General  power  of  taxation, 

Continued  105 

33.  General  power  of  taxation. 

Continued  107 

34.  General  power  of  taxation. 

Continued  109 

35.  General  power  of  taxation, 

Continued  112 

36.  General  power  of  taxation. 

Continued  114 

37.  Concerning  the  difficulties  of  the 

CONVENTION  IN  DEVISING  A  PROPER 
FORM  OF  GOVERNMENT  117 

38.  Difficulties  in  devising  a  proper 

form  of  government,  Continued, 

AND  THE  INCOHERENCE  OF  THE  OBJEC¬ 
TIONS  TO  THE  NEW  PLAN  EXPOSED  I  2  1 

39.  The  conformity  of  the  plan  to  re¬ 

publican  principles  125 

40.  The  powers  of  the  convention  to 

FORM  A  MIXED  GOVERNMENT  EX¬ 
AMINED  AND  SUSTAINED  1  28 

41.  General  view  of  the  powers  con¬ 

ferred  by  the  constitution  132 

42.  The  powers  conferred  by  the  con¬ 

stitution  further  considered  1 36 

43.  The  powers  conferred  by  the  con¬ 

stitution,  Continued  139 


27 


CO  XT  EX  TS 


X  umber  page 

44.  Restrictions  on  the  authority  of 

THE  SEVERAL  STATES  144 

4  5.  The  alleged  danger  from  the  powers 
or  the  union  to  the  state  govern¬ 
ment  CON  SI  Dl- RED  147 

46.  The  influence  of  the  state  and  fed¬ 

eral  GOVERNMENTS  COMPARED  1  50 

47.  The  particular  structi  re  oi  the 

NEW  GOVERNMENT  AND  THE  DISTRIBU¬ 
TION  OF  POWER  AMONG  ITS  DIFFERENT 
PARTS  153 

48.  These  departments  should  not  be  so 

FAR  SEPARATED  AS  TO  HAVE  NO  CON¬ 
STITUTIONAL  CONTROL  ON  I R  EACH 
OTHER  156 

49.  M  El  HOD  OF  GUARDING  AGAINST  THE  EN- 

CROACHMl  NTS  OF  ANY  ONE  DEPART¬ 
MENT  OF  GOVERNMENT  BY  APPEAL¬ 
ING  TO  Tin  PEOPLE  THROUGH  A  CON¬ 
VENE  ION  159 

50.  Periodical  appeals  to  ihe  people 

CONSIDERED  l6l 

51.  The  STRUCTURE  OF  THE.  GOVERNMENT 

MUST  FURNISH  THE  PROPER  CHECKS 
AND  BALANCES  BETWEEN  THE  DIFFER¬ 


ENT  DEPARTMENTS  l  6  2 

52.  Till  1IOISI  OI  REPRESENTATIVES  165 

53.  1  I  OUSE  OF  RI  PRESENTA  I  IVES, 

Continued  167 

5.}.  I  ME  APPORTIONMENT  OI  MEMBERS 

AMONG  III!  STA  1  IS  I  70 

55.  TlIK  TOTAL  NUMBFR  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF 

RI  PR  I  SI  VIA  IT  \  IS  172 

56.  The  TOTAL  NUMBFR  OF  1  111  HOUSE  OF 

represent  mini  s,  Continued  174 

57.  The  ali.f ged  tendency  of  the  new 


PI  AN  TO  El  F  VA  I  E  1  TIE  I  EW  AT  Till  EX¬ 
PENSE  OI  THE  MANY  CONSIDERED  IN 
CONN  I  CHON  Will!  RI  PRESF  NT  A  1  ION  1  76 
58.  ObJICEION  THAT  THE  NUMBFR  OF  MEM 
Bl  RS  WILL  NOT  BE  AUGMENT  ED  AS  THE 
PROGRESS  OI  POPULATION  DEMANDS, 

COS  SI  DF  RID  179 

r,9_  CilN(  I  RMV.  IHE  POWER  OF  CONGRESS 
IO  RI  GI  LATE  Till  ELM  I  ION  OI  Ml  M 
Bl  RS  182 


Number  page 

60.  The  power  oi  congress.  Continued  184 

61.  The  power  of  congress.  Continued  187 

62.  The  senate  188 

63.  The  senate.  Continued  191 

64.  The  powers  of  the  senate  195 

65 .  T II E  PO W FR S  O F  THE  SENATE,  Cofltifl  Ued  1  98 

66.  Objections  to  the  power  of  the  sen¬ 

ate  TO  SIT  as  a  COURT  FOR  IMPEACH¬ 
MENTS  FURTHER  CONSIDERED  200 

67.  The  executive  department  203 

68.  The  mode  or  electing  the  president  205 

69.  The  REAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  EXEC¬ 

UTIVE  207 

70.  The  EXECUTIVE  DEPARTMENT  further 

CONSIDERED  2  10 

71.  Thf  duration  in  office  of  thf  exec- 

UTINE  2  14 

72.  The  duration  in  office  of  the  exec¬ 

utive,  Continued ,  and  rf- 

FLIGIBILITY  OF  THE  EXECUTIVE  CON¬ 
SIDERED  2l6 

73.  The  provision  for  the  support  of  the 

EX  I. Cl  TIN  F,  AND  1  HE  VETO  POWER  2  18 

74.  THE  COMMAND  OF  THE  MILITARY  AND 

NAVAL  FORCES,  AND  THE  PARDONING 
POWER  OI  THE  EXECUTIVE  22  1 

75.  The  treaty-making  power  of  the 

EXECUTIVE  222 

76.  The  appointing  power  of  the  exec¬ 

utive  225 

77.  Th e  a p po i NT  1  n G  po w HR ,  C o? it i nued 

AND  OTHER  POWERS  OF  THE  EXEC¬ 
UTIVE,  CONSIDERED  227 

78.  The  JUDICIARY  DEPARTMENT  229 

79.  Thi:  judiciary.  Continued  233 

8().  Till  POWERS  OI  Till  JUDICIARY  234 

81.  I*i ie  judiciary.  Continued,  and  the 

DISTRIBUTION  OF  T  HE  JUDICIAL  AU¬ 
THOR!  IN  237 

82.  IT  1  k  judiciary,  Continued  242 

83.  T u f  judiciary ,  Continued  in  rela¬ 

tion  TO  TRIAL  BY  JURY  244 

84.  CERTAIN  GENERAL  AND  MISCELLANEOUS 

OBJECTIONS  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION 
CONSIDERED  AND  ANSWERED  2$1 

8  Tj.  r.OM  I  l  DING  RI  MARKS  256 


THE  FEDERALIST 


Mum  her  i 

[HAMILTON] 

After  an  unequivocal  experience  of  the  in¬ 
efficiency  of  the  subsisting  federal  govern¬ 
ment,  you  are  called  upon  to  deliberate  on  a 
new  Constitution  for  the  United  States  of 
America.  The  subject  speaks  its  own  import¬ 
ance;  comprehending  in  its  consequences 
nothing  less  than  the  existence  of  theUNION, 
the  safety  and  welfare  of  the  parts  of  which 
it  is  composed,  the  fate  of  an  empire  in  many 
respects  the  most  interesting  in  the  world.  It 
has  been  frequently  remarked  that  it  seems  to 
have  been  reserved  to  the  people  of  this  coun¬ 
try,  by  their  conduct  and  example,  to  decide 
the  important  question,  whether  societies  of 
men  are  really  capable  or  not  of  establishing 
good  government  from  reflection  and  choice, 
or  whether  they  are  forever  destined  to  de¬ 
pend  for  their  political  constitutions  on  acci¬ 
dent  and  force.  If  there  be  any  truth  in  the 
remark,  the  crisis  at  which  we  are  arrived  may 
with  propriety  be  regarded  as  the  era  in  which 
that  decision  is  to  be  made;  and  a  wrong  elec¬ 
tion  of  the  part  we  shall  act  may,  in  this  view, 
deserve  to  be  considered  as  the  general  mis¬ 
fortune  of  mankind. 

This  idea  will  add  the  inducements  of  phi¬ 
lanthropy  to  those  of  patriotism,  to  heighten 
the  solicitude  which  all  considerate  and  good 
men  must  feel  for  the  event.  Happy  will  it  be 
if  our  choice  should  be  directed  by  a  judicious 
estimate  of  our  true  interests,  unperplexed 
and  unbiased  by  considerations  not  connected 
with  the  public  good.  But  this  is  a  thing  more 
ardently  to  be  wished  than  seriously  to  be  ex¬ 
pected.  The  plan  offered  to  our  deliberations 
affects  too  many  particular  interests,  innovates 
upon  too  many  local  institutions,  not  to  in¬ 
volve  in  its  discussion  a  variety  of  objects  for¬ 
eign  to  its  merits,  and  of  views,  passions  and 
prejudices  little  favourable  to  the  discovery 
of  truth. 


Among  the  most  formidable  of  the  obstacles 
which  the  new  Constitution  will  have  to  en¬ 
counter  may  readily  be  distinguished  the  ob¬ 
vious  interest  of  a  certain  class  of  men  in 
every  State  to  resist  all  changes  which  may  haz¬ 
ard  a  diminution  of  the  power,  emolument, 
and  consequence  of  the  offices  they  hold  under 
the  State  establishments;  and  the  perverted 
ambition  of  another  class  of  men,  who  will 
either  hope  to  aggrandise  themselves  by  the 
confusions  of  their  country,  or  will  flatter 
themselves  with  fairer  prospects  of  elevation 
from  the  subdivision  of  the  empire  into  sev¬ 
eral  partial  confederacies  than  from  its  union 
under  one  government. 

It  is  not,  however,  my  design  to  dwell  upon 
observations  of  this  nature.  I  am  well  aware 
that  it  would  be  disingenuous  to  resolve  in¬ 
discriminately  the  opposition  of  any  set  of 
men  (merely  because  their  situations  might 
subject  them  to  suspicion)  into  interested  or 
ambitious  views.  Candour  will  oblige  us  to  ad¬ 
mit  that  even  such  men  may  be  actuated  by 
upright  intentions;  and  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  much  of  the  opposition  which  has  made 
its  appearance,  or  may  hereafter  make  its  ap¬ 
pearance,  will  spring  from  sources,  blameless 
at  least,  if  not  respectable— the  honest  errors 
of  minds  led  astray  by  preconceived  jealousies 
and  fears.  So  numerous  indeed  and  so  power¬ 
ful  are  the  causes  which  serve  to  give  a  false 
bias  to  the  judgment,  that  we,  upon  many 
occasions,  see  wise  and  good  men  on  the 
wrong  as  well  as  on  the  right  side  of  questions 
of  the  first  magnitude  to  society.  This  circum¬ 
stance,  if  duly  attended  to,  would  furnish  a 
lesson  of  moderation  to  those  who  are  ever  so 
much  persuaded  of  their  being  in  the  right  in 
any  controversy.  And  a  further  reason  for 
caution,  in  this  respect,  might  be  drawn  from 
the  reflection  that  we  are  not  always  sure  that 
those  who  advocate  the  truth  are  influenced 
by  purer  principles  than  their  antagonists. 
Ambition,  avarice,  personal  animosity,  party 


29 


THE  FEDERALIST 


opposition,  and  many  other  motives  not  more 
laudable  than  these,  are  apt  to  operate  as  well 
upon  those  who  support  as  those  who  oppose 
the  right  side  of  a  question.  Were  there  not 
even  these  inducements  to  moderation,  noth¬ 
ing  could  be  more  ill-judged  than  that  intol¬ 
erant  spirit  which  has,  at  all  times,  character¬ 
ised  political  parties.  For  in  politics,  as  in 
religion,  it  is  equally  absurd  to  aim  at  making 
proselytes  by  fire  and  sword.  Heresies  in  either 
can  rarely  be  cured  by  persecution. 

And  yet.  however  just  these  sentiments  will 
be  allowed  to  be.  we  have  already  sufficient  in¬ 
dications  that  it  will  happen  in  this  as  in  all 
former  cases  ol  great  national  discussion.  A 
torrent  of  angry  and  malignant  passions  will 
be  let  loose.  To  judge  from  the  conduct  of  the 
opposite  parties,  we  shall  be  led  to  conclude 
that  they  will  mutually  hope  to  evince  the 
justness  of  their  opinions,  and  to  increase  the 
number  of  their  converts  by  the  loudness  of 
their  declamations  and  the  bitterness  of  their 
invectives.  An  enlightened  zeal  for  the  energy 
and  efficiency  of  government  will  be  stigma¬ 
tised  as  the  offspring  of  a  temper  fond  of  des¬ 
potic  power  and  hostile  to  the  principles  of 
liberty.  An  over-scrupulous  jealousy  of  danger 
to  the  rights  of  the  people,  which  is  more  com¬ 
monly  the  fault  of  the  head  than  of  the  heart, 
will  be  represented  as  mere  pretence  and  arti 
fice,  the  stale  bait  for  popularity  at  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  the  public  good.  It  will  be  forgotten, 
on  the  one  hand,  that  jealousy  is  the  usual 
concomitant  of  love,  and  that  the  noble  en¬ 
thusiasm  of  liberty  is  apt  to  be  infected  with  a 
spirit  of  narrow  and  illiberal  distrust.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  will  be  equally  forgotten  that 
the  vigour  ol  government  is  essential  to  the 
security  of  liberty;  that,  in  the  contemplation 
of  a  sound  and  well-informed  judgment,  their 
interest  can  never  be  separated;  and  that  a 
dangerous  ambition  more  often  lurks  behind 
the  specious  mask  of  zeal  for  the  rights  of  the 
people  than  under  the  forbidding  appearance 
of  zeal  for  the  firmness  and  efficiency  of  gov 
eminent.  History  will  teach  ns  that  the  former 
has  been  found  a  much  more  certain  road  to 
i lie*  introduction  of  despotism  than  the  latier, 
and  that  of  those  men  who  have  overturned 
the  liberties  of  republics,  the  greatest  number 
base  begun  their  careen  by  paying  an  obse¬ 
quious  court  lo  tin*  people;  cominenc  ing  deni- 
agognes,  and  ending  tyrants. 

In  the  <  ourse  oi  the  prec  eel  ing  observations, 
I  have  had  an  e  ye,  my  fellow  c  iti/ens,  to  put¬ 
ting  you  upon  your  guard  against  all  attempts, 


from  whatever  quarter,  to  influence  your  de¬ 
cision,  in  a  matter  of  the  utmost  moment  to 
your  welfare,  by  any  impressions  other  than 
those  which  may  result  from  the  evidence  of 
truth.  You  will,  no  doubt,  at  the  same  time, 
have  collected  from  the  general  scope  of  them, 
that  they  proceed  from  a  source  not  unfriendly 
to  the  new  Constitution.  Yes,  my  countrymen. 

I  own  to  you  that,  after  having  given  it  an 
attentive  consideration,  1  am  clearly  of  opin¬ 
ion  it  is  your  interest  to  adopt  it.  1  am  con¬ 
vinced  that  this  is  the  safest  course  for  your 
liberty,  your  dignity,  and  your  happiness.  1 
affect  not  reserves  which  I  do  not  feel.  1  will 
not  amuse  you  with  an  appearance  of  delibera¬ 
tion  when  I  have  decided.  1  frankly  acknowl¬ 
edge  to  you  my  convictions,  and  I  will  freely 
lay  before  you  the  reasons  on  which  they  are 
founded.  The  consciousness  of  good  inten¬ 
tions  disdains  ambiguity.  1  shall  not,  however, 
multiply  professions  on  this  head.  My  mo¬ 
tives  must  remain  in  the  depository  of  my  own 
breast.  My  arguments  will  be  open  to  all.  and 
may  be  judged  of  by  all.  They  shall  at  least  be 
offered  in  a  spirit  which  will  not  disgrace  the 
cause  of  truth. 

I  propose,  in  a  series  of  papers,  to  discuss  the 
following  interesting  particulars:— The  utility 
of  the  UNION  to  your  political  prosperity — 
The  insufficiency  of  the  present  Confedera¬ 
tion  to  preserve  that  Union— The  necessity  of 
a  government  at  least  equally  energetic  with 
the  one  proposed ,  to  the  attainment  of  this 
0l)jrct—The  conformity  of  the  proposed  Con¬ 
stitution  to  the  true  principles  of  republican 
government— J ts  analogy  to  your  own  State 
constitution— and  lastly,  The  additional  se¬ 
curity  which  its  adoption  will  afford  to  the 
preservation  of  that  species  of  government ,  to 
liberty,  and  to  property. 

In  the  progress  of  this  discussion  I  shall  en¬ 
deavour  to  give  a  satisfactory  answer  to  all  the 
objections  which  shall  have  made  their  ap¬ 
pearance,  that  may  seem  to  have  any  claim  to 
your  attention. 

It  may  perhaps  be  thought  superfluous  to 
offer  arguments  to  prove  the  utility  of  the 
UNION  a  point,  no  doubt,  deeply  engraved 
on  the  hearts  of  the  great  body  of  the  people 
in  every  State,  and  one  which,  it  may  be  imag¬ 
ined.  has  no  adversaries.  Hut  the  fact  is.  that 
we  already  hear  it  whispered  in  the*  private 
circles  of  those  who  oppose  the  new  Constitu 
t ion ,  that  the  thirteen  States  arc  of  too  great 
extent  for  any  general  system,  and  that  we 
must  of  necessity  resort  to  separate  confedera- 


NUMBER  2  31 


cies  of  distinct  portions  of  the  whole.1  This 
doctrine  will,  in  all  probability,  be  gradually 
propagated,  till  it  has  votaries  enough  to 
countenance  an  open  avowal  of  it.  For  noth¬ 
ing  can  be  more  evident,  to  those  who  are 
able  to  take  an  enlarged  view  of  the  subject, 
than  the  alternative  of  an  adoption  of  the 
new  Constitution  or  a  dismemberment  of  the 
Union.  It  will  therefore  be  of  use  to  begin  by 
examining  the  advantages  of  that  Union,  the 
certain  evils,  and  the  probable  dangers,  to 
which  every  State  will  be  exposed  from  its  dis¬ 
solution.  This  shall  accordingly  constitute  the 
subject  of  my  next  address.  Publius 

Number  2 
Day] 

When  the  people  of  America  reflect  that  they 
are  now  called  upon  to  decide  a  question, 
which,  in  its  consequences,  must  prove  one  of 
the  most  important  that  ever  engaged  their 
attention,  the  propriety  of  their  taking  a  very 
comprehensive,  as  well  as  a  very  serious,  view 
of  it,  will  be  evident. 

Nothing  is  more  certain  than  the  indispen¬ 
sable  necessity  of  government,  and  it  is  equally 
undeniable,  that  whenever  and  however  it  is 
instituted,  the  people  must  cede  to  it  some  of 
their  natural  rights,  in  order  to  vest  it  with 
requisite  powers.  It  is  well  worthy  of  consid¬ 
eration,  therefore,  whether  it  would  conduce 
more  to  the  interest  of  the  people  of  America 
that  they  should,  to  all  general  purposes,  be 
one  nation,  under  one  federal  government,  or 
that  they  should  divide  themselves  into  sepa¬ 
rate  confederacies,  and  give  to  the  head  of 
each  the  same  kind  of  powers  which  they  are 
advised  to  place  in  one  national  government. 

It  has  until  lately  been  a  received  and  un¬ 
contradicted  opinion,  that  the  prosperity  of 
the  people  of  America  depended  on  their 
continuing  firmly  united,  and  the  wishes,  pray¬ 
ers,  and  efforts  of  our  best  and  wisest  citizens 
have  been  constantly  directed  to  that  object. 
But  politicians  now  appear,  who  insist  that 
this  opinion  is  erroneous,  and  that  instead  of 
looking  for  safety  and  happiness  in  union,  we 
ought  to  seek  it  in  a  division  of  the  States  into 
distinct  confederacies  or  sovereignties.  How¬ 
ever  extraordinary  this  new  doctrine  may  ap¬ 
pear,  it  nevertheless  has  its  advocates;  and  cer- 

1  The  same  idea,  tracing  the  arguments  to  their 
consequences,  is  held  out  in  several  of  the  late 
publications  against  the  new  Constitution.— 
Publius 


tain  characters  who  were  much  opposed  to  it 
formerly,  are  at  present  of  the  number.  What¬ 
ever  may  be  the  arguments  or  inducements 
which  have  wrought  this  change  in  the  senti¬ 
ments  and  declarations  of  these  gentlemen,  it 
certainly  would  not  be  wise  in  the  people  at 
large  to  adopt  these  new  political  tenets  with¬ 
out  being  fully  convinced  that  they  are  founded 
in  truth  and  sound  policy. 

It  has  often  given  me  pleasure  to  observe, 
that  independent  America  was  not  composed 
of  detached  and  distant  territories,  but  that 
one  connected,  fertile,  wide-spreading  coun¬ 
try  was  the  portion  of  our  western  sons  of  lib¬ 
erty.  Providence  has  in  a  particular  manner 
blessed  it  with  a  variety  of  soils  and  produc¬ 
tions,  and  watered  it  with  innumerable 
streams,  for  the  delight  and  accommodation 
of  its  inhabitants.  A  succession  of  navigable 
waters  forms  a  kind  of  chain  round  its  borders, 
as  if  to  bind  it  together;  while  the  most  noble 
rivers  in  the  world,  running  at  convenient  dis¬ 
tances,  present  them  with  highways  for  the 
easy  communication  of  friendly  aids,  and  the 
mutual  transportation  and  exchange  of  their 
various  commodities. 

With  equal  pleasure  I  have  as  often  taken 
notice,  that  Providence  has  been  pleased  to 
give  this  one  connected  country  to  one  united 
people— a  people  descended  from  the  same  an¬ 
cestors,  speaking  the  same  language,  profes¬ 
sing  the  same  religion,  attached  to  the  same 
principles  of  government,  very  similar  in  their 
manners  and  customs,  and  who,  by  their  joint 
counsels,  arms,  and  efforts,  fighting  side  by  side 
throughout  a  long  and  bloody  war,  have  nobly 
established  general  liberty  and  independence. 

This  country  and  this  people  seem  to  have 
been  made  for  each  other,  and  it  appears  as 
if  it  was  the  design  of  Providence,  that  an  in¬ 
heritance  so  proper  and  convenient  for  a  band 
of  brethren,  united  to  each  other  by  the 
strongest  ties,  should  never  be  split  into  a 
number  of  unsocial,  jealous,  and  alien  sov¬ 
ereignties. 

Similar  sentiments  have  hitherto  prevailed 
among  all  orders  and  denominations  of  men 
among  us.  To  all  general  purposes  we  have 
uniformly  been  one  people;  each  individual 
citizen  everywhere  enjoying  the  same  national 
rights,  privileges,  and  protection.  As  a  nation 
we  have  made  peace  and  war;  as  a  nation  we 
have  vanquished  our  common  enemies;  as  a 
nation  we  have  formed  alliances,  and  made 
treaties,  and  entered  into  various  compacts 
and  conventions  with  foreign  states. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


A  strong  sense  of  the  value  and  blessings  of 
union  induced  the  people,  at  a  very  early 
period,  to  institute  a  federal  government  to 
preserve  and  perpetuate  it.  T  hey  formed  it 
almost  as  soon  as  they  had  a  political  exist¬ 
ence:  nay.  at  a  time  when  their  habitations 
were  in  flames,  when  many  of  their  citizens 
were  bleeding,  and  when  the  progress  of  hos¬ 
tility  and  desolation  left  little  room  for  those 
calm  and  mature  inquiries  and  reflections 
which  must  ever  precede  the  formation  of  a 
wise  and  well-balanced  government  for  a  free 
people.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  a 
government  instituted  in  times  so  inauspi¬ 
cious.  should  on  experiment  be  found  greatly 
deficient  and  inadequate  to  the  purpose  it 
was  intended  to  answer. 

This  intelligent  people  perceived  and  re¬ 
gretted  these  defects.  Still  continuing  no  less 
attached  to  union  than  enamoured  of  liberty, 
they  observed  the  danger  which  immediately 
threatened  the  former  and  more  remotely  the 
latter;  and  being  persuaded  that  ample  se¬ 
nility  for  both  could  only  be  found  in  a  na¬ 
tional  government  more  wisely  framed,  they, 
as  with  one  voice,  convened  the  late  conven¬ 
tion  at  Philadelphia,  to  take  that  important 
subject  under  consideration. 

This  convention,  composed  of  men  who  pos¬ 
sessed  the  confidence  of  the  people,  and  many 
of  whom  had  become  highly  distinguished  by 
their  patriotism,  virtue,  and  wisdom,  in  times 
which  tried  the  minds  and  hearts  of  men, 
undertook  the  arduous  task.  In  the  mild  season 
of  peace,  with  minds  unoccupied  by  other 
subjects,  they  passed  many  months  in  cool,  un¬ 
interrupted,  and  daily  consultation;  and  final¬ 
ly,  without  having  been  awed  by  power,  or 
influenced  by  any  passionsexcept  love  for  their 
country,  they  presented  and  recommended  to 
the  people  the  plan  produced  by  their  joint 
and  very  unanimous  councils. 

Admit,  for  so  is  the  fact,  that  this  plan  is 
only  rrcnmmrndcd .  not  imposed,  yet  let  it  be 
remembered  that  it  U neither  recommended  to 
blind  approbation,  nor  to  blind  reprobation; 
bin  to  that  sedate  and  candid  consideration 
which  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  the 
subject  demand,  and  which  it  certainly  ought 
to  receive.  But  this  (as  was  remarked  in  the 
foiegoing  number  of  this  paper)  is  more  to  he 
wished  than  expected,  that  it  may  he  so  con¬ 
sidered  and  examined.  Fxperieuc  eon  a  former 
occasion  teaches  us  not  to  be  loo  sanguine  in 
such  hopes.  It  is  not  yet  forgotten  that  well 
grounded  apprehensions  of  imminent  danger 


induced  the  people  of  America  to  form  the 
memorable  Congress  of  1774.  That  body  rec¬ 
ommended  certain  measures  to  their  constitu¬ 
ents,  and  the  event  proved  their  wisdom;  yet 
it  is  fresh  in  our  memories  how  soon  the  press 
began  to  teem  with  pamphlets  and  weekl\ 
papers  against  those  very  measures.  Not  only 
many  of  the  officers  of  government,  who 
obeyed  the  dictates  of  personal  interest,  but 
others,  from  a  mistaken  estimate  of  conse¬ 
quences,  or  the  undue  influence  of  former  at¬ 
tachments,  or  whose  ambition  aimed  at  ob¬ 
jects  which  did  not  correspond  with  the  public 
good,  were  indefatigable  in  their  efforts  to  per¬ 
suade  the  people  to  reject  the  advice  of  that 
patriotic  Congress.  Many,  indeed,  were  de¬ 
ceived  and  deluded,  but  the  great  majority  of 
the  people  reasoned  and  decided  judiciously; 
and  happy  they  are  in  reflecting  that  they  did 
so. 

They  considered  that  the  Congress  was  com¬ 
posed  of  many  wise  and  experienced  men. 
That,  being  convened  from  different  parts  of 
the  country,  they  brought  with  them  and  com¬ 
municated  to  each  other  a  variety  of  useful 
information.  That,  in  the  course  of  the  time 
they  passed  together  in  inquiring  into  and 
discussing  the  true  interests  of  their  country, 
they  must  have  acquired  very  accurate  knowl¬ 
edge  on  that  head.  That  they  were  individ¬ 
ually  interested  in  the  public  liberty  and  pros¬ 
perity,  and  therefore  that  it  was  not  less  their 
inclination  than  their  duty  to  recommend 
only  such  measures  as,  after  the  most  mature 
deliberation,  they  really  thought  prudent  and 
advisable. 

These  and  similar  considerations  then  in¬ 
duced  the  people  to  rely  greatly  on  the  judg¬ 
ment  and  integrity  of  the  Congress;  and  they 
took  their  advice,  notwithstanding  the  various 
arts  and  endeavours  used  to  deter  them  from 
it.  But  it  the  people  at  large  had  reason  to 
confide  in  the  men  of  that  Congress,  few  of 
whom  had  been  fully  tried  orgerierally  known, 
still  greater  reason  have  they  now  to  respect 
the  judgment  and  advice  ol  the  convention, 
for  it  is  well  known  that  some  of  the  most 
distinguished  members  of  that  Congress,  who 
have  been  since  tried  and  justly  approved  for 
patriotism  and  abilities,  and  who  have  grown 
old  in  acquiring  political  information,  were 
also  members  of  this  convention,  and  earned 
into  it  their  act innulated  knowledge  and  ex 
perience. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  not  only  the 
first,  hut  every  succeeding  Congress,  as  well 


NUMBER  3  33 


as  the  late  convention,  have  invariably  joined 
with  the  people  in  thinking  that  the  pros¬ 
perity  of  America  depended  on  its  Union.  To 
preserve  and  perpetuate  it  was  the  great  ob¬ 
ject  of  the  people  in  forming  that  convention, 
and  it  is  also  the  great  object  of  the  plan 
which  the  convention  has  advised  them  to 
adopt.  With  what  propriety,  therefore,  or  for 
what  good  purposes,  are  attempts  at  this  par¬ 
ticular  period  made  by  some  men  to  depre¬ 
ciate  the  importance  of  the  Union?  Or  why 
is  it  suggested  that  three  or  four  confederacies 
would  be  better  than  one?  I  am  persuaded  in 
my  own  mind  that  the  people  have  always 
thought  right  on  this  subject,  and  that  their 
universal  and  uniform  attachment  to  the  cause 
of  the  Union  rests  on  great  and  weighty  rea¬ 
sons,  which  I  shall  endeavour  to  develop  and 
explain  in  some  ensuing  papers.  They  who 
promote  the  idea  of  substituting  a  number 
of  distinct  confederacies  in  the  room  of  the 
plan  of  the  convention,  seem  clearly  to  fore¬ 
see  that  the  rejection  of  it  would  put  the  con¬ 
tinuance  of  the  Union  in  the  utmost  jeop¬ 
ardy.  That  certainly  would  be  the  case,  and  I 
sincerely  wish  that  it  may  be  as  clearly  fore¬ 
seen  by  every  good  citizen,  that  whenever  the 
dissolution  of  the  Union  arrives,  America 
will  have  reason  to  exclaim,  in  the  words  of 
the  poet:  “FarewellI  a  long  Farewell  to  all 
my  Greatness/’  Publius 

Number  q 

[jay1 

It  is  not  a  new  observation  that  the  people  of 
any  country  (if,  like  the  Americans,  intelligent 
and  well-informed)  seldom  adopt  and  steadily 
persevere  for  many  years  in  an  erroneous  opin¬ 
ion  respecting  their  interests.  That  considera¬ 
tion  naturally  tends  to  create  great  respect  for 
the  high  opinion  which  the  people  of  America 
have  so  long  and  uniformly  entertained  of  the 
importance  of  their  continuing  firmly  united 
under  one  federal  government,  vested  with 
sufficient  powers  for  all  general  and  national 
purposes. 

The  more  attentively  I  consider  and  in¬ 
vestigate  the  reasons  which  appear  to  have 
given  birth  to  this  opinion,  the  more  I  become 
convinced  that  they  are  cogent  and  conclusive. 

Among  the  many  objects  to  which  a  wise 
and  free  people  find  it  necessary  to  direct 
their  attention,  that  of  providing  for  their 
safety  seems  to  be  the  first.  The  safety  of  the 
people  doubtless  has  relation  to  a  great  vari¬ 


ety  of  circumstances  and  considerations,  and 
consequently  affords  great  latitude  to  those 
who  wish  to  define  it  precisely  and  compre¬ 
hensively. 

At  present  I  mean  only  to  consider  it  as  it 
respects  security  for  the  preservation  of  peace 
and  tranquillity,  as  well  as  against  dangers 
from  foreign  arms  and  influence ,  as  from  dan¬ 
gers  of  the  like  kind  arising  from  domestic 
causes.  As  the  former  of  these  comes  first  in 
order,  it  is  proper  it  should  be  the  first  dis¬ 
cussed.  Let  us  therefore  proceed  to  examine 
whether  the  people  are  not  right  in  their 
opinion  that  a  cordial  Union,  under  an  ef¬ 
ficient  national  government,  affords  them  the 
best  security  that  can  be  devised  against  hos¬ 
tilities  from  abroad. 

The  number  of  wars  which  have  happened 
or  will  happen  in  the  world  will  always  be 
found  to  be  in  proportion  to  the  number 
and  weight  of  the  causes,  whether  real  or  pre¬ 
tended,  which  provoke  or  invite  them.  If  this 
remark  be  just,  it  becomes  useful  to  inquire 
whether  so  many  just  causes  of  war  are  likely 
to  be  given  by  United  America  as  by  disunited 
America;  for  if  it  should  turn  out  that  United 
America  will  probably  give  the  fewest,  then  it 
will  follow  that  in  this  respect  the  Union 
tends  most  to  preserve  the  people  in  a  state  of 
peace  with  other  nations. 

The  just  causes  of  war,  for  the  most  part, 
arise  either  from  violations  of  treaties  or  from 
direct  violence.  America  has  already  formed 
treaties  with  no  less  than  six  foreign  nations, 
and  all  of  them,  except  Prussia,  are  maritime, 
and  therefore  able  to  annoy  and  injure  us. 
She  has  also  extensive  commerce  with  Portu¬ 
gal,  Spain,  and  Britain,  and,  with  respect  to  the 
two  latter,  has,  in  addition,  the  circumstance 
of  neighbourhood  to  attend  to. 

It  is  of  high  importance  to  the  peace  of 
America  that  she  observe  the  laws  of  nations 
towards  all  these  powers,  and  to  me  it  appears 
evident  that  this  will  be  more  perfectly  and 
punctually  done  by  one  national  government 
than  it  could  be  either  by  thirteen  separate 
States  or  by  three  or  four  distinct  confederacies. 

Because  when  once  an  efficient  national 
government  is  established,  the  best  men  in 
the  country  will  not  only  consent  to  serve,  but 
also  will  generally  be  appointed  to  manage 
it;  for,  although  town  or  country,  or  other 
contracted  influence,  may  place  men  in  State 
assemblies,  or  senates,  or  courts  of  justice,  or 
executive  departments,  yet  more  general  and 
extensive  reputation  for  talents  and  other 


THE  FEDERALIST 


qualifications  will  be  necessary  to  recommend 
men  to  offices  under  the  national  government 
—especially  as  it  will  have  the  widest  field  for 
choice,  and  never  experience  that  want  of 
proper  persons  which  is  not  uncommon  in 
some  of  the  States.  Hence,  it  will  result  that 
the  administration,  the  political  counsels,  and 
the  judicial  decisions  of  the  national  govern¬ 
ment  will  be  more  wise,  systematical,  and  ju¬ 
dicious  than  those  of  individual  States,  and 
consequently  more  satisfactory  with  respect 
to  other  nations,  as  well  as  more  safe  with 
respect  to  us. 

Because,  under  the  national  government, 
treaties  and  articles  of  treaties,  as  well  as  the 
laws  of  nations,  will  always  be  expounded  in 
one  sense  and  executed  in  the  same  manner— 
whereas  adjudications  on  the  same  points  and 
questions,  in  thirteen  States. or  in  three  or  four 
confederacies,  will  not  always  accord  or  be 
consistent;  and  that,  as  well  from  the  variety 
of  independent  courts  and  judges  appointed 
by  different  and  independent  governments, 
as  from  the  different  local  laws  and  interests 
which  may  affect  and  influence  them.  The 
wisdom  of  the  convention,  in  committing 
such  questions  to  the  jurisdiction  and  judg¬ 
ment  of  courts  appointed  by  and  responsible 
only  to  one  national  government,  cannot  be 
too  much  commended. 

Because  the  prospect  of  present  loss  or  ad¬ 
vantage  may  often  tempt  the  governing  party 
in  one  or  two  Slates  to  swerve  from  good  faith 
and  justice:  but  those  temptations,  not  reach¬ 
ing  the  other  States,  and  consequently  having 
little  or  no  influence  on  the  national  govern¬ 
ment,  the  temptation  will  be  fruitless,  and  good 
faith  and  justice  be  preserved.  The  case  of  the 
treaty  of  peace  with  Britain  adds  great  weight 
to  this  reasoning. 

Because,  even  if  the  governing  party  in  a 
State  should  be  disposed  to  resist  such  temp¬ 
tations,  yet.  as  such  temptations  may.  and 
commonly  do,  result  from  circumstances  pe¬ 
culiar  to  the  Stale, and  may  affect  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  the  inhabitants,  the  governing  party 
may  not  always  be  able,  if  willing,  to  prevent 
the  injustice  meditated,  or  to  punish  the*  ag¬ 
gressors.  But  the  national  government,  not 
being  affected  by  those  local  circumstances, 
will  neither  be  induced  to  commit  the  wrong 
themsehes,  nor  want  powei  or  inclination  to 
present  or  punish  its  commission  by  others. 

So  far,  therefore,  as  either  designed  or  acci¬ 
dental  violations  of  treaties  and  (he  laws  of 
nations  alloid  just  causes  of  war,  they  are  less 


to  be  apprehended  under  one  general  gov¬ 
ernment  than  under  several  lesser  ones,  and 
in  that  respect  the  former  most  favours  the 
safety  of  the  people. 

As  to  those  just  causes  of  war  which  proceed 
from  direct  and  unlawful  violence,  it  appears 
equally  clear  to  me  that  one  good  national 
government  affords  vastly  more  securitvagainsl 
dangers  of  that  sort  than  can  be  derived  from 
any  other  quarter. 

Because  such  violences  are  more  frequently 
caused  by  the  passions  and  interests  of  a  part 
than  of  the  whole;  of  one  or  two  States  than 
of  the  Union.  Not  a  single  Indian  war  has 
yet  been  occasioned  by  aggressions  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  federal  government,  feeble  as  it  is:  but 
there  are  several  instances  of  Indian  hostili¬ 
ties  having  been  provoked  by  the  improper 
conduct  of  individual  States,  who,  either  un¬ 
able  or  unwilling  to  restrain  or  punish  of¬ 
fences,  have  given  occasion  to  the  slaughter 
of  many  innocent  inhabitants. 

The  neighbourhood  of  Spanish  and  British 
territories,  bordering  on  some  States  and  not 
on  others,  naturally  confines  the  causes  of 
quarrel  more  immediately  to  the  borderers. 
The  bordering  States,  if  any.  will  be  those 
who,  under  the  impulse  of  sudden  irritation, 
and  a  quick  sense  of  apparent  interest  or  in¬ 
jury,  will  be  most  likely,  by  direct  violence, 
to  excite  war  with  these  nations;  and  nothing 
can  so  effectually  obviate  that  danger  as  a  na¬ 
tional  government,  whose  wisdom  and  pru¬ 
dence  will  not  be  diminished  by  the  passions 
which  actuate  the  parties  immediately  inter¬ 
ested. 

But  not  only  fewer  just  causes  of  war  will 
be  given  by  the  national  government,  but  it 
will  also  be  more  in  their  power  to  accom¬ 
modate  and  settle  them  amicably.  They  will 
be  more  temperate  and  tool,  and  in  that  re¬ 
spect,  as  well  as  in  others,  will  be  more  in 
capacity  to  act  advisedly  than  the  offending 
State.  The  pride  of  states,  as  well  as  of  men. 
naturally  disposes  them  to  justify  all  their  ac¬ 
tions.  and  opposes  their  acknowledging,  cor- 
i et ting,  or  repairing  their  errors  and  offences. 
I  'he*  national  government,  in  such  cases,  will 
not  be  affected  by  tin's  pride,  but  will  proceed 
with  moderation  and  candour  to  consider  and 
decide  on  the  means  most  proper  to  extricate 
them  from  thedillic  ultics  which  threaten  them. 

Besides,  it  is  well  known  that  acknowledge¬ 
ments.  explanations,  and  compensations  arc 
often  accepted  as  satisfactory  from  a  strong 
united  nation,  which  would  be  rejected  as  tin- 


NUMBER  4  35 


satisfactory  if  offered  by  a  State  or  confeder¬ 
acy  of  little  consideration  or  power. 

In  the  year  1685,  the  state  of  Genoa  having 
offended  Louis  XIV.,  endeavoured  to  appease 
him.  He  demanded  that  they  should  send 
their  Doge ,  or  chief  magistrate,  accompanied 
by  four  of  their  senators,  to  France,  to  ask  his 
pardon  and  receive  his  terms.  They  were 
obliged  to  submit  to  it  for  the  sake  of  peace. 
Would  he  on  any  occasion  either  have  de¬ 
manded  or  have  received  the  like  humiliation 
from  Spain,  or  Britain,  or  any  other  powerful 
nation?  Publius 

Number  4 

[JAY1 

My  last  paper  assigned  several  reasons  why 
the  safety  of  the  people  would  be  best  secured 
by  union  against  the  danger  it  may  be  ex¬ 
posed  to  by  just  causes  of  war  given  to  other 
nations;  anid  those  reasons  show  that  such 
causes  would  not  only  be  more  rarely  given, 
but  would  also  be  more  easily  accommodated, 
by  a  national  government  than  either  by  the 
State  governments  or  the  proposed  little  con¬ 
federacies. 

But  the  safety  of  the  people  of  America 
against  dangers  from  foreign  force  depends 
not  only  on  their  forbearing  to  give  just  causes 
of  war  to  other  nations,  but  also  on  their  plac¬ 
ing  and  continuing  themselves  in  such  a  situ¬ 
ation  as  not  to  invite  hostility  or  insult;  for  it 
need  not  be  observed  that  there  are  pretended 
as  well  as  just  causes  of  war. 

It  is  too  true,  however  disgraceful  it  may  be 
to  human  nature,  that  nations  in  general  will 
make  war  whenever  they  have  a  prospect  of 
getting  anything  by  it;  nay,  absolute  mon- 
archs  will  often  make  war  when  their  nations 
are  to  get  nothing  by  it,  but  for  purposes  and 
objects  merely  personal,  such  as  a  thirst  for 
military  glory,  revenge  for  personal  affronts, 
ambition,  or  private  compacts  to  aggrandise 
or  support  their  particular  families  or  parti¬ 
sans.  These  and  a  variety  of  other  motives,  which 
affect  only  the  mind  of  the  sovereign,  often 
lead  him  to  engage  in  wars  not  sanctified  by 
justice  or  the  voice  and  interests  of  his  peo¬ 
ple.  But,  independent  of  these  inducements 
to  war,  which  are  more  prevalent  in  absolute 
monarchies,  but  which  well  deserve  our  at¬ 
tention,  there  are  others  which  affect  nations 
as  often  as  kings;  and  some  of  them  will  on 
examination  be  found  to  grow  out  of  our  rel¬ 
ative  situation  and  circumstances. 


With  France  and  with  Britain  we  are  rivals 
in  the  fisheries,  and  can  supply  their  markets 
cheaper  than  they  can  themselves,  notwith¬ 
standing  any  efforts  to  prevent  it  by  bounties 
on  their  own  duties  on  foreign  fish. 

With  them  and  with  most  other  European 
nations  we  are  rivals  in  navigation  and  the 
carrying  trade;  and  we  shall  deceive  ourselves 
if  we  suppose  that  any  of  them  will  rejoice  to 
see  it  flourish;  for,  as  our  carrying  trade  can¬ 
not  increase  without  in  some  degree  dimin¬ 
ishing  theirs,  it  is  more  their  interest,  and 
will  be  more  their  policy,  to  restrain  than  to 
promote  it. 

In  the  trade  to  China  and  India,  we  inter¬ 
fere  with  more  than  one  nation,  inasmuch  as 
it  enables  us  to  partake  in  advantages  which 
they  had  in  a  manner  monopolised,  and  as 
we  thereby  supply  ourselves  with  commodi¬ 
ties  which  we  used  to  purchase  from  them. 

The  extension  of  our  own  commerce  in  our 
own  vessels  cannot  give  pleasure  to  any  na¬ 
tions  who  possess  territories  on  or  near  this 
continent,  because  the  cheapness  and  excel¬ 
lence  of  our  productions,  added  to  the  cir¬ 
cumstance  of  vicinity,  and  the  enterprise  and 
address  of  our  merchants  and  navigators,  will 
give  us  a  greater  share  in  the  advantages 
which  those  territories  afford,  than  consists 
with  the  wishes  or  policy  of  their  respective 
sovereigns. 

Spain  thinks  it  convenient  to  shut  the  Mis¬ 
sissippi  against  us  on  the  one  side,  and  Brit¬ 
ain  excludes  us  from  the  Saint  Lawrence  on 
the  other;  nor  will  either  of  them  permit  the 
other  waters  which  are  between  them  and  us 
to  become  the  means  of  mutual  intercourse 
and  traffic. 

From  these  and  such  like  considerations, 
which  might,  if  consistent  with  prudence,  be 
more  amplified  and  detailed,  it  is  easy  to  see 
that  jealousies  and  uneasinesses  may  gradu¬ 
ally  slide  into  the  minds  and  cabinets  of  other 
nations,  and  that  we  are  not  to  expect  that 
they  should  regard  our  advancement  in  union, 
in  power  and  consequence  by  land  and  by 
sea,  with  an  eye  of  indifference  and  composure. 

The  people  of  America  are  aware  that  in¬ 
ducements  to  war  may  arise  out  of  these  cir¬ 
cumstances,  as  well  as  from  others  not  so 
obvious  at  present,  and  that  whenever  such 
inducements  may  find  fit  time  and  opportu¬ 
nity  for  operation,  pretences  to  colour  and 
justify  them  will  not  be  wanting.  Wisely, 
therefore,  do  they  consider  union  and  a  good 
national  government  as  necessary  to  put  and 


THE  FEDERALIST 


keep  them  in  such  a  situation  as,  instead  of 
inviting  war,  will  tend  to  repress  and  dis¬ 
courage  it.  That  situation  consists  in  the  best 
possible  state  of  defence,  and  necessarily  de¬ 
pends  on  the  government,  the  anus,  and  the 
resources  of  the  country. 

As  the  safety  of  the  whole  is  the  interest  of 
the  whole,  and  cannot  be  provided  for  without 
government,  either  one  or  more  or  many,  let 
us  inquire  whether  one  good  government  is 
not,  relative  to  the  object  in  question,  more 
competent  than  any  other  given  number  what¬ 
ever. 

One  government  can  collect  and  avail  it¬ 
self  of  the  talents  and  experience  of  the  ablest 
men.  in  whatever  part  of  the  Union  they  may 
be  found.  It  can  move  on  uniform  principles 
of  poliev.  It  can  harmonise,  assimilate,  and 
protect  the  several  parts  and  members,  and 
extend  the  benefit  of  its  foresight  and  pre¬ 
cautions  to  each.  In  the  formation  of  trea¬ 
ties,  it  will  regard  the  interest  of  the  whole, 
and  the  particular  interests  of  the  parts  as 
connected  with  that  of  the  whole.  It  can  ap¬ 
ply  the  resources  and  power  of  the  whole  to 
the  defence  of  any  particular  part,  and  that 
more  easily  and  expeditiously  than  State  gov¬ 
ernments  or  separate  confederacies  can  possi¬ 
bly  do,  for  want  of  concert  and  unity  of  system. 
It  can  place  the  militia  under  one  plan  of  dis¬ 
cipline,  and.  by  putting  their  olhcers  in  a 
proper  line  of  subordination  to  the  Chiel  Mag¬ 
istrate,  will,  as  it  were,  consolidate  them  into 
one  corps,  and  thereby  render  them  more  ef¬ 
ficient  than  if  divided  into  thirteen  or  into 
three  or  four  distinct  independent  companies. 

What  would  the  militia  of  Britain  be  if  the 
Knglish  militia  obeyed  the  government  of  Eng¬ 
land.  if  the  Scotch  militia  obeyed  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Scotland,  and  if  the  Welsh  militia 
obeyed  the  government  of  Wales?  Suppose  an 
invasion:  would  those  three  governments  (if 
they  agreed  at  all)  be  able,  with  all  their  te- 
speitive  forces,  to  operate  against  the  enemy 
v)  effec  tually  as  the  single  government  of  Great 
Britain  would? 

We  have  heaid  nine h  of  the  fleets  of  Britain, 
and  the  time  may  come,  if  we  are  wise,  when 
the  fleets  of  \meiica  may  engage  attention. 
But  if  one  national  government  had  not  so 
regulated  the  navigation  of  Britain  as  to  make 
it  a  nutserv  for  seamen  if  one  national  gov 
eminent  had  not  called  fotth  all  the  national 
means  and  materials  for  forming  fleets,  their 
prowess  and  then  thunder  would  never  have 
been  celebrated.  Let  Lngland  have  its  naviga¬ 


tion  and  fleet— let  Scotland  have  its  navigation 
and  fleet— let  Wales  have  its  navigation  and 
fleet— let  Ireland  have  its  navigation  and  fleet 
—let  those  four  of  the  constituent  parts  of  the 
British  empire  be  under  four  independent 
governments,  and  it  is  easy  to  perceive  how 
soon  thev  would  each  dwindle  into  compara¬ 
tive  insignificance. 

Apply  these  facts  to  our  own  case.  Leave 
America  divided  into  thirteen  or.  if  you  please, 
into  three  or  four  independent  governments— 
what  armies  could  they  raise  and  pay— what 
fleets  could  they  ever  hope  to  have?  If  one  was 
attacked,  would  the  others  fly  to  its  succour, 
and  spend  their  blood  and  money  in  its  de¬ 
fence?  Would  there  be  no  danger  of  their  be¬ 
ing  flattered  into  neutrality  by  its  specious 
promises,  or  seduced  by  a  too  great  fondness 
for  peace  to  decline  hazarding  their  tranquil¬ 
lity  and  present  safety  for  the  sake  of  neigh¬ 
bours.  of  whom  perhaps  they  have  been  jeal¬ 
ous.  and  whose  importance  they  are  content  to 
see  diminished.  Although  such  conduct  would 
not  be  wise,  it  would,  nevertheless,  be  natural. 
The  history  of  the  states  of  Greece,  and  of 
other  countries,  abounds  with  such  instances, 
and  it  is  not  improbable  that  what  has  so  often 
happened  would,  under  similar  circumstances, 
happen  again. 

But  admit  that  thev  might  be  willing  to  help 
the  invaded  State  or  confederacy.  How,  and 
when,  and  in  what  proportion  shall  aids  of 
men  and  money  be  afforded.*'  Who  shall  com¬ 
mand  the  allied  armies,  and  from  which  of 
them  shall  he  receive  his  orders?  Who  shall  set¬ 
tle  the  terms  of  peace,  and  in  case  of  disputes 
what  umpire  shall  decide  between  them  and 
compel  acquiescence?  Various  difficulties  and 
inconveniences  would  be  inseparable  from 
mu  h  a  situation:  whereas  one  government, 
watching  over  the  general  and  common  inter¬ 
ests.  and  combining  and  directing  the  powers 
and  resources  of  the  whole,  would  be  free  from 
all  these  embarrassments,  and  conduce  far 
more  to  the  safety  of  the  people. 

But  whatever  may  be  our  situation,  whether 
firmly  united  under  one  national  government, 
or  split  into  a  number  ol  confederal  ies.  certain 
it  is.  that  foreign  nations  will  know  and  view 
it  exactlv  as  it  is:  and  they  will  ac  t  towards  us 
accordingly.  11  they  see  that  our  national  gov¬ 
ernment  iselluicnt  and  well  administered,  oui 
trade  ptudently  regulated,  our  militia  prop 
eilv  organised  and  disciplined,  our  resources 
and  fm, i in  es  disc  reedy  managed,  out  credit  re¬ 
established,  our  people  free,  contented,  and 


NUMBER  5  37 


united,  they  will  be  much  more  disposed  to 
cultivate  our  friendship  than  provoke  our  re¬ 
sentment.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  find  us 
either  destitute  of  an  effectual  government 
(each  State  doing  right  or  wrong,  as  to  its  rul¬ 
ers  may  seem  convenient),  or  split  into  three  or 
four  independent  and  probably  discordant  re¬ 
publics  or  confederacies,  one  inclining  to  Brit¬ 
ain,  another  to  France,  and  a  third  to  Spain, 
and  perhaps  played  off  against  each  other  by 
the  three,  what  a  poor,  pitiful  figure  will 
America  make  in  their  eyes!  How  liable  would 
she  become  not  only  to  their  contempt,  but 
to  their  outrage;  and  how  soon  would  dear- 
bought  experience  proclaim  that  when  a  peo¬ 
ple  or  family  so  divide,  it  never  fails  to  be 
against  themselves.  Publius 

Number  5 

[jay1 

Queen  Anne,  in  her  letter  of  the  ist  July  1706, 
to  the  Scotch  Parliament,  makes  some  observa¬ 
tions  on  the  importance  of  the  Union  then 
forming  between  England  and  Scotland,  which 
merit  our  attention.  I  shall  present  the  public 
with  one  or  two  extracts  from  it:  “A11  entire 
and  perfect  union  will  be  the  solid  founda¬ 
tion  of  lasting  peace:  It  will  secure  your  re¬ 
ligion,  liberty,  and  property;  remove  the  ani¬ 
mosities  amongst  yourselves,  and  the  jealousies 
and  differences  betwixt  our  two  kingdoms.  It 
must  increase  your  strength,  riches  and  trade; 
and  by  this  union  the  whole  island,  being 
joined  in  affection  and  free  from  all  appre¬ 
hensions  of  different  interest,  will  be  enabled 
to  resist  all  its  enemies  “We  most  earnestly 
recommend  to  you  calmness  and  unanimity  in 
this  great  and  weighty  affair,  that  the  union 
may  be  brought  to  a  happy  conclusion,  being 
the  only  effectual  way  to  secure  our  present 
and  future  happiness,  and  disappoint  the  de¬ 
signs  of  our  and  your  enemies,  who  will  doubt¬ 
less,  on  this  occasion,  use  their  utmost  endeav¬ 
ours  to  prevent  or  delay  this  union.” 

It  was  remarked  in  the  preceding  paper,  that 
weakness  and  divisions  at  home  would  invite 
dangers  from  abroad;  and  that  nothing  would 
tend  more  to  secure  us  from  them  than  union, 
strength,  and  good  government  within  our¬ 
selves.  This  subject  is  copious  and  cannot  eas¬ 
ily  be  exhausted. 

The  history  of  Great  Britain  is  the  one  with 
which  we  are  in  general  the  best  acquainted, 
and  it  gives  us  many  useful  lessons.  We  may 
profit  by  their  experience  without  paying  the 


price  which  it  cost  them.  Although  it  seems 
obvious  to  common  sense  that  the  people  of 
such  an  island  should  be  but  one  nation,  yet 
we  find  that  they  were  for  ages  divided  into 
three,  and  that  those  three  were  almost  con¬ 
stantly  embroiled  in  quarrels  and  wars  with 
one  another.  Notwithstanding  their  true  in¬ 
terest  with  respect  to  the  continental  nations 
was  really  the  same,  yet  by  the  arts  and  policy 
and  practices  of  those  nations,  their  mutual 
jealousies  were  perpetually  kept  inflamed,  and 
for  a  long  series  of  years  they  were  far  more 
inconvenient  and  troublesome  than  they  were 
useful  and  assisting  to  each  other. 

Should  the  people  of  America  divide  them¬ 
selves  into  three  or  four  nations,  would  not  the 
same  thing  happen?  Would  not  similar  jeal¬ 
ousies  arise,  and  be  in  like  manner  cherished? 
Instead  of  their  being  “joined  in  affection” 
and  free  from  all  apprehension  of  different 
“interests,”  envy  and  jealousy  would  soon  ex¬ 
tinguish  confidence  and  affection,  and  the  par¬ 
tial  interests  of  each  confederacy,  instead  of 
the  general  interests  of  all  America,  would  be 
the  only  objects  of  their  policy  and  pursuits. 
Hence,  like  most  other  bordering  nations,  they 
would  always  be  either  involved  in  disputes 
and  war,  or  live  in  the  constant  apprehension 
of  them. 

The  most  sanguine  advocates  for  three  or 
four  confederacies  cannot  reasonably  suppose 
that  they  would  long  remain  exactly  on  an 
equal  footing  in  point  of  strength,  even  if  it 
was  possible  to  form  them  so  at  first;  but,  ad¬ 
mitting  that  to  be  practicable,  yet  what  human 
contrivance  can  secure  the  continuance  of 
such  equality?  Independent  of  those  local  cir¬ 
cumstances  which  tend  to  beget  and  increase 
power  in  one  part  and  to  impede  its  progress 
in  another,  we  must  advert  to  the  effects  of 
that  superior  policy  and  good  management 
which  would  probably  distinguish  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  one  above  the  rest,  and  by  which  their 
relative  equality  in  strength  and  consideration 
would  be  destroyed.  For  it  cannot  be  presumed 
that  the  same  degree  of  sound  policy,  pru¬ 
dence,  and  foresight,  would  uniformly  be  ob¬ 
served  by  each  of  these  confederacies  for  a  long 
succession  of  years. 

Whenever,  and  from  whatever  causes,  it 
might  happen,  and  happen  it  would,  that  any 
one  of  these  nations  or  confederacies  should 
rise  on  the  scale  of  political  importance  much 
above  the  degree  of  her  neighbours,  that  mo¬ 
ment  would  those  neighbours  behold  her  with 
envy  and  with  fear.  Both  those  passions  would 


38  THE  FEDERALIST 


lead  them  to  countenance,  if  not  to  promote, 
whatever  might  promise  to  diminish  her  im¬ 
portance:  and  would  also  restrain  them  from 
measures  calculated  to  advance  or  even  to 
secure  her  prosperity.  Much  time  would  not 
be  necessarv  to  enable  her  to  discern  these  un¬ 
friendly  dispositions.  She  would  soon  begin, 
not  only  to  lose  confidence  in  her  neighbours, 
but  also  to  feel  a  disposition  equally  unfavour¬ 
able  to  them.  Distrust  naturally  creates  dis¬ 
trust,  and  by  nothing  is  good-will  and  kind 
conduct  more  speedily  changed  than  by  in¬ 
vidious  jealousies  and  uncandid  imputations, 
whether  expressed  or  implied. 

The  North  is  generally  the  region  of  strength, 
and  many  local  circumstances  render  it  prob¬ 
able  that  the  most  Northern  of  the  proposed 
confederacies  would,  at  a  period  not  very  dis¬ 
tant,  be  unquestionably  more  formidable  than 
anv  of  the  others.  No  sooner  would  this  be¬ 
come  evident  than  the  Xortheui  Hive  would 
excite  the  same  ideas  and  sensations  in  the 
more  southern  parts  of  America  which  it  for¬ 
merly  did  in  the  southern  parts  of  Europe.  Nor 
does  it  appear  to  be  a  rash  conjecture  that  its 
young  swarms  might  often  be  tempted  to 
gather  honey  in  the  more  blooming  fields  and 
milder  air  of  their  luxurious  and  more  delicate 
neighbours. 

They  who  well  consider  the  history  of  similar 
divisions  and  confederacies  will  find  abundant 
reason  to  apprehend  that  those  in  contempla¬ 
tion  would  in  no  other  sense  be  neighbours 
than  as  they  would  be  borderers:  that  they 
would  neither  love  nor  trust  one  another,  but 
on  the  contrary  would  be  a  prey  to  discord, 
jealousy,  and  mutual  injuries:  in  short,  that 
they  would  place  us  exactly  in  the  situations 
in  which  some  nations  doubtless  wish  to  see  us, 
viz.,  fonniilable  only  to  each  other. 

From  these  considerations  it  appears  that 
those  gentlemen  are  greatly  mistaken  who  sup¬ 
pose  that  alliances  offensive  and  defensive 
might  be  formed  between  these  confederacies, 
and  would  produce  that  combination  and 
union  of  wills,  of  arms,  and  of  resources,  wliic  h 
would  be  necessary  to  put  and  keep  them  in  a 
formidable  state  of  defence  against  foreign 
enemies. 

When  did  the  independent  state's,  into  whit  It 
Britain  and  Spain  were  formerly  divided,  com¬ 
bine  in  such  alliance,  or  unite  their  forces 
against  a  foreign  enemy?  The  proposed  con 
federac  ies  will  be  (list nut  nations.  Each  of 
them  would  have  its  cotnmen  e  with  foreigners 
to  regulate  by  distinct  treaties:  and  as  their 


productions  and  commodities  are  different 
and  proper  for  different  markets,  so  would 
those  treaties  be  essentially  different.  Different 
commercial  concerns  must  create  different  in¬ 
terests,  and  of  course  different  degrees  of 
political  attachment  to  and  connection  with 
different  foreign  nations.  Hence  it  might  and 
probably  would  happen  that  the  foreign  na¬ 
tion  with  whom  the  Southern  confederacy 
might  be  at  war  would  be  the  one  with  whom 
the  Xorthern  confederacy  would  be  the  most 
desirous  of  preserving  peace  and  friendship. 
An  alliance  so  contrary  to  their  immediate  in¬ 
terest  would  not  therefore  be  easy  to  form, 
nor.  if  formed,  would  it  be  observed  and  ful¬ 
filled  with  perfect  good  faith. 

Nay,  it  is  far  more  probable  that  in  Amer¬ 
ica,  as  in  Europe,  neighbouring  nations,  acting 
under  the  impulse  of  opposite  interests  and  un¬ 
friendly  passions,  would  frequently  be  found 
taking  different  sides.  Considering  our  dis¬ 
tance  from  Europe,  it  would  be  more  natural 
for  these  confederacies  to  apprehend  danger 
from  one  another  than  from  distant  nations, 
and  therefore  that  each  of  them  should  be 
more  desirous  to  guard  against  the  others  by 
the  aid  of  foreign  alliances,  than  to  guard 
against  foreign  dangers  by  alliances  between 
themselves.  And  here  let  us  not  forget  how 
much  more  easy  it  is  to  receive  foreign  fleets 
into  our  ports,  and  foreign  armies  into  our 
country,  than  it  is  to  persuade  or  compel  them 
to  depart.  How  many  conquests  did  the  Ro¬ 
mans  and  others  make  in  the  characters  of 
allies,  and  what  innovations  did  they  under 
the  same  character  introduce  into  the  govern¬ 
ments  of  those  whom  they  pretended  to  pro¬ 
tect. 

Let  candid  men  judge,  then,  whether  the  di¬ 
vision  of  America  into  any  given  number  of 
independent  sovereignties  would  tend  to  se¬ 
cure  us  against  the  hostilities  and  improper  in¬ 
terference  of  foreign  nations.  Publius 

Number  6 

[HAMILTON] 

I  in  iiiki  K  last  numbers  of  this  paper  have 
been  dedicated  to  an  enumeration  of  the  dan¬ 
gers  to  which  we  should  be  exposed,  in  a  state 
of  disunion,  from  the  arms  and  arts  of  foreign 
nations.  I  shall  now  proceed  to  delineate  dan¬ 
gers  of  a  different  and,  perhaps,  still  more 
alarming  kind— those  which  will  in  all  proba¬ 
bility  flow  from  dissensions  between  the  States 
themselves,  and  from  domestic  factions  and 


NUMBER  6  39 


convulsions.  These  have  been  already  in  some 
instances  slightly  anticipated;  but  they  de¬ 
serve  a  more  particular  and  more  full  investi¬ 
gation. 

A  man  must  be  far  gone  in  Utopian  specula¬ 
tions  who  can  seriously  doubt  that,  if  these 
States  should  either  be  wholly  disunited,  or 
only  united  in  partial  confederacies,  the  sub¬ 
divisions  into  which  they  might  be  thrown 
would  have  frequent  and  violent  contests  with 
each  other.  To  presume  a  want  of  motives  for 
such  contests  as  an  argument  against  their 
existence,  would  be  to  forget  that  men  are  am¬ 
bitious,  vindictive,  and  rapacious.  To  look  for 
a  continuation  of  harmony  between  a  number 
of  independent,  unconnected  sovereignties  in 
the  same  neighbourhood,  would  be  to  disre¬ 
gard  the  uniform  course  of  human  events,  and 
to  set  at  defiance  the  accumulated  experience 
of  ages. 

The  causes  of  hostility  among  nations  are  in¬ 
numerable.  There  are  some  which  have  a  gen¬ 
eral  and  almost  constant  operation  upon  the 
collective  bodies  of  society.  Of  this  description 
are  the  love  of  power  or  the  desire  of  pre-emi¬ 
nence  and  dominion— the  jealousy  of  power, 
or  the  desire  of  equality  and  safety.  There 
are  others  which  have  a  more  circumscribed 
though  an  equally  operative  influence  within 
their  spheres.  Such  are  the  rivalships  and  com¬ 
petitions  of  commerce  between  commercial 
nations.  And  there  are  others,  not  less  numer¬ 
ous  than  either  of  the  former,  which  take  their 
origin  entirely  in  private  passions;  in  the  at¬ 
tachments,  enmities,  interests,  hopes,  and  fears 
of  leading  individuals  in  the  communities  of 
which  they  are  members.  Men  of  this  class, 
whether  the  favourites  of  a  king  or  of  a  people, 
have  in  too  many  instances  abused  the  con¬ 
fidence  they  possessed;  and  assuming  the  pre¬ 
text  of  some  public  motive,  have  not  scrupled 
to  sacrifice  the  national  tranquillity  to  per¬ 
sonal  advantage  or  personal  gratification. 

The  celebrated  Pericles,  in  compliance  with 
the  resentment  of  a  prostitute,1  at  the  expense 
of  much  of  the  blood  and  treasure  of  his  coun¬ 
trymen,  attacked,  vanquished,  and  destroyed 
the  city  of  the  Samnians.  The  same  man,  stim¬ 
ulated  by  private  pique  against  the  Megarens- 
ians y  another  nation  of  Greece,  or  to  avoid  a 
prosecution  with  which  he  was  threatened  as 
an  accomplice  in  a  supposed  theft  of  the  statu¬ 
ary  Phidias,3  or  to  get  rid  of  the  accusations 

1  Aspasia,  vide  Plutarch’s  Pericles—  Publius 

2  Ibid—  Publius 

3  Ibid—  Publius 


prepared  to  be  brought  against  him  for  dissi¬ 
pating  the  funds  of  the  state  in  the  purchase 
of  popularity,4  or  from  a  combination  of  all 
these  causes,  was  the  primitive  author  of  that 
famous  and  fatal  war,  distinguished  in  the 
Grecian  annals  by  the  name  of  the  Pelopon¬ 
nesian  war;  which,  after  various  vicissitudes, 
intermissions,  and  renewals,  terminated  in  the 
ruin  of  the  Athenian  commonwealth. 

The  ambitious  cardinal,  who  was  prime 
minister  to  Henry  VIII.,  permitting  his  vanity 
to  aspire  to  the  triple  crown,5  entertained 
hopes  of  succeeding  in  the  acquisition  of  that 
splendid  prize  by  the  influence  of  the  Emperor 
Charles  V.  To  secure  the  favour  and  interest  of 
this  enterprising  and  powerful  monarch,  he 
precipitated  England  into  a  war  with  France, 
contrary  to  the  plainest  dictates  of  policy,  and 
at  the  hazard  of  the  safety  and  independence, 
as  well  of  the  kingdom  over  which  he  presided 
by  his  counsels,  as  of  Europe  in  general.  For  if 
there  ever  was  a  sovereign  who  bid  fair  to 
realise  the  project  of  universal  monarchy,  it 
was  the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  of  whose  intrigues 
Wolsey  was  at  once  the  instrument  and  the 
dupe. 

The  influence  which  the  bigotry  of  one  fe¬ 
male,6  the  petulance  of  another,7  and  the  ca¬ 
bals  of  a  third,8  had  in  the  contemporary  pol¬ 
icy,  ferments,  and  pacifications,  of  a  consider¬ 
able  part  of  Europe,  are  topics  that  have  been 
too  often  descanted  upon  not  to  be  generally 
known. 

To  multiply  examples  of  the  agency  of  per¬ 
sonal  considerations  in  the  production  of  great 
national  events,  either  foreign  or  domestic,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  direction,  would  be  an  un¬ 
necessary  waste  of  time.  Those  who  have  but 
a  superficial  acquaintance  with  the  sources 
from  which  they  are  to  be  drawn,  will  them¬ 
selves  recollect  a  variety  of  instances;  and  those 
who  have  a  tolerable  knowledge  of  human 
nature  will  not  stand  in  need  of  such  lights, 
to  form  their  opinion  either  of  the  reality  or 
extent  of  that  agency.  Perhaps,  however,  a  ref¬ 
erence,  tending  to  illustrate  the  general  prin¬ 
ciple,  may  with  propriety  be  made  to  a  case 
which  has  lately  happened  among  ourselves. 

4  Ibid.  Phidias  was  supposed  to  have  stolen  some 
public  gold,  with  the  connivance  of  Pericles,  for 
the  embellishment  of  the  statue  of  Minerva.— 
Publius 

5  Worn  by  the  popes.— publius 

6  Madame  de  Maintenon.— Publius 

7  Duchess  of  Marlborough.— Publius 

8 Madame  de  Pompadour.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


If  Shays  had  not  been  a  desperate  debtor ,  it  is 
much  to  be  doubted  whether  Massachusetts 
would  have  been  plunged  into  a  civil  war. 

But  notwithstanding  the  concurring  testi¬ 
mony  of  experience,  in  this  particular,  there 
are  still  to  be  found  visionary  or  designing 
men,  who  stand  ready  to  advocate  the  paradox 
of  perpetual  peace  between  the  States,  though 
dismembered  and  alienated  from  each  other. 
The  genius  of  republics  (say  they)  is  pacific; 
the  spirit  of  commerce  has  a  tendency  to  soften 
the  manners  of  men,  and  to  extinguish  those 
inflammable  humours  which  have  so  often 
kindled  into  wars.  Commercial  republics,  like 
ours,  will  never  be  disposed  to  waste  them¬ 
selves  in  ruinous  contentions  with  each  other. 
They  will  be  governed  by  mutual  interest, 
and  will  cultivate  a  spirit  of  mutual  amity  and 
concord. 

Is  it  not  (we  may  ask  these  projectors  in 
politics)  the  true  interest  of  all  nations  to  cul¬ 
tivate  the  same  benevolent  ami  philosophic 
spirit?  If  this  be  their  true  interest,  have  they 
in  fact  pursued  it?  Has  it  not.  on  the  contrary, 
invariably  been  found  that  momentary  pas¬ 
sions,  and  immediate  interests,  have  a  more  ac¬ 
tive  and  imperious  control  over  human  con¬ 
duct  than  general  and  remote  considerations 
of  polity,  utility,  or  justice?  Have  republics  in 
prattice  been  less  addicted  to  war  than  mon- 
art  hies?  Are  not  the  former  administered  by 
men  as  well  as  the  latter?  Are  there  not  aver¬ 
sions,  predilections,  rivalships,  and  desires  of 
unjust  acquisitions,  that  afreet  nations  as  well 
as  kings?  Are  not  popular  assemblies  frequent¬ 
ly  subject  to  the  impulses  of  rage,  resentment, 
jealousy,  avarice,  and  of  other  irregular  and 
violent  propensities?  Is  it  not  well  known  that 
their  determinations  are  often  governed  by  a 
few  individuals  in  whom  (hey  place  confi¬ 
dence.  and  are,  of  course,  liable  to  be  tinctur¬ 
ed  by  the  passions  and  views  of  those  individu¬ 
als?  Has  commerce*  hitheito  done  anything 
more  than  <  hange  the  objec  i  of  war?  Is  not  the 
love  of  wealth  as  domineering  and  enterpris¬ 
ing  a  passion  as  that  of  power  or  glory?  Have 
there  not  been  as  many  wars  founded  upon 
commercial  motives  since  that  has  become  the 
prevailing  system  of  nations,  as  were  before 
occasioned  by  the  cupidity  ol  territory  or  do¬ 
minion?  Has  not  the  spirit  of  commerce,  in 
mans  instances,  administered  new  incentives 
to  the  appetite,  both  lor  the  one  and  lor  the 
other?  Let  experience,  the  least  fallible  guide 
of  human  opinions,  be  appealed  to  for  an  an¬ 
swer  to  these  inquiries. 


Sparta,  Athens.  Rome,  and  Carthage  were 
all  republics;  two  of  them,  Athens  and  Car¬ 
thage.  of  the  commercial  kind.  Vet  were  they 
as  often  engaged  in  wars,  offensive  and  defen¬ 
sive,  as  the  neighbouring  monarchies  of  the 
same  times.  Sparta  was  little  better  than  a  well- 
regulated  camp;  and  Rome  was  never  sated  of 
carnage  and  conquest. 

Carthage,  though  a  commercial  republic, 
was  the  aggressor  in  the  very  war  that  ended 
in  her  destruction.  Hannibal  had  carried  her 
anns  into  the  heart  of  Italy,  and  to  the  gates  of 
Rome,  before  Scipio,  in  turn,  gave  him  an 
overthrow  in  the  territories  of  Carthage,  and 
made  a  conquest  of  the  commonwealth. 

Venice,  in  later  times,  figured  more  than 
once  in  wars  of  ambition,  till,  becoming  an  ob¬ 
ject  to  the  other  Italian  states,  Pope  Julius  II. 
found  means  to  accomplish  that  formidable 
league,1  which  gave  a  deadly  blow  to  the  power 
and  pride  of  this  haughty  republic. 

The  provinces  of  Holland,  till  they  were 
overwhelmed  in  debts  and  taxes,  took  a  lead¬ 
ing  and  conspicuous  part  in  the  wars  of  Eu¬ 
rope.  They  had  furious  contests  with  England 
for  the  dominion  of  the  sea,  and  were  among 
the  most  persevering  and  most  implacable  of 
the  opponents  of  Louis  XIV. 

In  the  government  of  Britain  the  represent¬ 
atives  of  the  people  compose  one  branch  of  the 
national  legislature.  Commerce  has  been  for 
ages  the  predominant  pursuit  of  that  country. 
Eew  nations,  nevertheless,  have  been  more  fre¬ 
quent  Iv  engaged  in  war;  and  the  wars  in  which 
that  kingdom  has  been  engaged  have,  in  nu¬ 
merous  instances,  proceeded  from  the  people. 

There  have  been,  if  1  may  so  express  it.  al¬ 
most  as  many  popular  as  royal  wars.  The  cries 
of  the  nation  and  the  importunities  of  their 
representatives  have,  upon  various  occasions, 
dragged  their  monarchs  into  war,  or  continued 
them  in  it.  contrary  to  their  inclinations,  and 
sometimes  contrary  to  the  real  interests  of  the 
state.  In  that  memorable  struggle  for  superior¬ 
ity  between  the  rival  houses  of  Austria  and 
Hour  bon ,,  which  so  long  kept  Europe  in  a 
(lame,  it  is  well  known  that  the  antipathies  of 
the  English  against  the  Erench,  seconding  the 
ambition,  or  rather  the  avarice,  of  a  favourite 
leader,*  protracted  the  war  beyond  the  limits 
marked  out  bv  sound  policy,  and  for  a  con- 

*  I  lie  1  cagne  of  Cambrav,  c onqnehemling  the 
Emperor,  the  King  of  l  iame,  the  King  ol  Ara¬ 
gon.  and  most  ol  the  Italian  pi  hues  and  stales. 

IM  m  n  s 

■  I  he  Duke  ol  Mai Ihotough.  IVlu.n  s 


NUMBER 


siderable  time  in  opposition  to  the  views  of 
the  court. 

The  wars  of  these  two  last-mentioned  na¬ 
tions  have  in  a  great  measure  grown  out  of 
commercial  considerations— the  desire  of  sup¬ 
planting  and  the  fear  of  being  supplanted, 
either  in  particular  branches  of  traffic  or  in  the 
general  advantages  of  trade  and  navigation.1 

From  this  summary  of  what  has  taken  place 
in  other  countries,  whose  situations  have  borne 
the  nearest  resemblance  to  our  own,  what 
reason  can  we  have  to  confide  in  those  reveries 
which  would  seduce  us  into  an  expectation  of 
peace  and  cordiality  between  the  members  of 
the  present  confederacy,  in  a  state  of  separa¬ 
tion?  Have  we  not  already  seen  enough  of  the 
fallacy  and  extravagance  of  those  idle  theories 
which  have  amused  us  with  promises  of  an 
exemption  from  the  imperfections,  weaknesses, 
and  evils  incident  to  society  in  every  shape? 
Is  it  not  time  to  awake  from  the  deceitful 
dream  of  a  golden  age,  and  to  adopt  as  a 
practical  maxim  for  the  direction  of  our  politi¬ 
cal  conduct  that  we,  as  well  as  the  other  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  globe,  are  yet  remote  from  the 
happy  empire  of  perfect  wisdom  and  perfect 
virtue? 

Let  the  point  of  extreme  depression  to 
which  our  national  dignity  and  credit  have 
sunk,  let  the  inconveniences  felt  everywhere 
from  a  lax  and  ill  administration  of  govern¬ 
ment,  let  the  revolt  of  a  part  of  the  State  of 
North  Carolina,  the  late  menacing  disturb- 

1  In  the  text  said  to  have  been  revised  by  Hamil¬ 
ton  and  Madison,  and  adopted  by  Mr.  J.  C.  Ham¬ 
ilton,  the  following  additional  sentences  occur  at 
this  point:  “and  sometimes  even  the  more  cul¬ 
pable  desire  of  sharing  in  the  commerce  of  other 
nations  without  their  consent.  The  last  war  but 
two  between  Britain  and  Spain  sprang  from  the 
attempts  of  the  English  merchants  to  prosecute 
an  illicit  trade  with  the  Spanish  main.  These  un¬ 
justifiable  practices  on  their  part  produced  sever¬ 
ity  on  the  part  of  the  Spaniards  towards  the  sub¬ 
jects  of  Great  Britain  which  were  not  more  jus¬ 
tifiable,  because  they  exceeded  the  bounds  of  a 
just  retaliation  and  were  chargeable  with  inhu¬ 
manity  and  cruelty.  Many  of  the  English  who 
were  taken  on  the  Spanish  coast  were  sent  to  dig 
in  the  mines  of  Potosi;  and  by  the  usual  progress 
of  a  spirit  of  resentment,  the  innocent  were,  after 
a  while,  confounded  with  the  guilty  in  indis¬ 
criminate  punishment.  The  complaints  of  the 
merchants  kindled  a  violent  flame  throughout  the 
nation,  which  soon  after  broke  out  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  and  was  communicated  from  that 
body  to  the  ministry.  Letters  of  reprisal  were 
granted,  and  a  war  ensued,  which  in  its  conse¬ 
quences  overthrew  all  the  alliances  that  but 
twenty  years  before  had  been  formed  with  san¬ 
guine  expectations  of  the  most  beneficial  fruits.” 


ances  in  Pennsylvania,  and  the  actual  insurrec¬ 
tions  and  rebellions  in  Massachusetts,  declare 

So  far  is  the  general  sense  of  mankind  from 
corresponding  with  the  tenets  of  those  who  en¬ 
deavour  to  lull  asleep  our  apprehensions  of 
discord  and  hostility  between  the  States,  in  the 
event  of  disunion,  that  it  has  from  long  obser¬ 
vation  of  the  progress  of  society  become  a  sort 
of  axiom  in  politics,  that  vicinity,  or  nearness 
of  situation,  constitutes  nations  natural  ene¬ 
mies.  An  intelligent  writer  expresses  himself 
on  this  subject  to  this  effect:  “Neighbouring 
nations  [says  he]  are  naturally  enemies  of  each 
other,  unless  their  common  weakness  forces 
them  to  league  in  a  confederative  republic, 
and  their  constitution  prevents  the  differences 
that  neighbourhood  occasions,  extinguishing 
that  secret  jealousy  which  disposes  all  states  to 
aggrandise  themselves  at  the  expense  of  their 
neighbours.”  2  This  passage,  at  the  same  time, 
points  out  the  evil  and  suggests  the  remedy. 

Publius 

Number  y 

[HAMILTON] 

It  is  sometimes  asked,  with  an  air  of  seeming 
triumph,  what  inducements  could  the  States 
have,  if  disunited,  to  make  war  upon  each 
other?  It  would  be  a  full  answer  to  this  ques¬ 
tion  to  say— precisely  the  same  inducements 
which  have,  at  different  times,  deluged  in 
blood  all  the  nations  in  the  world.  But,  un¬ 
fortunately  for  us,  the  question  admits  of  a 
more  particular  answer.  There  are  causes  of 
differences  within  our  immediate  contempla¬ 
tion,  of  the  tendency  of  which,  even  under  the 
restraints  of  a  federal  constitution,  we  have 
had  sufficient  experience  to  enable  us  to  form 
a  judgment  of  what  might  be  expected  if  those 
restraints  were  removed. 

Territorial  disputes  have  at  all  times  been 
found  one  of  the  most  fertile  sources  of  hos¬ 
tility  among  nations.  Perhaps  the  greatest  pro¬ 
portion  of  wars  that  have  desolated  the  earth 
have  sprung  from  this  origin.  This  cause 
would  exist  among  us  in  full  force.  We  have  a 
vast  tract  of  unsettled  territory  within  the 
boundaries  of  the  United  States.  There  still  are 
discordant  and  undecided  claims  between  sev¬ 
eral  of  them,  and  the  dissolution  of  the  Union 
would  lay  a  foundation  for  similar  claims  be¬ 
tween  them  all.  It  is  well  known  that  they  have 

2  Vide  Principes  des  Negotiations,  par  l’Abbe  de 
Mably.— publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


heretofore  had  serious  and  animated  discus¬ 
sion  concerning  the  rights  to  the  lands  which 
were  ungranted  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution, 
and  which  usually  went  under  the  name  of 
crown  lands.  The  States  within  the  limits  of 
whose  colonial  governments  they  were  com¬ 
prised  have  claimed  them  as  their  property, 
the  others  have  contended  that  the  rights  of 
the  crown  in  this  article  devolved  upon  the 
Union;  especially  as  to  all  that  part  of  the 
Western  territory  which,  either  by  actual  pos¬ 
session,  or  through  the  submission  of  the  In¬ 
dian  proprietors,  was  subjected  to  the  juris¬ 
diction  of  the  king  of  Great  Britain,  till  it  was 
relinquished  in  the  treaty  of  peace.  This,  it  has 
been  said,  was  at  all  events  an  acquisition  to 
the  Confederacy  by  compact  with  a  foreign 
power.  It  has  been  the  prudent  policy  of  Con¬ 
gress  to  appease  this  controversy,  by  prevail¬ 
ing  upon  the  States  to  make  cessions  to  the 
United  States  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole. 
This  has  been  so  far  accomplished  as,  under  a 
continuation  of  the  Union,  to  afford  a  decided 
prospect  of  an  amicable  termination  of  the 
dispute.  A  dismemberment  of  the  Confeder¬ 
acy,  however,  would  revive  this  dispute,  and 
would  create  others  on  the  same  subject.  At 
present,  a  large  part  of  the  vacant  Western 
territory  is,  by  cession  at  least,  if  not  by  any 
anterior  right,  the  common  property  of  the 
Union.  If  that  were  at  an  end,  the  Stales  which 
made  the  cession,  on  a  principle  of  federal 
compromise,  would  be  apt,  when  the  motive 
of  the  grant  had  ceased,  to  reclaim  the  lands 
as  a  reversion.  The  other  States  would  no 
doubt  insist  on  a  proportion,  by  right  of  repre¬ 
sentation.  Their  argument  would  be,  that  a 
grant,  once  made,  could  not  be  revoked;  and 
that  the  justice  of  participating  in  territory 
acquired  or  secured  by  (he  joint  efforts  of  the 
Confederacy,  remained  undiminished.  II,  (on- 
trarv  to  probability,  it  should  be  admitted  by 
all  die  States,  that  each  had  a  right  to  a  share 
of  this  common  stock,  there  would  still  be  a 
cliffic  ulty  to  be  surmounted,  as  to  a  proper  rule 
of  apportionment.  Different  princ  iples  would 
be  set  up  by  different  States  for  this  purpose; 
and  as  they  would  alfect  the  opposite  interests 
of  die  parties,  they  might  not  easily  be  suscep¬ 
tible  of  a  pacific  adjustment. 

In  the  wide  field  of  Western  territory,  there¬ 
fore,  we  perceive  an  ample  theatre  for  hostile 
pretensions,  without  any  umpire  or  common 
judge  to  interpose  between  the  contending 
parties,  l  o  reason  from  the  past  to  the  future, 
we  shall  have  good  ground  to  apprehend  that 


the  sword  would  sometimes  be  appealed  to  as 
the  arbiter  of  their  differences.  The  circum¬ 
stances  of  the  dispute  between  Connecticut 
and  Pennsylvania,  respecting  the  land  at 
Wyoming,  admonish  us  not  to  be  sanguine  in 
expecting  an  easy  accommodation  of  such  dif¬ 
ferences.  The  articles  of  federation  obliged  the 
parties  to  submit  the  matter  to  the  decision  of 
a  federal  court.  The  submission  was  made, 
and  the  court  decided  in  favour  of  Pennsyl¬ 
vania.  But  Connecticut  gave  strong  indications 
of  dissatisfaction  with  that  determination;  nor 
did  she  appear  to  be  entirely  resigned  to  it. 
till,  by  negotiation  and  management,  some¬ 
thing  like  an  equivalent  was  found  for  the  loss 
she  supposed  herself  to  have  sustained.  Noth¬ 
ing  here  said  is  intended  to  convey  the  slight¬ 
est  censure  on  the  conduct  of  that  State.  She 
no  doubt  sincerely  believed  herself  to  have 
been  injured  by  the  decision;  and  Slates,  like 
individuals,  acquiesce  with  great  reluctance 
in  determinations  to  their  disadvantage. 

Those  who  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the 
inside  of  the  transactions  which  attended  the 
progress  of  the  controversy  between  this  State 
and  the  district  of  Vermont,  can  vouch  the  op¬ 
position  we  experienced,  as  well  from  States 
not  interested  as  from  those  which  were  inter¬ 
ested  in  the  claim;  and  can  attest  the  danger 
to  which  the  peace  of  the  Confederacy  might 
have  been  exposed,  had  this  Stale  attempted  to 
assert  its  rights  by  force.  Two  motives  pre¬ 
ponderated  in  that  opposition:  one.  a  jealousy 
entertained  of  our  future  power;  and  the 
other,  the  interest  of  certain  individuals  of  in¬ 
fluence  in  the  neighbouring  States,  who  had 
obtained  grants  of  lands  under  the  actual  gov¬ 
ernment  of  that  district.  Even  the  States  which 
brought  forward  claims,  in  contradiction  to 
ours,  seemed  more  solicitous  to  dismember  this 
State  than  to  establish  their  own  pretensions. 
These  were  New  Hampshire.  Massachusetts, 
and  Connecticut.  New  Jersey  and  Rhode  Is¬ 
land.  upon  all  occasions,  discovered  a  warm 
zeal  for  the  independence  of  Vermont:  and 
Maryland,  till  alarmed  by  the  appearance  of 
a  connection  between  Canada  and  that  State, 
entered  deeply  into  the  same  views.  These  be¬ 
ing  small  States,  saw  with  an  unfriendly  eye 
the  pcrspcc  tivc  of  out  growing  greatness.  In  a 
review  of  these  iransat  (ions  we  may  trace  some 
of  the  causes  which  would  be  likely  to  embroil 
the  States  with  c.u  li  other,  if  it  should  be  their 
unpropitious  destiny  to  become  disunited. 

The  competitions  of  commerce  would  be  an¬ 
other  fruitful  some e  of  c  ontention.  1  he  Slates 


NUMBER  7 


less  favourably  circumstanced  would  be  desir¬ 
ous  of  escaping  from  the  disadvantages  of  local 
situation,  and  of  sharing  in  the  advantages  of 
their  more  fortunate  neighbours.  Each  State, 
or  separate  confederacy,  would  pursue  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  commercial  policy  peculiar  to  itself. 
This  would  occasion  distinctions,  preferences, 
and  exclusions,  which  would  beget  discontent. 
The  habits  of  intercourse,  on  the  basis  of  equal 
privileges,  to  which  we  have  been  accustomed 
since  the  earliest  settlement  of  the  country, 
would  give  a  keener  edge  to  those  causes  of 
discontent  than  they  would  naturally  have  in¬ 
dependent  of  this  circumstance.  We  should  be 
ready  to  denominate  injuries  those  things 
which  were  in  reality  the  justifiable  acts  of  in¬ 
dependent  sovereignties  consulting  a  distinct 
interest.  The  spirit  of  enterprise,  wrhich  char¬ 
acterises  the  commercial  part  of  America,  has 
left  no  occasion  of  displaying  itself  unim¬ 
proved.  It  is  not  at  all  probable  that  this  un¬ 
bridled  spirit  w7ould  pay  much  respect  to  those 
regulations  of  trade  by  which  particular  States 
might  endeavour  to  secure  exclusive  benefits 
to  their  own  citizens.  The  infractions  of  these 
regulations,  on  one  side,  the  efforts  to  prevent 
and  repel  them,  on  the  other,  would  naturally 
lead  to  outrages,  and  these  to  reprisals  and 
wrars. 

The  opportunities  wThich  some  States  would 
have  of  rendering  others  tributary  to  them  by 
commercial  regulations  would  be  impatiently 
submitted  to  by  the  tributary  States.  The  rela¬ 
tive  situation  of  New7  York,  Connecticut,  and 
New  Jersey,  wTould  afford  an  example  of  this 
kind.  Newr  York,  from  the  necessities  of  reve¬ 
nue,  must  lay  duties  on  her  importations.  A 
great  part  of  these  duties  must  be  paid  by  the 
inhabitants  of  the  two  other  states  in  the  ca¬ 
pacity  of  consumers  of  what  we  import.  New 
York  would  neither  be  willing  nor  able  to 
forego  this  advantage.  Her  citizens  wrould  not 
consent  that  a  duty  paid  by  them  should  be 
remitted  in  favour  of  the  citizens  of  her  neigh¬ 
bours;  nor  would  it  be  practicable,  if  there 
were  not  this  impediment  in  the  way,  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  the  customers  in  our  own  markets. 
Would  Connecticut  and  New7  Jersey  long  sub¬ 
mit  to  be  taxed  by  New  York  for  her  exclusive 
benefit?  Should  wre  be  long  permitted  to  re¬ 
main  in  the  quiet  and  undisturbed  enjoyment 
of  a  metropolis,  from  the  possession  of  which 
w7e  derived  an  advantage  so  odious  to  our 
neighbours,  and,  in  their  opinion,  so  oppres¬ 
sive?  Should  w7e  be  able  to  preserve  it  against 
the  incumbent  weight  of  Connecticut  on  the 


one  side,  and  the  co-operating  pressure  of 
New7  Jersey  on  the  other?  These  are  questions 
that  temerity  alone  will  answer  in  the  af¬ 
firmative. 

The  public  debt  of  the  Union  would  be  a 
further  cause  of  collision  between  the  separate 
States  or  confederacies. The  apportionment,  in 
the  first  instance,  and  the  progressive  extin¬ 
guishment  afterward,  would  be  alike  produc¬ 
tive  of  ill-humour  and  animosity.  How7  would 
it  be  possible  to  agree  upon  a  rule  of  appor¬ 
tionment  satisfactory  to  all?  There  is  scarcely 
any  that  can  be  proposed  which  is  entirely  free 
from  real  objections.  These,  as  usual,  w7ould 
be  exaggerated  by  the  adverse  interest  of  the 
parties.  There  are  even  dissimilar  views  among 
the  States  as  to  the  general  principle  of  dis¬ 
charging  the  public  debt.  Some  of  them,  either 
less  impressed  w7ith  the  importance  of  national 
credit,  or  because  their  citizens  have  little,  if 
any,  immediate  interest  in  the  question,  feel 
an  indifference,  if  not  a  repugnance,  to  the 
payment  of  the  domestic  debt  at  any  rate. 
These  w7ould  be  inclined  to  magnify  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  of  a  distribution.  Others  of  them,  a 
numerous  body  of  whose  citizens  are  creditors 
to  the  public  beyond  the  proportion  of  the 
State  in  the  total  amount  of  the  national  debt, 
w7ould  be  strenuous  for  some  equitable  and  ef¬ 
fective  provision.  The  procrastinations  of  the 
former  w7ould  excite  the  resentments  of  the 
latter.  The  settlement  of  a  rule  would,  in  the 
meantime,  be  postponed  by  real  differences  of 
opinion  and  affected  delays.  The  citizens  of 
the  States  interested  w7ould  clamour;  foreign 
powers  w7ould  urge  for  the  satisfaction  of  their 
just  demands,  and  the  peace  of  the  States 
w7ould  be  hazarded  to  the  double  contingency 
of  external  invasion  and  internal  contention. 

Suppose  the  difficulties  of  agreeing  upon 
a  rule  surmounted,  and  the  apportionment 
made.  Still  there  is  great  room  to  suppose  that 
the  rule  agreed  upon  wTould,  upon  experi¬ 
ment,  be  found  to  bear  harder  upon  some 
States  than  upon  others.  Those  w7hich  were 
sufferers  by  it  would  naturally  seek  for  a  miti¬ 
gation  of  the  burden.  The  others  would  as 
naturally  be  disinclined  to  a  revision,  which 
wras  likely  to  end  in  an  increase  of  their  own 
incumbrances.  Their  refusal  wrould  be  too  plau¬ 
sible  a  pretext  to  the  complaining  States  to 
withhold  their  contributions,  not  to  be  em¬ 
braced  with  avidity;  and  the  non-compliance 
of  these  States  writh  their  engagements  w7ould 
be  a  ground  of  bitter  discussion  and  alterca¬ 
tion.  If  even  the  rule  adopted  should  in 


THE  FEDERALIST 


practice  justify  the  equality  of  its  principle, 
still  delinquencies  in  payments  on  the  part 
of  some  of  the  States  would  result  from  a  di- 
versityof  other  causes— the  real  deficiencyof  re¬ 
sources;  the  mismanagement  of  their  finances; 
accidental  disorders  in  the  management  of  the 
government;  and.  in  addition  to  the  rest,  the 
reluctance  with  which  men  commonly  part 
with  nionev  for  purposes  that  have  outlived 
the  exigencies  which  produced  them,  and  in¬ 
terfere  with  the  supply  of  immediate  wants. 
Delinquencies,  from  whatever  causes,  would 
be  productive  of  complaints,  recriminations, 
and  quarrels.  There  is,  perhaps,  nothing  more 
likely  to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  nations 
than  their  being  bound  to  mutual  contribu¬ 
tions  for  anv  common  object  that  does  not 
yield  an  equal  and  coincident  benefit.  For  it  is 
an  observation,  as  true  as  it  is  trite,  that  there 
is  nothing  men  differ  so  readily  about  as  the 
payment  of  money. 

Laws  in  violation  of  private  contracts,  as 
they  amount  to  aggressions  on  the  rights  of 
those  States  whose  citizens  are  injured  by 
them,  may  be  considered  as  another  probable 
source  of  hostility.  We  are  not  authorised  to 
expect  that  a  more  liberal  or  more  equitable 
spirit  would  preside  over  the  legislations  of 
the  individual  States  hereafter,  if  unrestrained 
by  any  additional  checks,  than  we  have  hereto¬ 
fore  seen  in  too  many  instances  disgracing 
their  several  (odes.  We  have  observed  the  dis¬ 
position  to  retaliation  excited  in  Connecticut, 
in  consequence  of  the  enormities  perpetrated 
by  the  Legislature  of  Rhode  Island;  and  we 
reasonably  infer  that,  in  similar  cases  under 
other  tire u instances,  a  war.  not  of  parchment, 
but  of  the  sword,  would  chastise  such  atrocious 
breac  lies  of  moral  obligation  and  social  justice. 

The  probability  of  incompatible  alliances 
between  the  different  States  or  confederacies 
and  different  foteign  nations,  and  the  effects 
of  this  situation  upon  the  peace  of  the  whole, 
have  been  sufficiently  unfolded  in  some  pre¬ 
ceding  papers.  From  the  view  they  have  ex¬ 
hibited  of  this  part  of  the  subject,  this  conclu¬ 
sion  is  to  be  drawn,  that  America,  if  not  con 
nec  ted  at  all.  or  only  bv  the  feeble  tie  of  a 
simple  league  offensive  and  defensive,  would. 
b\  the*  operation  of  sue  fi  jarring  alliances,  be 
giaduallv  entangled  in  all  tin*  pc  i  nic  ions  laby¬ 
rinths  of  European  politics  and  wars;  and  by 
the  destine  live-  contentious  of  the  parts  into 
w 1 1 i c  1 1  she  was  divided,  would  be-  likely  to  be¬ 
come  a  pies  to  the  artifices  and  machinations 
of  powers  equally  I  lie  enemies  of  them  all. 


Divide  et  impera  1  must  be  the  motto  of  every 
nation  that  either  hates  or  fears  us.2 

Publius 

Number  8 

[HAMILTON] 

Assuming  it  therefore  as  an  established  truth 
that  the  several  States,  in  case  of  disunion,  or 
such  combinations  of  them  as  might  happen 
to  be  formed  out  of  the  wreck  of  the  general 
Confederacy,  would  be  subject  to  those  vicis¬ 
situdes  of  peace  and  war.  of  friendship  and 
enmity  with  each  other,  which  have  fallen  to 
the  lot  of  all  neighbouring  nations  not  united 
under  one  government,  let  us  enter  into  a 
concise  detail  of  some  of  the  consequences  that 
would  attend  such  a  situation. 

War  between  the  States,  in  the  first  period 
of  their  separate  existence,  would  be  accom¬ 
panied  with  much  greater  distresses  than  it 
commonly  is  in  those  countries  where  regular 
military  establishments  have  long  obtained. 
The  disciplined  armies  always  kept  on  foot  on 
the  continent  of  Europe,  though  they  bear  a 
malignant  aspect  to  liberty  and  economv.have, 
notwithstanding,  been  productive  of  the  sig¬ 
nal  advantage  of  rendering  sudden  conquests 
impracticable,  and  of  preventing  that  rapid 
desolation  which  used  to  mark  the  progress  of 
war  prior  to  their  introduction.  1  he  art  of 
fortification  has  contributed  to  the  same  ends. 
The  nations  of  Europe  are  encircled  with 
chains  of  fortified  places,  which  mutually  ob¬ 
struct  invasion.  Campaigns  are  wasted  in  re¬ 
ducing  two  or  three  frontier  garrisons,  to  gain 
admittance  into  an  enemy’s  country.  Similar 
impediments  occur  at  every  step,  to  exhaust 
the  strength  and  delay  the  progress  of  an  in¬ 
vader.  Formerly,  an  invading  army  would 
penetrate  into  t he  heart  of  a  neighbouring 
country  almost  as  soon  as  intelligence  of  its  ap¬ 
proach  could  be  received;  but  now  a  compara¬ 
tively  small  force  of  disciplined  troops,  acting 
on  the  defensive,  with  the  aid  of  posts,  is  able 
to  impede,  and  finally  to  frustrate,  the  enter¬ 
prises  of  one  much  mot c  considerable.  1  he  his 
tory  of  war,  in  that  quarter  of  the  globe,  is  no 
longer  a  history  of  nations  subdued  and  em¬ 
pires  overturned;  blit  of  towns  taken  and  re¬ 
taken;  of  battles  that  decide  nothing,  of  rc- 

1  Divide  and  command.—  I't  n«  u  s 

aIn  order  tfiai  the  whole  subject  of  these  panels 
m;i\  as  soon  as  possible  he*  laid  befoic  the  public, 
ii  is  pmposed  to  publish  them  fom  times  a  week 

on  I  itesdav  in  the  New  York  Packet  and  on 
I  hnrsday  in  the  Daily  Advertiser.— Publius 


NUMBER  8 


treats  more  beneficial  than  victories;  of  much 
effort  and  little  acquisition. 

In  this  country  the  scene  would  be  alto¬ 
gether  reversed.  The  jealousy  of  military  estab¬ 
lishments  would  postpone  them  as  long  as 
possible.  The  want  of  fortifications,  leaving  the 
frontiers  of  one  State  open  to  another,  would 
facilitate  inroads.  The  populous  States  would, 
with  little  difficulty,  overrun  their  less  popu¬ 
lous  neighbours.  Conquests  would  be  as  easy 
to  be  made  as  difficult  to  be  retained.  War, 
therefore,  would  be  desultory  and  predatory. 
Plunder  and  devastation  ever  march  in  the 
train  of  irregulars.  The  calamities  of  indi¬ 
viduals  would  make  the  principal  figure  in  the 
events  which  would  characterise  our  military 
exploits. 

This  picture  is  not  too  highly  wrought; 
though,  I  confess,  it  would  not  long  remain  a 
just  one.  Safety  from  external  danger  is  the 
most  powerful  director  of  national  conduct. 
Even  the  ardent  love  of  liberty  will,  after  a 
time,  give  way  to  its  dictates.  The  violent  de¬ 
struction  of  life  and  property  incident  to  war, 
the  continual  effort  and  alarm  attendant  on  a 
state  of  continual  danger,  will  compel  nations 
the  most  attached  to  liberty  to  resort  for  repose 
and  security  to  institutions  which  have  a  tend¬ 
ency  to  destroy  their  civil  and  political  rights. 
To  be  more  safe,  they  at  length  become  will¬ 
ing  to  run  the  risk  of  being  less  free. 

The  institutions  chiefly  alluded  to  are  stand¬ 
ing  armies  and  the  correspondent  appendages 
of  military  establishments.  Standing  armies,  it 
is  said,  are  not  provided  against  in  the  new 
Constitution;  and  it  is  therefore  inferred  that 
they  may  exist  under  it.1  Their  existence,  how¬ 
ever  from  the  very  terms  of  the  proposition, 
is,  at  most,  problematical  and  uncertain.2  But 
standing  armies,  it  may  be  replied,  must  in¬ 
evitably  result  from  a  dissolution  of  the  Con¬ 
federacy.  Frequent  war  and  constant  appre¬ 
hension,  which  require  a  state  of  as  constant 
preparation,  will  infallibly  produce  them.  The 
weaker  States  or  confederacies  would  first  have 
recourse  to  them,  to  put  themselves  upon  an 

^his  objection  will  be  fully  examined  in  its 
proper  place,  and  it  will  be  shown  that  the  only 
natural  precaution  which  could  have  been  taken 
on  this  subject  has  been  taken;  and  a  much  better 
one  than  is  to  be  found  in  any  constitution  that 
has  been  heretofore  framed  in  America,  most  of 
which  contain  no  guard  at  all  on  this  subject.— 
Publius 

2 In  the  revised  text:  “This  inference,  from  the 
very  form  of  the  proposition,  is,  at  best,  problem¬ 
atical  and  uncertain.” 


equality  with  their  more  potent  neighbours. 
They  would  endeavour  to  supply  the  inferior¬ 
ity  of  population  and  resources  by  a  more 
regular  and  effective  system  of  defence,  by 
disciplined  troops,  and  by  fortifications.  They 
would,  at  the  same  time,  be  necessitated  to 
strengthen  the  executive  arm  of  government, 
in  doing  which  their  constitutions  would  ac¬ 
quire  a  progressive  direction  towards  mon¬ 
archy.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  war  to  increase  the 
executive  at  the  expense  of  the  legislative  au¬ 
thority. 

The  expedients  which  have  been  mentioned 
would  soon  give  the  States  or  confederacies 
that  made  use  of  them  a  superiority  over  their 
neighbours.  Small  states,  or  states  of  less  natu¬ 
ral  strength,  under  vigorous  governments,  and 
with  the  assistance  of  disciplined  armies,  have 
often  triumphed  over  large  states,  or  states  of 
greater  natural  strength,  which  have  been  des¬ 
titute  of  these  advantages.  Neither  the  pride 
nor  the  safety  of  the  more  important  States  or 
confederacies  would  permit  them  long  to  sub¬ 
mit  to  this  mortifying  and  adventitious  supe¬ 
riority.  They  would  quickly  resort  to  means 
similar  to  those  by  which  it  had  been  effected, 
to  reinstate  themselves  in  their  lost  pre-emi¬ 
nence.  Thus  we  should,  in  a  little  time,  see  es¬ 
tablished  in  every  part  of  this  country  the  same 
engines  of  despotism  which  have  been  the 
scourge  of  the  Old  World.  This,  at  least,  would 
be  the  natural  course  of  things;  and  our  rea¬ 
sonings  will  be  the  more  likely  to  be  just,  in 
proportion  as  they  are  accommodated  to  this 
standard. 

These  are  not  vague  inferences  drawn  from 
supposed  or  speculative  defects  in  a  Constitu¬ 
tion,  the  whole  power  of  which  is  lodged  in 
the  hands  of  a  people,  or  their  representatives 
and  delegates,  but  they  are  solid  conclusions, 
drawn  from  the  natural  and  necessary  progress 
of  human  affairs. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  asked,  by  way  of  objec¬ 
tion  to  this,  why  did  not  standingannies  spring 
up  out  of  the  contentions  which  so  often  dis¬ 
tracted  the  ancient  republics  of  Greece?  Differ¬ 
ent  answers,  equally  satisfactory,  may  be  given 
to  this  question.  The  industrious  habits  of  the 
people  of  the  present  day,  absorbed  in  the  pur¬ 
suits  of  gain,  and  devoted  to  the  improvements 
of  agriculture  and  commerce,  are  incompat¬ 
ible  with  the  condition  of  a  nation  of  soldiers, 
which  was  the  true  condition  of  the  people  of 
those  republics.  The  means  of  revenue,  which 
have  been  so  greatly  multiplied  by  the  increase 
of  gold  and  silver  and  of  the  arts  of  industry, 


THE  FEDERALIST 


and  the  science  of  finance,  which  is  the  off¬ 
spring  of  modern  limes,  concurring  with  the 
habits  of  nations,  have  produced  an  entire 
revolution  in  the  system  of  war.  and  have  ren¬ 
dered  disciplined  armies,  distinct  from  the  body 
of  the  citizens,  the  inseparable  companions  of 
frequent  hostility. 

There  is  a  wide  difference,  also,  between 
military  establishments  in  a  country  seldom  ex¬ 
posed  by  its  situation  to  internal  invasions, 
and  in  one  which  is  often  subject  to  them,  and 
always  apprehensive  of  them.  1  he  rulers  of  the 
former  can  have  no  good  pretext,  if  they  are 
even  so  inclined,  to  keep  on  foot  armies  so  nu¬ 
merous  as  must  of  necessity  be  maintained  in 
the  latter.  These  armies  being,  in  the  first  case, 
rarelv,  if  at  all,  called  into  activity  for  interior 
defence,  the  people  are  in  no  danger  of  being 
broken  to  military  subordination.  The  laws 
are  not  accustomed  to  relaxations,  in  favour  of 
military  exigencies;  the  civil  state  remains  in 
full  \  igour,  neither  corrupted,  nor  confounded 
with  the  principles  or  propensities  of  the  other 
state.  The  smallness  of  the  army  renders  the 
natural  strength  of  the  community  an  over¬ 
match  for  it:  and  the  citizens,  not  habituated 
to  look  up  to  the  military  power  for  protec¬ 
tion,  or  to  submit  to  its  oppressions,  neither 
love  nor  fear  the  soldiery:  they  view  them  with 
a  spirit  of  jealous  acquiescence  in  a  necessary 
evil,  and  stand  reach  to  resist  a  power  which 
they  suppose  may  be  exerted  to  the  prejudice 
of  their  rights.  The  army  under  such  circum¬ 
stances  may  usefully  aid  the  magistrate  to  sup¬ 
press  a  small  faction,  or  an  occasional  mob.  or 
insurrection;  but  it  will  be  unable  to  enforce 
encroachments  against  the  united  efforts  of  the 
great  body  of  the  people. 

In  a  country  in  the  predicament  last  de¬ 
scribed,  the  contrary  of  all  this  happens.  1  he 
perpetual  menac  mgs  of  danger  oblige  the  gov¬ 
ernment  to  be  always  prepared  to  repel  it;  its 
armies  must  be  numerous  enough  for  instant 
defence.  1  he  continual  nec  cssity  for  their  serv¬ 
ices  enhances  the  importable  of  the  soldier, 
and  proportionally  degrades  the'  condition  of 
the  t  iti/en  1  lie  military  state  bet  ome.selevated 
aho\ e  the  civil.  The  inhabitants  of  territories, 
often  the  theatre  of  war.  arc  unavoidably 
subjected  to  frequent  infringements  on  their 
rights,  which  serve  to  weaken  their  sense  of 
those  rights;  and  1>\  degrees  the*  people  arc 
hmught  to  consider  the  soldiery  not  onls  as 
their  piotct  tors,  but  as  their  supeiiois.  Hie 
transition  from  this  disposition  to  that  of  con¬ 
sidering  them  masters,  is  neither  remote  nor 


difficult;  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  prevail  upon 
a  people  under  such  impressions,  to  make  a 
bold  or  effectual  resistance  to  usurpations  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  military  power. 

The  kingdom  of  Great  Britain  falls  within 
the  first  description.  An  insular  situation,  and 
a  powerful  marine,  guarding  it  in  a  great  meas¬ 
ure  against  the  possibility  of  foreign  invasion, 
supersede  the  necessity  of  a  numerous  army 
within  the  kingdom.  A  sufficient  force  to  make 
head  against  a  sudden  descent,  till  the  militia 
could  have  time  to  rally  and  embody,  is  all  that 
has  been  deemed  requisite.  No  motive  of  na¬ 
tional  policy  has  demanded,  nor  would  public 
opinion  have  tolerated,  a  larger  number  of 
troops  upon  its  domestic  establishment.  There 
has  been,  for  a  long  time  past,  little  room  for 
the  operation  of  the  other  causes,  which  have 
been  enumerated  as  the  consequences  of  in¬ 
ternal  war.  This  peculiar  felicity  of  situation 
has,  in  a  great  degree,  contributed  to  preserve 
the  liberty  which  that  country  to  this  day  en¬ 
joys,  in  spite  of  the  prevalent  venality  and  cor¬ 
ruption.  If,  on  the  contrary,  Britain  had  been 
situated  on  the  continent,  and  had  been  com¬ 
pelled.  as  she  would  have  been,  by  that  situa¬ 
tion,  to  make  her  military  establishments  at 
home  co  extensive  with  those  of  theothcr  great 
powers  of  Europe,  she,  like  them,  would  in  all 
probability  be,  at  this  day,  a  victim  to  the  ab¬ 
solute  power  of  a  single  man.  l'is  possible, 
though  not  easy,  that  the  people  of  that  island 
may  he  enslaved  from  other  causes;  but  it  can¬ 
not  be  by  the  prowess  of  an  army  so  inconsid¬ 
erable  as  that  which  has  been  usually  kept  up 
within  the  kingdom. 

If  we  are  wise  enough  to  preserve  the  Union 
we  may  for  ages  enjoy  an  advantage  similar  to 
that  of  an  insulated  situation.  Europe  is  at  a 
great  distance  from  us.  Her  colonies  in  our 
vicinity  will  be  likely  to  continue  too  much 
disproportioned  in  strength  to  he  able  to  give 
us  am  dangerous  annoyance.  Extensive  mili- 
tarv  establishments  cannot,  in  this  position,  be 
necessary  to  our  security.  But  ii  we  should  be 
disunited,  and  the  integral  parts  should  either 
remain  separated,  or.  which  is  most  probable, 
should  be  drawn  together  into  two  or  three 
confederacies,  we  should  be.  in  a  short  course 
of  time,  in  the  predicament  ol  the  continental 
powers  of  Europe— our  liberties  would  be  a  prey 
to  the  means  ol  defending  oursehes  against 
the  ambition  and  jealous)  of  each  othei 

1  bis  is  an  idea  not  superficial  or  futile,  but 
solid  and  weighty.  It  deserves  the  most  serious 
and  mature  consideration  of  c\erv  prudent 


NUMBER  9 


and  honest  man  of  whatever  party.  If  such 
men  will  make  a  firm  and  solemn  pause,  and 
meditate  dispassionately  on  the  importance  of 
this  interesting  idea;  if  they  will  contemplate 
it  in  all  its  attitudes,  and  trace  it  to  all  its  con¬ 
sequences,  they  will  not  hesitate  to  part  with 
trivial  objections  to  a  Constitution,  the  rejec¬ 
tion  of  which  would  in  all  probability  put  a 
final  period  to  the  Union.  The  airy  phantoms 
that  flit  before  the  distempered  imaginations 
of  some  of  its  adversaries  would  quickly  give 
place  to  the  more  substantial  forms  of  dangers, 
real,  certain,  and  formidable.  Publius 

Number  g 

[HAMILTON] 

A  firm  Union  will  be  of  the  utmost  moment 
to  the  peace  and  liberty  of  the  States,  as  a  bar¬ 
rier  against  domestic  faction  and  insurrection. 
It  is  impossible  to  read  the  history  of  the  petty 
republics  of  Greece  and  Italy  without  feeling 
sensations  of  horror  and  disgust  at  the  distrac¬ 
tions  with  which  they  were  continually  agitat¬ 
ed,  and  at  the  rapid  succession  of  revolutions 
by  which  they  were  kept  in  a  state  of  perpetual 
vibration  between  the  extremes  of  tyranny  and 
anarchy.  If  they  exhibit  occasional  calms,  these 
only  serve  as  short-lived  contrasts  to  the  furi¬ 
ous  storms  that  are  to  succeed.  If  now  and  then 
intervals  of  felicity  open  to  view,  we  behold 
them  with  a  mixture  of  regret,  arising  from  the 
reflection  that  the  pleasing  scenes  before  us 
are  soon  to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  tempestu¬ 
ous  waves  of  sedition  and  party  rage.  If  mo¬ 
mentary  rays  of  glory  break  forth  from  the 
gloom,  while  they  dazzle  us  with  a  transient 
and  fleeting  brilliancy,  they  at  the  same  time 
admonish  us  to  lament  that  the  vices  of  gov¬ 
ernment  should  pervert  the  direction  and 
tarnish  the  lustre  of  those  bright  talents  and 
exalted  endowments  for  which  the  favoured 
soils  that  produced  them  have  been  so  justly 
celebrated. 

From  the  disorders  that  disfigure  the  annals 
of  those  republics  the  advocates  of  despotism 
have  drawn  arguments,  not  only  against  the 
forms  of  republican  government,  but  against 
the  very  principles  of  civil  liberty.  They  have 
descried  all  free  government  as  inconsistent 
with  the  order  of  society,  and  have  indulged 
themselves  in  malicious  exultation  over  its 
friends  and  partisans.  Happily  for  mankind, 
stupendous  fabrics  reared  on  the  basis  of  lib¬ 
erty,  which  have  flourished  for  ages,  have,  in 
a  few  glorious  instances,  refuted  their  gloomy 


sophisms.  And,  I  trust,  America  will  be  the 
broad  and  solid  foundation  of  other  edifices, 
not  less  magnificent,  which  will  be  equally  per¬ 
manent  monuments  of  their  errors. 

But  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  portraits 
they  have  sketched  of  republican  government 
were  too  just  copies  of  the  originals  from  which 
they  were  taken.  If  it  had  been  found  imprac¬ 
ticable  to  have  devised  models  of  a  more  per¬ 
fect  structure,  the  enlightened  friends  to  lib¬ 
erty  would  have  been  obliged  to  abandon  the 
cause  of  that  species  of  government  as  indefen¬ 
sible.  The  science  of  politics,  however,  like 
most  other  sciences,  has  received  great  improve¬ 
ment.  The  efficacy  of  various  principles  is  now 
well  understood,  which  were  either  not  known 
at  all,  or  imperfectly  known  to  the  ancients. 
The  regular  distribution  of  power  into  distinct 
departments;  the  introduction  of  legislative 
balances  and  checks;  the  institution  of  courts 
composed  of  judges  holding  their  offices  dur¬ 
ing  good  behaviour;  the  representation  of  the 
people  in  the  legislature  by  deputies  of  their 
own  election:  these  are  wholly  new  discoveries, 
or  have  made  their  principal  progress  towards 
perfection  in  modern  times.  They  are  means, 
and  powerful  means,  by  which  the  excellences 
of  republican  government  may  be  retained  and 
its  imperfections  lessened  or  avoided.  To  this 
catalogue  of  circumstances  that  tend  to  the 
amelioration  of  popular  systems  of  civil  gov¬ 
ernment,  I  shall  venture,  however  novel  it  may 
appear  to  some,  to  add  one  more,  on  a  prin¬ 
ciple  which  has  been  made  the  foundation  of 
an  objection  to  the  new  Constitution;  I  mean 
the  enlargement  of  the  orbit  within  which 
such  systems  are  to  revolve,  either  in  respect  to 
the  dimensions  of  a  single  State,  or  to  the  con¬ 
solidation  of  several  smaller  States  into  one 
great  Confederacy.  The  latter  is  that  which  im¬ 
mediately  concerns  the  object  under  consider¬ 
ation.  It  will,  however,  be  of  use  to  examine 
the  principle  in  its  application  to  a  single 
State,  which  shall  be  attended  to  in  another 
place. 

The  utility  of  a  Confederacy  as  well  to  sup¬ 
press  faction  and  to  guard  the  internal  tran¬ 
quillity  of  states,  as  to  increase  their  external 
force  and  security,  is  in  reality  not  a  new  idea. 
It  has  been  practised  upon  in  different  coun¬ 
tries  and  ages,  and  has  received  the  sanction  of 
the  most  approved  writers  on  the  subjects  of 
politics.  The  opponents  of  the  plan  proposed 
have,  with  great  assiduity,  cited  and  circulated 
the  observations  of  Montesquieu  on  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  contracted  territory  for  a  republican 


48 


THE  FEDERALIST 


government.  But  they  seem  not  to  have  been 
apprised  of  the  sentiments  of  that  great  man 
expressed  in  another  part  of  his  work,  nor  to 
have  adverted  to  the  consequences  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  to  which  they  subscribe  with  such  ready 
acquiescence. 

When  Montesquieu  recommends  a  small  ex¬ 
tent  for  republics,  the  standards  he  had  in  view 
were  of  dimensions  far  short  of  the  limits  of 
almost  even  one  of  these  States.  Neither  \  ir- 
ginia.  Massachusetts.  Pennsylvania,  New  York, 
North  Carolina,  nor  Georgia  can  by  an\  means 
be  compared  with  the  models  from  which  he 
reasoned  and  to  which  the  terms  of  his  de¬ 
scription  apply.  If  we  therefore  take  his  ideas 
on  this  point  as  the  criterion  of  truth,  we 
shall  be  driven  to  the  alternative  either  of 
taking  refuge  at  once  in  the  arms  of  mon¬ 
archy,  or  of  splitting  ourselves  into  an  infinity 
of  little,  jealous,  clashing,  tumultuous  com¬ 
monwealths,  the  wretched  nurseries  of  unceas¬ 
ing  discord,  and  the  miserable  objects  of  uni¬ 
versal  pity  or  contempt.  Some  of  the  writers 
who  have  come  forward  on  the  other  side  of 
the  question  seem  to  have  been  aware  of  the 
dilemma;  and  have  even  been  bold  enough  to 
hint  at  the  division  of  the  larger  Slates  as  a  de¬ 
sirable  thing.  Such  an  infatuated  policy,  such 
a  desperate  expedient,  might,  by  the  multipli¬ 
cation  of  petty  offices,  answer  the  \iews  of  men 
who  possess  not  qualifications  to  extend  their 
influence  beyond  the  nariow  circles  of  per¬ 
sonal  intrigue,  but  it  could  never  promote 
the  greatness  or  happiness  of  the  people  of 
A  meric  a. 

Referring  the  examination  of  the  principle 
itseli  to  another  place,  as  has  been  already 
mentioned,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  remark  here 
that,  in  the  sense  of  the  author  who  has  been 
most  emphatically  quoted  upon  the  occasion, 
it  would  only  dictate  a  reduction  of  the  size  of 
i he  more  considerable  members  of  the  Union, 
hut  would  not  militate  against  their  being 
all  comprehended  in  one  confederate  gov¬ 
ernment.  And  this  is  the  true  question,  in 
the  discussion  of  which  we  are  at  present 
interested. 

So  lar  are  the  suggestions  of  Montesquieu 
fioin  standing  in  opposition  to  a  general 
Union  of  the  States,  that  he  explicitly  neats 
of  a  Com  tin  ra  n  Ri  et’iu.tc.  as  the  expedient 
for  extending  the  sphere  ol  popular  govern¬ 
ment,  and  tec  one  ding  the  advantages  of  nion- 
. 1 1 <  ] i %  with  those  ol  republicanism. 

“It  is  very  probable*'  (says  he’)  "that  man* 

1  Sfnrit  of  l.awx,  hook  l \ . — 1*«  l»I  u  s 


kind  would  have  been  obliged  at  length  to 
live  constantly  under  the  government  of  a  sin¬ 
gle  person,  had  they  not  contrived  a  kind  of 
constitution  that  has  all  the  internal  advan¬ 
tages  of  a  republican,  together  with  the  ex¬ 
ternal  force  of  a  monarchical,  government.  I 
mean  a  Confederate  Republic. 

“This  form  of  government  is  a  convention 
by  which  several  smaller  states  agree  to  be¬ 
come  members  of  a  larger  one,  which  they  in¬ 
tend  to  form.  It  is  a  kind  of  assemblage  of  so¬ 
cieties  that  constitute  a  new  one.  capable  of 
increasing,  bv  means  of  new  associations,  till 
they  arrive  to  such  a  degree  of  power  as  to  he 
able  to  provide  for  the  security  of  the  united 
body. 

"A  republic  of  this  kind,  able  to  withstand 
an  external  force,  may  support  itself  without 
any  internal  corruptions.  The  form  of  this  so¬ 
ciety  prevents  all  manner  of  inconveniences. 

“If  a  single  member  should  attempt  to  usurp 
the  supreme  authority,  he  could  not  be  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  an  equal  authority  and  credit 
in  all  the  confederate  states.  Were  he  to  have 
too  great  influence  over  one.  this  would  alarm 
the  rest.  Were  he  to  subdue  a  part,  that  which 
would  still  remain  tree  might  oppose  him  with 
forces  independent  of  those  which  he  had 
usurped,  and  overpower  him  before  he  could 
be  settled  in  his  usurpation. 

“Should  a  popular  insurrection  happen  in 
one  of  the  confederate  states,  the  others  ate 
able  to  quell  it.  Should  abuses  creep  into  one 
part,  thev  arc  reformed  by  those  that  remain 
sound.  I  lie  state  may  be  destroyed  on  one  side, 
and  not  on  the  other;  the  confederacy  may  be 
dissolved,  and  the  confederates  preserve  their 
sovereignty. 

“As  this  government  is  composed  of  small 
republics,  it  enjoys  the  internal  happiness  of 
each;  and  with  respect  to  its  external  situation, 
it  is  possessed,  bv  means  of  the  association,  of 
all  the  advantages  of  large  monarchies:* 

1  have  thought  it  proper  to  quote  at  length 
these  interesting  passages,  because  thev  con¬ 
tain  a  luminous  abridgment  of  the  principal 
arguments  in  favour  of  the  Union,  and  must 
effectually  remove  the  false  impressions  whic.lt 
,i  misapplication  of  other  parts  of  the  work 
w  as  calc  it  la  t  cc  1  to  make.  I  lie}  have. at  the  same 
time,  an  intimate  connection  with  the  more 
immediate  design  of  this  paper;  which  is,  to 
illustrate  the  tendency  of  the  Union  to  repress 
domestic  faction  and  insurrection. 

\  distinction,  more  subtle  than  accurate,  lias 
been  raised  between  a  confederacy  and  a  coin 


NUMBER  10 


solidation  of  the  States.  The  essential  charac¬ 
teristic  of  the  first  is  said  to  be  the  restriction 
of  its  authority  to  the  members  in  their  col¬ 
lective  capacities,  without  reaching  to  the  in¬ 
dividuals  of  whom  they  are  composed.  It  is 
contended  that  the  national  council  ought  to 
have  no  concern  with  any  object  of  internal 
administration.  An  exact  equality  of  suffrage 
between  the  members  has  also  been  insisted 
upon  as  a  leading  feature  of  a  confederate  gov¬ 
ernment.  These  positions  are,  in  the  main, 
arbitrary;  they  are  supported  neither  by  prin¬ 
ciple  nor  precedent.  It  has  indeed  happened, 
that  governments  of  this  kind  have  generally 
operated  in  the  manner  which  the  distinction, 
taken  notice  of,  supposes  to  be  inherent  in 
their  nature;  but  there  have  been  in  most  of 
them  extensive  exceptions  to  the  practice, 
which  serve  to  prove,  as  far  as  example  will 
go,  that  there  is  no  absolute  rule  on  the  sub¬ 
ject.  And  it  will  be  clearly  shown,  in  the  course 
of  this  investigation,  that  as  far  as  the  prin¬ 
ciple  contended  for  has  prevailed,  it  has  been 
the  cause  of  incurable  disorder  and  imbecility 
in  the  government. 

The  definition  of  a  confederate  republic 
seems  simply  to  be  “an  assemblage  of  socie¬ 
ties,”  or  an  association  of  two  or  more  states 
into  one  state.  The  extent,  modifications,  and 
objects  of  the  federal  authority,  are  mere  mat¬ 
ters  of  discretion.  So  long  as  the  separate  or¬ 
ganisation  of  the  members  be  not  abolished; 
so  long  as  it  exists,  by  a  constitutional  neces¬ 
sity,  for  local  purposes;  though  it  should  be  in 
perfect  subordination  to  the  general  authority 
of  the  union,  it  would  still  be,  in  fact  and  in 
theory,  an  association  of  states,  or  a  confeder¬ 
acy.  The  proposed  Constitution,  so  far  from 
implying  an  abolition  of  the  State  govern¬ 
ments,  makes  them  constituent  parts  of  the 
national  sovereignty,  by  allowing  them  a  di¬ 
rect  representation  in  the  Senate,  and  leaves 
in  their  possession  certain  exclusive  and  very 
important  portions  of  sovereign  power.  This 
fully  corresponds,  in  every  rational  import  of 
the  terms,  w’ith  the  idea  of  a  federal  govern¬ 
ment. 

In  the  Lycian  confederacy,  wThich  consisted 
of  twenty-three  cities  or  republics,  the  largest 
were  entitled  to  three  votes  in  the  common 
council,  those  of  the  middle  class  to  two,  and 
the  smallest  to  one.  The  common  council  had 
the  appointment  of  all  the  judges  and  magis¬ 
trates  of  the  respective  cities.  This  was  cer¬ 
tainly  the  most  delicate  species  of  interference 
in  their  internal  administration;  for  if  there 


be  anything  that  seems  exclusively  appropri¬ 
ated  to  the  local  jurisdictions,  it  is  the  ap¬ 
pointment  of  their  own  officers.  Yet  Montes¬ 
quieu,  speaking  of  this  association,  says:  “Were 
I  to  give  a  model  of  an  excellent  Confederate 
Republic,  it  would  be  that  of  Lycia.”  Thus  we 
perceive  that  the  distinctions  insisted  upon 
were  not  within  the  contemplation  of  this  en¬ 
lightened  civilian;  and  we  shall  be  led  to  con¬ 
clude  that  they  are  the  novel  refinements  of  an 
erroneous  theory.  Publius 

Number  io 

[MADISON] 

Among  the  numerous  advantages  promised  by 
a  well-constructed  Union,  none  deserves  to 
be  more  accurately  developed  than  its  tend¬ 
ency  to  break  and  control  the  violence  of  fac¬ 
tion.  The  friendof  popular  governments  never 
finds  himself  so  much  alarmed  for  their  char¬ 
acter  and  fate  as  when  he  contemplates  their 
propensity  to  this  dangerous  vice.  He  will  not 
fail,  therefore,  to  set  a  due  value  on  any  plan 
which,  without  violating  the  principles  to 
which  he  is  attached,  provides  a  proper  cure 
for  it.  The  instability,  injustice,  and  confusion 
introduced  into  the  public  councils,  have,  in 
truth,  been  the  mortal  diseases  under  which 
popular  governments  have  everywhere  per¬ 
ished;  as  they  continue  to  be  the  favourite  and 
fruitful  topics  from  wrhich  the  adversaries  to 
liberty  derive  their  most  specious  declama¬ 
tions.  The  valuable  improvements  made  by 
the  American  constitutions  on  the  popular 
models,  both  ancient  and  modern,  cannot  cer¬ 
tainly  be  too  much  admired;  but  it  would  be 
an  unwarrantable  partiality,  to  contend  that 
they  have  as  effectually  obviated  the  danger 
on  this  side,  as  was  wished  and  expected.  Com¬ 
plaints  are  everywhere  heard  from  our  most 
considerate  and  virtuous  citizens,  equally  the 
friends  of  public  and  private  faith,  and  of 
public  and  personal  liberty,  that  our  govern¬ 
ments  are  too  unstable,  that  the  public  good 
is  disregarded  in  the  conflicts  of  rival  parties, 
and  that  measures  are  too  often  decided,  not 
according  to  the  rules  of  justice  and  the  rights 
of  the  minor  party,  but  by  the  superior  force 
of  an  interested  and  overbearing  majority. 
However  anxiously  we  may  wrish  that  these 
complaints  had  no  foundation,  the  evidence 
of  known  facts  will  not  permit  us  to  deny  that 
they  are  in  some  degree  true.  It  will  be  found, 
indeed,  on  a  candid  review  of  our  situation, 
that  some  of  the  distresses  under  which  we 


THE  FEDERALIST 


labour  have  been  erroneously  charged  on  the 
operation  of  our  governments;  but  it  will  be 
found,  at  the  same  time,  that  other  causes  will 
not  alone  account  for  many  of  our  heaviest 
misfortunes;  and,  particularly,  for  that  pre¬ 
vailing  and  increasing  distrust  of  public  en¬ 
gagements.  and  alarm  for  private  rights,  which 
are  echoed  from  one  end  of  the  continent  to 
the  other.  These  must  be  chiefly,  if  not  wholly, 
effects  of  the  unsteadiness  and  injustice  with 
which  a  factious  spirit  has  tainted  our  public 
administrations. 

Hy  a  faction,  I  understand  a  number  of  citi¬ 
zens,  whether  amounting  to  a  majority  or  mi¬ 
nority  of  the  whole,  who  are  united  and  act¬ 
uated  by  some  common  impulse  of  passion, 
or  of  interest,  adverse  to  the  rights  of  other 
citizens,  or  to  the  permanent  and  aggregate 
interests  of  the  community. 

There  are  two  methods  of  curing  the  mis¬ 
chiefs  of  faction:  the  one,  by  removing  its 
causes;  the  other,  by  controlling  its  effects. 

There  are  again  two  methods  of  removing 
the  causes  of  faction:  the  one,  by  destroying 
the  liberty  which  is  essential  to  its  existence; 
the  other,  by  giving  to  every  citizen  the  same 
opinions,  the  same  passions,  and  the  same  in¬ 
terests. 

It  could  never  be  more  truly  said  than  of 
the  first  remedy,  that  it  was  worse  than  the 
disease.  Liberty  is  to  faction  what  air  is  to  fire, 
an  aliment  without  which  it  instantly  expires. 
Hut  it  could  not  be  less  folly  to  abolish  liberty, 
which  is  essential  to  political  life,  because  it 
nourishes  faction,  than  it  would  be  to  wish 
the  annihilation  of  air,  which  is  essential  to 
animal  life,  because  it  imparts  to  fire  its  de- 
struc  tivc  agency. 

The  second  expedient  is  as  impracticable 
as  the  first  would  be  unwise.  As  long  as  the 
reason  of  man  continues  fallible,  and  he  is  at 
liberty  to  exercise  it,  different  opinions  will 
be  formed.  As  long  as  the  connection  subsists 
between  his  reason  and  his  self-love,  his  opin¬ 
ions  and  his  passions  will  have  a  reciprocal  in¬ 
fluence  on  each  other;  and  the  former  will  be 
objects  to  which  the  latter  will  attach  them¬ 
selves.  I  he  divetsity  in  the  faculties  of  men. 
from  which  the  rights  of  property  originate,  is 
not  less  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  a  uniform 
it\  of  interests.  I  lie*  protection  oi  these  facul¬ 
ties  is  the  fust  objec  t  of  government.  From  the 
protection  of  diHerent  and  imcc|iial  faculties 
o!  acquiring  property,  the  possession  oi  clit 
f c-1  c  ut  degrees  and  kinds  of  prnpcttv  immedi¬ 
ate!)  results;  and  from  the*  influence  of  these 


on  the  sentiments  and  views  of  the  respective 
proprietors,  ensues  a  division  of  the  society 
into  different  interests  and  parties. 

The  latent  causes  of  faction  are  thus  sown 
in  the  nature  of  man;  and  we  see  them  every¬ 
where  brought  into  different  degrees  of  ac¬ 
tivity,  according  to  the  different  circumstances 
of  civil  society.  A  zeal  for  different  opinions 
concerning  religion,  concerning  government, 
and  many  other  points,  as  well  of  speculation 
as  of  practice;  an  attachment  of  different  lead¬ 
ers  ambitiously  contending  for  pre-eminence 
and  power;  or  to  persons  of  other  descriptions 
whose  fortunes  have  been  interesting  to  the 
human  passions,  have,  in  turn,  divided  man¬ 
kind  into  parties,  inflamed  them  with  mutual 
animosity,  and  rendered  them  much  more  dis¬ 
posed  to  vex  and  oppress  each  other  than  to  co¬ 
operate  for  their  common  good.  So  strong  is 
this  propensity  of  mankind  to  fall  into  mutual 
animosities,  that  where  no  substantial  occa¬ 
sion  presents  itself,  the  most  frivolous  and  fan¬ 
ciful  distinctions  have  been  sufficient  to  kindle 
their  unfriendly  passions  and  excite  their  most 
violent  conflicts.  Hut  the  most  common  and 
durable  source  of  factions  has  been  the  vari¬ 
ous  and  unequal  distribution  of  property. 
Those  who  hold  and  those  who  are  without 
property  have  ever  formed  distinct  interests  in 
society.  Those  who  are  creditors,  and  those 
who  arc  debtors,  fall  under  a  like  discrimina¬ 
tion.  A  landed  interest,  a  manufacturing  in¬ 
terest,  a  mercantile  interest,  a  moneyed  inter¬ 
est,  with  many  lesser  interests,  grow  up  of 
necessity  in  civilised  nations,  and  divide  them 
into  different  classes,  actuated  by  different  sen¬ 
timents  and  views.  The  regulation  of  these 
various  and  interfering  interests  forms  the 
principal  task  of  modern  legislation,  and  in¬ 
volves  the  spirit  of  part)  and  faction  in  the 
necessary  and  ordinary  operations  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment. 

No  man  is  allowed  to  he  a  judge  in  his  own 
cause,  because  his  interest  would  certainly  bias 
bis  judgment,  and,  not  improbably,  corrupt 
bis  integrity.  With  equal,  nay,  with  greater 
reason,  a  both  of  men  are  unfit  to  be  both 
judges  and  parties  at  the  same  time;  yet  what 
are  many  of  the  most  important  acts  of  legisla¬ 
tion  but  so  many  judicial  determinations,  not 
indeed  concerning  the  l  ights  of  single  persons, 
but  concerning  the  rights  of  large  bodies  of 
citizens?  And  what  are  the  different  classes  ol 
legislators  but  advocates  and  parties  to  the 
causes  which  the)  determine?  Is  a  law  pro¬ 
posed  concerning  private  debts?  It  is  a  epics- 


NUMBER  10 


don  to  which  the  creditors  are  parties  on  one 
side  and  the  debtors  on  the  other.  Justice 
ought  to  hold  the  balance  between  them.  Yet 
the  parties  are,  and  must  be,  themselves  the 
judges;  and  the  most  numerous  party,  or,  in 
other  words,  the  most  powerful  faction  must 
be  expected  to  prevail.  Shall  domestic  manu¬ 
factures  be  encouraged,  and  in  what  degree,  by 
restrictions  on  foreign  manufactures?  are  ques¬ 
tions  which  would  be  differently  decided  by 
the  landed  and  the  manufacturing  classes,  and 
probably  by  neither  with  a  sole  regard  to  jus¬ 
tice  and  the  public  good.  The  apportionment 
of  taxes  on  the  various  descriptions  of  prop¬ 
erty  is  an  act  which  seems  to  require  the  most 
exact  impartiality;  yet  there  is,  perhaps,  no 
legislative  act  in  which  greater  opportunity 
and  temptation  are  given  to  a  predominant 
party  to  trample  on  the  rules  of  justice.  Every 
shilling  with  which  they  overburden  the  in¬ 
ferior  number  is  a  shilling  saved  to  their  own 
pockets. 

It  is  in  vain  to  say  that  enlightened  states¬ 
men  will  be  able  to  adjust  these  clashing  inter¬ 
ests,  and  render  them  all  subservient  to  the 
public  good.  Enlightened  statesmen  will  not 
always  be  at  the  helm.  Nor,  in  many  cases,  can 
such  an  adjustment  be  made  at  all  without 
taking  into  view  indirect  and  remote  consider¬ 
ations,  which  will  rarely  prevail  over  the  im¬ 
mediate  interest  which  one  party  may  find  in 
disregarding  the  rights  of  another  or  the  good 
of  the  whole. 

The  inference  to  which  we  are  brought  is, 
that  the  causes  of  faction  cannot  be  removed, 
and  that  relief  is  only  to  be  sought  in  the 
means  of  controlling  its  effects. 

If  a  faction  consists  of  less  than  a  majority, 
relief  is  supplied  by  the  republican  principle, 
which  enables  the  majority  to  defeat  its  sin¬ 
ister  views  by  regular  vote.  It  may  clog  the  ad¬ 
ministration,  it  may  convulse  the  society;  but 
it  will  be  unable  to  execute  and  mask  its  vio¬ 
lence  under  the  forms  of  the  Constitution. 
When  a  majority  is  included  in  a  faction,  the 
form  of  popular  government,  on  the  other 
hand,  enables  it  to  sacrifice  to  its  ruling  pas¬ 
sion  or  interest  both  the  public  good  and  the 
rights  of  other  citizens.  To  secure  the  public 
good  and  private  rights  against  the  danger  of 
such  a  faction,  and  at  the  same  time  to  preserve 
the  spirit  and  the  form  of  popular  govern¬ 
ment,  is  then  the  great  object  to  which  our 
inquiries  are  directed.  Let  me  add  that  it  is 
the  great  desideratum  by  which  this  form  of 
government  can  be  rescued  from  the  oppro¬ 


brium  under  which  it  has  so  long  laboured, 
and  be  recommended  to  the  esteem  and  adop¬ 
tion  of  mankind. 

By  what  means  is  this  object  obtainable? 
Evidently  by  one  of  two  only.  Either  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  the  same  passion  or  interest  in  a 
majority  at  the  same  time  must  be  prevented, 
or  the  majority,  having  such  co-existent  pas¬ 
sion  or  interest,  must  be  rendered,  by  their 
number  and  local  situation,  unable  to  concert 
and  carry  into  effect  schemes  of  oppression. 
If  the  impulse  and  the  opportunity  be  suffered 
to  coincide,  we  well  know  that  neither  moral 
nor  religious  motives  can  be  relied  on  as  an 
adequate  control.  They  are  not  found  to  be 
such  on  the  injustice  and  violence  of  indi¬ 
viduals,  and  lose  their  efficacy  in  proportion 
to  the  number  combined  together,  that  is,  in 
proportion  as  their  efficacy  becomes  needful. 

From  this  view  of  the  subject  it  may  be  con¬ 
cluded  that  a  pure  democracy,  by  which  I 
mean  a  society  consisting  of  a  small  number  of 
citizens,  who  assemble  and  administer  the  gov¬ 
ernment  in  person,  can  admit  of  no  cure  for 
the  mischiefs  of  faction.  A  common  passion 
or  interest  will,  in  almost  every  case,  be  felt 
by  a  majority  of  the  whole;  a  communication 
and  concert  result  from  the  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  itself;  and  there  is  nothing  to  check  the 
inducements  to  sacrifice  the  weaker  party  or 
an  obnoxious  individual.  Hence  it  is  that  such 
democracies  have  ever  been  spectacles  of  turbu¬ 
lence  and  contention;  have  ever  been  found 
incompatible  with  personal  security  or  the 
rights  of  property;  and  have  in  general  been 
as  short  in  their  lives  as  they  have  been  violent 
in  their  deaths.  Theoretic  politicians,  who 
have  patronised  this  species  of  government, 
have  erroneously  supposed  that  by  reducing 
mankind  to  a  perfect  equality  in  their  political 
rights,  they  would,  at  the  same  time,  be  per¬ 
fectly  equalised  and  assimilated  in  their  pos¬ 
sessions,  their  opinions,  and  their  passions. 

A  republic,  by  which  I  mean  a  government 
in  which  the  scheme  of  representation  takes 
place,  opens  a  different  prospect,  and  promises 
the  cure  for  which  we  are  seeking.  Let  us  ex¬ 
amine  the  points  in  which  it  varies  from  pure 
democracy,  and  we  shall  comprehend  both  the 
nature  of  the  cure  and  the  efficacy  which  it 
must  derive  from  the  Union. 

The  two  great  points  of  difference  between 
a  democracy  and  a  republic  are:  first,  the  dele¬ 
gation  of  the  government,  in  the  latter,  to  a 
small  number  of  citizens  elected  by  the  rest; 
secondly,  the  greater  number  of  citizens,  and 


I'HE  FEDERALIST 


a  considerable  deduction?  Would  not  so  cir¬ 
cuitous  an  intercourse  facilitate  the  competi¬ 
tions  of  other  nations,  by  enhancing  the  price 
of  British  commodities  in  our  markets,  and 
bv  transferring  toother  hands  the  management 
of  this  interesting  branch  of  the  British  com¬ 
merce? 

\  mature  consideration  of  the  objects  sug¬ 
gested  bv  these  questions  will  justify  a  belief 
that  the  real  disadvantages  to  Britain  from 
such  a  state  of  things,  conspiring  with  the 
prepossessions  of  a  great  part  of  the  nation  in 
favour  of  the  American  trade,  and  with  the 
importunities  of  the  West  India  Islands,  would 
produce  a  relaxation  in  her  present  system, 
and  would  let  11s  into  the  enjoyment  of  privi- 
leges  in  the  markets  of  those  islands  and  else¬ 
where.  from  which  our  trade  would  derive  the 
most  substantial  benefits.  Such  a  point  gained 
from  (he  British  government,  and  which  could 
not  be  expected  without  an  equivalent  in  ex¬ 
emptions  and  immunities  in  our  markets, 
would  be  likely  to  have  a  correspondent  effect 
on  the  conduct  of  other  nations,  who  would 
not  be  inclined  to  see  themselves  altogether 
supplanted  in  our  trade. 

A  further  resource  for  influencing  the  con¬ 
duct  of  Kuropean  nations  toward  us.  in  this 
respect,  would  arise  from  the  establishment  of 
a  federal  navy.  1  here  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
continuance  of  the  Union  under  an  efficient 
government,  would  put  it  in  our  power,  at  a 
period  not  very  distant  to  create  a  navy  which, 
if  it  could  not  vie  with  those  of  the  great  mar¬ 
itime  fiowers.  would  at  least  be  of  respectable 
weight  if  thrown  into  the  scale  of  either  of 
two  contending  parties.  'This  would  be  more 
peculiarly  the  case  in  relation  to  operations  in 
the  West  Indies.  A  few  ships  of  the  line,  sent 
opportunely  to  the*  reinforcement  of  either 
side,  would  often  he  sufficient  to  decide  the 
fate  of  a  campaign,  on  the  event  of  which 
interests  of  the  greatest  magnitude*  were  sns- 
pended.  ( )ur  position  is.  in  this  respec  t.  a  most 
commanding  one.  \nd  it  to  this  consideration 
vs e*  add  dial  of  the  use  fulness  of  supplies  from 
this  countiv,  in  the*  prosecution  of  milit.nv 
operations  in  the*  West  Indies,  it  will  readilv 
he  perceived  that  a  situation  mi  favourable* 
would  enable  us  to  bargain  with  great  advan¬ 
tage*  fot  commercial  privileges.  \  price  would 
he*  se*t  not  unis  upon  our  friendship  hut  upon 
our  ne*utralii v.  Bv  a  steads  adherence*  to  the 
Union,  we*  mas  hope,  ere  long,  to  become*  the 
arbiter  of  1  mope  in  \rnerica.  and  to  be  able* 
to  incline  the*  balance*  of  i  urope.in  competi¬ 


tions  in  this  part  of  the  world  as  our  interest 
may  dictate. 

But  in  the  reverse  of  this  eligible  situation, 
we  shall  discover  that  the  rivalships  of  the 
parts  would  make  them  checks  upon  each 
other,  and  would  frustrate  all  the  tempting  ad¬ 
vantages  which  nature  has  kindly  placed  with¬ 
in  our  reach.  In  a  state  so  insignificant  our 
commerce  would  be  a  prey  to  the  wanton  in¬ 
termeddling  of  all  nations  at  war  with  each 
other:  who.  having  nothing  to  fear  from  us. 
would  with  little  scruple  or  remorse  supply 
their  wants  by  depredations  on  our  property 
as  often  as  it  fell  in  their  way.  The  rights  of 
neutrality  will  only  be  respected  when  they  are 
defended  by  an  adequate  power.  A  nation, 
despicable  by  its  weakness,  forfeits  even  the 
privilege  of  being  neutral. 

Under  a  vigorous  national  government,  the 
natural  strength  and  resources  of  the  country, 
directed  to  a  common  interest,  would  baffle  all 
the  combinations  of  l  uropean  jealousy  to  re¬ 
strain  our  growth.  This  situation  would  even 
take  away  the  motive  to  such  combinations, 
by  inducing  an  impracticability  of  success. 
An  active  commerce,  an  extensive  navigation, 
and  a  flourishing  marine  would  then  he  the 
offspring  of  moral  and  physical  necessity.  We 
might  defy  the  little  arts  of  the  little  politi¬ 
cians  to  control  or  varv  the  irresistible  and  un¬ 
changeable  course  of  nature. 

But  in  a  state  of  disunion,  these  combina¬ 
tions  might  exist  and  might  operate  with  suc¬ 
cess.  It  would  he  in  the  power  of  the  maritime 
nations,  availing  themselves  of  out  universal 
impotence,  to  prescribe  (he  conditions  of  our 
political  existence:  and  as  they  have  a  common 
interest  in  being  our  carriers,  and  still  more  in 
preventing  our  becoming  theirs,  they  would  in 
all  probability  combine  to  embarrass  our  navi¬ 
gation  in  such  a  manner  as  would  in  (‘fleet 
destroy  it.  and  confine  us  to  a  iwssnr  com 
MiktT.  We  should  then  be  compelled  to  con¬ 
tent  ourselves  with  tlu*  first  price  of  0111  com 
modifies,  and  10  see  the  profits  of  our  trade 
snatched  from  us  to  enrich  our  enemies  and 
peisec  mors,  l  li.it  unequalled  spirit  of  enter¬ 
prise,  which  signalises  dir  genius  of  the  \mcr- 
ic  an  men  bants  and  n.iv  i gators,  and  whic  h  is  in 
itself  an  inexhaustible  mine  of  national  wealth, 
would  be  stifled  and  lost,  and  poverty  and 
disgrace  would  overspread  a  countrv  which, 
with  wisdom,  might  make  herself  the*  admira¬ 
tion  and  envv  of  the  world. 

I  here  are  lights  of  great  moment  to  the 
trade  of  \merica  which  an*  tights  of  the  U11 


NUMBER  ii 


ion— I  allude  to  the  fisheries,  to  the  navigation 
of  the  Western  lakes,  and  to  that  of  the  Mis¬ 
sissippi.  The  dissolution  of  the  Confederacy 
would  give  room  for  delicate  questions  con¬ 
cerning  the  future  existence  of  these  rights; 
which  the  interest  of  more  powerful  partners 
would  hardly  fail  to  solve  to  our  disadvantage. 
The  disposition  of  Spain  with  regard  to  the 
Mississippi  needs  no  comment.  France  and 
Britain  are  concerned  with  us  in  the  fisheries, 
and  view  them  as  of  the  utmost  moment  to 
their  navigation.  They,  of  course,  would  hardly 
remain  long  indifferent  to  that  decided  mas¬ 
tery,  of  which  experience  has  shown  us  to  be 
possessed  in  this  valuable  branch  of  traffic,  and 
by  which  we  are  able  to  undersell  those  nations 
in  their  own  markets.  What  more  natural  than 
that  they  should  be  disposed  to  exclude  from 
the  lists  such  dangerous  competitors? 

This  branch  of  trade  ought  not  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  partial  benefit.  All  the  navigating 
States  may,  in  different  degrees,  advantage¬ 
ously  participate  in  it,  and  under  circum¬ 
stances  of  a  greater  extension  of  mercantile 
capital,  would  not  be  unlikely  to  do  it.  As  a 
nursery  of  seamen,  it  now  is,  or,  when  time 
shall  have  more  nearly  assimilated  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  navigation  in  the  several  States,  will 
become,  a  universal  resource.  To  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  a  navy,  it  must  be  indispensable. 

To  this  great  national  object,  a  navy,  union 
will  contribute  in  various  ways.  Every  institu¬ 
tion  will  grow  and  flourish  in  proportion  to 
the  quantity  and  extent  of  the  means  concen¬ 
tred  towards  its  formation  and  support.  A 
navy  of  the  United  States,  as  it  would  embrace 
the  resources  of  all,  is  an  object  far  less  remote 
than  a  navy  of  any  single  State  or  partial  con¬ 
federacy,  which  would  only  embrace  the  re¬ 
sources  of  a  single  part.  It  happens,  indeed, 
that  different  portions  of  confederated  Amer¬ 
ica  possess  each  some  peculiar  advantage  for 
this  essential  establishment.  The  more  south¬ 
ern  States  furnish  in  greater  abundance  cer¬ 
tain  kinds  of  naval  stores— tar,  pitch,  and  tur¬ 
pentine.  Their  wood  for  the  construction  of 
ships  is  also  of  a  more  solid  and  lasting  texture. 
The  difference  in  the  duration  of  the  ships  of 
which  the  navy  might  be  composed,  if  chiefly 
constructed  of  Southern  wood,  would  be  of 
signal  importance,  either  in  the  view  of  naval 
strength  or  of  national  economy.  Some  of  the 
Southern  and  of  the  Middle  States  yield  a 
greater  plenty  of  iron,  and  of  better  quality. 
Seamen  must  chiefly  be  drawn  from  the  North¬ 
ern  hive.  The  necessity  of  naval  protection  to 


55 

external  or  maritime  commerce  does  not  re¬ 
quire  a  particular  elucidation,  no  more  than 
the  conduciveness  of  that  species  of  commerce 
to  the  prosperity  of  a  navy. 

An  unrestrained  intercourse  between  the 
States  themselves  will  advance  the  trade  of 
each  by  an  interchange  of  their  respective  pro¬ 
ductions,  not  only  for  the  supply  of  reciprocal 
wants  at  home,  but  for  exportation  to  foreign 
markets.  The  veins  of  commerce  in  every  part 
will  be  replenished,  and  will  require  addi¬ 
tional  motion  and  vigour  from  a  free  circula¬ 
tion  of  the  commodities  of  every  part.  Com¬ 
mercial  enterprise  will  have  much  greater 
scope,  from  the  diversity  in  the  productions  of 
different  States.  When  the  staple  of  one  fails 
from  a  bad  harvest  or  unproductive  crop,  it 
can  call  to  its  aid  the  staple  of  another.  The 
variety,  not  less  than  the  value,  of  products  for 
exportation  contributes  to  the  activity  of  for¬ 
eign  commerce.  It  can  be  conducted  upon 
much  better  terms  with  a  large  number  of  ma¬ 
terials  of  a  given  value  than  with  a  small  num¬ 
ber  of  materials  of  the  same  value;  arising  from 
the  competitions  of  trade  and  from  the  fluctu¬ 
ations  of  markets.  Particular  articles  may  be  in 
great  demand  at  certain  periods,  and  unsale¬ 
able  at  others;  but  if  there  be  a  variety  of  arti¬ 
cles,  it  can  scarcely  happen  that  they  should 
all  be  at  one  time  in  the  latter  predicament, 
and  on  this  account  the  operations  of  the  mer¬ 
chant  would  be  less  liable  to  any  considerable 
obstruction  or  stagnation.  The  speculative 
trader  will  at  once  perceive  the  force  of  these 
observations,  and  will  acknowledge  that  the 
aggregate  balance  of  the  commerce  of  the 
United  States  would  bid  fair  to  be  much  more 
favourable  than  that  of  the  thirteen  States 
without  union  or  with  partial  unions. 

It  may  perhaps  be  replied  to  this,  that 
whether  the  States  are  united  or  disunited, 
there  would  still  be  an  intimate  intercourse 
between  them  which  would  answer  the  same 
ends;  but  this  intercourse  would  be  fettered, 
interrupted,  and  narrowed  by  a  multiplicity 
of  causes,  which  in  the  course  of  these  papers 
have  been  amply  detailed.  A  unity  of  com¬ 
mercial,  as  well  as  political,  interests,  can  only 
result  from  a  unity  of  government. 

There  are  other  points  of  view  in  which 
this  subject  might  be  placed,  of  a  striking  and 
animating  kind.  But  they  would  lead  us  too  far 
into  the  regions  of  futurity,  and  would  involve 
topics  not  proper  for  a  newspaper  discussion. 
I  shall  briefly  observe,  that  our  situation  in¬ 
vites  and  our  interests  prompt  us  to  aim  at  an 


THE  FEDERALIST 


ascendant  in  the  system  of  American  affairs. 
The  world  may  politically,  as  well  as  geograph¬ 
ically,  be  divided  into  four  parts,  each  having 
a  distinct  set  of  interests.  Unhappily  for  the 
other  three,  Europe,  by  her  arms  and  by  her 
negotiations,  by  force  and  by  fraud,  has,  in 
different  degrees,  extended  her  dominion  over 
them  all.  Africa,  Asia,  and  America,  have  suc¬ 
cessively  felt  her  domination.  1  he  superiority 
she  has  long  maintained  has  tempted  her  to 
plume  herself  as  the  Mistress  of  ihe  World, 
and  to  consider  the  rest  of  mankind  as  created 
for  her  benefit.  Men  admired  as  profound 
philosophers  have,  in  direct  terms,  attributed 
to  her  inhabitants  a  physical  superiority,  and 
have  gravely  asserted  that  all  animals,  and 
with  them  the  human  species,  degenerate  in 
America— that  even  dogs  cease  to  bark  alter 
hasing  breathed  awhile  in  our  atmosphere.1 
Facts  have  too  long  supported  these  arrogant 
pretensions  of  the  Europeans.  It  belongs  to  us 
to  vindicate  the  honourof  the  human  race,  and 
to  teach  that  assuming  brother,  moderation. 
Union  will  enable  us  to  do  it.  Disunion  will 
add  another  victim  to  his  triumphs.  Let  Ameri¬ 
cans  disdain  to  be  the  instrumentsof  European 
greatness!  Let  the  thirteen  States,  bound  to¬ 
gether  in  a  strict  and  indissoluble  Union,  con- 
on  in  erecting  one  great  American  system, 
superior  to  the  control  of  all  transatlantic  force 
or  influence,  and  able  to  dictate  the  terms  of 
i he  connection  between  the  old  and  the  new 
world!  Publius 

Number  12 

[ham  11.  ion] 

Thf  M  i  ras  of  Union  upon  the  commercial 
prospei ity  ol  the  States  have  been  sufficiently 
delineated.  Its  leridcncv  to  promote  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  revenue  will  be  the  subject  of  our  pres¬ 
ent  inquiry. 

The  prosperity  of  commerce  is  now  per¬ 
ceived  and  acknowledged  by  all  enlightened 
statesmen  to  be  the  most  useful  as  well  as  the 
most  productive  source  of  national  wealth. and 
has  accotclinglv  become  a  piimarv  object  of 
the  ir  political  cares,  by  multiplying  the  means 
of  gi  at  1  Tic  at  ion,  by  promoting  the  inlitiduc- 
tiou  and  circulation  of  the  precious  metals, 
those  darling  objects  of  human  avarice  and 
enterprise*,  it  serves  to  vivilv  and  invigoiaU 
the  channels  of  industry,  and  to  make  them 

'  I\  rr  hr  re  hrs  frfulo\t>f>hiqurs  sur  Irs  Amfiicnim. 

Pi  m  11  s 


flow  with  greater  activity  and  copiousness. 
The  assiduous  merchant,  the  laborious  hus¬ 
bandman,  the  active  mechanic,  and  the  in¬ 
dustrious  manufacturer— all  orders  of  men, 
look  forward  with  eager  expectation  and  grow¬ 
ing  alacrity  to  this  pleasing  reward  of  their 
toils.  The  often-agitated  question  between 
agriculture  and  commerce  has,  from  indubita¬ 
ble  experience,  received  a  decision  which  has 
silenced  the  rivalship  that  once  subsisted  be¬ 
tween  them,  and  has  proved,  to  the  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  their  friends,  that  their  interests  are 
intimately  blended  and  interwoven.  It  has 
been  found  in  various  countries  that,  in  pro¬ 
portion  as  commerce  has  flourished,  land  has 
risen  in  value.  And  how  could  it  have  hap¬ 
pened  otherwise?  Could  that  which  procures  a 
freer  vent  for  the  products  of  the  earth,  which 
furnishes  new  incitements  to  the  cultivation  of 
land,  which  is  the  most  powerful  instrument 
in  increasing  the  quantity  of  money  in  a  state 
—could  that,  in  fine,  which  is  the  faithful  hand¬ 
maid  of  labour  and  industry,  in  every  shape, 
fail  to  augment  that  article,  which  is  the  pro¬ 
lific  parent  of  far  the  greatest  part  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  upon  which  they  are  exerted?  It  is  aston¬ 
ishing  that  so  simple  a  truth  should  ever  have 
had  an  adversary;  and  it  is  one.  among  a  mul¬ 
titude  of  proofs,  how  apt  a  spirit  of  ill-formed 
jealousy,  or  of  too  gieat  abstraction  and  refine¬ 
ment,  is  to  lead  men  astray  from  the  plainest 
truths  of  reason  anti  conviction. 

The  ability  of  a  country'  to  pay  taxes  must 
always  be  proportioned,  in  a  great  degree,  to 
the  quantity  of  money  in  circulation,  anti  to 
the  celerity  with  which  it  circulates.  Com¬ 
merce,  contributing  tti  both  these  objects,  must 
of  necessity  render  the  payment  of  taxes  easier, 
and  facilitate  the  requisite  supplies  to  the 
treasury.  The  hereditary  dominions  of  the 
Emperor  of  Germany  contain  a  great  extent  of 
fertile,  cultivated,  and  populous  territory,  a 
large  proportion  of  which  is  situated  in  mild 
and  luxuriant  climates.  In  some  parts  of  this 
territory  ate  to  he  found  the  best  gold  and  sil 
vet  mines  in  Euiope.  And  yet,  from  the  want 
uf  1  lie  fostering  influence  of  commerce,  that 
monarch  can  boast  but  slender  revenues,  lie 
has  several  turns  been  compelled  to  owe  ob¬ 
ligations  to  the  pecuniary  succours  of  other 
nations  for  the  preservation  of  his  essential 
interests,  and  is  unable,  upon  the  strength  of 
his  own  resources,  to  sustain  a  long  or  con 
tinned  war. 

but  it  is  not  in  this  aspect  of  the  subject 


NUMBER  12 


alone  that  Union  will  be  seen  to  conduce  to 
the  purpose  of  revenue.  There  are  other  points 
of  view,  in  which  its  influence  will  appear 
more  immediate  and  decisive.  It  is  evident 
from  the  state  of  the  country,  from  the  habits 
of  the  people,  from  the  experience  we  have 
had  on  the  point  itself,  that  it  is  impracticable 
to  raise  any  very  considerable  sums  by  direct 
taxation.  Tax  laws  have  in  vain  been  multi¬ 
plied;  new  methods  to  enforce  the  collection 
have  in  vain  been  tried;  the  public  expecta¬ 
tion  has  been  uniformly  disappointed,  and  the 
treasuries  of  the  States  have  remained  empty. 
The  popular  system  of  administration  inher¬ 
ent  in  the  nature  of  popular  government,  co¬ 
inciding  with  the  real  scarcity  of  money  inci¬ 
dent  to  a  languid  and  mutilated  state  of  trade, 
has  hitherto  defeated  every  experiment  for 
extensive  collections,  and  has  at  length  taught 
the  different  legislatures  the  folly  of  attempt¬ 
ing  them. 

No  person  acquainted  with  what  happens 
in  other  countries  will  be  surprised  at  this 
circumstance.  In  so  opulent  a  nation  as  that 
of  Britain,  where  direct  taxes  from  superior 
wealth  must  be  much  more  tolerable,  and,  from 
the  vigour  of  the  government,  much  more 
practicable,  than  in  America,  far  the  greatest 
part  of  the  national  revenue  is  derived  from 
taxes  of  the  indirect  kind,  from  imposts,  and 
from  excises.  Duties  on  imported  articles  form 
a  large  branch  of  this  latter  description. 

In  America,  it  is  evident  that  we  must  a  long 
time  depend  for  the  means  of  revenue  chiefly 
on  such  duties.  In  most  parts  of  it,  excises  must 
be  confined  within  a  narrow  compass.  The  gen¬ 
ius  of  the  people  will  ill  brook  the  inquisitive 
and  peremptory  spirit  of  excise  laws.  The 
pockets  of  the  farmers,  on  the  other  hand,  will 
reluctantly  yield  but  scanty  supplies,  in  the  un¬ 
welcome  shape  of  impositions  on  their  houses 
and  lands;  and  personal  property  is  too  pre¬ 
carious  and  invisible  a  fund  to  be  laid  hold  of 
in  any  other  way  than  by  the  imperceptible 
agency  of  taxes  on  consumption. 

If  these  remarks  have  any  foundation,  that 
state  of  things  which  will  best  enable  us  to  im¬ 
prove  and  extend  so  valuable  a  resource  must 
be  best  adapted  to  our  political  welfare.  And 
it  cannot  admit  of  a  serious  doubt,  that  this 
state  of  things  must  rest  on  the  basis  of  a 
general  Union.  As  far  as  this  would  be  condu¬ 
cive  to  the  interests  of  commerce,  so  far  it  must 
tend  to  the  extension  of  the  revenue  to  be 
drawn  from  that  source.  As  far  as  it  would 


contribute  to  rendering  regulations  for  the 
collection  of  the  duties  more  simple  and  effi¬ 
cacious,  so  far  it  must  serve  to  answer  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  making  the  same  rate  of  duties  more 
productive,  and  of  putting  it  into  the  power 
of  the  government  to  increase  the  rate  with¬ 
out  prejudice  to  trade. 

The  relative  situation  of  these  States;  the 
number  of  rivers  with  which  they  ate  inter¬ 
sected,  and  of  bays  that  wash  their  shores:  the 
facility  of  communication  in  every  direction: 
the  affinity  of  language  and  manners;  the  fa¬ 
miliar  habits  of  intercourse;— all  these  are  cir¬ 
cumstances  that  would  conspire  to  render  an 
illicit  trade  between  them  a  matter  of  little 
difficulty,  and  would  insure  frequent  evasions 
of  the  commercial  regulations  of  each  other. 
The  separate  States  or  confederacies  would  be 
necessitated  by  mutual  jealousy  to  avoid  the 
temptations  to  that  kind  of  trade  by  the  low¬ 
ness  of  their  duties.  The  temper  of  our  govern 
ments,  for  a  long  time  to  come,  would  not  per¬ 
mit  those  rigorous  precautions  by  which  the 
European  nations  guard  the  avenues  into  their 
respective  countries,  as  well  by  land  as  by 
water;  and  which,  even  there,  are  found  in¬ 
sufficient  obstacles  to  the  adventurous  strata¬ 
gems  of  avarice. 

In  France,  there  is  an  army  of  patrols  (as 
they  are  called)  constantly  employed  to  secure 
their  fiscal  regulations  against  the  inroads  of 
the  dealers  in  contraband  trade.  Mr.  Neckar 
computes  the  number  of  these  patrols  at  up¬ 
wards  of  twenty  thousand.  This  shows  the  im¬ 
mense  difficulty  in  preventing  that  species  of 
traffic,  where  there  is  an  inland  communica¬ 
tion,  and  places  in  a  strong  light  the  disad¬ 
vantages  with  which  the  collection  of  duties  in 
this  country  would  be  encumbered,  if  by  dis¬ 
union  the  States  should  be  placed  in  a  situa¬ 
tion,  with  respect  to  each  other,  resembling 
that  of  France  with  respect  to  her  neighbours. 
The  arbitrary  and  vexatious  powers  with  which 
the  patrols  are  necessarily  armed,  would  be 
intolerable  in  a  free  country. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  there  be  but  one  gov¬ 
ernment  pervading  all  the  States,  there  will 
be,  as  to  the  principal  part  of  our  commerce, 
but  one  side  to  guard— the  Atlantic  coast. 
Vessels  arriving  directly  from  foreign  coun¬ 
tries,  laden  with  valuable  cargoes,  would  rarely 
choose  to  hazard  themselves  to  the  compli¬ 
cated  and  critical  perils  which  would  attend 
attempts  to  unlade  prior  to  their  coming  into 
port.  They  would  have  to  dread  both  the  clan- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


58 

gcrs  of  the  coast,  and  of  detection,  as  well  after 
as  before  their  arrival  at  the  places  of  their 
final  destination.  An  ordinary  degree  of  vigi¬ 
lance  would  be  competent  to  the  prevention 
of  anv  material  infractions  upon  the  rights  of 
the  revenue.  A  few  armed  vessels,  judiciously 
stationed  at  the  entrances  of  our  ports,  might 
at  a  small  expense  be  made  useful  sentinels  ol 
the  laws.  And  the  government  having  the  same 
interest  to  provide  against  violations  every¬ 
where,  the  co-operation  of  its  measures  in  each 
State  would  have  a  powerful  tendency  to  ren¬ 
der  them  effectual.  Here  also  we  should  pre¬ 
serve.  by  Union,  an  advantage  which  nature 
holds  out  to  us.  and  which  would  be  relin¬ 
quished  by  separation.  The  United  States  lie 
at  a  great  distance  from  Europe,  and  at  a  con¬ 
siderable  distance  from  all  other  places  with 
which  they  would  have  extensive  connections 
of  foreign  trade.  The  passage  from  them  to 
us.  in  a  few  hours,  or  in  a  single  night,  as  be¬ 
tween  the  coasts  of  France  and  Britain,  and  of 
other  neighbouring  nations,  would  be  imprac¬ 
ticable.  This  is  a  prodigious  security  against  a 
direct  contraband  with  foreign  countries;  but 
a  circuitous  contraband  to  one  State,  through 
the  medium  of  another,  would  be  both  easy 
and  safe.  The  difference  between  a  direct  im¬ 
portation  from  abroad,  and  an  indirect  im¬ 
portation  through  the  channel  of  a  neigh¬ 
bouring  State,  in  small  parcels,  according  to 
time  and  opportunity,  with  the  additional  fa¬ 
cilities  of  inland  communication,  must  be 
palpable  to  every  man  of  discernment. 

U  is  therefore  evident,  that  one  national  gov¬ 
ernment  would  be  able,  at  much  less  expense, 
to  extend  the  duties  on  imports,  beyond  com¬ 
parison.  further  than  would  be  practicable  to 
the  States  separately,  or  to  any  partial  con¬ 
federacies.  Hitherto.  1  believe,  it  may  safely  be 
asserted,  that  these  duties  have  not  upon  an 
average  exceeded  in  any  State  three  per  cent. 
In  France  they  are  estimated  to  be  about  fif¬ 
teen  per  cent.,  and  in  Britain  they  exceed  this 
proportion.1  There  seems  to  be  nothing  to  hin¬ 
der  their  being  increased  in  this  country  to  at 
least  treble  their  present  amount.  I  he  single 
article  of  at  dent  spirits,  under  federal  regula¬ 
tion.  might  be  made  to  furnish  a  considerable 
revenue.  Upon  a  ratio  to  the  importation  into 
this  State,  the  whole  quantity  imported  into 
the  United  States  may  be-  estimated  at  four 
millions  of  gallon*:  which,  at  a  shilling  per 
gallon,  would  produce  two  hundred  thousand 
*  If  mV  niemnrs  be  right  they  amount  to  twenty 
per  cent.— l*i  tu  tus 


pounds.  That  article  would  well  bear  this  rate 
of  du tv;  and  if  it  should  tend  to  diminish  the 
consumption  of  it,  such  an  effort  would  he 
equally  favourable  to  the  agriculture,  to  the 
economy,  to  the  morals,  and  to  the  health  of 
the  society.  There  is.  perhaps,  nothing  so  much 
a  subject  of  national  extravagance  as  these 
spirits. 

What  will  be  the  consequence,  if  we  are  not 
able  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  resource  in  ques¬ 
tion  in  its  full  extent?  A  nation  cannot  long 
exist  without  revenues.  Destitute  of  this  essen¬ 
tial  support,  it  must  resign  its  independence, 
and  sink  into  the  degraded  condition  of  a 
province.  This  is  an  extremity  to  which  no 
government  will  of  choice  accede.  Revenue, 
therefore,  must  be  had  at  all  events.  In  this 
country,  if  the  principal  part  be  not  drawn 
from  commerce,  it  must  fall  with  oppressive 
weight  upon  land.  It  has  been  already  inti¬ 
mated  that  excises,  in  their  true  signification, 
are  too  little  in  unison  with  the  feelings  of 
the  people  to  admit  of  great  use  being  made 
of  that  mode  of  taxation;  nor,  indeed,  in  the 
States  where  almost  the  sole  employment  is 
agriculture,  are  the  objects  proper  for  excise 
sufficiently  numerous  to  permit  ver\  ample 
collections  in  that  way.  Personal  estate  (as  has 
been  before  remarked),  from  the  difficulty  in 
tracing  it,  cannot  be  subjected  to  large  contri¬ 
butions  by  any  other  means  than  by  taxes  on 
consumption.  In  populous  cities,  it  may  be 
enough  the  subject  of  conjecture  to  occasion 
the  oppression  of  individuals  without  much 
aggregate  benefit  to  the  State;  but  beyond 
these  circles,  it  must,  in  a  great  measure,  es¬ 
cape  the  eye  and  the  hand  of  the  tax-gatherer. 
As  the  necessities  of  the  State,  nevertheless, 
must  be  satisfied  in  some  mode  or  other,  the 
defect  of  other  resources  must  throw  the  priiv 
cipal  weight  of  public  burdens  on  the  posses¬ 
sors  of  land.  \nd  as,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
wants  of  the  government  can  never  obtain  an 
adequate  supply,  unless  all  the  sounes  of  rev¬ 
enue  are  open  to  its  demands,  the  finances  of 
the  community,  under  such  embarrassments, 
cannot  be  put  into  a  situation  consistent  with 
its  respectability  or  its  security.  1  Inis  we  shall 
not  even  have  the  consolations  of  a  full  treas¬ 
ury  to  atone  for  the  oppression  of  that  valu¬ 
able  class  of  the  citizens  who  are  employed  in 
the  cultivation  of  the  soil.  But  public  and  pri¬ 
vate  distress  will  keep  pace  with  each  othei  in 
gloomy  concert;  and  unite  in  deploring  the 
infatuation  of  those  counsels  which  led  to  dis- 

PUIILIUS 


union. 


59 


NUMBER  1 5 


Number  13 

[HAMILTON] 

As  connected  with  the  subject  of  revenue, 
we  may  with  propriety  consider  that  of  econ¬ 
omy.  The  money  saved  from  one  object  may 
be  usefully  applied  to  another,  and  there  will 
be  so  much  the  less  to  be  drawn  from  the 
pockets  of  the  people.  If  the  States  are  united 
under  one  government,  there  will  be  but  one 
national  civil  list  to  support;  if  they  are  di¬ 
vided  into  several  confederacies,  there  will  be 
as  many  different  national  civil  lists  to  be  pro¬ 
vided  for— and  each  of  them,  as  to  the  prin¬ 
cipal  departments,  coextensive  with  that  which 
would  be  necessary  for  a  government  of  the 
whole.  The  entire  separation  of  the  States  into 
thirteen  unconnected  sovereignties  is  a  project 
too  extravagant  and  too  replete  with  danger 
to  have  many  advocates.  The  ideas  of  men 
who  speculate  upon  the  dismemberment  of 
the  empire  seemed  generally  turned  towards 
three  confederacies— one  consisting  of  the  four 
Northern,  another  of  the  four  Middle,  and  a 
third  of  the  five  Southern  States.  There  is  little 
probability  that  there  would  be  a  greater  num¬ 
ber.  According  to  this  distribution,  each  con¬ 
federacy  would  comprise  an  extent  of  territory 
larger  than  that  of  the  kingdom  of  Great 
Britain.  No  well-informed  man  will  suppose 
that  the  affairs  of  such  a  confederacy  can  be 
properly  regulated  by  a  government  less  com¬ 
prehensive  in  its  organs  or  institutions  than 
that  which  has  been  proposed  by  the  conven¬ 
tion.  When  the  dimensions  of  a  State  attain 
to  a  certain  magnitude,  it  requires  the  same 
energy  of  government  and  the  same  forms 
of  administration  which  are  requisite  in  one  of 
much  greater  extent.  This  idea  admits  not  of 
precise  demonstration,  because  there  is  no  rule 
by  which  we  can  measure  the  momentum  of 
civil  power  necessary  to  the  government  of 
any  given  number  of  individuals;  but  when 
we  consider  that  the  island  of  Britain,  nearly 
commensurate  with  each  of  the  supposed  con¬ 
federacies,  contains  about  eight  millions  of 
people,  and  when  we  reflect  upon  the  degree 
of  authority  required  to  direct  the  passions 
of  so  large  a  society  to  the  public  good,  we 
shall  see  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  like  por¬ 
tion  of  power  w'ould  be  sufficient  to  perform 
the  same  task  in  a  society  far  more  numerous. 
Civil  power,  properly  organised  and  exerted, 
is  capable  of  diffusing  its  force  to  a  very  great 
extent:  and  can,  in  a  manner,  reproduce  itself 
in  every  part  of  a  great  empire  by  a  judicious 


arrangement  of  subordinate  institutions. 

The  supposition  that  each  confederacy  into 
which  the  States  would  be  likely  to  be  divided 
would  require  a  government  not  less  com¬ 
prehensive  than  the  one  proposed,  will  be 
strengthened  by  another  supposition  more 
probable  than  that  which  presents  us  with 
three  confederacies  as  the  alternative  to  a  gen¬ 
eral  Union.  If  we  attend  carefully  to  geograph¬ 
ical  and  commercial  considerations,  in  con¬ 
junction  with  the  habits  and  prejudices  of  the 
different  States,  we  shall  be  led  to  conclude 
that  in  cases  of  disunion  they  will  most  natu¬ 
rally  league  themselves  under  two  govern¬ 
ments.  The  four  Eastern  States,  from  all  the 
causes  that  form  the  links  of  national  sympathy 
and  connection,  may  with  certainty  be  expect¬ 
ed  to  unite.  New  York,  situated  as  she  is,  would 
never  be  unwise  enough  to  oppose  a  feeble 
and  unsupported  flank  to  the  weight  of  that 
confederacy.  There  are  other  obvious  reasons 
that  would  facilitate  her  accession  to  it.  New 
Jersey  is  too  small  a  State  to  think  of  being  a 
frontier,  in  opposition  to  this  still  more  pow¬ 
erful  combination;  nor  do  there  appear  to  be 
any  obstacles  to  her  admission  into  it.  Even 
Pennsylvania  would  have  strong  inducements 
to  join  the  Northern  league.  An  active  foreign 
commerce,  on  the  basis  of  her  own  navigation, 
is  her  true  policy,  and  coincides  with  the  opin¬ 
ions  and  dispositions  of  her  citizens.  The  more 
Southern  States,  from  various  circumstances, 
may  not  think  themselves  much  interested  in 
the  encouragement  of  navigation.  They  may 
prefer  a  system  which  would  give  unlimited 
scope  to  all  nations  to  be  the  carriers  as  well 
as  the  purchasers  of  their  commodities.  Penn¬ 
sylvania  may  not  choose  to  confound  her  in¬ 
terests  in  a  connection  so  adverse  to  her  policy 
As  she  must  at  all  events  be  a  frontier,  she  may 
deem  it  most  consistent  with  her  safety  to  have 
her  exposed  side  turned  towards  the  weaker 
power  of  the  Southern,  rather  than  towards 
the  stronger  power  of  the  Northern,  Confeder¬ 
acy.  This  would  give  her  the  fairest  chance  to 
avoid  being  the  Flanders  of  America.  What¬ 
ever  may  be  the  determination  of  Pennsylva¬ 
nia,  if  the  Northern  Confederacy  includes  New 
Jersey,  there  is  no  likelihood  of  more  than  one 
confederacy  to  the  south  of  that  State. 

Nothing  can  be  more  evident  than  that  the 
thirteen  States  will  be  able  to  support  a  na¬ 
tional  government  better  than  one  half,  or 
one  third,  or  any  number  less  than  the  whole. 
This  reflection  must  have  great  weight  in  ob¬ 
viating  that  objection  to  the  proposed  plan, 


6o  THE  FEDERALIST 

which  is  founded  on  the  principle  of  expense; 
an  objection, however,  which,  when  we  come  to 
take  a  nearer  view  of  it,  will  appear  in  every 
light  to  stand  on  mistaken  ground. 

If,  in  addition  to  the  consideration  of  a 
plurality  of  civil  lists,  we  take  into  view  the 
number  of  persons  who  must  necessarily  be 
employed  to  guard  the  inland  communication 
between  the  different  confederacies  against 
illicit  trade,  and  who  in  time  will  infallibly 
spring  up  out  of  the  necessities  of  tevenue, 
and  if  we  also  take  into  view  the  militarv  es¬ 
tablishments  which  it  has  been  shown  would 
una\  oidablv  result  from  the  jealousies  and 
conflicts  of  the  several  nations  into  which  the 
Stales  would  be  divided,  we  shall  clearlv  dis¬ 
cover  that  a  separation  would  be  not  less  in¬ 
jurious  to  the  economy,  than  to  the  tianquil- 
litv.  commerce,  revenue,  and  liberty  of  e\ery 
part.  rmuJLS 


Number  14 

f  M  ADI  SUN] 

We  ham  seen  the  necessity  of  the  Union,  as 
our  bulwark  against  foreign  danger,  as  the  con¬ 
servator  of  peace  among  ourselves,  as  the 
guardian  of  out  commerce,  and  other  common 
interests,  as  the  only  substitute  for  those  mili¬ 
tary  establishments  which  have  subsetted  the 
liberties  of  the  Old  Wot  Id.  and  as  the  proper 
antidote  for  the  diseases  of  fa<  tton,  whic  It  have 
proved  fatal  to  other  popular  governments, 
and  .»f  which  alarming  .symptoms  have  been 
betrayed  bv  our  own.  All  that  remains,  within 
this  branch  nl  our  inquiiies.  is  to  take  notice 
of  an  objection  that  may  be  drawn  front  the 
great  extent  of  country  which  the  Union  em¬ 
braces  A  few  observations  on  this  subject  will 
lie  the  more  proper,  as  it  is  pen  cited  that  the 
adtersaric*  of  the  new  Constitution  are  avail¬ 
ing  themselves  of  the  prevailing  prejudice 
with  regard  to  the  practicable  sphere  of  re¬ 
publican  administration,  in  order  to  supply, 
lit  imaginary  dillirnlties.  the  want  of  those 
solid  objections  whuh  they  eiidcatout  in  tain 
to  Intel. 

|  he  error  which  limits  republican  govern¬ 
ment  to  a  narrow  district  has  been  unfolded 
,md  1  eluted  in  jimcding  papers.  I  innark  here 
only  that  it  seems  to  owe  its  rise  and  preta 
leme  cltieUt  to  the  confounding  ol  a  republic 
with  a  dt  mot  r at  y .  applting  to  the  formci 
1  cm  soilings  diawn  fiom  the  nature  of  the  lat 
icr.  I  he  tine  distim  lion  between  these  forms 
was  also  adverted  to  on  a  former  occasion.  It 


is,  that  in  a  democracy  the  people  meet  and 
exercise  the  government  in  person;  in  a  repub¬ 
lic,  they  assemble  and  administer  it  by  theii 
representatives  and  agents.  A  democracy,  con- 
sequently,  will  be  confined  to  a  small  spot.  A 
republic  may  be  extended  over  a  large  region. 

To  this  accidental  source  of  the  error  may 
be  added  the  artifice  of  some  celebrated  au¬ 
thors,  whose  writings  have  had  a  great  share 
in  forming  the  modern  standard  of  political 
opinions.  Being  subjects  either  of  an  absolute 
or  limited  monarchy,  they  have  endeavoured 
to  heighten  the  advantages,  or  palliate  the 
evils  of  those  forms,  by  placing  in  comparison 
the  vices  and  defects  of  the  republican,  and  by- 
citing  as  specimens  of  the  latter  the  turbulent 
democracies  of  ancient  Greece  and  modern 
Italy.  Under  the  confusion  of  names,  it  has 
been  an  east  task  to  transfer  to  a  republic  ob¬ 
servations  applicable  to  a  democracy  only; 
and  among  others,  the  observation  that  it  can 
never  be  established  but  among  a  small  num¬ 
ber  of  people,  living  within  a  small  compass 
of  territory. 

Such  a  fallacy  may  have  been  the  less  per¬ 
ceived,  as  most  of  the  popular  governments  of 
antiquity  were  of  the  democratic  species;  and 
even  in  modern  Europe,  to  which  we  owe  the 
great  principle  of  representation,  no  example 
is  seen  of  a  government  wholly  popular,  and 
founded,  at  the  same  time,  wholly  on  that 
principle.  If  Europe  has  the  merit  of  discover¬ 
ing  this  great  mechanical  power  in  govern 
inent,  by  the  simple  agency  of  which  die  will 
of  the  largest  political  body  mat  be  coiuen- 
1  red .  and  its  force  directed  to  any  object  which 
the  public  good  requires.  America  can  claim 
the  merit  of  making  the  discovery  the  basis  ol 
immixed  and  extensive  republics.  It  is  only  to 
be  lamented  that  any  of  her  citizens  should 
w i sit  to  deprive  her  of  the  additional  merit  of 
displaying  its  full  clluacv  in  the  establishment 
of  the  comprehensive  system  now  under  her 
consideration. 

\s  die  natural  limit  of  a  democracy  is  that 
distance  from  the  central  point  whic  h  will  just 
permit  the  most  remote  c  itizens  to  assemble  as 
often  as  tlteir  public  functions  demand,  and 
will  include  no  greater  number  than  can  join 
in  those  functions;  so  the  natural  limit  of  a 
republic  is  that  distant  e  ln>m  the  centre  whic  h 
will  b.iielv  allow  die  1  epr rsentatives  to  meet 
is  often  as  may  be  necessary  lor  the  atlminis- 
1 1 .1 1  ion  of  public  a  Hairs.  Gan  i  1  be  sa  id  that  the 
limits  of  the  I  iiited  States  exceed  this  dis¬ 
tant  ez  If  will  not  be  Said  by  those  who  recollect 


NUMBER  i4  61 


that  the  Atlantic  coast  is  the  longest  side  of  the 
Union,  that  during  the  term  of  thirteen  years 
the  representatives  of  the  States  have  been  al¬ 
most  continually  assembled,  and  that  the  mem¬ 
bers  from  the  most  distant  States  are  not 
chargeable  with  greater  intermissions  of  at¬ 
tendance  than  those  from  the  States  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Congress. 

That  we  may  form  a  juster  estimate  with  re¬ 
gard  to  this  interesting  subject,  let  us  resort  to 
the  actual  dimensions  of  the  Union.  The  lim¬ 
its,  as  fixed  by  the  treatv  of  peace,  are:  on  the 
east  the  Atlantic,  on  the  south  the  latitude  of 
thirty-one  degrees,  on  the  west  the  Mississippi, 
and  on  the  north  an  irregular  line  running  in 
some  instances  beyond  the  forty-fifth  degree, 
in  others  falling  as  low  as  the  forty-second. 
The  southern  shore  of  Lake  Erie  lies  below 
that  latitude.  Computing  the  distance  be¬ 
tween  the  thirty-first  and  fortv-fifth  degrees,  it 
amounts  to  nine  hundred  and  seventy-three 
common  miles;  computing  it  from  thirty-one 
to  forty-two  degrees,  to  seven  hundred  and 
sixtv-four  miles  and  a  half.  Taking  the  mean 
for  the  distance,  the  amount  will  be  eight  hun¬ 
dred  and  sixty-eight  miles  and  three  fourths. 
The  mean  distance  from  the  Atlantic  to  the 
Mississippi  does  not  probablv  exceed  seven 
hundred  and  fifty  miles.  On  a  comparison  of 
this  extent  with  that  of  several  countries  in 
Europe,  the  practicability  of  rendering  our 
system  commensurate  to  it  appears  to  be  de¬ 
monstrable.  It  is  not  a  great  deal  larger  than 
Germany,  where  a  diet  representing  the  whole 
empire  is  continually  assembled;  or  than  Po¬ 
land  before  the  late  dismemberment,  where 
another  national  diet  was  the  depositary  of  the 
supreme  power.  Passing  by  France  and  Spain, 
we  find  that  in  Great  Britain,  inferior  as  it 
may  be  in  size,  the  representatives  of  the 
northern  extremity  of  the  island  have  as  far 
to  travel  to  the  national  council  as  will  be  re¬ 
quired  of  those  of  the  most  remote  parts  of  the 
Union. 

Favourable  as  this  view  of  the  subject  may 
be,  some  observations  remain  which  will  place 
it  in  a  light  still  more  satisfactory. 

In  the  first  place  it  is  to  be  remembered  that 
the  general  government  is  not  to  be  charged 
with  the  whole  power  of  making  and  admin¬ 
istering  laws.  Its  jurisdiction  is  limited  to  cer¬ 
tain  enumerated  objects,  which  concern  all 
the  members  of  the  republic,  but  which  are 
not  to  be  attained  by  the  separate  provisions 
of  any.  The  subordinate  governments,  which 
can  extend  their  care  to  all  those  other  objects 


which  can  be  separately  provided  for,  will  re¬ 
tain  their  due  authority  and  activity.  Were  it 
proposed  by  the  plan  of  the  convention  to 
abolish  the  governments  of  the  particular 
States,  its  adversaries  would  have  some  ground 
for  their  objection;  though  it  would  not  be 
difficult  to  show  that  if  they  were  abolished 
the  general  government  would  be  compelled, 
by  the  principle  of  self-preservation,  to  rein¬ 
state  them  in  their  proper  jurisdiction. 

A  second  observation  to  be  made  is  that  the 
immediate  object  of  the  federal  Constitution 
is  to  secure  the  union  of  the  thirteen  primitive 
States,  which  we  know  to  be  practicable;  and 
to  add  to  them  such  other  States  as  may  arise 
in  their  own  bosoms,  or  in  their  neighbour¬ 
hoods,  which  we  cannot  doubt  to  be  equally 
practicable.  The  arrangements  that  mav  be 
necessary  for  those  angles  and  fractions  of  our 
territory  which  lie  on  our  north-western  fron¬ 
tier,  must  be  left  to  those  whom  further  dis¬ 
coveries  and  experience  will  render  more  equal 
to  the  task. 

Let  it  be  remarked,  in  the  third  place,  that 
the  intercourse  throughout  the  Union  will  be 
facilitated  by  new  improvements.  Roads  will 
everywhere  be  shortened,  and  kept  in  better 
order:  accommodations  for  travellers  will  be 
multiplied  and  meliorated;  an  interior  navi¬ 
gation  on  our  eastern  side  will  be  opened 
throughout,  or  nearly  throughout,  the  whole 
extent  of  the  thirteen  States.  The  communica¬ 
tion  between  the  Western  and  Atlantic  dis¬ 
tricts,  and  between  different  parts  of  each,  will 
be  rendered  more  and  more  easy  bv  those 
numerous  canals  with  which  the  beneficence 
of  nature  has  intersected  our  country,  and 
which  art  finds  it  so  little  difficult  to  connect 
and  complete. 

A  fourth  and  still  more  important  consider¬ 
ation  is,  that  as  almost  every  State  will,  on  one 
side  or  other,  be  a  frontier,  and  will  thus  find, 
in  a  regard  to  its  safety,  an  inducement  to 
make  some  sacrifices  for  the  sake  of  the  general 
protection;  so  the  States  which  lie  at  the  great¬ 
est  distance  from  the  heart  of  the  Union,  and 
which,  of  course,  may  partake  least  of  the 
ordinary  circulation  of  its  benefits,  will  be  at 
the  same  time  immediately  contiguous  to  for¬ 
eign  nations,  and  will  consequently  stand,  on 
particular  occasions,  in  greatest  need  of  its 
strength  and  resources.  It  may  be  inconvenient 
for  Georgia,  or  the  States  forming  our  western 
or  north-eastern  borders,  to  send  their  repre¬ 
sentatives  to  the  seat  of  government;  but  they 
would  find  it  more  so  to  struggle  alone  against 


THE  F EDERAL1S 1 


an  invading  enemy,  or  even  to  support  alone 
the  whole  expense  of  those  precautions  which 
ma\  be  dictated  by  the  neighbourhood  of  con¬ 
tinual  danger.  If  they  should  derive  less  bene¬ 
fit,  therefore,  from  the  Union  in  some  respects 
than  the  less  distant  States,  they  will  derive 
greater  benefit  from  it  in  other  respects,  and 
thus  the  proper  equilibrium  will  be  main¬ 
tained  throughout. 

I  submit  to  you.  my  fellow-citizens,  these 
considerations,  in  full  confidence  that  the  good 
sense  which  hassoolten  marked  yom  decisions 
will  allow  them  their  due  weight  and  effect; 
and  that  you  will  never  suffer  difficulties,  how¬ 
ever  formidable  in  appearance,  or  however 
fashionable  the  error  on  which  they  may  be 
founded,  to  drive  you  into  the  gloomy  and 
perilous  scene  into  which  the  advocates  for  dis¬ 
union  would  conduct  you.  Hearken  not  to  the 
unnatural  voice  which  tells  you  that  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  America,  knit  together  as  they  are  by  so 
many  cords  of  affection,  can  no  longer  live  to¬ 
gether  as  members  of  the  same  family:  can  no 
longer  continue  the  mutual  guardians  of  their 
mutual  happiness;  can  no  longer  be  fellow- 
citizens  of  one  great,  respectable,  and  flourish¬ 
ing  empire.  Hearken  not  to  the  voice  which 
petulantly  tells  you  that  the  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  recommended  for  your  adoption  is  a 
novelty  in  the  political  world;  that  it  has  never 
vet  had  a  place  in  the  theories  of  the  wildest 
projectors;  that  it  rashly  attempts  what  it  is 
impossible  to  accomplish.  No,  my  countrymen, 
shut  your  ears  against  this  unhallowed  lan¬ 
guage.  Shut  your  hearts  against  the  poison 
which  it  conveys;  the  kindred  blood  which 
flows  in  the  veihs  of  American  citizens,  the 
mingled  blood  which  they  have  shed  in  defence 
of  their  sacred  rights,  consecrate  their  Union, 
and  excite  horror  at  the  idea  of  their  becoming 
aliens,  rivals,  enemies.  And  if  novelties  are  to 
be  shunned,  believe  me,  the  most  alarming  of 
all  novelties,  the  most  wild  of  all  projects,  the 
most  rash  of  all  attempts,  is  that  ol  rending  us 
in  pieces,  in  order  to  preserve  our  liberties  and 
promote  our  happiness.  Hut  why  is  the  experi¬ 
ment  of  an  extended  republic  to  he  rejec  ted, 
merely  because  it  may  comprise  what  is  new? 
Is  it  not  the  glory  of  the  people  of  America, 
that,  whilst  they  have  paid  a  decent  regard  to 
die  opinions  ol  former  times  and  other  na¬ 
tions.  the\  have*  not  snlfered  a  blind  venera¬ 
tion  foi  antiquity,  lor  custom,  or  lor  names. 
10  override  the*  suggestions  of  their  own  good 
sense,  the  knowledge  of  their  own  situation, 
and  the  lessons  of  their  own  experience?  fo 


this  manly  spirit,  posterity  will  be  indebted 
for  the  possession,  anci  the  world  for  the  ex¬ 
ample,  of  the  numerous  innovations  displayed 
on  the  American  theatre,  in  favour  of  private 
rights  and  public  happiness.  Had  no  impor¬ 
tant  step  been  taken  by  the  leaders  of  the  Rev¬ 
olution  for  which  a  precedent  could  not  be 

discovered,  nogovernment  established  of  which 

an  exact  model  did  not  present  itself,  the 
people  of  the  United  Slates  might,  at  this  mo¬ 
ment,  have  been  numbered  among  the  melan¬ 
choly  victims  of  misguided  councils,  must  at 
best  have  been  labouring  under  the  weight  of 
some  of  those  forms  which  have  crushed  the 
liberties  of  the  rest  of  mankind.  Happily  for 
America,  happily,  we  trust,  for  the  whole  hu¬ 
man  race,  they  pursued  a  new  and  more  noble 
course.  Thev  accomplished  a  revolution  which 
has  no  parallel  in  the  annals  of  human  society. 
They  reared  the  fabrics  of  governments  which 
have  no  model  on  the  fac  e  of  the  globe.  1  hey 
formed  the  design  of  a  great  Confederacy, 
which  it  is  incumbent  on  their  successors  to 
improve  and  perpetuate.  11  their  works  be- 
trav  imperfections,  we  wonder  at  the  fewness 
of  them.  If  they  erred  most  in  the  structure  of 
the  Union,  this  was  the  work  most  ditlicult  to 
be  executed:  this  is  the  work  which  has  been 
new  modelled  by  the  act  ol  your  convention, 
and  it  is  that  act  on  which  you  are  now  to 
deliberate  and  to  decide.  Publius 

Number  ij 

[HAMILTON] 

In  tiik  course  of  the  preceding  papers,  I  have 
endeavouied.  my  fellow-citizens,  to  place  be¬ 
fore*  von,  in  a  clear  and  convincing  light,  the 
importance  of  Union  to  your  political  safety 
and  happiness.  I  have  unfolded  to  you  a 
complication  of  dangers  to  which  you  would 
he*  exposed,  should  you  permit  that  sacred 
knot  which  hinds  the  people  of  \merica  to 
gel  her  to  be  severed  or  dissolved  by  ambition 
or  by  avarice,  by  jealousy  or  by  misrepresent.! 
lion  In  the  secpiel  of  the  inquiry  through 
which  1  propose  to  accompany  you.  the  truths 
intended  to  Ik*  inculcated  will  receive  further 
continuation  from  lac  ts  and  aiguments  hithei 
to  unnoticed.  If  the  road  over  which  you  will 
still  have  to  pass  should  in  some*  places  appear 
to  you  tedious  or  irksome,  you  will  recollect 
that  you  are  in  cpiesl  of  information  on  a  sub¬ 
ject  the  most  momentous  which  can  engage 
the  attention  ol  a  free  people,  that  the*  field 
through  which  you  have  to  travel  is  in  itself 


NUMBER  15  63 


spacious,  and  that  the  difficulties  of  the  jour¬ 
ney  have  been  unnecessarily  increased  by  the 
mazes  with  which  sophistry  has  beset  the  way. 
It  will  be  my  aim  to  remove  the  obstacles  from 
your  progress  in  as  compendious  a  manner  as 
it  can  be  done,  without  sacrificing  utility  to 
despatch. 

In  pursuance  of  the  plan  which  I  have  laid 
down  for  the  discussion  of  the  subject,  the 
point  next  in  order  to  be  examined  is  the  “in¬ 
sufficiency  of  the  present  Confederation  to  the 
preservation  of  the  Union.”  It  may  perhaps 
be  asked  what  need  there  is  of  reasoning  or 
proof  to  illustrate  a  position  which  is  not 
either  controverted  or  doubted,  to  which  the 
understandings  and  feelings  of  all  classes  of 
men  assent,  and  which  in  substance  is  ad¬ 
mitted  by  the  opponents  as  well  as  by  the 
friends  of  the  new  Constitution.  It  must  in 
truth  be  acknowledged  that,  however  these  may 
differ  in  other  respects,  they  in  general  appear 
to  harmonise  in  this  sentiment,  at  least,  that 
there  are  material  imperfections  in  our  na¬ 
tional  system,  and  that  something  is  necessary 
to  be  done  to  rescue  us  from  impending  an¬ 
archy.  The  facts  that  support  this  opinion  are 
no  longer  objects  of  speculation.  They  have 
forced  themselves  upon  the  sensibility  of  the 
people  at  large,  and  have  at  length  extorted 
from  those,  whose  mistaken  policy  has  had  the 
principal  share  in  precipitating  the  extremity 
at  which  we  are  arrived,  a  reluctant  confession 
of  the  reality  of  those  defects  in  the  scheme  of 
our  federal  government,  which  have  been  long 
pointed  out  and  regretted  by  the  intelligent 
friends  of  the  Union. 

We  may  indeed  with  propriety  be  said  to 
have  reached  almost  the  last  stage  of  national 
humiliation.  There  is  scarcely  anything  that 
can  wound  the  pride  or  degrade  the  character 
of  an  independent  nation  which  we  do  not  ex¬ 
perience.  Are  there  engagements  to  the  per¬ 
formance  of  which  we  are  held  by  every  tie  re¬ 
spectable  among  men?  These  are  the  subjects 
of  constant  and  unblushing  violation.  Do  we 
owe  debts  to  foreigners  and  to  our  own  citizens 
contracted  in  a  time  of  imminent  peril  for  the 
preservation  of  our  political  existence?  These 
remain  without  any  proper  or  satisfactory  pro¬ 
vision  for  their  discharge.  Have  we  valuable 
territories  and  important  posts  in  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  a  foreign  power  which,  by  express  stipu¬ 
lations,  ought  long  since  to  have  been  surren¬ 
dered?  These  are  still  retained,  to  the  preju¬ 
dice  of  our  interests,  not  less  than  of  our  rights. 
Are  we  in  a  condition  to  resent  or  to  repel  the 


aggression?  We  have  neither  troops,  nor  treas¬ 
ury,  nor  government.1  Are  we  even  in  a  condi¬ 
tion  to  remonstrate  with  dignity?  The  just  im¬ 
putations  on  our  own  faith,  in  respect  to  the 
same  treaty,  ought  first  to  be  removed.  Are  we 
entitled  by  nature  and  compact  to  a  free  par¬ 
ticipation  in  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi? 
Spain  excludes  us  from  it.  Is  public  credit  an 
indispensable  resource  in  time  of  public  dan¬ 
ger?  We  seem  to  have  abandoned  its  cause  as 
desperate  and  irretrievable.  Is  commerce  of 
importance  to  national  wealth?  Ours  is  at  the 
lowest  point  of  declension.  Is  respectability  in 
the  eyes  of  foreign  powers  a  safeguard  against 
foreign  encroachments?  The  imbecility  of  our 
government  even  forbids  them  to  treat  with 
us.  Our  ambassadors  abroad  are  the  mere  pag¬ 
eants  of  mimic  sovereignty.  Is  a  violent  and 
unnatural  decrease  in  the  value  of  land  a  symp¬ 
tom  of  national  distress?  The  price  of  improved 
land  in  most  parts  of  the  country  is  much  lower 
than  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  quantity  of 
waste  land  at  market,  and  can  only  be  fully 
explained  by  that  want  of  private  and  public 
confidence  which  are  so  alarmingly  prevalent 
among  all  ranks,  and  which  have  a  direct  tend¬ 
ency  to  depreciate  property  of  every  kind.  Is 
private  credit  the  friend  and  patron  of  indus¬ 
try.  That  most  useful  kind  which  relates  to 
borrowing  and  lending  is  reduced  within  the 
narrowest  limits,  and  this  still  more  from  an 
opinion  of  insecurity  than  from  the  scarcity 
of  money.  To  shorten  an  enumeration  of  par¬ 
ticulars  which  can  afford  neither  pleasure  nor 
instruction,  it  may  in  general  be  demanded, 
what  indication  is  there  of  national  disorder, 
poverty,  and  insignificance  that  could  befall 
a  community  so  peculiarly  blessed  with  natural 
advantages  as  we  are,  which  does  not  form  a 
part  of  the  dark  catalogue  of  our  public  mis¬ 
fortunes? 

This  is  the  melancholy  situation  to  which  we 
have  been  brought  by  those  very  maxims  and 
councils  which  would  now  deter  us  from  adopt¬ 
ing  the  proposed  Constitution;  and  which,  not 
content  with  having  conducted  us  to  the  brink 
of  a  precipice,  seem  resolved  to  plunge  us  into 
the  abyss  that  awaits  us  below.  Here,  my  coun¬ 
trymen,  impelled  by  every  motive  that  ought 
to  influence  an  enlightened  people,  let  us  make 
a  firm  stand  for  our  safety,  our  tranquillity, 
our  dignity,  our  reputation.  Let  us  at  last  break 
the  fatal  charm  which  has  too  long  seduced  us 
from  the  paths  of  felicity  and  prosperity. 

It  is  true,  as  has  been  before  observed,  that 

4  “I  mean  for  the  Union.”— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


64 

farts,  too  stubborn  to  be  resisted,  have  pro¬ 
duced  a  species  of  general  assent  to  the  ab¬ 
stract  proposition  that  there  exist  material  de¬ 
lects  in  our  national  system;  but  the  usefulness 
of  the  concession,  on  the  part  of  the  old  adver¬ 
saries  of  federal  measures,  is  destroyed  by  a 
strenuous  opposition  to  a  remedy,  upon  the 
onl\  principles  that  can  give  it  a  chance  of 
success.  While  they  admit  that  the  gen  eminent 
of  the  United  States  is  destitute  of  energy,  they 
conte  nd  against  conferring  upon  it  those  poyv- 
ers  which  are  requisite  to  supply  that  energy. 
They  seem  still  to  aim  at  things  repugnant  and 
irreconcilable!  at  an  augmentation  of  federal 
authority .  yvithout  a  diminution  of  State  au¬ 
thority;  at  sovereignty  in  the  Union,  and  com¬ 
plete  independence  in  the  members.  I  hey 
still,  in  fine,  seem  to  cherish  with  blind  devo¬ 
tion  the  political  monster  of  an  impnium  in 
imperio .  This  renders  a  full  display  of  the 
principal  defects  of  the  Confederation  neces¬ 
sary.  in  order  to  show  that  the  evils  yve  ex¬ 
perience  do  not  proceed  from  minute  or  par¬ 
tial  imperfections,  but  from  fundamental  er¬ 
rors  in  the  structure  of  the  building,  yvhich 
cannot  be  amended  othenvise  than  bv  an  al¬ 
teration  in  the  first  principles  and  main  pillars 
of  the  fabric. 

1  he  great  and  radical  vice  in  the  construc¬ 
tion  of  the  existing  Confederation  is  in  the 
prim  iplc  of  1  MCI  SI  \  I  ION  for  S  I  A  l  ES  or 
('.OVERNM  ENTS.  in  their  CORPORA  IE 
or  COLLECTIVE  CAPAC1  HES.  and  as  con¬ 
tradistinguished  from  the  INDIVIDl  \LS  of 
whic  h  thev  consist  Though  this  pi  inc  iplc  does 
not  mu  through  all  the  powers  delegated  to 
the  Union,  yet  it  pervades  and  governs  those 
on  which  the  efficacy  of  the  rest  depend*.  Ex¬ 
cept  as  to  the  rule  of  apportionment,  the 
1  lined  States  has  an  indefinite  discretion  to 
make  icquisitions  lor  men  and  money;  but 
they  have  no  authority  to  raise  either,  by  reg¬ 
ulations  extending  to  the  individual  citizens 
of  Xmeric  a .  I  he  consequence  of  this  is.  that 
though  in  theory  their  resolutions  concerning 
those  objects  are  laws,  constitutionally  bind¬ 
ing  011  die-  members  ol  the  l  mon.  yet  in  prac- 
tic  c  they  are  mere  recommendations  yvhic  h  the* 
States  observe  or  disregard  at  their  option. 

It  is  a  singular  instance  ol  the  capricious- 
mss  of  the  human  mind,  that,  after  all  the  ad¬ 
monitions  we  have  had  1mm  experience  on 
this  head,  there  should  still  be  found  men 
who  objec  t  to  the  new  Constitution  for  deviat¬ 
ing  ftoin  a  pt  inc  iple  yvhic  h  has  been  found  the 
|,ane  of  the  old.  and  yvhic  h  is  in  itself  c*y  ideiitly 


incompatible  with  the  idea  of  government:  a 
principle,  in  short,  yvhich,  if  it  is  to  be  exe¬ 
cuted  at  all.  must  substitute  the  violent  and 
sanguinary  agency  of  the  syvord  to  the  mild 
influence  of  the  magistracy*. 

There  is  nothing  absurd  or  impracticable 
in  the  idea  of  a  league  or  alliance  betyveen  in¬ 
dependent  nations  for  certain  defined  pur¬ 
poses  precisely  stated  in  a  treaty  regulating  all 
the  details  of  time,  place,  circumstance,  and 
quantity;  leaving  nothing  to  future  discretion: 
and  depending  for  its  execution  on  the  good 
faith  of  the  parties.  Compacts  of  this  kind 
exist  among  all  civilised  nations,  subject  to 
the  usual  vicissitudes  of  peace  and  war.  of  ob¬ 
servance  and  non-observance,  as  the  interests 
or  passions  of  the  contracting  powers  dictate. 
In  the  early  part  of  the  present  century  there 
yvas  an  epidemical  rage  in  Europe  for  this 
species  of  compacts,  from  yvhich  the  politi¬ 
cians  of  the  times  fondly  hoped  for  benefits 
which  yvere  never  realised.  With  a  view  to  es¬ 
tablishing  the  equilibrium  of  power  and  the 
peace  of  that  part  of  the  yvorld,  all  the  re¬ 
sources  of  negotiation  yvere  exhausted,  and 
triple  and  quadruple  alliances  yvere  formed: 
but  they  yvere  scarcely  formed  before  thev  yvere 
broken,  giving  an  instructive  but  afflicting  les¬ 
son  to  mankind,  how  little  dependence  is  to  be 
placed  on  treaties  yvhich  have  no  other  sane 
tion  than  the  obligations  of  good  faith,  and 
which  oppose  general  considerations  of  peace 
and  justice  to  the  impulse  of  any  immediate 
interest  or  passion. 

If  the  particular  States  in  this  country  arc 
disposed  to  stand  in  a  similar  relation  to  each 
other,  and  to  drop  the  project  of  a  general 

DISCRETIONARY  SHIM  RIM  t  NDENCE,  the  ScllOme 

would  indeed  be  pernicious,  and  would  entail 
upon  us  all  the  mischiefs  yvhich  have  been 
enumerated  under  the  first  head;  but  it  would 
have  the  merit  of  being,  at  least,  consistent 
and  practicable,  \handoning  all  vicyvs  towards 
a  confederate  government,  this  yvould  bring  us 
to  a  simple  alliance  ollcnsive  and  defensive; 
and  yvould  place  ns  in  a  situation  to  be  alter¬ 
nate  friends  and  enemies  of  each  other,  as  out 
mutual  jealousies  and  rivalships.  nourished  liv 
the  intiigucs  of  foreign  nations,  should  pre- 
sc  ribe  to  us. 

Hut  if  we  arc  unwilling  to  be  placed  in  this 
perilous  situation;  if  yve  still  yvill  adhere  to  the 
design  o!  a  national  government,  or.  yvhich  is 
the  same  tiling,  ol  a  superintending  power, 
under  the  ditection  of  a  common  council,  yve 
must  resolve  to  incorporate  into  our  plan 


NUMBER  75  65 


those  ingredients  which  may  be  considered  as 
forming  the  characteristic  difference  between 
a  league  and  a  government;  we  must  extend 
the  authority  of  the  Union  to  the  persons  of 
the  citizens— the  only  proper  objects  of  govern¬ 
ment. 

Government  implies  the  power  of  making 
laws.  It  is  essential  to  the  idea  of  a  law,  that  it 
be  attended  with  a  sanction;  or,  in  other  words, 
a  penalty  or  punishment  for  disobedience.  If 
there  be  no  penalty  annexed  to  disobedience, 
the  resolutions  or  commands  which  pretend  to 
be  laws  will,  in  fact,  amount  to  nothing  more 
than  advice  or  recommendation.  This  penalty, 
whatever  it  may  be,  can  only  be  inflicted  in 
two  ways:  by  the  agency  of  the  courts  and  min¬ 
isters  of  justice,  or  by  military  force;  by  the 
coercion  of  the  magistracy,  or  by  the  coercion 
of  arms.  The  first  kind  can  evidently  apply 
only  to  men;  the  last  kind  must  of  necessity  be 
employed  against  bodies  politic,  or  communi¬ 
ties,  or  States.  It  is  evident  that  there  is  no 
process  of  a  court  by  which  the  observance  of 
the  laws  can,  in  the  last  resort,  be  enforced. 
Sentences  may  be  denounced  against  them  for 
violations  of  their  duty;  but  these  sentences 
can  only  be  carried  into  execution  by  the 
sword.  In  an  association  where  the  general 
authority  is  confined  to  the  collective  bodies 
of  the  communities  that  compose  it.  every 
breach  of  the  laws  must  involve  a  state  of  war; 
and  military  execution  must  become  the  only 
instrument  of  civil  obedience.  Such  a  state  of 
things  can  certainly  not  deserve  the  name  of 
government,  nor  would  any  prudent  man 
choose  to  commit  his  happiness  to  it. 

There  was  a  time  when  we  were  told  that 
breaches,  by  the  States,  of  the  regulations  of 
the  federal  authority  were  not  to  be  expected; 
that  a  sense  of  common  interest  would  preside 
over  the  conduct  of  the  respective  members, 
and  would  beget  a  full  compliance  with  all  the 
constitutional  requisitions  of  the  Union.  This 
language,  at  the  present  day,  would  appear  as 
wild  as  a  great  part  of  what  we  now  hear  from 
the  same  quarter  will  be  thought,  when  we  shall 
have  received  further  lessons  from  that  best 
oracle  of  wisdom,  experience.  It  at  all  times 
betrayed  an  ignorance  of  the  true  springs  by 
which  human  conduct  is  actuated,  and  belied 
the  original  inducements  to  the  establishment 
of  civil  power.  Why  has  government  been  in¬ 
stituted  at  all?  Because  the  passions  of  men 
will  not  conform  to  the  dictates  of  reason  and 
justice,  without  constraint.  Has  it  been  found 
that  bodies  of  men  act  with  more  rectitude  or 


greater  disinterestedness  than  individuals?  The 
contrary  of  this  has  been  inferred  by  all  accu¬ 
rate  observers  of  the  conduct  of  mankind;  and 
the  inference  is  founded  upon  obvious  reasons. 
Regard  to  reputation  has  a  less  active  influ¬ 
ence,  when  the  infamy  of  a  bad  action  is  to  be 
divided  among  a  number,  than  when  it  is  to 
fall  singly  upon  one.  A  spirit  of  faction,  which 
is  apt  to  mingle  its  poison  in  the  deliberations 
of  all  bodies  of  men,  will  often  hurrv  the  per¬ 
sons  of  whom  they  are  composed  into  impro¬ 
prieties  and  excesses,  for  which  they  would 
blush  in  a  private  capacity. 

In  addition  to  all  this,  there  is,  in  the  nature 
of  sovereign  power,  an  impatience  of  control, 
that  disposes  those  who  are  invested  with  the 
exercise  of  it,  to  look  with  an  evil  eye  upon  all 
external  attempts  to  restrain  or  direct  its  opera¬ 
tions.  From  this  spirit  it  happens,  that  in  every 
political  association  which  is  formed  upon  the 
principle  of  uniting  in  a  common  interest  a 
number  of  lesser  sovereignties,  there  will  be 
found  a  kind  of  eccentric  tendency  in  the  sub¬ 
ordinate  or  inferior  orbs,  by  the  operation  of 
which  there  will  be  a  perpetual  effort  in  each 
to  fly  off  from  the  common  centre.  This  tend¬ 
ency  is  not  difficult  to  be  accounted  for.  It  has 
its  origin  in  the  love  of  power.  Power  con¬ 
trolled  or  abridged  is  almost  always  the  rival 
and  enemy  of  that  power  by  which  it  is  con¬ 
trolled  or  abridged.  This  simple  proposition 
will  teach  us  how  little  reason  there  is  to  expect 
that  the  persons  intrusted  with  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  the  affairs  of  the  particular  members  of 
a  confederacy  will  at  all  times  be  readv,  with 
perfect  good  humour,  and  an  unbiased  regard 
to  the  public  weal,  to  execute  the  resolutions 
or  decrees  of  the  general  authority.  The  reverse 
of  this  results  from  the  constitution  of  human 
nature. 

If,  therefore,  the  measures  of  the  Confeder¬ 
acy  cannot  be  executed  without  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  the  particular  administrations,  there 
will  be  little  prospect  of  their  being  executed 
at  all.  The  rulers  of  the  respective  members, 
whether  they  have  a  constitutional  right  to  do 
it  or  not,  will  undertake  to  judge  of  the  pro¬ 
priety  of  the  measures  themselves.  Thev  will 
consider  the  conformity  of  the  thing  proposed 
or  required  to  their  immediate  interests  or 
aims;  the  momentary  conveniences  or  incon¬ 
veniences  that  would  attend  its  adoption.  All 
this  will  be  done;  and  in  a  spirit  of  interested 
and  suspicious  scrutiny,  without  that  knowl¬ 
edge  of  national  circumstances  and  reasons  of 
state,  which  is  essential  to  a  right  judgment,  and 


THE  FEDERALIST 


with  that  strong  predilection  in  favour  of  local 
objects,  which  can  hardly  fail  to  mislead  the 
decision.  The  same  process  must  be  repeated 
in  every  member  of  which  the  body  is  consti¬ 
tuted;  and  the  execution  of  the  plans,  framed 
by  the  councils  of  the  whole,  will  always  fluc¬ 
tuate  on  the  discretion  of  the  ill-informed  and 
prejudiced  opinion  of  every  part.  I  hose  who 
have  been  conversant  in  the  proceedings  of 
popular  assemblies;  who  have  seen  how  ditfi- 
cult  it  often  is,  where  there  is  no  exterior  pres¬ 
sure  of  circumstances,  to  bring  them  to  harmo¬ 
nious  resolutions  on  important  points,  will 
readily  conceive  how  impossible  it  must  be  to 
induce  a  number  of  such  assemblies,  deliber¬ 
ating  at  a  distance  from  each  other,  at  different 
times,  and  under  different  impressions,  long 
to  cooperate  in  the  same  views  and  pursuits. 

In  our  case,  the  concurrence  of  thirteen  dis¬ 
tinct  sovereign  wills  is  requisite,  under  the 
Confederation,  to  the  complete  execution  of 
every  important  measure  that  proceeds  from 
the  Union.  It  has  happened  as  was  to  have 
been  foreseen.  The  measures  of  the  Union 
have  not  been  executed;  the  delinquencies  of 
the  States  have,  step  by  step,  matured  them¬ 
selves  to  an  extreme,  which  has,  at  length, 
arrested  all  the  wheels  of  the  national  govern¬ 
ment,  and  brought  them  to  an  awful  stand. 
Congress  at  this  time  sea  rich  possess  the  means 
of  keeping  up  the  forms  of  administration,  till 
the  States  tan  have  time  to  agree  upon  a  more 
substantial  substitute  for  the  present  shadow 
of  a  federal  government.  Things  did  not  come 
to  this  desperate  extremity  at  orue.  The  causes 
which  have  been  specified  produced  at  first 
only  unequal  and  disproportionate  degrees  of 
compliance  with  the  requisitions  of  the  Union. 
I  he  greater  deficiencies  of  some  States  tur- 
nished  the  pretext  of  example  and  the  tempta¬ 
tion  of  interest  to  the  complying,  or  to  the 
least  delinquent  States.  Why  should  we  do 
more  in  proportion  than  those  who  are  em¬ 
barked  with  us  in  the  same  political  voyage? 
Wliv  should  we  consent  to  bear  more  than  our 
proper  share  of  the  common  burden?  T  lic^sc 
weir  suggest  ions  whit  h  human  selfishness  ( otild 
not  withstand,  and  which  r\en  speculative 
men,  who  looked  forward  to  remote  conse¬ 
quences,  could  not, without  hesitation,  combat, 
bach  State,  yielding  to  tin*  persuasive  voice  of 
immediate  interest  or  <  onv rnicnc  e.  has  sue 
(cssiNely  withdrawn  its  support,  till  the  hail 
and  tottering  edifice  seems  ready  to  Kill  upon 
our  heads,  and  to  crush  us  beneath  its  111ms. 

I*i  in  u  s 


Number  16 

[HAMILTON] 

The  tendency  of  the  principle  of  legislation 
for  States,  or  communities,  in  their  political 
capacities,  as  it  has  been  exemplified  by  the 
experiment  we  have  made  of  it,  is  equally 
attested  by  the  events  which  have  befallen  all 
other  governments  of  the  confederate  kind,  of 
which  we  have  any  account,  in  exact  propor¬ 
tion  to  its  prevalence  in  those  systems.  The 
confirmations  of  this  fact  will  be  worthy  of  a 
distinct  and  particular  examination.  I  shall 
content  myself  with  barelyobserving  here,  that 
of  all  the  confederacies  of  antiquity,  which 
history  has  handed  down  to  us,  the  Lycian  and 
Achaean  leagues,  as  far  as  there  remain  vestiges 
of  them,  appear  to  have  been  most  free  from 
the  fetters  of  that  mistaken  principle, and  were 
accordingly  those  which  have  best  deserved, 
and  have  most  liberally  received,  the  applaud¬ 
ing  suffrages  of  political  writers. 

This  exceptional  principle  may,  as  truly  as 
emphatically,  be  styled  the  parent  of  anarchy; 
It  has  been  seen  that  delinquencies  in  the 
members  of  the  Union  are  its  natural  and 
necessary  offspring;  and  that  whenever  they 
happen,  theonlyconstitutional  remedy  is  force, 
and  the  immediate  effect  of  the  use  of  it,  civil 
war. 

It  remains  to  inquire  how  far  so  odious  an 
engine  of  government,  in  its  application  to  us, 
would  even  be  capable  of  answering  its  end. 
If  there  should  not  be  a  large  army  constantly 
at  the  disposal  of  the  national  government  it 
would  either  not  be  able  to  employ  force  at  all. 
or,  when  this  could  be  done,  it  would  amount 
to  a  war  between  parts  of  the  Confederacy  con¬ 
cerning  the  infractions  of  a  league,  in  which 
the  strongest  combination  would  be  most  likeh 
to  prevail,  whether  it  consisted  of  those  who 
supported  or  of  those  who  resisted  the  general 
authority.  It  would  rarely  happen  that  the  de¬ 
linquency  to  he  redressed  would  be  confined  to 
a  single  member,  and  if  there  were  more  than 
one  who  had  neglec  ted  their  duty,  similarity  of 
situation  would  induce  them  to  unite  for  com¬ 
mon  defence.  Independent  of  this  motive  of 
sympathy,  if  a  large  and  influential  State 
should  happen  to  he  the  aggressing  member,  it 
would  commonly  have  weight  enough  with  its 
neighbours  to  win  over  some  ol  them  as  asso- 
c  iates  to  its  <  ause.  Spec  ions  arguments  of  clan 
get  to  the  common  liberi)  could  easily  be  con¬ 
trived;  plausible  excuses  for  the*  deficiencies 
ol  the  party  could,  without  dilliculty,  he  in 


NUMBER  1 6  67 


vented  to  alarm  the  apprehensions,  inflame  the 
passions,  and  conciliate  the  good-will,  even  of 
those  States  which  were  not  chargeable  writh 
any  violation  or  omission  of  duty.  This  would 
be  the  more  likely  to  take  place,  as  the  delin¬ 
quencies  of  the  larger  members  might  be  ex¬ 
pected  sometimes  to  proceed  from  an  ambi¬ 
tious  premeditation  in  their  rulers,  with  a  view 
to  getting  rid  of  all  external  control  upon  their 
designs  of  personal  aggrandisement;  the  better 
to  effect  which  it  is  presumable  they  would 
tamper  beforehand  with  leading  individuals 
in  the  adjacent  States.  If  associates  could  not 
be  found  at  home,  recourse  would  be  had  to 
the  aid  of  foreign  powers,  who  would  seldom 
be  disinclined  to  encouraging  the  dissensions 
of  a  Confederacy,  from  the  firm  union  of  which 
they  had  so  much  to  fear.  When  the  sword  is 
once  drawn,  the  passions  of  men  observe  no 
bounds  of  moderation.  The  suggestions  of 
wounded  pride,  the  instigations  of  irritated 
resentment,  would  be  apt  to  carry  the  States 
against  which  the  arms  of  the  Union  were  ex¬ 
erted,  to  any  extremes  necessary  to  avenge  the 
affront  or  to  avoid  the  disgrace  of  submission. 
The  first  war  of  this  kind  would  probably 
terminate  in  a  dissolution  of  the  Union. 

This  may  be  considered  as  the  violent  death 
of  the  Confederacy.  Its  more  natural  death  is 
what  we  now  seem  to  be  on  the  point  of  expe¬ 
riencing,  if  the  federal  system  be  not  speedily 
renovated  in  a  more  substantial  form.  It  is  not 
probable,  considering  the  genius  of  this  coun¬ 
try,  that  the  complying  States  would  often 
be  inclined  to  support  the  authority  of  the 
Union  by  engaging  in  a  war  against  the  non¬ 
complying  States.  They  would  always  be  more 
ready  to  pursue  the  milder  course  of  putting 
themselves  upon  an  equal  footing  with  the  de¬ 
linquent  members  by  an  Imitation  of  their 
example.  And  the  guilt  of  all  would  thus  be¬ 
come  the  security  of  all.  Our  past  experience 
has  exhibited  the  operation  of  this  spirit  in  its 
full  light.  There  would,  in  fact,  be  an  insuper¬ 
able  difficulty  in  ascertaining  when  force  could 
with  propriety  be  employed.  In  the  article  of 
pecuniary  contribution,  which  would  be  the 
most  usual  source  of  delinquency,  it  would 
often  be  impossible  to  decide  whether  it  had 
proceeded  from  disinclination  or  inability.  The 
pretence  of  the  latter  would  always  be  at  hand. 
And  the  case  must  be  very  flagrant  in  which  its 
fallacy  could  be  detected  with  sufficient  cer¬ 
tainty  to  justify  the  harsh  expedient  of  com¬ 
pulsion.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  this  problem 
alone,  as  often  as  it  should  occur,  would  open 


a  wide  field  for  the  exercise  of  factious  views, 
of  partiality,  and  of  oppression,  in  the  major¬ 
ity  that  happened  to  prevail  in  the  national 
council. 

It  seems  to  require  no  pains  to  prove  that 
the  States  ought  not  to  prefer  a  national  Con¬ 
stitution  which  could  only  be  kept  in  motion 
by  the  instrumentality  of  a  large  army  contin¬ 
ually  on  foot  to  execute  the  ordinary  requisi¬ 
tions  or  decrees  of  the  government.  And  yet 
this  is  the  plain  alternative  involved  by  those 
who  wish  to  deny  it  the  power  of  extending  its 
operations  to  individuals.  Such  a  scheme,  if 
practicable  at  all,  would  instantly  degenerate 
into  a  military  despotism;  but  it  will  be  found 
in  every  light  impracticable.  The  resources  of 
the  Union  would  not  be  equal  to  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  an  army  considerable  enough  to  con¬ 
fine  the  larger  States  within  the  limits  of  their 
duty;  nor  would  the  means  ever  be  furnished 
of  forming  such  an  army  in  the  first  instance. 
Whoever  considers  the  populousness  and 
strength  of  several  of  these  States  singly  at  the 
present  juncture,  and  looks  forward  to  what 
they  will  become,  even  at  the  distance  of  half 
a  century,  will  at  once  dismiss  as  idle  and 
visionary  any  scheme  which  aims  at  regulating 
their  movements  by  laws  to  operate  upon  them 
in  their  collective  capacities,  and  to  be  executed 
by  a  coercion  applicable  to  them  in  the  same 
capacities.  A  project  of  this  kind  is  little  less 
romantic  than  the  monster-taming  spirit  which 
is  attributed  to  the  fabulous  heroes  and  demi¬ 
gods  of  antiquity. 

Even  in  those  confederacies  which  have  been 
composed  of  members  smaller  than  many  of 
our  countries,  the  principle  of  legislation  for 
sovereign  States,  supported  by  military  coer¬ 
cion,  has  never  been  found  effectual.  It  has 
rarely  been  attempted  to  be  employed,  but 
against  the  weaker  members;  and  in  most  in¬ 
stances  attempts  to  coerce  the  refractory  and 
disobedient  have  been  the  signals  of  bloody 
wars,  in  which  one  half  of  the  confederacy  has 
displayed  its  banners  against  the  other  half. 

The  result  of  these  observations  to  an  in¬ 
telligent  mind  must  be  clearly  this,  that  if  it 
be  possible  at  any  rate  to  construct  a  federal 
government  capable  of  regulating  the  common 
concerns  and  preserving  the  general  tranquil¬ 
lity,  it  must  be  founded,  as  to  the  objects  com¬ 
mitted  to  its  care,  upon  the  reverse  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  contended  for  by  the  opponents  of  the 
proposed  Constitution.  It  must  carry  its  agency 
to  the  persons  of  the  citizens.  It  must  stand  in 
need  of  no  intermediate  legislations;  but  must 


THE  FEDERALIST 


itself  be  empowered  to  employ  the  arm  of  the 
ordinary  magistrate  to  execute  its  own  resolu¬ 
tions.  The  majesty  of  the  national  authority 
must  he  manifested  through  the  medium  of 
the  courts  of  justice.  The  government  of  the 
Union,  like  that  of  each  State,  must  he  able  to 
address  itself  immediately  to  the  hopes  and 
fears  of  individuals:  and  to  attract  to  its  sup¬ 
port  those  passions  which  have  the  strongest 
influence  upon  the  human  heart.  It  must,  in 
short,  possess  all  the  means,  and  have  a  right 
to  resort  to  all  the  methods,  of  executing  the 
powers  with  which  it  is  intrusted,  that  are  pos¬ 
sessed  and  exercised  by  the  governments  of  the 
particular  States. 

To  this  reasoning  it  may  perhaps  he  ob¬ 
jected.  that  if  any  State  should  he  disaffected 
to  the  authority  of  tiie  Union,  it  could  at  any 
time  obstruct  the  execution  of  its  laws,  and 
bring  the  matter  to  the  same  issueof  force,  with 
the  necessitv  of  which  the  opposite  scheme  is 
reproached. 

The  plausibility  of  thisobjection  will  vanish 
the  moment  we  advert  to  the  essential  differ¬ 
ence  between  a  mere  non-compliance  and  a 
direct  and  ACTIVE  resistance.  If  the  interposi¬ 
tion  of  the  State  legislatures  be  necessary  to 
gisc  effect  to  a  measure  of  the  Union,  they 
have  onlv  not  to  act,  or  to  act  evasively,  and 
the  measure  is  defeated.  This  neglect  of  duty 
may  be  disguised  under  affected  but  unsub¬ 
stantial  provisions,  so  as  not  to  appear,  and  of 
course  not  to  excite'  any  alarm  in  the  people 
for  the  safety  of  the  Constitution.  Ihe  State 
leaders  mav  even  make  a  merit  of  their  surrep¬ 
titious  invasions  of  it  on  the  ground  of  some 
temporary  convenience,  exemption,  or  advan¬ 
tage. 

Hut  if  the  execution  of  the  laws  of  the  na¬ 
tional  government  should  not  require  the  in¬ 
tervention  of  the  State  legislatures,  if  they 
were  to  pass  into  immediate  opera  lion  upon 
the  citizens  themselves,  the  particular  govern¬ 
ments  could  not  interrupt  their  progress  with¬ 
out  an  open  and  violent  exertion  of  an  uncon¬ 
stitutional  power.  No  omissions  nor  evasions 
would  answer  the  end.  Thev  would  be  obliged 
to  act.  and  in  such  a  manner  as  would  leave 
no  doubt  that  thev  had  euc  toadied  on  the 
national  rights  \n  experiment  of  this  nature 
would  a  1  wavs  be  hazardous  in  the  lac e  ol  a  con 
stitution  in  am  degree  competent  to  its  own 
defence,  and  of  a  people  enlightened  enough 


to  distinguish  between  a  legal  exercise  and  an 
illegal  usurpation  of  authority.  The  success  of 
it  would  require  not  merely  a  factious  major¬ 
ity  in  the  legislature,  but  the  concurrence  of 
the  courts  of  justice  and  of  the  body  of  the 
people.  If  the  judges  were  not  embarked  in  a 
conspiracy  with  the  legislature,  they  would 
pronounce  the  resolutions  of  such  a  majority 
to  be  contrary  to  the  supreme  law  of  the  land, 
unconstitutional,  and  void.  If  the  people  were 
not  tainted  with  the  spirit  of  their  State  repre¬ 
sentatives.  they,  as  the  natural  guardians  of  the 
Constitution,  would  throw  their  weight  into 
the  national  scale  and  give  it  a  decided  pre¬ 
ponderance'  in  the  contest.  Attempts  of  this 
kind  would  not  often  be  made  with  levity  or 
rashness,  because  thev  could  seldom  be  made 
without  danger  to  the  authors,  unless  in  cases 
of  a  tyrannical  exercise  of  the  federal  authority. 

If  opposition  to  the  national  government 
should  arise  from  the  disorderly  conduct  of  re¬ 
fractory  or  seditious  individuals,  it  could  be 
overcome  by  the  same  means  which  are  daily 
employed  against  the  same  evil  under  the  State 
governments.  Idle  magistracy,  being  equally 
the  ministers  of  the  law  of  the  land,  from  what¬ 
ever  source  it  might  emanate,  would  doubtless 
be  as  ready  to  guard  the  national  as  the  local 
regulations  from  the  inroads  of  private  licen¬ 
tiousness.  As  to  those  partial  commotions  and 
insurrections,  which  sometimes  disquiet  soci¬ 
ety,  from  the  intrigues  of  an  inconsiderable 
faction,  or  from  sudden  or  occasional  ill-hu¬ 
mours  that  do  not  infect  the  great  body  of  the 
community,  the  general  government  could 
command  more  extensive  resources  for  thesup- 
pression  of  disturbances  of  that  kind  than 
would  he  in  the  power  of  any  single  member. 
And  as  to  those  mortal  feuds  which,  in  certain 
conjunctures,  spread  a  conflagration  through 
a  whole  nation,  or  through  a  verv  large  pro¬ 
portion  of  it.  proceeding  either  from  weight v 
causes  of  discontent  given  by  the  government 
or  from  the  contagion  of  some  violent  popular 
parowsm.  thev  do  not  fall  within  any  ordinars 
rules  of  calculation.  W  hen  they  happen,  ihrv 
commonlv  amount  to  resolutions  and  dismem¬ 
berments  of  empire.  No  lorm  of  government 
can  alsvass  either  a\oid  or  control  them.  It  is 
in  sain  to  hope  to  guard  against  events  too 
mights  for  human  foresight  or  pret  ant  ion.  and 
it  svnulcl  be  idle  to  object  to  a  government 
because  it  could  not  perform  impossibilities. 

Prm  u  s 


NUMBER  77  69 


Number  iy 

[HAMILTON] 

An  objection,  of  a  nature  different  from  that 
which  has  been  stated  and  answered,  in  my 
last  address,  may  perhaps  be  likewise  urged 
against  the  principle  of  legislation  for  the  in¬ 
dividual  citizens  of  America.  It  may  be  said 
that  it  would  tend  to  render  the  government 
of  the  Union  too  powerful,  and  to  enable  it 
to  absorb  those  residuary  authorities,  which  it 
might  be  judged  proper  to  leave  with  the  States 
for  local  purposes.  Allowing  the  utmost  lati¬ 
tude  to  the  love  of  power  which  any  reasonable 
man  can  require,  I  confess  I  am  at  a  loss  to 
discover  what  temptation  the  persons  intrusted 
with  the  administration  of  the  general  govern¬ 
ment  could  ever  feel  to  divest  the  States  of  the 
authorities  of  that  description.  The  regula¬ 
tion  of  the  mere  domestic  police  of  a  State 
appears  to  me  to  hold  out  slender  allurements 
to  ambition.  Commerce,  finance,  negotiation, 
and  war  seem  to  comprehend  all  the  objects 
which  have  charms  for  minds  governed  by  that 
passion:  and  all  the  powers  necessary  to  those 
objects  ought,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  lodged 
in  the  national  depository.  The  administra¬ 
tion  of  private  justice  between  the  citizens  of 
the  same  State,  the  supervision  of  agriculture 
and  of  other  concerns  of  a  similar  nature,  all 
those  things,  in  short,  which  are  proper  to  be 
provided  for  by  local  legislation,  can  never  be 
desirable  cares  of  a  general  jurisdiction.  It  is 
therefore  improbable  that  there  should  exist 
a  disposition  in  the  federal  councils  to  usurp 
the  powers  with  which  they  are  connected; 
because  the  attempt  to  exercise  those  powers 
would  be  as  troublesome  as  it  would  be  nuga¬ 
tory;  and  the  possession  of  them,  for  that  rea¬ 
son.  would  contribute  nothing  to  the  dignity, 
to  the  importance,  or  to  the  splendour  of  the 
national  government. 

But  let  it  be  admitted,  for  argument’s  sake, 
that  mere  wantonness  and  lust  of  domination 
would  be  sufficient  to  beget  that  disposition; 
still  it  may  be  safely  affirmed,  that  the  sense  of 
the  constituent  body  of  the  national  repre¬ 
sentatives,  or,  in  other  words,  the  people  of  the 
several  States,  would  control  the  indulgence  of 
so  extravagant  an  appetite.  It  will  always  be 
far  more  easy  for  the  State  governments  to 
encroach  upon  the  national  authorities,  than 
for  the  national  government  to  encroach  upon 
the  State  authorities.  The  proof  of  this  propo¬ 
sition  turns  upon  the  greater  degree  of  influ¬ 


ence  which  the  State  governments,  if  they  ad¬ 
minister  their  affairs  with  uprightness  and 
prudence,  will  generally  possess  over  the  peo¬ 
ple;  a  circumstance  which  at  the  same  time 
teaches  us  that  there  is  an  inherent  and  in¬ 
trinsic  weakness  in  all  federal  constitutions; 
and  that  too  much  pains  cannot  be  taken  in 
their  organisation,  to  give  them  all  the  force 
which  is  compatible  with  the  principles  of 
liberty. 

T  he  superiority  of  influence  in  favour  of  the 
particular  governments  would  result  partly 
from  the  diffusive  construction  of  the  national 
government,  but  chiefly  from  the  nature  of 
the  objects  to  which  the  attention  of  the  State 
administrations  would  be  directed. 

It  is  a  known  fact  in  human  nature,  that  its 
affections  are  commonly  weak  in  proportion 
to  the  distance  or  diffusiveness  of  the  object. 
Upon  the  same  principle  that  a  man  is  more 
attached  to  his  family  than  to  his  neighbour¬ 
hood,  to  his  neighbourhood  than  to  the  com¬ 
munity  at  large,  the  people  of  each  State  w  ould 
be  apt  to  feel  a  stronger  bias  towards  their  local 
governments  than  towards  the  government  of 
the  Union:  unless  the  force  of  that  principle 
should  be  destroyed  by  a  much  better  adminis¬ 
tration  of  the  latter. 

This  strong  propensity  of  the  human  heart 
wTould  find  powerful  auxiliaries  in  the  objects 
of  State  regulation. 

The  variety  of  more  minute  interests,  which 
will  necessarily  fall  under  the  superintendence 
of  the  local  administrations,  and  which  will 
form  so  many  rivulets  of  influence,  running 
through  every  part  of  the  society,  cannot  lie 
particularised,  without  involving  a  detail  too 
tedious  and  uninteresting  to  compensate  for 
the  instruction  it  might  afford. 

There  is  one  transcendent  advantage  be¬ 
longing  to  the  province  of  the  State  govern¬ 
ments,  which  alone  suffices  to  place  the  matter 
in  a  clear  and  satisfactory  light,— I  mean  the 
ordinary  administration  of  criminal  and  civil 
justice.  This,  of  all  others,  is  the  most  power¬ 
ful,  most  universal,  and  most  attractive  source 
of  popular  obedience  and  attachment.  It  is 
that  which,  being  the  immediate  and  visible 
guardian  of  life  and  property,  having  its  bene¬ 
fits  and  its  terrors  in  constant  activity  before 
the  public  eye,  regulating  all  those  personal 
interests  and  familiar  concerns  to  which  the 
sensibility  of  individuals  is  more  immediately 
awake,  contributes,  more  than  any  other  cir¬ 
cumstance,  to  impressing  upon  the  minds  of 


THE  FEDERALIST 


the  people,  affection,  esteem,  and  reverence 
towards  the  government.  This  great  cement  of 
soviet),  which  will  diffuse  itself  almost  wholly 
through  the  channels  of  the  particular  gov¬ 
ernments,  independent  of  all  other  causes  of 
influence,  would  insure  them  so  decided  an 
empire  over  their  respective  citizens  as  to  ren¬ 
der  them  at  all  times  a  complete  counterpoise, 
and,  not  unfretjuently,  dangerous  rivals  to  the 
power  of  the  Union. 

The  operations  of  the  national  government, 
on  the  other  hand,  falling  less  immediately 
under  the  observation  of  the  mass  of  the  citi¬ 
zens,  the  benefits  derived  from  it  will  chiefly 
be  perceived,  and  attended  to  by  speculative 
men.  Relating  to  more  general  interests,  they 
will  be  less  apt  to  come  home  to  the  feelings  of 
the  people;  and,  in  proportion,  less  likely  to 
inspire  an  habitual  sense  of  obligation,  and 
an  acti\e  sentiment  of  attachment. 

The  reasoning  on  this  head  has  been  abun¬ 
dantly  exemplified  by  theexpcrience  of  all  fed¬ 
eral  constitutions  with  which  we  are  acquaint- 
ed,  and  of  all  others  which  have  borne  the 
least  analogy  to  them. 

Though  the  ancient  feudal  systems  were 
not,  strictly  speaking,  confederacies,  yet  they 
partook  of  the  nature  of  that  species  of  asso¬ 
ciation.  There  was  a  common  head,  chieftain, 
or  sovereign,  whose  authority  extended  over 
the  whole  nation;  and  a  number  of  subordi¬ 
nate  vassals,  or  feudatories,  who  had  large  por¬ 
tions  of  land  allotted  to  them,  and  numerous 
trains  of  inferior  vassals  or  retainers,  who  occu¬ 
pied  and  cultivated  that  land  upon  the  tenure 
of  fealty  or  obedience  to  the  persons  of  whom 
they  held  it.  Each  principal  vassal  was  a  kind 
of  sovereign  within  his  particular  demesnes. 
The  ( nnse<|iieiu es  of  this  situation  were  a  con¬ 
tinual  opposition  to  authority  ol  the  sovereign, 
and  frequent  wars  between  the  great  barons 
or  thief  feudatoiies  themselves.  1  he  power  of 
the  head  of  the  nation  was  commonly  tooweak, 
either  to  present*  the  public  peace,  or  to  pro¬ 
tect  the  people  against  the  oppressions  of  their 
immediate  finds.  I  his  period  of  European 
a II airs  is  emphatically  styled  by  historians  the 
times  of  feudal  .mart  hy. 

When  the  sovereign  happened  to  be  a  man 
of  vigoronsand  warlike  temper  and  of  superior 
abilities,  he  would  acquire  a  personal  weight 
and  influence,  which  answered,  for  the  time, 
tin  pm  poses  ol  a  more  regular  authority.  Hut 
in  general,  the  power  of  the  barons  triumphed 
over  dial  of  die  prince;  and  in  many  instances 
his  dominion  was  euiiielv  ihiowit  nit,  and  die 


great  fiefs  were  erected  into  independent  prin¬ 
cipalities  or  States.  In  diose  instances  in  which 
the  monarch  finally  prevailed  over  his  vassals, 
his  success  was  chiefly  owing  to  the  tyranny 
of  those  vassals  over  their  dependents.  The 
barons,  or  nobles,  equally  the  enemies  of  the 
sovereign  and  the  oppressors  of  the  common 
people,  were  dreaded  and  detested  by  both: 
till  mutual  danger  and  mutual  interest  affected 
a  union  between  them  fatal  to  the  power  of 
the  aristocracy.  Had  the  nobles,  by  a  conduct 
of  clemency  and  justice,  preserved  the  fidelity 
and  devotion  of  their  retainers  and  followers, 
the  contests  between  them  and  the  prince  must 
almost  always  have  ended  in  their  favour,  and 
in  the  abridgment  or  subversion  of  the  royal 
authority. 

This  is  not  an  assertion  founded  merely  in 
speculation  or  conjecture.  Among  other  illus¬ 
trations  of  its  truth  which  might  be  cited.  Scot¬ 
land  will  furnish  a  cogent  example.  The  spirit 
of  clanship  which  was,  at  an  early  day,  intro¬ 
duced  into  that  kingdom,  uniting  the  nobles 
and  their  dependants  by  ties  equivalent  to 
those  of  kindred,  rendered  the  aristocracy  a 
constant  overmatch  for  the  power  of  the  mon¬ 
arch,  till  the  incorporation  with  England  sub¬ 
dued  its  fierce  and  ungovernable  spirit,  and 
reduced  it  within  those  rules  of  subordination 
which  a  more  rational  and  more  energetic 
system  of  civil  polity  had  previously  estab¬ 
lished  in  the  latter  kingdom. 

The  separate  governments  in  a  confederacy 
may  aptly  be  compared  with  the  feudal  baron¬ 
ies;  with  this  advantage  in  their  favour,  that 
from  the  reasons  already  explained,  they  will 
generally  possess  the  confidence  and  good-will 
of  the  people,  and  with  so  important  a  support, 
will  be  able  effectually  to  oppose  all  encroach 
incuts  of  the  national  government.  It  will  be 
well  if  they  are  not  able  to  counteract  its  legiti¬ 
mate  and  necessary  authority.  T  he  points  of 
similitude  consist  in  the  rivalship  of  power, 
applicable  to  both,  and  in  the  com:i:n  ikation 
of  large  portions  of  the  strength  of  the  com¬ 
munity  into  particular  mrostrs,  in  one  case 
at  the  disposal  ol  individuals,  in  the  other  case 
at  ihe  disposal  of  political  bodies. 

A  concise  review  of  the  events  that  have 
attended  confederate  government  swill  further 
illustrate  iliis  important  doctrine;  an  inatten¬ 
tion  to  which  has  been  the  great  source  of  our 
political  mistakes,  and  lias  given  our  jealousy 
a  direction  to  the  wrong  side.  I  liisreview  shall 
form  the  subject  of  some  ensuing  papers. 

IViu.hs 


NUMBER  1 8 


Number  18 

[HAMILTON  AND  MADISON] 

Among  the  confederacies  of  antiquity,  the 
most  considerable  was  that  of  the  Grecian  re¬ 
publics,  associated  under  the  Amphictyonic 
council.  From  the  best  accounts  transmitted  of 
this  celebrated  institution,  it  bore  a  very  in¬ 
structive  analogy  to  the  present  Confedera¬ 
tion  of  the  American  States. 

The  members  retained  the  character  of  in¬ 
dependent  and  sovereign  states,  and  had  equal 
votes  in  the  federal  council.  This  council  had 
a  general  authority  to  propose  and  resolve 
whatever  it  judged  necessary  for  the  common 
welfare  of  Greece;  to  declare  and  carry  on  war; 
to  decide,  in  the  last  resort,  all  controversies 
between  the  members;  to  fine  the  aggressing 
party;  to  employ  the  whole  force  of  the  con¬ 
federacy  against  the  disobedient;  to  admit  new 
members.  The  Amphictyons  were  the  guard¬ 
ians  of  religion,  and  of  the  immense  riches 
belonging  to  the  temple  of  Delphos,  where 
they  had  the  right  of  jurisdiction  in  contro¬ 
versies  between  the  inhabitants  and  those  who 
came  to  consult  the  oracle.  As  a  further  pro¬ 
vision  for  the  efficacy  of  the  federal  powers, 
they  took  an  oath  mutually  to  defend  and  pro¬ 
tect  the  united  cities,  to  punish  the  violators 
of  this  oath,  and  to  inflict  vengeance  on  sacri¬ 
legious  despoilers  of  the  temple. 

In  theory,  and  upon  paper,  this  apparatus 
of  powers  seems  amply  sufficient  for  all  general 
purposes.  In  several  material  instances  they  ex¬ 
ceed  the  powers  enumerated  in  the  articles  of 
confederation.  The  Amphictyons  had  in  their 
hands  the  superstition  of  the  times,  one  of 
the  principal  engines  by  which  government 
was  then  maintained;  they  had  a  declared  au¬ 
thority  to  use  coercion  against  refractory  cities, 
and  were  bound  by  oath  to  exert  this  author¬ 
ity  on  the  necessary  occasions. 

Very  different,  nevertheless,  was  the  experi¬ 
ment  from  the  theory.  The  powers,  like  those 
of  the  present  Congress,  were  administered  by 
deputies  appointed  wholly  by  the  cities  in  their 
political  capacities;  and  exercised  over  them 
in  the  same  capacities.  Hence  the  weakness, 
the  disorders,  and  finally  the  destruction  of  the 
confederacy.  The  more  powerful  members,  in¬ 
stead  of  being  kept  in  awe  and  subordina¬ 
tion,  tyrannised  successively  over  all  the  rest. 
Athens,  as  we  learn  from  Demosthenes,  was 
the  arbiter  of  Greece  seventy-three  years.  The 
Lacedaemonians  next  governed  it  twenty-nine 
years;  at  a  subsequent  period,  after  the  battle 


of  Leuctra,  the  Thebans  had  their  turn  of  dom¬ 
ination. 

It  happened  but  too  often,  according  to 
Plutarch,  that  the  deputies  of  the  strongest 
cities  awed  and  corrupted  those  of  the  weaker; 
and  that  judgment  went  in  favour  of  the  most 
powerful  party. 

Even  in  the  midst  of  defensive  and  danger¬ 
ous  wars  with  Persia  and  Macedon,  the  mem¬ 
bers  never  acted  in  concert,  and  were,  more  or 
fewer  of  them,  eternally  the  dupes  or  the  hire¬ 
lings  of  the  common  enemy.  The  intervals  of 
foreign  war  were  filled  up  by  domestic  vicissi¬ 
tudes,  convulsions,  and  carnage. 

After  the  conclusion  of  the  war  with  Xerxes, 
it  appears  that  the  Lacedaemonians  required 
that  a  number  of  the  cities  should  be  turned 
out  of  the  confederacy  for  the  unfaithful  part 
they  had  acted.  The  Athenians,  finding  that 
the  Lacedaemonians  would  lose  fewer  parti¬ 
sans  by  such  a  measure  than  themselves,  and 
would  become  masters  of  the  public  delibera¬ 
tions,  vigorously  opposed  and  defeated  the 
attempt.  This  piece  of  history  proves  at  once 
the  inefficiency  of  the  union,  the  ambition  and 
jealousy  of  its  most  powerful  members,  and 
the  dependent  and  degraded  condition  of  the 
rest.  The  smaller  members,  though  entitled  by 
the  theory  of  their  system  to  revolve  in  equal 
pride  and  majesty  around  the  common  centre, 
had  become,  in  fact,  satellites  of  the  orbs  of 
primary  magnitude. 

Had  the  Greeks,  says  the  Abbe  Milot,  been 
as  wise  as  they  were  courageous,  they  would 
have  been  admonished  by  experience  of  the 
necessity  of  a  closer  union,  and  would  have 
availed  themselves  of  the  peace  which  fol¬ 
lowed  their  success  against  the  Persian  arms, 
to  establish  such  a  reformation.  Instead  of  this 
obvious  policy,  Athens  and  Sparta,  inflated 
with  the  victories  and  the  glory  they  had 
acquired,  became  first  rivals  and  then  enemies; 
and  did  each  other  infinitely  more  mischief 
than  they  had  suffered  from  Xerxes.  Their  mu¬ 
tual  jealousies,  fears,  hatreds,  and  injuries  end¬ 
ed  in  the  celebrated  Peloponnesian  war;  which 
itself  ended  in  the  ruin  and  slavery  of  the 
Athenians  who  had  begun  it. 

As  a  weak  government,  when  not  at  war,  is 
ever  agitated  by  internal  dissensions,  so  these 
never  fail  to  bring  on  fresh  calamities  from 
abroad.  The  Phocians  having  ploughed  up 
some  consecrated  ground  belonging  to  the 
temple  of  Apollo,  the  Amphictyonic  council, 
according  to  the  superstition  of  the  age,  im¬ 
posed  a  fine  on  the  sacrilegious  offenders.  The 


THE  FEDERALIST 


Phocians,  abetted  by  Athens  and  Sparta,  re¬ 
fused  to  submit  to  the  decree.  The  Thebans, 
with  others  of  the  cities,  undertook  to  main¬ 
tain  the  authority  of  the  Amphictvons,  and  to 
avenge  the  violated  god.  The  latter,  being  the 
weaker  party,  invited  the  assistance  of  Philip 
of  Macedon,  who  had  secretly  fostered  the 
contest.  Philip  gladly  seized  the  opportunity 
of  executing  the  designs  he  had  long  planned 
against  the  liberties  of  Greece.  By  his  intrigues 
and  bribes  he  won  over  to  his  interests  the  pop¬ 
ular  leaders  of  several  cities;  by  their  influ¬ 
ence  and  votes,  gained  admission  into  the 
Amphictyonic  council;  and  by  his  arts  and  his 
arms  made  himself  master  of  the  confederacy. 

Such  were  the  consequences  of  the  fallacious 
principle  on  which  this  interesting  establish¬ 
ment  was  founded.  Had  Greece,  savs  a  judi¬ 
cious  observer  on  her  fate,  been  united  by  a 
stricter  confederation,  and  persevered  in  her 
union,  she  would  never  have  worn  the  chains 
of  Macedon;  and  might  have  proved  a  barrier 
to  the  vast  projects  of  Rome. 

The  Achaean  league,  as  it  is  called,  was  an¬ 
other  society  of  Grecian  republics,  which  sup¬ 
plies  us  with  valuable  instruction. 

The  Union  here  was  far  more  intimate,  and 
its  organisation  much  wiser,  than  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  instance.  It  will  accordingly  appear, 
that  though  not  exempt  from  a  similar  catas¬ 
trophe,  it  by  no  means  equally  deserved  it. 

The  cities  composing  this  league  retained 
their  municipal  jurisdiction,  appointed  their 
own  officers,  and  enjoyed  a  perfect  equality. 
The  senate,  in  which  they  were  represented, 
had  the  sole  and  exclusive  right  of  peace  and 
war;  of  sending  and  receiving  ambassadors;  of 
entering  into  treaties  a  ltd  allianc  es;  of  appoint¬ 
ing  a  chief  magistrate  or  praetor,  as  he  was 
called,  who  commanded  their  armies,  and  who, 
with  the  ads  ice  and  consent  of  ten  of  the  sena¬ 
tors,  not  only  administered  the  government  in 
the  recess  of  the  senate,  but  had  a  great  share 
in  its  de  liberations,  when  assembled.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  the  primitive  constitution,  there  were 
two  pr.etors  associated  in  the  administration; 
but  cm  trial  a  single  one  was  preferred. 

It  appears  that  the  cities  had  all  the  same 
laws  and  customs,  the  same  weights  and  meas¬ 
ures.  and  the  same  money.  But  how  far  this 
elleet  proceeded  fiom  the*  authority  of  the  fed¬ 
eral  council  is  left  in  line ertaintv.  It  is  said 
only  that  the*  cities  were  in  a  manner  compelled 
to  receive  the  same  laws  and  usages.  When 
Lac ed.emon  was  brought  into  the*  league  hy 
Phtlopcnucu,  it  was  attended  w  ith  an  abolition 


of  the  institutions  and  laws  of  Lycurgus,  and 
an  adoption  of  those  of  the  Achaeans.  The 
Amphictvonic  confederacy,  of  which  she  had 
been  a  member,  left  her  in  the  full  exercise  of 
her  government  and  her  legislation.  This  cir¬ 
cumstance  alone  proves  a  very  material  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  genius  of  the  two  systems. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  such  imper¬ 
fect  monuments  remain  of  this  curious  politi¬ 
cal  fabric.  Could  its  interior  structure  and  reg¬ 
ular  operation  be  ascertained,  it  is  probable 
that  more  light  would  be  thrown  by  it  on  the 
science  of  federal  government,  than  by  any  of 
the  like  experiments  with  which  we  are  ac¬ 
quainted. 

One  important  fact  seems  to  be  witnessed 
by  all  the  historians  who  take  notice  of  Achaean 
affairs.  It  is,  that  as  well  after  the  renovation 
of  the  league  by  Aratus,  as  before  its  dissolu¬ 
tion  by  the  arts  of  Macedon,  there  was  infi¬ 
nitely  more  of  moderation  and  justice  in  the 
administration  of  its  government,  and  less  of 
violence  and  sedition  in  the  people,  than  were 
to  be  found  in  any  of  the  cities  exercising 
singly  all  the  prerogatives  of  sovereignty.  1  he 
Abb  £  Mably,  in  his  observations  on  Greece, 
says  that  the  popular  government,  which  was 
so  tempestuous  elsewhere,  caused  no  disortlers 
in  the  members  of  the  Ach.ean  republic,  be¬ 
cause  it  urns  there  tempered  by  the  general 
authority  and  laws  of  the  confederacy. 

We  are  not  to  conclude  too  hastily,  however, 
that  faction  did  not.  in  a  certain  degree, agitate 
the  particular  cities;  much  less  that  a  due  subor¬ 
dination  and  harmony  reigned  in  the  general 
system.  The  contrary  is  sufficiently  displayed 
in  the  vicissitudes  and  fate  of  the  republic. 

Whilst  the  Amphictyonic  confederacy  re¬ 
mained,  that  of  the  Achaans,  which  compre¬ 
hended  t lie  less  important  cities  only,  made 
little  figure  on  the  theatre  of  Greece.  When 
the  former  became  a  victim  to  Macedon,  the 
latter  was  spared  by  the  policy  of  Philip 
and  Alexander.  Under  the  successors  of  these 
primes,  however,  a  different  policy  prevailed. 
1  hr  arts  of  division  were  practised  among  the 
A<  h.cans.  Kachcitv  was  seduced  into  a  separate 
interest;  the  union  was  dissolved.  Some  of  the 
cities  fell  under  the  tyranny  of  Macedonian 
garrisons;  others  under  that  of  usurpers  spring¬ 
ing  out  ol  their  own  confusions.  Shame  and 
oppression  ere  long  awakened  their  love  of 
liberty.  A  few  cities  reunited.  Their  example 
was  followed  by  otheis,  as  opportunities  were 
found  of  cutting  oil  their  tyrants  The  league 
soon  embraced  almost  the  whole  Peloponnesus. 


NUMBER  ip 


Macedon  saw  its  progress;  but  was  hindered 
by  internal  dissensions  from  stopping  it.  All 
Greece  caught  the  enthusiasm  and  seemed 
ready  to  unite  in  one  confederacy,  when  the 
jealousy  and  envy  in  Sparta  and  Athens,  of 
the  rising  glory  of  the  Achaeans,  threw  a  fatal 
damp  on  the  enterprise.  The  dread  of  the  Mace¬ 
donian  power  induced  the  league  to  court  the 
alliance  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  who, 
as  successors  of  Alexander,  were  rivals  of  the 
king  of  Macedon.  This  policy  was  defeated 
by  Cleomenes,  king  of  Sparta,  who  was  led  by 
his  ambition  to  make  an  unprovoked  attack 
on  his  neighbours,  the  Achaeans,  and  who,  as 
an  enemy  to  Macedon,  had  interest  enough 
with  the  Egyptian  and  Syrian  princes  to  effect 
a  breach  of  their  engagements  with  the  league. 
The  Achxans  were  now  reduced  to  the  dilem¬ 
ma  of  submitting  to  Cleomenes,  or  of  suppli¬ 
cating  the  aid  of  Macedon,  its  former  oppres¬ 
sor.  The  latter  expedient  was  adopted.  The 
contests  of  the  Greeks  always  afforded  a  pleas¬ 
ing  opportunity  to  that  powerful  neighbour 
of  intermeddling  in  their  affairs.  A  Macedo¬ 
nian  armv  quickly  appeared.  Cleomenes  was 
vanquished.  The  Achaeans  soon  experienced, 
as  often  happens,  that  a  victorious  and  power¬ 
ful  ally  is  but  another  name  for  a  master.  All 
that  their  most  abject  compliances  could  ob¬ 
tain  from  him  was  a  toleration  of  the  exercise 
of  their  laws.  Philip,  who  was  now  on  the 
throne  of  Macedon,  soon  provoked  by  his  tyr¬ 
annies,  fresh  combinations  among  the  Greeks. 
The  Achaeans,  though  weakened  by  internal 
dissensions  and  by  the  revolt  of  Messene,  one 
of  its  members,  being  joined  by  the  /Etolians 
and  Athenians,  erected  the  standard  of  opposi¬ 
tion,  Finding  themselves,  though  thus  sup¬ 
ported,  unequal  to  the  undertaking,  they  once 
more  had  recourse  to  the  dangerous  expedi¬ 
ent  of  introducing  the  succour  of  foreign 
arms.  The  Romans,  to  whom  the  invitation 
was  made,  eagerly  embraced  it.  Philip  was  con¬ 
quered;  Macedon  subdued.,  A  new  crisis  en¬ 
sued  to  the  league.  Dissensions  broke  out 
among  its  members.  These  the  Romans  fos¬ 
tered.  Callicrates  and  other  popular  leaders 
became  mercenary  instruments  for  inveigling 
their  countrymen.  The  more  effectually  to 
nourish  discord  and  disorder  the  Romans  had, 
to  the  astonishment  of  those  who  confided  in 
their  sincerity,  already  proclaimed  universal 
liberty1  throughout  Greece.  With  the  same 

’This  was  but  another  name  more  specious  for 
the  independence  of  the  members  on  the  federal 
head.— Publius 


insidious  views,  they  now  seduced  the  members 
from  the  league,  by  representing  to  their  pride 
the  violation  it  committed  on  their  sover¬ 
eignty.  By  these  arts  this  union,  the  last  hope 
of  Greece,  the  last  hope  of  ancient  liberty,  was 
torn  into  pieces;  and  such  imbecility  and  dis¬ 
traction  introduced  that  the  arms  of  Rome 
found  little  difficulty  in  completing  the  ruin 
which  their  arts  had  commenced.  The  Achaeans 
were  cut  to  pieces,  and  Achaia  loaded  with 
chains,  under  which  it  is  groaning  at  this 
hour. 

I  have  thought  it  not  superfluous  to  give  the 
outlines  of  this  important  portion  of  history; 
both  because  it  teaches  more  than  one  lesson, 
and  because,  as  a  supplement  to  the  outlines 
of  the  Achaean  constitution,  it  emphatically 
illustrates  the  tendency  of  federal  bodies  rather 
to  anarchy  among  the  members,  than  to  tyr¬ 
anny  in  the  head.  Publius 

Number  ig 

[HAMILTON  AND  MADISON] 

The  examples  of  ancient  confederacies,  cited 
in  my  last  paper,  have  not  exhausted  the 
source  of  experimental  instruction  on  the  sub¬ 
ject.  There  are  existing  institutions,  founded 
on  a  similar  principle,  which  merit  partic¬ 
ular  consideration.  The  first  which  presents 
itself  is  the  Germanic  body. 

In  the  early  ages  of  Christianity,  Germany 
was  occupied  by  seven  distinct  nations,  who 
had  no  common  chief.  The  Franks,  one  of  the 
number,  having  conquered  the  Gauls,  estab¬ 
lished  the  kingdom  which  has  taken  its  name 
from  them.  In  the  ninth  century  Charlemagne, 
its  warlike  monarch,  carried  his  victorious 
arms  in  every  direction;  and  Germany  became 
a  part  of  his  vast  dominions.  On  the  dismem¬ 
berment,  which  took  place  under  his  sons,  this 
part  was  erected  into  a  separate  and  independ¬ 
ent  empire.  Charlemagne  and  his  immediate 
descendants  possessed  the  reality,  as  well  as 
the  ensigns  and  dignity  of  imperial  power.  But 
the  principal  vassals,  whose  fiefs  had  become 
hereditary,  and  who  composed  the  national 
diets  which  Charlemagne  had  not  abolished, 
gradually  threw  off  the  yoke  and  advanced  to 
sovereign  jurisdiction  and  independence.  The 
force  of  imperial  sovereignty  was  insufficient 
to  restrain  such  powerful  dependants;  or  to 
preserve  the  unity  and  tranquillity  of  the  em¬ 
pire.  The  most  furious  private  wars,  accom¬ 
panied  with  every  species  of  calamity,  were 
carried  on  between  the  different  princes  and 


THE  FEDERALIST 


states.  The  imperial  authority,  unable  to  main¬ 
tain  the  public  order,  declined  by  degrees  till 
it  was  almost  extinct  in  the  anarchy  which 
agitated  the  long  interval  between  the  death 
of  the  last  emperor  of  the  Suabian  and  the 
accession  of  the  first  emperor  of  the  Austrian 
lines.  In  the  eleventh  century  the  emperors 
enjoyed  full  sovereignty:  In  the  fifteenth  they 
had  little  more  than  the  symbols  and  decora¬ 
tions  of  power. 

Out  of  this  feudal  system,  which  has  itself 
many  of  the  important  features  of  a  confed¬ 
eracy,  has  grown  the  federal  system  which  con¬ 
stitutes  the  Germanic  empire.  Its  powers  are 
vested  in  a  diet  representing  the  component 
members  of  the  confederacy;  in  the  emperor, 
who  is  the  executive  magistrate,  with  a  nega¬ 
tive  on  the  decrees  of  the  diet;  and  in  the  im¬ 
perial  chamberand  the  aulic  council,  two  judi¬ 
ciary  tribunals  having  supreme  jurisdiction 
in  controversies  which  concern  the  empire,  or 
which  happen  among  its  members. 

The  diet  possesses  the  general  power  of  leg¬ 
islating  for  the  empire;  of  making  war  and 
peace;  contracting  alliances;  assessing  quotas 
of  troops  and  money;  constructing  fortresses; 
regulating  coin;  admitting  new  members;  and 
subjecting  disobedient  members  to  the  ban  of 
the  empire,  by  which  the  party  is  degraded 
from  his  sovereign  rights  and  his  possessions 
forfeited.  The  members  of  the  confederacy  are 
expressly  restricted  from  entering  into  com¬ 
pacts  prejudicial  to  the  empire;  from  impos¬ 
ing  tolls  and  duties  on  their  mutual  inter- 
course,  without  the  consent  of  the  emperor 
and  diet;  from  altering  the  value  of  money; 
from  doing  injustice  to  one  another;  or  from 
affording  assistance  or  retreat  to  disturbers  of 
the  public  peace.  And  the  ban  is  denounced 
against  such  as  shall  violate  any  of  these  re¬ 
strictions.  The  members  of  the  diet,  as  such, 
are  subject  in  all  cases  to  be  judged  by  the  em¬ 
peror  and  diet,  and  in  their  private  capacities 
by  the  aulic  council  and  imperial  chamber. 

I  he  prerogatives  of  the  emperor  are  numer¬ 
ous.  I  he  most  important  of  them  are:  his  ex¬ 
clusive  right  to  make  piopositions  to  the  diet; 
to  negative  its  resolutions;  to  name  ambassa¬ 
dors;  to  confer  dignities  and  titles;  to  fill  va- 
c  ant  elec  torates;  to  found  11110  entities;  to  grant 
privileges  not  injurious  to  the  stales  of  the  cm* 
pile;  in  receive  and  apply  the  public  revenues; 
and  generally  to  watch  over  the  public  safe  ty. 
In  certain  cases,  the  electors  form  a  council  to 
him.  In  quality  of  emperor,  he  possesses  no 
territory  within  the  empire,  nor  receives  any 


revenue  for  his  support.  But  his  revenue  and 
dominions,  in  other  qualities,  constitute  him 
one  of  the  most  powerful  princes  in  Europe. 

From  such  a  parade  of  constitutional  pow¬ 
ers,  in  the  representatives  and  head  of  this  con¬ 
federacy,  the  natural  supposition  would  be, 
that  it  must  form  an  exception  to  the  general 
character  which  belongs  to  its  kindred  systems. 
Nothing  would  be  further  from  the  reality. 
The  fundamental  principle  on  which  it  rests, 
that  the  empire  is  a  community  of  sovereigns, 
that  the  diet  is  a  representation  of  sovereigns, 
and  that  the  laws  are  addressed  to  sovereigns, 
renders  the  empire  a  nerveless  body,  incapable 
of  regulating  its  own  members,  insecure  against 
external  dangers,  and  agitated  with  unceasing 
fermentations  in  its  own  bowels. 

The  history  of  Germany  is  a  history  of  wars 
between  the  emperor  and  the  princes  and 
states;  of  wars  among  the  princes  and  states 
themselves;  of  the  licentiousness  of  the  strong, 
and  the  oppression  of  the  weak;  of  foreign  in¬ 
trusions,  and  foreign  intrigues;  of  requisitions 
of  men  and  money  disregarded,  or  partially 
complied  with;  of  attempts  to  enforce  them, 
altogether  abortive,  or  attended  with  slaughter 
and  desolation,  involving  the  innocent  with 
the  guilty;  of  general  imbecility,  confusion, 
and  misery. 

In  the  sixteenth  century,  the  emperor,  with 
one  part  of  the  empire  on  his  side,  was  seen  en¬ 
gaged  against  the  other  princes  and  states.  In 
one  of  the  conllicts,  the  emperor  himself  was 
put  to  flight,  and  very  near  being  made  prison¬ 
er  by  the  Elector  of  Saxony.  The  late  king  of 
Prussia  was  more  than  once  pitted  against 
his  imperial  sovereign;  and  commonly  proved 
an  overmatch  for  him.  Controversies  and  wars 
among  the  members  themselves  have  been  so 
common,  that  the  German  annals  are  crowded 
with  the  bloody  pages  which  describe  them. 
Previous  to  the  peace  of  Westphalia,  Germany 
was  desolated  by  a  war  of  thirty  years,  in  which 
the  emperor,  with  one  half  of  the  empire,  was 
on  one  side,  and  Sweden,  with  the  other  half, 
on  the  opposite  side.  Peace  was  at  length  nego 
tinted,  and  di<  tated  by  loreign  powers;  and  the 
articles  ol  it.  to  which  foreign  powers  are 
parties,  made  a  fundamental  part  of  the  Ger¬ 
manic  constitution. 

If  the  nation  happens,  on  any  emergency,  to 
be  more  united  by  the  necessity  of  self  deleiue, 
its  situation  is  still  deplorable.  Military  prepa 
rations  must  be  preceded  by  so  many  tedious 
discussions,  arising  from  the  jealousies,  pride, 
separate  views,  and  dashing  pretensions  ofsov- 


NUMBER  19 


ereign  bodies,  that  before  the  diet  can  settle  the 
arrangements,  the  enemy  are  in  the  field;  and 
before  the  federal  troops  are  ready  to  take  it, 
are  retiring  into  winter  quarters. 

The  small  body  of  national  troops,  which 
has  been  judged  necessary  in  time  of  peace,  is 
defectively  kept  up,  badly  paid,  infected  with 
local  prejudices,  and  supported  by  irregu¬ 
lar  and  disproportionate  contributions  to  the 
treasury. 

The  impossibility  of  maintaining  order  and 
dispensing  justice  among  these  sovereign  sub¬ 
jects,  produced  the  experiment  of  dividing  the 
empire  into  nine  or  ten  circles  or  districts;  of 
giving  them  an  interior  organisation,  and  of 
charging  them  with  the  military  execution  of 
the  laws  against  delinquent  and  contumacious 
members.  This  experiment  has  only  served  to 
demonstrate  more  fully  the  radical  vice  of  the 
constitution.  Each  circle  is  the  miniature  pic¬ 
ture  of  the  deformities  of  this  political  mon¬ 
ster.  They  either  fail  to  execute  their  commis¬ 
sions,  or  they  do  it  with  all  the  devastation  and 
carnage  of  civil  war.  Sometimes  whole  circles 
are  defaulters;  and  then  they  increase  the  mis¬ 
chief  which  they  were  instituted  to  remedy. 

We  may  form  some  judgment  of  this  scheme 
of  military  coercion  from  a  sample  given  by 
Thuanus.  In  Donawerth,  a  free  and  imperial 
city  of  the  circle  of  Suabia,  the  Abbe  de  St. 
Croix  enjoyed  certain  immunities  which  had 
been  reserved  to  him.  In  the  exercise  of  these, 
on  some  public  occasions,  outrages  were  com¬ 
mitted  on  him  by  the  people  of  the  city.  The 
consequence  was  that  the  city  was  put  under 
the  ban  of  the  empire,  and  the  Duke  of  Ba¬ 
varia,  though  director  of  another  circle,  ob¬ 
tained  an  appointment  to  enforce  it.  He  soon 
appeared  before  the  city  with  a  corps  of  ten 
thousand  troops,  and  finding  it  a  fit  occasion, 
as  he  had  secretly  intended  from  the  begin¬ 
ning,  to  revive  an  antiquated  claim,  on  the  pre¬ 
text  that  his  ancestors  had  suffered  the  place 
to  be  dismembered  from  his  territory,1  he  took 
possession  of  it  in  his  own  name,  disarmed, 
and  punished  the  inhabitants,  and  reannexed 
the  city  to  his  domains. 

It  may  be  asked,  perhaps,  what  has  so  long 
kept  this  disjointed  machine  from  falling  en¬ 
tirely  to  pieces?  The  answer  is  obvious:  The 
weakness  of  most  of  the  members,  who  are  un¬ 
willing  to  expose  themselves  to  the  mercy  of 

1  Pfeffel,  N ouve l  Abreg.  Chronol.  de  I’Hist.,  etc., 
d’Allemagne,  says  the  pretext  was  to  indemnify 
himself  for  the  expense  of  the  expedition.— 
Publius 


foreign  powers;  the  weakness  of  most  of  the 
principal  members,  compared  with  the  for¬ 
midable  powers  all  around  them;  the  vast 
weight  and  influence  which  the  emperor  de¬ 
rives  from  his  separate  and  hereditary  domin¬ 
ions;  and  the  interest  he  feels  in  preserving  a 
system  with  which  his  family  pride  is  con¬ 
nected,  and  which  constitutes  him  the  first 
prince  in  Europe;— these  causes  support  a 
feeble  and  precarious  Union;  whilst  the  repel¬ 
lent  quality,  incident  to  the  nature  of  sover¬ 
eignty,  and  which  time  continually  strength¬ 
ens,  prevents  any  reform  whatever,  founded  on 
a  proper  consolidation.  Nor  is  it  to  be  imag¬ 
ined,  if  this  obstacle  could  be  surmounted,  that 
the  neighbouring  powers  would  suffer  a  revo¬ 
lution  to  take  place,  which  would  give  to  the 
empire  the  force  and  pre-eminence  to  which 
it  is  entitled.  Foreign  nations  have  long  con¬ 
sidered  themselves  as  interested  in  the  changes 
made  by  events  in  this  constitution;  and  have, 
on  various  occasions,  betrayed  their  policy  of 
perpetuating  its  anarchy  and  weakness. 

If  more  direct  examples  were  wanting,  Po¬ 
land,  as  a  government  over  local  sovereigns, 
might  not  improperly  be  taken  notice  of.  Nor 
could  any  proof  more  striking  be  given  of 
the  calamities  flowing  from  such  institutions. 
Equally  unfit  for  self-government  and  self-de¬ 
fence,  it  has  long  been  at  the  mercy  of  its 
powerful  neighbours;  who  have  lately  had  the 
mercy  to  disburden  it  of  one-third  of  its  peo¬ 
ple  and  territories. 

The  connection  among  the  Swiss  cantons 
scarcely  amounts  to  a  confederacy;  though  it 
is  sometimes  cited  as  an  instance  of  the  stabil¬ 
ity  of  such  institutions. 

They  have  no  common  treasury;  no  com¬ 
mon  troops  even  in  war;  no  common  coin;  no 
common  judicatory;  nor  any  other  common 
mark  of  sovereignty. 

They  are  kept  together  by  the  peculiarity  of 
their  topographical  position;  by  their  individ¬ 
ual  weakness  and  insignificancy;  by  the  fear  of 
powerful  neighbours,  to  one  of  which  they 
were  formerly  subject;  by  the  few  sources  of 
contention  among  a  people  of  such  simple  and 
homogeneous  manners;  by  their  joint  interest 
in  their  dependent  possessions;  by  the  mutual 
aid  they  stand  in  need  of,  for  suppressing  in¬ 
surrections  and  rebellions,  an  aid  expressly 
stipulated,  and  often  required  and  afforded; 
and  by  the  necessity  of  some  regular  and  per¬ 
manent  provision  for  accommodating  disputes 
among  the  cantons.  The  provision  is,  that  the 
parties  at  variance  shall  each  choose  four 


THE  FEDERALIST 


judges  out  of  the  neutral  cantons,  who.  in  case 
of  disagreement,  choose  an  umpire.  This  tri¬ 
bunal,  under  an  oath  of  impartiality,  pro¬ 
nounces  definitive  sentence,  which  all  the  can¬ 
tons  are  bound  to  enforce.  The  competency  of 
this  regulation  may  be  estimated  bv  a  clause  in 
their  treaty  of  1683.  with  Victor  Amadeus  of 
Savov;  in  which  he  obliges  himself  to  inter¬ 
pose  as  mediator  in  disputes  between  the  can¬ 
tons,  and  to  employ  force,  it  necessary,  against 
die  contumacious  party. 

So  far  as  the  peculiarity  of  their  case  will 
admit  of  comparison  with  that  of  the  United 
States,  it  serves  to  confirm  the  principle  in¬ 
tended  to  be  established.  \\  hatever  efficacy  the 
union  may  have  had  in  ordinary  cases,  it  ap¬ 
pears  that  the  moment  a  cause  of  difference 
sprang  up,  capable  of  trying  its  strength,  it 
failed.  The  contro\ ersies  on  the  subject  of  re¬ 
ligion.  which  in  three  instances  have  kindled 
violent  and  bloody  contests,  may  be  said,  in 
fact,  to  have  severed  the  league.  The  Protes¬ 
tant  and  Catholic  cantons  have  since  had  their 
separate  diets,  where  all  the  most  important 
concerns  are  adjusted,  and  which  have  left  the 
general  diet  little  other  business  than  to  take 
care  of  the  common  bailages. 

That  separation  had  another  consequence, 
which  merits  attention.  It  produced  opposite 
alliances  with  foreign  powers:  of  Herne,  at  the 
head  ot  the  Protestant  association,  with  the 
United  Provinces:  and  of  Luzerne,  at  the  head 
of  the  Catholic  association,  with  France, 

Puulius 

Number  20 

HAMILTON  AND  MADISON’] 

Tin  Umih)  Xktmkrlands  are  a  confederacy 
of  republics,  or  rather  of  aristoc  nicies  of  a  very 
remarkable  texture,  yet  confirming  all  the  les¬ 
sons  derived  from  those  which  we  have  already 
res  iewed. 

I  he  union  is  <  0111  posed  of  seven  c oecjual  and 
sovereign  states,  and  each  state  or  province  is 
a  composition  of  equal  and  independent  cities. 
In  all  important  cases,  not  otilv  the  provinces 
but  the  ( ities  must  be  unanimous. 

l  he  sovereignty  of  the  Union  is  represented 
l>\  the  States -General,  consisting  usually  of 
about  lifts  deputies  appointed  l>\  the  prov- 
i IK  cs.  I  hey  hold  their  seats,  some  for  life,  some 
for  six.  tin ee.  and  one  years;  Irom  two  prov¬ 
inces  they  continue  in  appointment  during 
pleasure. 

I  he  States-Gcnrral  have  authority  to  enter 


into  treaties  and  alliances:  to  make  war  and 
peace:  to  raise  armies  and  equip  fleets:  to  as¬ 
certain  quotas  and  demand  contributions.  In 
all  these  cases,  however,  unanimity  and  the 
sanction  of  their  constituents  are  requisite. 
They  have  authority  to  appoint  and  receive 
ambassadors:  to  execute  treaties  and  alliances 
already  formed;  to  provide  for  the  collection 
of  duties  on  imports  and  exports:  to  regulate 
the  mint,  with  a  saving  to  the  provincial  rights; 
to  govern  as  sovereigns  the  dependent  terri¬ 
tories.  Theprovincesarerestrained.  unless  with 
the  general  consent,  from  entering  into  foreign 
treaties:  from  establishing  imposts  injurious 
to  others,  or  charging  their  neighbours  with 
higher  duties  than  their  own  subjects.  A  coun¬ 
cil  of  state,  a  chamber  of  accounts,  with  five 
colleges  of  admiralty,  aid  and  fortify  the  fed¬ 
eral  administration. 

The  executive  magistrate  of  the  union  is  the 
stacltholder,  who  is  now  an  hereditary  prince. 
His  principal  weight  and  influence  in  the  re¬ 
public  are  derived  from  this  independent  title; 
from  his  great  patrimonial  estates;  from  his 
family  connections  with  some  of  the  chief  po¬ 
tentates  of  Fu rope;  and,  more  than  all.  per¬ 
haps.  from  his  being  stadtholder  in  the  several 
provinces,  as  well  as  for  the  union;  in  which 
provincial  quality  he  has  the  appointment  of 
town  magistrates  under  certain  regulations, 
executes  provincial  decrees,  presides  when  he 
pleases  in  the  provincial  tribunals,  and  has 
throughout  the  power  of  pardon. 

As  stadtholder  of  the  union,  he  has,  how¬ 
ever,  considerable  prerogatives. 

In  his  political  capacity,  he  has  authority  to 
settle  disputes  between  the  provinces,  when 
other  methods  fail;  to  assist  at  the  delibera¬ 
tions  of  the  States* General,  and  at  their  par¬ 
ticular  conferences:  to  give  audiences  to  for¬ 
eign  ambassadors,  and  to  keep  agents  for  his 
particular  a  Hairs  at  foreign  courts. 

In  his  military  capacity  he  commands  the 
federal  troops,  provides  for  garrisons,  and  in 
general  regulates  military  a  Hairs;  disposes  of  all 
appointments,  from  colonels  to  ensigns,  and 
of  the  governments  and  posts  of  fortified  towns. 

In  bis  marine  c  apac  it v  lie  is  admiral-general, 
and  superintends  and  directs  everything  rela¬ 
tive  to  naval  fort  es  and  other  naval  a  Hairs;  pre¬ 
sides  in  the  admiralties  in  pci  son  or  bv  proxy: 
appoints  lieutenant-admirals  and  other  0II1 
c  ers;  and  establishes  i  nunc  ils  of  war,  whose  sen¬ 
tences  are  not  executed  till  he  approves  them. 

1 1  is  revenue,  exc  lusiv  e  of  his  private  income, 
amounts  to  three  hundred  thousand  Horins. 


NUMBER  20 


The  standing  army  which  he  commands  con¬ 
sists  of  about  forty  thousand  men. 

Such  is  the  nature  of  the  celebrated  Belgic 
confederacy. asdelineatedon parchment.  What 
are  the  characters  which  practice  has  stamped 
upon  it?  Imbecility  in  the  government;  discord 
among  the  provinces;  foreign  influence  and 
indignities;  a  precarious  existence  in  peace, 
and  peculiar  calamities  from  war. 

It  was  long  ago  remarked  by  Grotius,  that 
nothing  but  the  hatred  of  his  countrymen  to 
the  house  of  Austria  kept  them  from  being 
ruined  by  the  vices  of  their  constitution. 

The  union  of  Utrecht,  says  another  re¬ 
spectable  writer,  reposes  an  authority  in  the 
States-General,  seemingly  sufficient  to  secure 
harmony,  but  the  jealousy  in  each  province 
renders  the  practice  very  different  from  the 
theory. 

The  same  instrument,  says  another,  obliges 
each  province  to  levy  certain  contributions; 
but  this  article  never  could,  and  probably 
never  will,  be  executed;  because  the  inland 
provinces,  who  have  little  commerce,  cannot 
pay  an  equal  quota. 

In  matters  of  contribution,  it  is  the  practice 
to  waive  the  articles  of  the  constitution.  The 
danger  of  delay  obliges  the  consenting  prov¬ 
inces  to  furnish  their  quota,  without  waiting 
for  the  others;  and  then  to  obtain  reimburse¬ 
ment  from  the  others,  by  deputations,  which 
are  frequent,  or  otherwise,  as  they  can.  The 
great  wealth  and  influence  of  the  province  of 
Holland  enable  her  to  effect  both  these  pur¬ 
poses. 

It  has  more  than  once  happened  that  the 
deficiencies  had  to  be  ultimately  collected  at 
the  point  of  the  bayonet;  a  thing  practicable, 
though  dreadful,  in  a  confederacy  where  one 
of  the  members  exceeds  in  force  all  the  rest, 
and  where  several  of  them  are  too  small  to 
meditate  resistance,  but  utterly  impracticable 
in  one  composed  of  members,  several  of  which 
are  equal  to  each  other  in  strength  and  re¬ 
sources,  and  equal  singly  to  a  vigorous  and 
persevering  defence. 

Foreign  ministers,  says  Sir  William  Temple, 
who  was  himself  a  foreign  minister,  elude  mat¬ 
ters  taken  ad  referendum ,  by  tampering  with 
the  provinces  and  cities.  In  1726,  the  treaty  of 
Hanover  was  delayed  by  these  means  a  whole 
year.  Instances  of  a  like  nature  are  numerous 
and  notorious. 

In  critical  emergencies,  the  States-General 
are  often  compelled  to  overleap  their  consti¬ 
tutional  bounds.  In  1688,  they  concluded  a 


treaty  of  themselves  at  the  risk  of  their  heads. 
The  treaty  of  Westphalia,  in  1648,  by  which 
their  independence  was  formally  and  finally 
recognised,  was  concluded  without  the  consent 
of  Zealand.  Even  as  recently  as  the  last  treaty 
of  peace  with  Great  Britain,  the  constitutional 
principle  of  unanimity  was  departed  from,  A 
weak  constitution  must  necessarily  terminate 
in  dissolution,  for  want  of  proper  powers,  or 
the  usurpation  of  powers  requisite  for  the  pub¬ 
lic  safety.  Whether  the  usurpation,  when  once 
begun,  wall  stop  at  the  salutary  point,  or  go 
forward  to  the  dangerous  extreme,  must  de¬ 
pend  on  the  contingencies  of  the  moment. 
Tyranny  has  perhaps  oftener  grown  out  of  the 
assumptions  of  power,  called  for,  on  pressing 
exigencies,  by  a  defective  constitution,  than 
out  of  the  full  exercise  of  the  largest  constitu¬ 
tional  authorities. 

Notwithstanding  the  calamities  produced  by 
the  stadtholdership,  it  has  been  supposed  that 
without  his  influence  in  the  individual  prov¬ 
inces,  the  causes  of  anarchy  manifest  in  the 
confederacy  would  long  ago  have  dissolved  it. 
'‘Under  such  a  government,”  says  the  Abbe 
Mably,  “the  Union  could  never  have  sub¬ 
sisted,  if  the  provinces  had  not  a  spring  within 
themselves,  capable  of  quickening  their  tardi¬ 
ness,  and  compelling  them  to  the  same  way  of 
thinking.  This  spring  is  the  stadtholder.”  It  is 
remarked  by  Sir  William  Temple,  “that  in  the 
intermissions  of  the  stadtholdership.  Holland, 
by  her  riches  and  her  authority,  which  drew 
the  others  into  a  sort  of  dependence,  supplied 
the  place.” 

These  are  not  the  only  circumstances  which 
have  controlled  the  tendency  to  anarchy  and 
dissolution.  The  surrounding  powers  impose 
an  absolute  necessity  of  union  to  a  certain  de¬ 
gree,  at  the  same  time  that  they  nourish  by 
their  intrigues  the  constitutional  vices  which 
keep  the  republic  in  some  degree  always  at 
their  mercy. 

The  true  patriots  have  long  bewailed  the 
fatal  tendency  of  these  vices,  and  have  made 
no  less  than  four  regular  experiments  by  ex¬ 
traordinary  assemblies ,  convened  for  the  spe¬ 
cial  purpose,  to  applv  a  remedy.  As  many  times 
has  their  laudable  zeal  found  it  impossible  to 
unite  the  public  councils  in  reforming  the 
known,  the  acknowledged,  the  fatal  evils  of 
the  existing  constitution.  Let  us  pause,  my 
fellow-citizens,  for  one  moment,  over  this  mel¬ 
ancholy  and  monitory  lesson  of  history;  and 
with  the  tear  that  drops  for  the  calamities 
brought  on  mankind  by  their  adverse  opinions 


THE  FEDERALIST 


and  selfish  passions,  let  our  gratitude  mingle 
an  ejaculation  to  Heaven,  for  the  propitious 
concord  which  has  distinguished  the  consulta¬ 
tions  for  our  political  happiness. 

A  design  was  also  conceived  of  establishing 
a  general  tax  to  be  administered  by  the  federal 
authority.  This  also  had  its  adversaries  and 
failed. 

This  unhappy  people  seem  to  be  now  suffer¬ 
ing  from  popular  convulsions,  from  dissen¬ 
sions  among  the  stales,  and  from  the  actual 
invasion  of  foreign  arms,  the  crisis  of  their 
destiny.  All  nations  have  their  eyes  fixed  on 
the  awful  spectacle.  The  first  wish  prompted 
bv  human it\  is,  that  this  severe  trial  may  issue 
in  such  a  revolution  of  their  government  as 
will  establish  their  union,  and  render  it  the 
pareiu  of  tranquillity,  freedom,  and  happi¬ 
ness:  The  next,  that  the  asylum  under  which, 
we  trust,  the  enjoyment  of  these  blessings  will 
speedily  be  secured  in  this  country,  may  re¬ 
ceive  and  console  them  for  the  catastrophe  of 
their  own. 

I  make  no  apology  for  having  dwelt  so  long 
on  the  contemplation  of  these  federal  prece¬ 
dents.  Experience  is  the  oracle  of  truth;  and 
where  its  responses  are  unequivocal,  theyouglu 
to  be  conclusive  and  sacred.  The  important 
truth,  which  it  unequivocally  pronounces  in 
the  present  case,  is  that  a  sovereignty  over  sov¬ 
ereigns,  a  government  over  governments,  a 
legislation  for  communities,  as  contradistin¬ 
guished  from  individuals,  as  it  is  a  solecism  in 
theory,  so  in  practice  it  is  subversive  of  the 
order  and  ends  of  civil  polity,  by  substituting 
violence  in  place  of  law .  or  the  destructive 
coercion  of  the  sword  in  place  of  the  mild  and 
salutary  coercion  of  the  magistracy. 

Publius 

Number  21 

j  ItAMILI  ON] 

Hamm;  in  the  three  last  numbers  taken  a  sum¬ 
mary  review  of  the  principal  cin  umstances 
and  e\ cuts  whit  h  have  depic  ted  the  genius  and 
fate  of  other  confederate  governments,  1  shall 
now  proceed  in  the  enumeration  of  the  most 
important  of  those  defec  is  whit h  have  hitherto 
disappointed  our  hopes  from  the  system  estab¬ 
lished  among  ourselves.  To  form  a  safe  and 
satisfactory  judgment  of  the  proper  remedy, 
it  is  absoluteh  necessary  that  wc  should  be 
well  acquainted  with  the  extent  and  malignity 
of  the  disease. 

The  next  most  palpable  defect  of  the  sub¬ 


sisting  Confederation  is  the  total  want  of  a 
sanction  to  its  laws.  The  United  States,  as  now 
composed,  have  no  powers  to  exact  obedience, 
or  punish  disobedience  to  their  resolutions, 
either  by  pecuniary  mulcts,  by  a  suspension  or 
divestiture  of  privileges,  or  by  any  other  con¬ 
stitutional  mode.  There  is  no  express  delega¬ 
tion  of  authority  to  them  to  use  force  against 
delinquent  members;  and  if  such  a  right 
should  be  ascribed  to  the  federal  head,  as  re¬ 
sulting  from  the  nature  of  the  social  compact 
between  the  States,  it  must  be  by  inference  and 
construction,  in  the  face  of  that  part  of  the 
second  article,  by  which  it  is  declared,  “that 
each  Slate  shall  retain  every  power,  jurisdic¬ 
tion,  and  right,  not  expressly  delegated  to  the 
United  States  in  Congress  assembled.”  There 
is,  doubtless,  a  striking  absurdity  in  supposing 
that  a  right  of  this  kind  does  not  exist,  but  we 
are  reduced  to  the  dilemma  either  of  embrac¬ 
ing  that  supposition,  preposterous  as  it  may 
seem,  or  of  contravening  or  explaining  away  a 
provision,  which  has  been  of  late  a  repeated 
theme  of  the  eulogies  of  those  who  oppose  the 
new  Constitution;  and  the  want  of  which,  in 
that  plan,  has  been  the  subject  of  much  plausi¬ 
ble  animadversion  and  severe  criticism.  If  wc 
are  unwilling  to  impair  the  force  of  this  ap¬ 
plauded  provision,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  con¬ 
clude,  that  the  United  States  afford  the  extra¬ 
ordinary  spectacle  of  a  government  destitute 
even  of  the  shadow  of  constitutional  power  to 
enforce  the  execution  of  its  own  laws.  It  will 
appear,  from  the  specimens  which  have  been 
cited,  that  the  American  Confederacy,  in  this 
particular,  stands  discriminated  from  every 
other  institution  of  a  similar  kind,  and  exhib¬ 
its  a  new  and  unexampled  phenomenon  in  the 
political  world. 

The  want  of  a  mutual  guaranty  of  the  State 
governments  is  another  capital  imperfection 
in  the  federal  plan.  There  is  nothing  of  this 
kind  declared  in  the  articles  that  compose  it: 
and  to  imply  a  tacit  guaranty  from  considera¬ 
tions  of  utility,  would  be  a  still  more  flagrant 
departure  from  the  c lause  whit  h  has  been  men¬ 
tioned.  than  to  imply  a  tacit  power  of  coert  ion 
from  the  like  considerations.  Ehe  want  of  a 
guaranty,  though  it  might  in  its  consequences 
endanger  the  Union,  does  not  so  immediately 
attack  its  existence  as  the  want  of  a  constitu¬ 
tional  sanction  to  its  laws. 

Without  a  guaranty  the  assistance  to  be  de¬ 
rived  from  the  l  uion  in  repelling  those  do¬ 
mestic  dangers  which  may  sometimes  threaten 
the  existence  of  the  Slate  constitutions,  must 


NUMBER  21 


be  renounced.  Usurpation  may  rear  its  crest 
in  each  State,  and  trample  upon  the  liberties 
of  the  people,  while  the  national  government 
could  legally  do  nothing  more  than  behold  its 
encroachments  with  indignation  and  regret.  A 
successful  faction  may  erect  a  tyranny  on  the 
ruins  of  order  and  law,  while  no  succour  could 
constitutionally  be  afforded  by  the  Union  to 
the  friends  and  supporters  of  the  government. 
The  tempestuous  situation  from  which  Massa¬ 
chusetts  has  scarcely  emerged,  evinces  that  dan¬ 
gers  of  this  kind  are  not  merely  speculative. 
Who  can  determine  what  might  have  been  the 
issue  of  her  late  convulsions,  if  the  malcon¬ 
tents  had  been  headed  bv  a  Caesar  or  by  a 
Cromwell?  Who  can  predict  what  effect  a  des¬ 
potism,  established  in  Massachusetts,  would 
have  upon  the  liberties  of  New  Hampshire  or 
Rhode  Island,  of  Connecticut  or  New  York? 

The  inordinate  pride  of  State  importance 
has  suggested  to  some  minds  an  objection  to 
the  principle  of  a  guaranty  in  the  federal  gov¬ 
ernment,  as  involving  an  officious  interference 
in  the  domestic  concerns  of  the  members.  A 
scruple  of  this  kind  would  deprive  us  of  one  of 
the  principal  advantages  to  be  expected  from 
union,  and  can  only  flow  from  a  misapprehen¬ 
sion  of  the  nature  of  the  provision  itself.  It 
could  be  no  impediment  toreformsof  theState 
constitutions  by  a  majority  of  the  people  in  a 
legal  and  peaceable  mode.  This  right  would 
remain  undiminished.  The  guaranty  could 
only  operate  against  changes  to  be  effected  by 
violence.  Towards  the  preventions  of  calami¬ 
ties  of  this  kind,  too  many  checks  cannot  be 
provided.  The  peace  of  society  and  the  stability 
of  government  depend  absolutely  on  the  effi¬ 
cacy  of  the  precautions  adopted  on  this  head. 
Where  the  whole  power  of  the  government  is 
in  the  hands  of  the  people,  there  is  the  less  pre¬ 
tence  for  the  use  of  violent  remedies  in  partial 
or  occasional  distempers  of  the  State.  The  natu¬ 
ral  cure  for  an  ill-administration,  in  a  popu¬ 
lar  or  representative  constitution,  is  a  change 
of  men.  A  guaranty  by  the  national  authority 
would  be  as  much  levelled  against  the  usurpa¬ 
tions  of  rulers  as  against  the  ferments  and  out¬ 
rages  of  faction  and  sedition  in  the  community. 

The  principle  of  regulating  the  contribu¬ 
tions  of  the  States  to  the  common  treasury  by 
quotas  is  another  fundamental  error  in  the 
Confederation.  Its  repugnancy  to  an  adequate 
supply  of  the  national  exigencies  has  been  al¬ 
ready  pointed  out,  and  has  sufficiently  appear¬ 
ed  from  the  trial  which  has  been  made  of  it.  I 
speak  of  it  now  solely  with  a  view  to  equality 


among  the  States.  Those  who  have  been  ac¬ 
customed  to  contemplate  the  circumstances 
which  produce  and  constitute  national  wealth, 
must  be  satisfied  that  there  is  no  common 
standard  or  barometer  by  which  the  degrees  of 
it  can  be  ascertained.  Neither  the  value  of 
lands,  nor  the  numbers  of  the  people,  which 
have  been  successively  proposed  as  the  rule  of 
State  contributions,  has  any  pretension  to  be¬ 
ing  a  just  representative.  If  we  compare  the 
wealth  of  the  United  Netherlands  with  that  of 
Russia  or  Germany,  or  even  of  France,  and  if 
we  at  the  same  time  compare  the  total  value  of 
the  lands  and  the  aggregate  population  of  that 
contracted  district  with  the  total  value  of  the 
lands  and  the  aggregate  population  of  the  im¬ 
mense  regions  of  either  of  the  three  last-men¬ 
tioned  countries,  we  shall  at  once  discover  that 
there  is  no  comparison  between  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  either  of  these  two  objects  and  that  of 
the  relative  wealth  of  those  nations.  If  the  like 
parallel  were  to  be  run  between  several  of  the 
American  States,  it  would  furnish  a  like  result. 
Let  Virginia  be  contrasted  with  North  Caro¬ 
lina.  Pennsylvania  with  Connecticut,  or  Mary¬ 
land  with  New  Jersey,  and  we  shall  be  con¬ 
vinced  that  the  respective  abilities  of  those 
States,  in  relation  to  revenue,  bear  little  or  no 
analogy  to  their  comparative  stock  in  lands  or 
to  their  comparative  population.  The  position 
may  be  equally  illustrated  by  a  similar  process 
between  the  counties  of  the  same  State.  No 
man  who  is  acquainted  with  the  State  of  New 
York  will  doubt  that  the  active  wealth  of 
King’s  County  bears  a  much  greater  propor¬ 
tion  to  that  of  Montgomery  than  it  would  ap¬ 
pear  to  be  if  we  should  take  either  the  total 
value  of  the  lands  or  the  total  number  of  the 
people  as  a  criterion! 

The  wealth  of  nations  depends  upon  an  in¬ 
finite  variety  of  causes.  Situation,  soil,  climate, 
the  nature  of  the  productions,  the  nature  of 
the  government,  the  genius  of  the  citizens,  the 
degree  of  information  they  possess,  the  state 
of  commerce,  of  arts,  of  industry,— these  cir¬ 
cumstances  and  many  more,  too  complex,  mi¬ 
nute,  or  adventitious  to  admit  of  a  particular 
specification,  occasion  differences  hardly  con¬ 
ceivable  in  the  relative  opulence  and  riches  of 
different  countries.  The  consequence  clearly 
is  that  there  can  be  no  common  measure  of  na¬ 
tional  wealth,  and,  of  course,  no  general  or 
stationary  rule  by  which  the  ability  of  a  state 
to  pay  taxes  can  be  determined.  The  attempt, 
therefore,  to  regulate  the  contributions  of  the 
members  of  a  confederacy  by  any  such  rule. 


THE  FEDERAL! SI 


cannot  fail  to  be  productive  of  glaring  inequal- 
ity  and  extreme  oppression. 

This  inequality  would  of  itself  be  sufficient 
in  America  to  work,  the  eventual  destiuction 
of  the  Union,  if  any  mode  of  enforcing  a  com* 
pliance  with  its  requisitions  could  be  devised. 
The  suffering  Stales  would  not  long  consent  to 
remain  associated  upon  a  principle  which  dis¬ 
tributes  the  public  burdens  with  so  unequal  a 
hand,  and  which  was  calculated  to  impoverish 
and  oppress  the  citizens  of  some  States,  while 
those  of  others  would  scarcely  be  conscious  of 
the  small  proportion  of  the  weight  they  were 
required  to  sustain.  This,  however,  is  an  evil 
inseparable  from  the  principle  of  quotas  and 
requisitions. 

There  is  no  method  of  steering  clear  of  this 
inconvenience, but  by  authorising  the  national 
government  to  raise  its  own  revenues  in  its 
own  way.  Imposts,  excises,  and,  in  geneial,  all 
duties  upon  articles  of  consumption,  may  be 
compared  to  a  fluid,  which  will,  in  time,  find 
its  level  with  the  means  of  paying  them.  The 
amount  to  be  contributed  by  each  citizen  will 
in  a  degree  be  at  his  own  option,  and  can  be 
regulated  by  an  attention  to  his  resources.  The 
rich  may  be  extravagant,  the  poor  can  be 
frugal;  and  private  oppression  may  always 
be  avoided  by  a  judicious  selection  of  objects 
proper  for  such  impositions.  If  inequalities 
should  arise  in  some  Slates  from  duties  on  par¬ 
ticular  objects,  these  will,  in  all  probability, 
be  ( ounterbalanced  by  proportional  inequali¬ 
ties  in  other  States,  from  the  duties  on  other 
objects.  In  the  course  of  time  and  things,  an 
equilibrium,  as  far  as  it  is  attainable  in  so 
complicated  a  subject,  will  be  established  every¬ 
where.  Or,  if  inequalities  should  still  exist, 
they  would  neither  be  so  great  in  their  de¬ 
gree,  so  uniform  in  their  operation,  nor  so 
odious  in  their  appearance,  as  those  which 
would  necessarily  spring  from  quotas,  upon 
an\  scale  that  can  possibly  be  devised. 

It  is  a  signal  advantage  of  taxes  cm  articles 
of  consumption,  that  they  contain  in  their  own 
nature  a  security  against  excess.  They  pre¬ 
scribe  t heir  own  limit;  which  cannot  be  ex- 
i  ceded  without  defeating  the  end  proposed,— 
that  is.  an  extension  ol  the  revenue.  When  ap 
plied  to  this  ohjec  t.  the  saving  is  as  just  as  it  is 
witlv,  that,  "in  political  arithmetic,  two  and 
two  ilo  not  alwavs  make  four."  If  duties  ate  too 
high,  they  lessen  the  consumption;  the  collec¬ 
tion  is  chided:  and  the  procluc  t  to  the*  tieasui  v 
is  not  so  great  as  when  they  ate  ( onlmed  within 
propn  and  moderate  bounds.  I  his  forms  a 


complete  barrier  against  any  material  oppres¬ 
sion  of  the  citizens  by  taxes  of  this  class,  and  is 
itself  a  natural  limitation  of  the  power  of  im¬ 
posing  them. 

Impositions  of  this  kind  usually  fall  undei 
the  denomination  oi  indirect  taxes,  and  must 
for  a  long  time  constitute  the  chief  part  of  the 
revenue  raised  in  this  country.  1  hose  ot  the 
direct  kind,  which  principally  relate  to  land 
and  buildings,  may  admit  of  a  rule  of  appor¬ 
tionment.  Either  the  value  of  land,  or  the 
number  of  the  people,  may  serve  as  a  standard. 
The  state  of  agriculture  and  the  populousness 
of  a  country  have  been  considered  as  nearly 
connected  with  each  other.  And,  as  a  rule,  for 
the  purpose  intended,  numbers,  in  the  view  of 
simplicity  and  certainty,  are  entitled  to  a  pref¬ 
erence.  In  every  country  it  is  a  herculean  task 
to  obtain  a  valuation  of  the  land;  in  a  country 
imperfectly  settled  and  progressive  in  improve¬ 
ment,  the  difficulties  are  increased  almost  to 
impracticability.  The  expense  of  an  accurate 
valuation  is,  in  all  situations,  a  formidable  ob¬ 
jection.  In  a  branch  of  taxation  where  no 
limits  to  the  discretion  of  the  government  are 
to  be  found  in  the  nature  of  things,  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  a  fixed  rule,  not  incompatible  with 
the  end,  may  be  attended  with  fewer  incon¬ 
veniences  than  to  leave  that  discretion  alto¬ 
gether  at  large.  Publius 

Number  22 

[HAMILTON] 

l.N  addition  to  the  defects  already  enumerated 
in  the  existing  federal  system,  there  aie  others 
of  not  less  importance,  which  cone  nr  in  condol¬ 
ing  it  altogether  unfit  for  the  administration 
of  the  allairs  of  the  l  nion. 

1  he  want  of  a  power  to  regulate  commerce 
is  by  all  parties  allowed  to  be  of  the  mmibet. 
The  utility  of  such  a  powei  has  been  antici¬ 
pated  undei  the  lust  head  of  our  inqtiiiiev 
and  lor  this  reason,  as  well  as  from  the  uni 
versa  1  conviction  entertained  upon  the  sub¬ 
ject,  little  need  be  added  in  this  plaie.  It  is 
indeed  evident,  on  the  most  superficial  view, 
that  there  is  no  object,  either  as  it  lespects  the 
interests  of  trade  or  finance,  that  more  stnmglv 
demands  a  federal  supermu  ndeinc  I  he  want 
ol  it  lias  already  operated  as  a  bar  to  the  lot- 
mation  of  benefit  ial  treaties  with  foreign  pow 
ers,  and  has  given  occasions  of  dissatisfaction 
between  the  Slates.  No  nation  acquainted  with 
the  iiatuie  ol  our  political  association  would 
be  unwise  enough  to  enter  into  stipulations 


NUMBER  22 


with  the  United  States,  by  which  they  con¬ 
ceded  privileges  of  any  importance  to  them, 
while  they  were  apprised  that  the  engagements 
on  the  part  of  the  Union  might  at  any  moment 
be  violated  by  its  members,  and  while  they 
found  from  experience  that  they  might  enjoy 
every  advantage  they  desired  in  our  markets, 
without  granting  us  any  return  but  such  as 
their  momentary  convenience  might  suggest. 
It  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  wondered  at  that  Mr. 
Jenkinson,  in  ushering  into  the  House  of  Com¬ 
mons  a  bill  for  regulating  the  temporary  inter¬ 
course  between  the  two  countries,  should  pref¬ 
ace  its  introduction  by  a  declaration  that  simi¬ 
lar  provisions  in  former  bills  had  been  found 
to  answer  every  purpose  to  the  commerce  of 
Great  Britain,  and  that  it  would  be  prudent  to 
persist  in  the  plan  until  it  should  appear 
whether  the  American  government  was  likely 
or  not  to  acquire  greater  consistency.1 

Several  States  have  endeavoured,  by  sepa¬ 
rate  prohibitions,  restrictions,  and  exclusions, 
to  influence  the  conduct  of  that  kingdom  in 
this  particular,  but  the  want  of  concert,  arising 
from  the  want  of  a  general  authority  and  from 
clashing  and  dissimilar  views  in  the  State,  has 
hitherto  frustrated  every  experiment  of  the 
kind,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  as  long  as  the 
same  obstacles  to  a  uniformity  of  measures 
continue  to  exist. 

The  interfering  and  unneighbourly  regula¬ 
tions  of  some  States,  contrary  to  the  true  spirit 
of  the  Union,  have,  in  different  instances, 
given  just  cause  of  umbrage  and  complaint  to 
others,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  examples  of 
this  nature,  if  not  restrained  by  a  national  con¬ 
trol,  would  be  multiplied  and  extended  till 
they  became  not  less  serious  sources  of  animos¬ 
ity  and  discord  than  injurious  impediments 
to  the  intercourse  between  the  different  parts 
of  the  Confederacy.  “The  commerce  of  the 
German  empire 2  is  in  continual  trammels  from 
the  multiplicity  of  the  duties  which  the  several 
princes  and  states  exact  upon  the  merchan¬ 
dises  passing  through  their  territories,  by  means 
of  which  the  fine  streams  and  navigable  rivers 
with  which  Germany  is  so  happily  watered  are 
rendered  almost  useless.”  Though  the  genius 
of  the  people  of  this  country  might  never  per¬ 
mit  this  description  to  be  strictly  applicable 
to  us,  yet  we  may  reasonably  expect,  from  the 
gradual  conflicts  of  State  regulations,  that  the 

:This,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect,  was  the  sense 
of  his  speech  on  introducing  the  last  bill.— 
Publius 

-Encyclopaedia,  article  “Empire.’'— Publius 


8l 

citizens  of  each  would  at  length  come  to  be 
considered  and  treated  by  the  others  in  no  bet¬ 
ter  light  than  that  of  foreigners  and  aliens. 

The  power  of  raising  armies,  by  the  most 
obvious  construction  of  the  articles  of  the 
Confederation,  is  merely  a  power  of  making 
requisitions  upon  the  States  for  quotas  of  men. 
This  practice,  in  the  course  of  the  late  war, 
was  found  replete  with  obstructions  to  a  vigor¬ 
ous  and  to  an  economical  system  of  defence. 
It  gave  birth  to  a  competition  between  the 
States  which  created  a  kind  of  auction  tor 
men.  In  order  to  furnish  the  quotas  required 
of  them,  they  outbid  each  other  till  bounties 
grew  to  an  enonnous  and  insupportable  size. 
The  hope  of  a  still  further  increase  afforded  an 
inducement  to  those  who  were  disposed  to 
serve  to  procrastinate  their  enlistment,  and 
disinclined  them  from  engaging  for  anv  con¬ 
siderable  periods.  Hence,  slow  and  scant\  lev¬ 
ies  of  men,  in  the  most  critical  emergencies  of 
our  affairs;  short  enlistments  at  an  unparal¬ 
leled  expense;  continual  fluctuations  in  the 
troops,  ruinous  to  their  discipline  and  subject¬ 
ing  the  public  safety  frequently  to  the  perilous 
crisis  of  a  disbanded  army.  Hence,  also,  those 
oppressive  expedients  for  raising  men  which 
were  upon  several  occasions  practised,  and 
which  nothing  but  the  enthusiasm  of  liberty 
would  have  induced  the  people  to  endure. 

This  method  of  raising  troops  is  not  more 
unfriendly  to  economy  and  rigour  than  it  is 
to  an  equal  distribution  of  the  burden.  The 
States  near  the  seat  of  war,  influenced  by  mo¬ 
tives  of  self-preservation,  made  efforts  to  fur¬ 
nish  their  quotas,  which  even  exceeded  their 
abilities;  while  those  at  a  distance  from  danger 
were,  for  the  most  part,  as  remiss  as  the  others 
were  diligent,  in  their  exertions.  The  immedi¬ 
ate  pressure  of  this  inequality  was  not  in  this 
case,  as  in  that  of  the  contributions  of  money, 
alleviated  by  the  hope  of  a  final  liquidation. 
The  States  which  did  not  pay  their  propor¬ 
tions  of  money  might  at  least  be  charged  with 
their  deficiencies;  but  no  account  could  be 
formed  of  the  deficiencies  in  the  supplies  of 
men.  We  shall  not,  however,  see  much  reason 
to  regret  the  want  of  this  hope,  when  we  con¬ 
sider  how  little  prospect  there  is.  that  the  most 
delinquent  States  will  ever  be  able  to  make 
compensation  for  their  pecuniarv  failures. 
The  system  of  quotas  and  requisitions,  wheth¬ 
er  it  be  applied  to  men  or  money,  is,  in  even 
view,  a  system  of  imbecility  in  the  Union,  and 
of  inequality  and  injustice  among  the  mem¬ 
bers. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


The  right  of  equal  suffrage  among  the  States 
is  another  exceptionable  part  of  the  Confed¬ 
eral  ion.  Every  idea  of  proportion  and  every 
rule  of  fair  representation  conspire  to  con¬ 
demn  a  principle,  which  gives  to  Rhode  Island 
an  equal  weight  in  the  scale  of  power  with 
Massachusetts,  or  Connecticut,  or  New  York; 
and  to  Delaware  an  equal  voice  in  the  na¬ 
tional  deliberations  with  Pennsylvania,  or  Vir¬ 
ginia,  or  North  Carolina.  Its  operation  con¬ 
tradicts  the  fundamental  maxim  of  republican 
gosernnient.  which  requires  that  the  sense  of 
the  majority  should  prevail.  Sophistry  may 
replv.  that  sovereigns  are  equal,  and  that  a  ma¬ 
jority  of  the  votes  of  the  States  will  be  a  major¬ 
ity  of  confederated  America.  But  this  kind  of 
logical  legerdemain  will  never  counteract  the 
plain  suggestions  of  justice  and  commonsense. 
It  mav  happen  that  this  majority  of  States  is  a 
small  minority  of  the  people  of  America;1  and 
two  thirds  of  the  people  of  America  could  not 
long  be  persuaded,  upon  the  credit  of  artificial 
distinctions  and  syllogistic  subtleties,  to  sub¬ 
mit  their  interests  to  the  management  and  dis¬ 
posal  of  one  third.  The  larger  States  would 
after  a  while  revolt  from  the  idea  of  receiving 
the  law  from  the  smaller.  To  acquiesce  in  such 
a  privation  of  their  due  importance  in  the 
political  scale,  would  be  not  merely  to  be  in¬ 
sensible  to  the  love  of  power,  but  even  to  sacri¬ 
fice  the  desire  of  equality.  It  is  neither  rational 
to  expect  the  first,  nor  just  to  require  the  last, 
i  he  smaller  States,  considering  how  peculiarly 
their  safety  and  welfare  depend  on  union, 
ought  readily  to  renounce  a  pretension  which, 
il  not  relinquished,  would  prove  fatal  to  its 
duration. 

It  may  be  objected  to  this,  that  not  seven 
but  nine  States,  or  two-thirds  of  the  yvhole 
number,  must  consent  to  the  most  important 
resolutions;  and  it  may  be  thence  inferred, 
that  nine  States  would  always  comprehend  a 
majority  of  the  Union.  But  this  does  not  ob- 
\iatc  the  impropriety  of  an  equal  vote  be¬ 
tween  States  of  the  most  unequal  dimensions 
and  populousness;  nor  is  the  inference  ac¬ 
curate  in  point  of  fact;  for  we  can  enumerate 
nine  States  which  contain  less  than  a  majority 
of  the  people;3  and  it  is  constitutionally  possi- 

1  New  Hampshire,  Rhode  Island.  New  Jersey. 
Del.i vvnie.  (.enrgia.  South  Carolina,  and  Mai  viand 
arc*  a  majority  of  the  whole  number  of  the  Slates, 
but  they  do  not  contain  one  third  of  the  people,— 
in  in  ii  s 

7  \dd  New  York  and  Connecticut  to  the  fore¬ 
going  seven,  and  they  will  be  less  than  a  majority. 

Pi  hi  n  s 


blc  that  these  nine  may  give  the  vote.  Besides, 
there  are  matters  of  considerable  moment  de¬ 
terminable  by  a  bare  majority;  and  there  are 
others,  concerning  which  doubts  have  been  en¬ 
tertained,  which,  if  interpreted  in  favour  of 
the  sufficiency  of  a  vote  of  seven  States,  would 
extend  its  operation  to  interests  of  the  first 
magnitude.  In  addition  to  this,  it  is  to  be  ob¬ 
served  that  there  is  a  probability  of  an  increase 
in  the  number  of  States,  and  no  provision  for 
a  proportional  augmentation  of  the  ratio  of 
votes. 

But  this  is  not  all:  yvhat  at  first  sight  may 
seem  a  remedy,  is,  in  reality,  a  poison.  To  give 
a  minority  a  negative  upon  the  majority 
(which  is  always  the  case  yvhere  more  than  a 
majority  is  requisite  to  a  decision),  is,  in  its 
tendency,  to  subject  the  sense  of  the  greater 
number  to  that  of  the  lesser.  Congress,  from 
the  non-attendance  of  a  few  States,  have  been 
frequently  in  the  situation  of  a  Polish  diet, 
yvhere  a  single  vote  has  been  sufficient  to  put 
a  stop  to  all  their  movements.  A  sixtieth  part 
of  the  Union,  which  is  about  the  proportion  of 
Delaware  and  Rhode  Island,  has  several  times 
been  able  to  oppose  an  entire  bar  to  its  opera¬ 
tions.  This  is  one  of  those  refinements  which, 
in  practice,  has  an  effect  the  reverse  of  yvhat  is 
expected  from  it  in  theory.  The  necessity  of 
unanimity  in  public  bodies,  or  of  something 
approaching  towards  it.  has  been  founded 
upon  a  supposition  that  it  would  contribute  to 
security.  But  its  real  operation  is  to  embarrass 
the  administration,  to  destroy  the  energy  of 
the  government,  and  to  substitute  the  pleas¬ 
ure.  caprice,  or  artifices  of  an  insignificant, 
turbulent,  or  corrupt  junto,  to  the  regular 
deliberations  and  decisions  of  a  respectable 
majority.  In  those  emergencies  of  a  nation,  in 
which  the  goodness  or  badness,  the  vreakness 
or  strength  of  its  government,  is  of  the  great¬ 
est  importance,  there  is  commonly  a  necessity 
for  action.  The  public  business  must,  in  some 
way  or  other,  go  forward.  If  a  pertinacious  mi¬ 
nority  can  control  the  opinion  of  a  majority 
respecting  the  best  mode  of  conducting  it.  the 
majority,  in  order  that  something  may  he 
done,  must  conform  to  the  views  of  the  mi¬ 
nority;  and  thus  the  sense  of  the  smaller  num¬ 
ber  will  overrule  that  of  the  greater,  and  give 
a  tone  to  the  national  proceedings.  Hence, 
tedious  delays:  continual  negotiation  and  in¬ 
trigue:  contemptible  compromises  of  the  pub¬ 
lic  good.  And  yet,  in  such  a  system,  it  is  even 
happy  when  such  compromises  pan  take  place: 
for  upon  some  occasions  things  yvill  not  admit 


NUMBER  22 


of  accommodation;  and  then  the  measures  of 
government  must  be  injuriously  suspended,  or 
fatally  defeated.  It  is  often,  by  the  impractica¬ 
bility  of  obtaining  the  concurrence  of  the 
necessary  number  of  votes,  kept  in  a  state  of 
inaction.  Its  situation  must  always  savour  of 
weakness,  sometimes  border  upon  anarchy. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  discover,  that  a  principle 
of  this  kind  gives  greater  scope  to  foreign  cor¬ 
ruption,  as  well  as  to  domestic  faction,  than 
that  which  permits  the  sense  of  the  majority  to 
decide;  though  the  contrary  of  this  has  been 
presumed.  The  mistake  has  proceeded  from 
not  attending  with  due  care  to  the  mischiefs 
that  may  be  occasioned  by  obstructing  the 
progress  of  government  at  certain  critical  sea¬ 
sons.  When  the  concurrence  of  a  large  num¬ 
ber  is  required  by  the  Constitution  to  the  do¬ 
ing  of  any  national  act,  we  are  apt  to  rest  satis¬ 
fied  that  all  is  safe,  because  nothing  improper 
will  be  likely  to  be  done :  but  we  forget  how 
much  good  may  be  prevented,  and  how  much 
ill  may  be  produced,  by  the  power  of  hinder¬ 
ing  the  doing  what  may  be  necessary,  and  of 
keeping  affairs  in  the  same  unfavourable  pos¬ 
ture  in  which  they  may  happen  to  stand  at 
particular  periods. 

Suppose,  for  instance,  we  were  engaged  in  a 
war.  in  conjunction  with  one  foreign  nation, 
against  another.  Suppose  the  necessity  of  our 
situation  demanded  peace,  and  the  interest  or 
ambition  of  our  ally  led  him  to  seek  the  prose¬ 
cution  of  the  war,  with  views  that  might  justify 
us  in  making  separate  terms.  In  such  a  state  of 
things,  this  ally  of  ours  would  evidently  find  it 
much  easier,  by  his  bribes  and  intrigues,  to  tie 
up  the  hands  of  government  from  making 
peace,  where  two-thirds  of  all  the  votes  were 
requisite  to  that  object,  than  where  a  simple 
majority  would  suffice.  In  the  first  case,  he 
would  have  to  corrupt  a  smaller  number;  in 
the  last,  a  greater  number.  Upon  the  same  prin¬ 
ciple,  it  would  be  much  easier  for  a  foreign 
power  with  which  we  were  at  war  to  perplex 
our  councils,  and  embarrass  our  exertions. 
And,  in  a  commercial  view,  we  may  be  sub¬ 
jected  to  similar  inconveniences.  A  nation,  with 
which  we  might  have  a  treaty  of  commerce, 
could  with  much  greater  facility  prevent  our 
forming  a  connection  with  her  competitor  in 
trade,  though  such  a  connection  should  be 
ever  so  beneficial  to  ourselves. 

Evils  of  this  description  ought  not  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  imaginary.  One  of  the  weak  sides  of 
republics,  among  their  numerous  advantages, 
is  that  they  afford  too  easy  an  inlet  to  foreign 


corruption.  An  hereditary  monarch,  though 
often  disposed  to  sacrifice  his  subjects  to  his 
ambition,  has  so  great  a  personal  interest  in 
the  government  and  in  the  external  glory  of 
the  nation,  that  it  is  not  easy  for  a  foreign 
power  to  give  him  an  equivalent  for  what  he 
would  sacrifice  by  treachery  to  the  state.  The 
world  has  accordingly  been  witness  to  few  ex¬ 
amples  of  this  species  of  royal  prostitution, 
though  there  have  been  abundant  specimens 
of  every  other  kind. 

In  republics,  persons  elevated  from  the  mass 
of  the  community,  by  the  suffrages  of  their 
fellow-citizens,  to  stations  of  great  pre-emi¬ 
nence  and  power,  may  find  compensations  for 
betraying  their  trust,  which,  to  any  but  minds 
animated  and  guided  by  superior  virtue,  may 
appear  to  exceed  the  proportion  of  interest 
they  have  in  the  common  stock,  and  to  over¬ 
balance  the  obligations  of  duty.  Hence  it  is 
that  history  furnishes  us  with  so  many  mortify¬ 
ing  examples  of  the  prevalency  of  foreign 
corruption  in  republican  governments.  How 
much  this  contributed  to  the  ruin  of  the  an¬ 
cient  commonwealths  has  been  already  deline¬ 
ated.  It  is  well  known  that  the  deputies  of  the 
United  Provinces  have,  in  various  instances, 
been  purchased  by  the  emissaries  of  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  kingdoms.  The  Earl  of  Chesterfield 
(if  my  memory  serves  me  right),  in  a  letter  to 
his  court,  intimates  that  his  success  in  an  im¬ 
portant  negotiation  must  depend  on  his  ob¬ 
taining  a  major’s  commission  for  one  of  those 
deputies.  And  in  Sweden  the  parties  were  al¬ 
ternately  bought  by  France  and  England  in  so 
barefaced  and  notorious  a  manner  that  it  ex¬ 
cited  universal  disgust  in  the  nation,  and  was 
a  principal  cause  that  the  most  limited  mon¬ 
arch  in  Europe,  in  a  single  day,  without  tu¬ 
mult,  violence,  or  opposition,  became  one  of 
the  most  absolute  and  uncontrolled. 

A  circumstance  which  crowns  the  defects  of 
the  Confederation  remains  yet  to  be  men¬ 
tioned— the  want  of  a  judiciary  power.  Laws 
are  a  dead  letter  without  courts  to  expound 
and  define  their  true  meaning  and  operation. 
The  treaties  of  the  United  States,  to  have  any 
force  at  all,  must  be  considered  as  part  of  the 
law  of  the  land.  Their  true  import,  as  far  as 
respects  individuals,  must,  like  all  other  laws, 
be  ascertained  by  judicial  determinations.  To 
produce  uniformity  in  these  determinations, 
they  ought  to  be  submitted,  in  the  last  resort, 
to  one  supreme  tribunal.  And  this  tribunal 
ought  to  be  instituted  under  the  same  author¬ 
ity  which  forms  the  treaties  themselves.  These 


THE  FEDERALIS  T 


ingredients  are  both  indispensable.  If  there  is 
in  each  Slate  a  court  of  final  jurisdiction,  there 
there  may  be  as  many  different  final  determi¬ 
nations  on  the  same  point  as  there  are  courts. 
There  are  endless  diversities  in  the  opinions 
of  men.  We  often  see  not  only  different  courts 
but  the  judges  of  the  same  court  differing  from 
each  other.  To  avoid  the  confusion  which 
would  unavoidably  result  from  the  contra¬ 
dictory  decisions  of  a  number  of  independ¬ 
ent  judicatories,  all  nations  have  found  it 
necessary  to  establish  one  court  paramount  to 
the  rest,  possessing  a  general  superintendence, 
and  authorised  to  settle  and  declare  in  the  last 
resort  a  uniform  rule  of  civil  justice. 

T  his  is  the  more  necessary  where  the  frame 
of  the  government  is  so  compounded  that  the 
laws  of  the  whole  are  in  danger  of  being  con¬ 
travened  by  the  laws  of  the  parts.  In  this  case, 
if  the  particular  tribunals  are  invested  with  a 
right  of  ultimate  jurisdiction,  besides  the  con¬ 
tradictions  to  be  expected  from  difference  of 
opinion,  there  will  be  much  to  fear  from  the 
bias  of  local  views  and  prejudices,  and  from 
the  interference  of  local  regulations.  As  often 
as  such  an  interference  was  to  happen,  there 
would  be  reason  to  apprehend  that  the  pro- 
\  isions  of  the  particular  laws  might  be  pre¬ 
ferred  to  those  of  the  general  laws;  for  nothing 
is  more  natural  to  men  in  office  than  to  look 
with  pec  uliar  deference  towards  that  authority 
to  which  they  owe  their  official  existence.  The 
treaties  ol  the  United  States,  under  the  present 
Constitution,  are  liable  to  the  infractions  of 
thirteen  different  legislatures,  and  as  many  dif¬ 
ferent  courus  of  filial  jurisdiction,  acting  under 
the  authority  of  those  legislatures.  1  he  faith, 
the  reputation,  the  peace  of  the  whole  Union, 
are  thus  continually  at  the  mercy  of  the  prej¬ 
udices.  the  passions,  and  the  interests  of  every 
member  of  which  it  is  composed.  Is  it  possible 
that  foreign  nations  can  either  tespect  or  con¬ 
fide  in  such  a  government?  Is  it  possible  that 
the  people  ol  \ merit :i  will  longer  consent  to 
trust  their  honour,  their  happiness,  iheii  safe¬ 
ty,  on  so  precarious  a  foundation:' 

lu  this  review  ol  the  Confederation,  i  have 
confined  in \ self  to  the  exhibition  of  its  most 
material  delects;  passing  over  those  impel  lec¬ 
tions  ill  its  details  by  which  even  a  great  part 
of  the  power  intended  to  be*  conferred  upon 
it  has  been  in  a  great  measure  rendered  abor¬ 
tive.  It  must  he  l>\  this  time  evident  to  all  men 
of  tellee  lion,  who  c  an  divest  themselves  ol  the* 
prepossessions  of  preconceived  opinions  that 
it  is  a  system  so  radii  ally  vie  ions  and  unsound, 


as  to  admit  not  of  amendment  but  by  an  entire 
change  in  its  leading  features  and  characters. 

The  organisation  of  Congress  is  itself  utterly 
improper  for  the  exercise  of  those  powers 
which  are  necessary  to  be  deposited  in  the 
Union.  A  single  assembly  may  be  a  proper  re¬ 
ceptacle  of  those  slender,  or  rather  fettered, 
authorities,  which  have  been  heretofore  dele¬ 
gated  to  the  federal  head;  but  it  would  be  in¬ 
consistent  with  all  the  principles  of  good  gov¬ 
ernment.  to  intrust  it  with  those  additional 
powers  which,  even  the  moderate  and  more 
rational  adversaries  of  the  proposed  Constitu¬ 
tion  admit,  ought  to  resident  the  United  States. 
If  that  plan  should  not  be  adopted,  and  if  the 
necessity  of  the  Union  should  be  able  to  with¬ 
stand  the  ambitious  aims  of  those  men  who 
mav  indulge  magnificent  schemes  of  personal 
aggrandisement  from  its  dissolution,  the  prob¬ 
ability  would  be,  that  we  should  run  into  the 
project  of  conferring  supplementary  powers 
upon  Congress,  as  they  are  now  constituted; 
and  either  the  machine,  from  the  intrinsic  fee¬ 
bleness  ol  its  structure,  will  moulder  into 
piec  es,  in  spite  of  our  ill-judged  efforts  to  prop 
it;  or.  by  successive  augmentations  of  its  force 
and  energy,  as  necessity  might  prompt,  we  shall 
finally  act  mutilate,  in  a  single  body,  all  the 
most  important  prerogatives  of  sovereignty, 
and  thus  entail  upon  our  posterity  one  of  the 
most  execrable  limits  of  government  that 
human  infatuation  ever  contrived.  I  fins  we 
should  create  in  realitv  that  very  tyranny  whic  h 
the  adversaries  of  the  new  Constitution  cither 
are,  or  effect  to  he.  solicitous  to  avert. 

It  has  not  a  little  <  oiitrilmted  to  the  infirm¬ 
ities  of  the  existing  federal  system,  that  it  never 
had  a  ratification  by  the  rtoiM.r..  Resting  on 
no  better  foundation  than  the  consent  of  the 
several  legislatures,  it  lias  been  exposed  to  he- 
queut  and  intricate  questions  concerning  the 
validity  ol  its  powers,  and  has.  in  some  in¬ 
stances.  given  birth  to  the  enormous  doctrine 
of  a  l  ight  of  legislative*  tepeal.  Owing  its  ratifi 
cation  to  the  law  of  a  .State*,  it  lias  been  con¬ 
tended  that  the  same  authority  might  repeal 
the  law  bv  vvhicli  it  was  ratified.  However  gross 
a  he  resy  it  mav  be  to  maintain  that  a  party  to 
a  corn  pad  has  a  right  to  revoke  that  compact . 
the  doc  nine  itself  lias  had  respectable  advo¬ 
cates.  I  lie  possibility  of  a  question  of  this  na 
lure  proves  the*  necessity  of  laving  the  foim 
datious  ol  our  national  government  drepei 
than  in  the  nine  sain  lion  of  delegated  author¬ 
ity.  J  he  labile  of  \meiiean  empire  ought  to 
jest  on  the  solid  basis  ol  iitr  consi  ni  oi  mi 


NUMBER  23  85 


people.  The  streams  of  national  power  ought 
to  flow  immediately  from  that  pure,  original 
fountain  of  all  legitimate  authority. 

Publius 

Number  23 

[HAMILTON] 

The  necessity  of  a  Constitution,  at  least 
equally  energetic  with  the  one  proposed,  to 
the  preservation  of  the  Union,  is  the  point  at 
the  examination  of  which  we  are  now  arrived. 

This  inquiry  will  naturally  divide  itself  into 
three  branches— the  objects  to  be  provided  for 
by  the  federal  government,  the  quantity  of 
power  necessary  to  the  accomplishment  of  those 
objects,  the  persons  upon  whom  that  power 
ought  to  operate.  Its  distribution  and  organ¬ 
isation  will  more  properly  claim  our  atten¬ 
tion  under  the  succeeding  head. 

The  principal  purposes  to  be  answered  by 
union  are  these— the  common  defence  of  the 
members;  the  preservation  of  the  public  peace, 
as  well  against  internal  convulsions  as  external 
attacks;  the  regulation  of  commerce  with  other 
nations  and  between  the  States;  the  superin¬ 
tendence  of  our  intercourse,  political  and  com¬ 
mercial,  with  foreign  countries. 

The  authorities  essential  to  the  common  de¬ 
fence  are  these:  to  raise  armies;  to  build  and 
equip  fleets;  to  prescribe  rules  for  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  both;  to  direct  their  operations;  to 
provide  for  their  support.  These  powers  ought 
to  exist  without  limitation,  because  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  foresee  or  define  the  extent  and 
variety  of  national  exigencies,  or  the  corres¬ 
pondent  extent  and  variety  of  the  means  which 
may  be  necessary  to  satisfy  them.  The  circum¬ 
stances  that  endanger  the  safety  of  nations  are 
infinite,  and  for  this  reason  no  constitutional 
shackles  can  wisely  be  imposed  on  the  power 
to  which  the  care  of  it  is  committed.  This  power 
ought  to  be  co-extensive  with  all  the  possible 
combinationsof  such  circumstances;  andought 
to  be  under  the  direction  of  the  same  councils 
which  are  appointed  to  preside  over  the  com¬ 
mon  defence. 

This  is  one  of  those  truths  which,  to  a  cor¬ 
rect  and  unprejudiced  mind,  carries  its  own 
evidence  along  with  it;  and  may  be  obscured, 
but  cannot  be  made  plainer  by  argument  or 
reasoning.  It  rests  upon  axioms  as  simple  as 
they  are  universal;  the  means  ought  to  be  pro¬ 
portioned  to  the  end;  the  persons,  from  whose 
agency  the  attainment  of  any  end  is  expected, 
ought  to  possess  the  means  by  which  it  is  to  be 
attained. 


Whether  there  ought  to  be  a  federal  govern¬ 
ment  intrusted  with  the  care  of  the  common 
defence,  is  a  question  in  the  first  instance  open 
for  discussion;  but  the  moment  it  is  decided  in 
the  affirmative,  it  will  follow,  that  that  govern¬ 
ment  ought  to  be  clothed  with  all  the  powers 
requisite  to  complete  execution  of  its  trust. 
And  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  the  circum¬ 
stances  which  may  affect  the  public  safety  are 
reducible  within  certain  determinate  limits; 
unless  the  contrary  of  this  position  can  be  fairly 
and  rationally  disputed,  it  must  be  admitted, 
as  a  necessary  consequence,  that  there  can  be 
no  limitation  of  that  authority  which  is  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  the  defence  and  protection  of  the 
community,  in  any  matter  essential  to  its  effi¬ 
cacy— that  is,  in  any  matter  essential  to  the  for¬ 
mation,  direction,  or  support  of  the  national 
FORCES. 

Defective  as  the  present  Confederation  has 
been  proved  to  be,  this  principle  appears  to 
have  been  fully  recognised  by  the  framers  of 
it;  though  they  have  not  made  proper  or  ade¬ 
quate  provision  for  its  exercise.  Congress  have 
an  unlimited  discretion  to  make  requisitions 
of  men  and  money;  to  govern  the  army  and 
navy;  to  direct  their  operations.  As  their  requi¬ 
sitions  are  made  constitutionally  binding  upon 
the  States,  who  are  in  fact  under  the  most 
solemn  obligation  to  furnish  the  supplies  re¬ 
quired  of  them,  the  intention  evidently  was, 
that  the  United  States  should  command  what¬ 
ever  resources  were  by  them  judged  requisite 
to  the  “common  defence  and  general  welfare.” 
It  was  presumed  that  a  sense  of  their  true 
interests,  and  a  regard  to  the  dictates  of  good 
faith,  would  be  found  sufficient  pledges  for 
the  punctual  performance  of  the  duty  of  the 
members  to  the  federal  head. 

The  experiment  has,  however,  demonstrat¬ 
ed  that  this  expectation  was  ill-founded  and 
illusory;  and  the  observations,  made  under 
the  last  head,  will,  I  imagine,  have  sufficed  to 
convince  the  impartial  and  discerning,  that 
there  is  an  absolute  necessity  for  an  entire 
change  in  the  first  principles  of  the  system;  that 
if  we  are  in  earnest  about  giving  the  Union 
energy  and  duration,  we  must  abandon  the 
vain  project  of  legislating  upon  the  States  in 
their  collective  capacities;  we  must  extend  the 
laws  of  the  federal  government  to  the  individ¬ 
ual  citizens  of  America;  we  must  discard  the 
fallacious  scheme  of  quotas  and  requisitions, 
as  equally  impracticable  and  unjust.  The  re¬ 
sult  from  all  this  is  that  the  Union  ought  to  be 
invested  with  full  power  to  levy  troops;  to 


THE  FEDERALIST 


build  and  equip  fleets;  and  to  raise  the  reve¬ 
nues  which  will  be  required  for  the  formation 
and  support  of  an  army  and  navy,  in  the  cus- 
toinarv  and  ordinary  modes  practised  in  other 
governments. 

If  the  circumstances  of  our  country  are  such 
as  to  demand  a  compound  instead  of  a  simple, 
a  confederate  instead  of  a  sole,  government, 
i be  essential  point  width  will  remain  to  be 
adjusted  will  be  to  discriminate  the  objects, 
as  far  as  it  can  be  done,  which  shall  appertain 
to  the  different  provinces  or  departments  of 
power:  allowing  to  each  the  most  ample  au¬ 
thority  for  fulfilling  the  objects  committed  to 
its  charge.  Shall  the  Union  be  constituted  the 
guardian  of  the  common  safety?  Arc  fleets  and 
armies  and  revenues  necessary  to  this  purpose.' 
The  government  of  the  Union  must  be  em¬ 
powered  to  pass  all  laws,  and  to  make  all  regu¬ 
lations  which  have  relation  to  them.  I  lie  same 
must  be  the  case  in  respect  to  commerce,  and 
to  e\ery  other  matter  to  which  its  jurisdiction 
is  permitted  to  extend.  Is  the  administration 
of  justice  between  the  citizens  of  the  same 
State  the  proper  department  of  the  local  gov¬ 
ernments?  These  must  possess  all  the  author¬ 
ities  which  are  connected  with  this  object,  and 
with  every  other  that  may  be  allotted  to  their 
particular  cognisance  and  direction.  Not  to 
confer  in  each  case  a  degree  ol  power  commen¬ 
surate  to  the  end.  would  be  to  violate  the  most 
ob\  ions  rules  of  prudence  and  propriety,  and 
improvidcntly  to  trust  the  great  interests  of 
the  nation  to  hands  which  arc  disabled  from 
managing  them  with  \igour  and  success. 

Who  so  like  ly  to  make  suitable  provisions 
for  the  public  defence  as  that  body  to  which 
the  guardianship  of  the  public  safety  is  con¬ 
fided;  wliic  h,  as  the  centre  of  information,  will 
best  understand  the  extent  and  urgency  oi 
the  dangers  that  threaten:  as  the  representa- 
ti\e  of  the  wnoi  r,  will  feel  itself  most  deeply 
interested  in  the  preservation  of  every  pail; 
which,  from  the  responsibility  implied  in  the 
cl u i \  assigned  to  it.  will  be  most  sensibly  im¬ 
pressed  with  the  necessity  of  proper  exertions; 
and  which,  by  the  extension  of  its  authority 
throughout  the  States,  can  alone  establish 
uniformity  and  concert  in  the-  plans  and  meas¬ 
ures  by  which  the  common  safety  is  to  be* 
secured?  Is  the  re*  not  a  manifest  inconsistent  v 
in  devolving  upon  the*  federal  government  the* 
care  of  the  general  defence,  and  leaving  in 
the  State  governments  the*  efle<hve  powers  bv 
which  it  is  to  be  provided  lor?  Is  not  a  want 
of  cooperation  the  infallible  consequence  of 


such  a  svstem?  And  will  not  weakness,  disorder, 
an  undue  distribution  of  the  burdens  and  ca¬ 
lamities  of  war.  an  unnecessary  and  intolerable 
increase  of  expense,  be  its  natural  and  inev  i- 
table  concomitants?  Have  we  not  had  unequiv¬ 
ocal  experience  of  its  cftects  in  the  course  of 
the  revolution  which  we  have  just  accom¬ 
plished? 

Everv  view  we  may  take  of  the  subject,  as 
candid  inquirers  after  truth,  will  serve  to  con¬ 
vince  us,  that  it  is  both  unwise  and  dangerous 
to  denv  the  federal  government  an  uncon  fined 
authority,  as  to  all  those  objects  which  are  in¬ 
trusted  to  its  management.  It  will  indeed  de¬ 
serve  the  most  vigilant  and  careful  attention 
of  the  people,  to  see  that  it  be  modelled  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  admit  of  its  being  safely 
vested  with  the  requisite  powers.  11  any  plan 
which  has  been,  or  may  be.  offered  to  our  con¬ 
sideration.  should  not.  upon  a  dispassionate 
inspection,  be  found  to  answer  this  descrip¬ 
tion,  it  ought  to  be  rejected.  A  government, 
the  constitution  of  which  renders  it  unfit  to  be 
trusted  with  all  the  powers  which  a  free  people 
ought  to  delegate  to  any  governmetit,  would 
be  an  unsafe  and  improper  depositary  of  the 
national  interests.  W  herever  these  can  with 
propriety  be  confided,  the  coincident  powers 
may  safely  accompanv  them.  This  is  the  true 
result  of  all  just  reasoning  upon  the  subject. 
And  the  adversaries  ol  the  plan  promulgated 
by  theconvention  ought  tohave confined  them¬ 
selves  to  showing  that  the  internal  structure 
of  the  proposed  government  was  such  as  to 
render  it  unworthy  of  the  confidence  of  the* 
people.  They  ought  not  to  have  wandered  into 
inflammatory  declamations  and  unmeaning 
cavils  about  the  extent  of  the  powers.  The 
lowers  arc  not  too  extensive  for  the  objects 
of  federal  administration,  or,  in  other  words, 
for  the  management  of  our  national  intir 
i  ms;  nor  can  any  satisfactory  argument  be 
framed  to  show  that  they  are  chargeable  with 
such  an  excess.  11  it  be  true,  as  has  been  in¬ 
sinuated  by  some  of  the  writers  on  the  other 
side,  that  the  difficulty  arises  from  the  nature 
of  the  thing,  and  that  the  extent  of  the  coun¬ 
try  will  not  permit  us  to  form  a  government  in 
which  such  ample  powers  can  safely  be  re¬ 
posed.  it  would  prove  that  we  ought  to  con 
tract  our  views,  and  resort  to  the  expedient  of 
separate  confederacies,  which  will  move  with 
in  more  practicable  spheres,  for  the  absurdity 
must  continually  stare  us  in  the  fa<  e  of  confid¬ 
ing  to  a  government  the  direction  of  the  most 
essential  national  interests,  without  daring  to 


NUMBER  24  87 


trust  it  to  the  authorities  which  are  indis¬ 
pensable  to  their  proper  and  efficient  manage¬ 
ment.  Let  us  not  attempt  to  reconcile  contra¬ 
dictions,  but  firmly  embrace  a  rational  alterna¬ 
tive. 

I  trust,  however,  that  the  impracticability  of 
one  general  system  cannot  be  shown.  I  am 
greatly  mistaken,  if  anything  of  weight  has  yet 
been  advanced  of  this  tendency;  and  I  flatter 
myself  that  the  observations  which  have  been 
made  in  the  course  of  these  papers  have  served 
to  place  the  reverse  of  that  position  in  as  clear  a 
light  as  any  matter  still  in  the  womb  of  time 
and  experience  can  be  susceptible  of.  This,  at 
all  events,  must  be  evident,  that  the  very  diffi¬ 
culty  itself,  drawn  from  the  extent  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  is  the  strongest  argument  in  favour  of  an 
energetic  government;  for  any  other  can  cer¬ 
tainly  never  preserve  the  Union  of  so  large  an 
empire.  If  we  embrace  the  tenets  of  those  who 
oppose  the  adoption  of  the  proposed  Consti¬ 
tution,  as  the  standard  of  our  political  creed, 
we  cannot  fail  to  verify  the  gloomy  doctrines 
which  predict  the  impracticability  of  a  na¬ 
tional  system  pervading  entire  limits  of  the 
present  Confederacy.  Publius 

Number  24 

[HAMILTON] 

To  the  powers  proposed  to  be  conferred  up¬ 
on  the  federal  government,  in  respect  to  the 
creation  and  direction  of  the  national  forces, 

I  have  met  with  but  one  specific  objection, 
which,  if  I  understand  it  right,  is  this— that 
proper  provision  has  not  been  made  against 
the  existence  of  standing  armies  in  time  of 
peace;  an  objection  which,  I  shall  now  endeav¬ 
our  to  show,  rests  on  weak  and  unsubstantial 
foundations. 

It  has  indeed  been  brought  forward  in  the 
most  vague  and  general  form,  supported  only 
by  bold  assertions,  without  the  appearance  of 
argument;  without  even  the  sanction  of  theo¬ 
retical  opinions;  in  contradiction  to  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  other  free  nations,  and  to  the  general 
sense  of  America,  as  expressed  in  most  of  the 
existing  constitutions.  The  propriety  of  this 
remark  will  appear  the  moment  it  is  recollected 
that  the  objection  under  consideration  turns 
upon  a  supposed  necessity  of  restraining  the 
legislative  authority  of  the  nation,  in  the 
article  of  military  establishments;  a  principle 
unheard  of,  except  in  one  or  two  of  our  State 
constitutions,  and  rejected  in  all  the  rest. 

A  stranger  to  our  politics,  who  was  to  read 


our  newspapers  at  the  present  juncture,  with¬ 
out  having  previously  inspected  the  plan  re¬ 
ported  by  the  convention,  would  be  naturally 
led  to  one  of  two  conclusions:  either  that  it 
contained  a  positive  injunction,  that  standing 
armies  should  be  kept  up  in  time  of  peace;  or 
that  it  vested  in  the  executive  the  whole  power 
of  levying  troops,  without  subjecting  his  dis¬ 
cretion,  in  any  shape,  to  the  control  of  the  leg¬ 
islature. 

If  he  came  afterwards  to  peruse  the  plan 
itself,  he  would  be  surprised  to  discover  that 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other  was  the  case; 
that  the  whole  power  of  raising  armies  was 
lodged  in  the  Legislature ,  not  in  the  Executive; 
that  this  legislature  was  to  be  a  popular  body, 
consisting  of  the  representatives  of  the  people 
periodically  elected;  and  that  instead  of  the 
provision  he  had  supposed  in  favour  of  stand¬ 
ing  armies,  there  was  to  be  found,  in  respect 
to  this  object,  an  important  qualification  even 
of  the  legislative  discretion,  in  that  clause 
which  forbids  the  appropriation  of  money  for 
the  support  of  an  army  for  any  longer  period 
than  two  years— a  precaution  which,  upon  a 
nearer  view  of  it,  will  appear  to  be  a  great  and 
real  security  against  the  keeping  up  of  troops 
without  evident  necessity. 

Disappointed  in  his  first  surmise,  the  person 
I  have  supposed  would  be  apt  to  pursue  his 
conjectures  a  little  further.  He  would  naturally 
say  to  himself,  it  is  impossible  that  all  this  ve¬ 
hement  and  pathetic  declamation  can  be  with¬ 
out  some  colourable  pretext.  It  must  needs  be 
that  this  people,  so  jealous  of  their  liberties, 
have,  in  all  the  preceding  models  of  the  con¬ 
stitutions  which  they  have  established,  inserted 
the  most  precise  and  rigid  precautions  on  this 
point,  the  omission  of  which,  in  the  new  plan, 
has  given  birth  to  all  this  apprehension  and 
clamour. 

If,  under  this  impression,  he  proceeded  to 
pass  in  review  the  several  State  constitutions, 
how  great  would  be  his  disappointment  to  find 
that  two  only  of  them1  contained  an  interdic- 

’This  statement  of  the  matter  is  taken  from  the 
printed  collection  of  State  constitutions.  Penns\l- 
vania  and  North  Carolina  are  the  two  which  con¬ 
tain  the  interdiction  in  these  words:  “As  standing 
armies  in  time  of  peace  are  dangerous  to  liberty, 
they  ought  .not  to  be  kept  up.”  This  is,  in  truth, 
rather  a  caution  than  a  prohibition.  New  Hamp¬ 
shire,  Massachusetts,  Delaware,  and  Maryland 
have,  in  each  of  their  bills  of  rights,  a  clause  to 
this  effect:  “Standing  armies  are  dangerous  to  lib¬ 
erty,  and  ought  not  to  be  raised  or  kept  up  with¬ 
out  THE  CONSENT  OI  THE  LEGISLATURE”;  which  is  a 
formal  admission  of  the  authority  of  the  Legisla- 


THE  F EDERAL1S1 


tion  of  standing  armies  in  time  of  peace;  that 
the  other  eleven  had  either  observed  a  pro¬ 
found  silence  on  the  subject,  or  had  in  express 
terms  admitted  the  right  of  the  legislature  to 
authorise  their  existence. 

Still,  however,  he  would  be  persuaded  that 
there  must  be  some  plausible  foundation  for 
the  cry  raised  on  this  head.  He  would  never  be 
able  to  imagine,  while  any  source  of  informa¬ 
tion  remained  unexplored,  that  it  was  nothing 
more  than  an  experiment  upon  the  public  cre¬ 
dulity,  dictated  either  by  a  deliberate  inten¬ 
tion  to  deceive,  or  by  the  overflowings  of  a  zeal 
too  intemperate  to  be  ingenuous.  It  woidd 
probably  occur  to  him,  that  he  would  be  likely 
to  find  the  precautions  he  was  in  search  of  in  the 
primitive  compact  between  the  States.  Here, 
at  length,  he  would  expect  to  meet  with  a  solu¬ 
tion  of  the  enigma.  No  doubt,  he  would  ob¬ 
serve  to  himself,  the  existing  Confederation 
must  contain  the  most  explicit  provisions 
against  military  establishments  in  time  of 
peace;  and  a  departure  from  this  model,  in  a 
favourite  point,  has  occasioned  the  discontent 
which  appears  to  influence  these  political 
champions. 

If  he  should  now  apply  himself  to  a  careful 
and  critical  survey  of  the  articles  of  Confed¬ 
eration.  his  astonishment  would  not  only  be 
increased,  but  would  acquire  a  mixture  of  in¬ 
dignation,  at  the  unexpected  discovery  that 
these  articles,  instead  of  containing  the  pro¬ 
hibition  he  looked  for,  and  though  they  had, 
with  jealous  circumspection,  restricted  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  State  legislatures  in  this  partic¬ 
ular,  had  not  imposed  a  single  restraint  on  that 
of  the  United  States.  If  he  happened  to  be  a 
man  of  quick  sensibility,  or  ardent  temper,  he 
could  now  no  longer  refrain  from  regarding 
these  clamours  as  the  dishonest  artifices  of  a 
sinister  and  unprincipled  opposition  to  a  plan 
which  ought  at  least  to  receive  a  fair  and  can¬ 
did  examination  from  all  sincere  lovers  of 
their  country!  How  else,  lie  would  say,  could 
the  authors  ol  them  have  been  tempted  to  sent 
such  loud  censures  upon  that  plan,  about  a 
point  in  which  it  seems  to  have  conformed  it¬ 
self  to  the  general  sense  of  Americ  a  as  dec  hired 

turc.  New  ^  oik  has  no  hills  of  rights,  and  hei  con¬ 
stitution  sa\s  not  a  wend  about  the  mailer.  No 
hills  of  rights  appear  annexed  lo  the  constitutions 
of  the  other  Stales,  except  the  loiegoiug.  and  their 
constitutions  ate  equal!)  silent.  I  am  told,  how 
evci,  that  one  or  two  Stales  have  hills  of  rights 
which  do  not  appeal  in  (Ins  collection:  hut  that 
those  also  recognise  the  tight  of  the  legislative 
authority  in  this  respect.—  Ptnuus 


in  its  different  forms  of  government,  and  in 
which  it  has  even  superadded  a  new  and  pow¬ 
erful  guard  unknown  to  any  of  them?  If.  on 
the  contrary,  he  happened  to  be  a  man  of  calm 
and  dispassionate  feelings,  he  would  indulge 
a  sigh  for  the  frailty  of  human  nature,  and 
would  lament  that  in  a  matter  so  interesting 
to  the  happiness  of  millions,  the  true  merits  of 
the  question  should  be  perplexed  and  entan¬ 
gled  by  expedients  so  unfriendly  to  an  impar¬ 
tial  and  right  determination.  Even  such  a  man 
could  hardly  forbear  remarking,  that  a  con¬ 
duct  of  this  kind  has  too  much  the  appearance 
of  an  intention  to  mislead  the  people  by  alarm¬ 
ing  their  passions,  rather  than  to  convince 
them  by  arguments  addressed  to  their  under¬ 
standings. 

But  however  little  this  objection  may  he 
countenanced,  even  by  precedents  among  our¬ 
selves,  it  may  he  satisfactory  to  take  a  nearer 
view  of  its  intrinsic  merits.  From  a  close  ex 
animation  it  will  appear  that  restraints  upon 
the  discretion  of  the  legislature  in  respect  to 
military  establishments  in  time  of  peace,  would 
be  improper  to  be*  imposed,  and  if  imposed, 
from  the  necessities  of  society,  would  be  un¬ 
likely  to  be  observed. 

Though  a  wide  ocean  separates  the  United 
States  from  Europe,  yet  there  are  various  con¬ 
siderations  that  warn  us  against  an  excess  ol 
confidence  or  security.  On  one  side  of  us,  and 
stretching  far  into  our  rear,  are  growing  settle¬ 
ments  subject  to  the  dominion  of  Britain.  On 
the  other  side,  and  extending  to  meet  the  Brit¬ 
ish  settlements,  are  colonies  and  establish¬ 
ments  subject  to  the  dominion  of  Spain  1  his 
situation,  and  the  vicinity  of  the  West  India 
Islands,  belonging  to  these  two  powers,  create 
between  them,  in  respect  to  their  American 
possessions  and  in  relation  to  us.  a  common 
interest.  The  savage  ttibes  on  our  Western 
frontier  ought  to  he*  regarded  as  our  natural 
enemies,  their  natural  allies,  because  they  have 
most  to  fear  front  us.  and  most  to  hope  from 
them.  I  he  improvements  in  the  art  ol  naviga¬ 
tion  have,  as  to  the*  lac  ilitv  ol  c omiiiimication. 
rendered  distant  nations,  in  a  great  measure, 
neighbours.  Britain  and  Spain  are  among  die 
pi  inc  ipal  maritime  powers  ol  1  urope.  \  future 
concert  ol  views  between  these  nations  ought 
not  to  be  regarded  as  improbable*.  Flic  inc  t  eas 
ing  remoteness  ol  c oiisaiiguinilv  is  every  clay 
diminishing  the*  lone  of  the  lamilv  compact 
between  France  and  Spain.  \ttd  politicians 
have  ever  with  great  reason  considered  the  lies 
of  blood  as  feeble  and  precarious  links  of 


NUMBER  25 


political  connection.  These  circumstances  com¬ 
bined,  admonish  us  not  to  be  too  sanguine  in 
considering  ourselves  as  entirely  out  of  the 
reach  of  danger. 

Previous  to  the  Revolution,  and  ever  since 
the  peace,  there  has  been  a  constant  necessity 
for  keeping  small  garrisons  on  our  Western 
frontier.  No  person  can  doubt  that  these  will 
continue  to  be  indispensable,  if  it  should  only 
be  against  the  ravages  and  depredations  of  the 
Indians.  These  garrisons  must  either  be  fur¬ 
nished  by  occasional  detachments  from  the 
militia,  or  by  permanent  corps  in  the  pay  of 
the  government.  The  first  is  impracticable; 
and  if  practicable,  would  be  pernicious.  The 
militia  would  not  long,  if  at  all,  submit  to  be 
dragged  from  their  occupations  and  families 
to  perform  that  most  disagreeable  duty  in 
times  of  profound  peace.  And  if  they  could 
be  prevailed  upon  or  compelled  to  do  it,  the 
increased  expense  of  a  frequent  rotation  of 
service,  and  the  loss  of  labour  and  disconcer¬ 
tion  of  the  industrious  pursuits  of  individu¬ 
als,  would  form  conclusive  objections  to  the 
scheme.  It  would  be  as  burdensome  and  in¬ 
jurious  to  the  public  as  ruinous  to  private  citi¬ 
zens.  The  latter  resource  of  permanent  corps 
in  the  pay  of  the  government  amounts  to  a 
standing  army  in  time  of  peace;  a  small  one, 
indeed,  but  not  the  less  real  for  being  small. 
Here  is  a  simple  view  of  the  subject  that  shows 
us  at  once  the  impropriety  of  a  constitutional 
interdiction  of  such  establishments,  and  the 
necessity  of  leaving  the  matter  to  the  discre¬ 
tion  and  prudence  of  the  legislature. 

In  proportion  to  our  increase  in  strength,  it 
is  probable,  nay,  it  may  be  said  certain,  that 
Britain  and  Spain  would  augment  their  mili¬ 
tary  establishments  in  our  neighbourhood.  If 
we  should  not  be  willing  to  be  exposed,  in  a 
naked  and  defenceless  condition,  to  their  in¬ 
sults  and  encroachments,  we  should  find  it  ex¬ 
pedient  to  increase  our  frontier  garrison  in 
some  ratio  to  the  force  by  which  our  Western 
settlements  might  be  annoyed.  There  are,  and 
will  be,  particular  posts,  the  possession  of 
which  will  include  the  command  of  large  dis¬ 
tricts  of  territory,  and  facilitate  future  inva¬ 
sions  of  the  remainder.  It  may  be  added  that 
some  of  those  posts  will  be  keys  to  the  trade 
with  the  Indian  nations.  Can  any  man  think 
it  would  be  wise  to  leave  such  posts  in  a  situa¬ 
tion  to  be  at  any  instant  seized  by  one  or  the 
other  of  two  neighbouring  and  formidable 
powers?  To  act  this  part  would  be  to  desert  all 
the  usual  maxims  of  prudence  and  policy. 


89 

If  we  mean  to  be  a  commercial  people,  or 
even  to  be  secure  on  our  Atlantic  side,  we  must 
endeavour,  as  soon  as  possible,  to  have  a  navy. 
To  this  purpose  there  must  be  dockyards  and 
arsenals;  and  for  the  defence  of  these,  fortifi¬ 
cations,  and  probably  garrisons.  When  a  na¬ 
tion  has  become  so  powerlul  by  sea  that  it  can 
protect  its  dockyards  by  its  fleets,  this  super¬ 
sedes  the  necessity  of  garrisons  for  that  pur¬ 
pose;  but  where  naval  establishments  are  in 
their  infancy,  moderate  garrisons  will,  in  all 
likelihood,  be  found  an  indispensable  security 
against  descents  for  the  destruction  of  the 
arsenals  and  dockyards,  and  sometimes  of  the 
fleet  itself.  Publius 

Number  25 

[HAMILTON] 

It  may  perhaps  be  urged  that  the  objects  enu¬ 
merated  in  the  preceding  number  ought  to 
be  provided  for  by  the  State  governments,  un¬ 
der  the  direction  of  the  Union.  But  this  would 
be,  in  reality,  an  inversion  of  the  primary 
principle  of  our  political  association,  as  it 
would  in  practice  transfer  the  care  of  the  com¬ 
mon  defence  from  the  federal  head  to  the  indi¬ 
vidual  members:  a  project  oppressive  to  some 
States,  dangerous  to  all,  and  baneful  to  the 
Confederacy. 

The  territories  of  Britain,  Spain,  and  of  the 
Indian  nations  in  our  neighbourhood  do  not 
border  on  particular  States,  but  encircle  the 
Union  from  Maine  to  Georgia.  The  danger, 
though  in  different  degrees,  is  therefore  com¬ 
mon.  And  the  means  of  guarding  against  it 
ought,  in  like  manner,  to  be  the  objects  of 
common  councils  and  of  a  common  treasury. 
It  happens  that  some  States,  from  local  situa¬ 
tion,  are  more  directly  exposed.  New  York  is 
of  this  class.  Upon  the  plan  of  separate  pro¬ 
visions,  New  York  would  have  to  sustain  the 
whole  weight  of  the  establishments  requisite 
to  her  immediate  safety,  and  to  the  mediate  or 
ultimate  protection  of  her  neighbours.  This 
would  neither  be  equitable  as  it  respected  New 
York  nor  safe  as  it  respected  the  other  States. 
Various  inconveniences  would  attend  such  a 
system.  The  States,  to  whose  lot  it  might  fall 
to  support  the  necessary  establishments,  would 
be  as  little  able  as  willing,  for  a  considerable 
time  to  come,  to  bear  the  burden  of  competent 
provisions.  The  security  of  all  would  thus  be 
subjected  to  the  parsimony,  improvidence,  or 
inability  of  a  part.  If  the  resources  of  such  part 
becoming  more  abundant  and  extensive,  its 


THE  FEDERALIST 


9° 

provisions  should  be  proportionally  enlarged, 
the  other  States  would  cjmck.lv  take  the  alarm 
at  seeing  the  whole  military  force  of  the  bnion 
in  the  hands  of  two  or  three  of  its  members, 
and  those  probably  amongst  the  most  powerful. 
Thev  would  each  choose  to  have  some  counter¬ 
poise,  and  pretences  could  easily  be  contri\ed. 
In  this  situation,  military  establishments,  nour¬ 
ished  by  mutual  jealous),  would  be  apt  to 
swell  beyond  their  natural  or  proper  size:  and 
being  at  the  separate  disposal  of  the  members, 
they  would  be  engines  for  the  abridgment  or 
demolition  of  the  national  authority. 

Reasons  have  been  already  given  to  induce 
a  supposition  that  the  State  governments  will 
too  naturall)  be  prone  to  a  rivalship  with  that 
of  the  Union,  the  foundation  of  which  will  be 
the  love  of  power:  and  that  in  any  contest  be¬ 
tween  the  federal  head  and  one  of  its  members 
the  people  will  be  most  apt  to  unite  with  their 
local  government.  If.  in  addition  to  this  im¬ 
mense  advantage,  the  ambition  of  the  mem¬ 
bers  should  be  stimulated  by  the  separate  and 
independent  possession  of  military  forces,  it 
would  a  fiord  too  strong  a  temptation  and  too 
great  a  facility  to  them  to  make  enterprises 
upon,  and  finally  to  subvert,  the  constitu¬ 
tional  authority  of  the  Union.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  liberty  of  the  people  would  be  less 
safe  in  this  state  of  things  than  in  that  which 
left  the  national  forces  in  the  hands  of  the  na¬ 
tional  government.  As  far  as  an  army  may  be 
considered  as  a  dangerous  weapon  of  power,  it 
had  better  be  in  those  hands  of  which  the  peo¬ 
ple  are  most  likely  to  be  jealous  than  in  those 
of  which  they  are  least  likely  to  be  jealous.  Foi 
it  is  a  truth,  which  the  experience  of  ages  has 
attested,  that  the  people  are  always  most  in 
danger  when  the  means  of  injuring  their  rights 
are  in  the  possession  of  those  of  whom  they  en¬ 
tertain  the  least  suspicion. 

The  framers  of  the  existing  Confederation, 
fully  aware  of  the  danger  to  the  Union  from 
the  separate  possession  of  military  forces  by 
the  States,  have,  in  express  terms,  prohibited 
them  from  ha\  ing  either  ships  or  troops,  unless 
with  the  consent  of  Congress.  I  he  truth  is. 
that  the  existence  of  a  federal  government  and 
military  establishments  under  State  authority 
are  not  less  at  variance  with  each  other  than  a 
due  supply  of  the  federal  treasury  and  the 
system  of  (juntas  and  requisitions. 

I  here  are  other  lights  besides  those  already 
taken  untie  e  of.  in  whic  h  the  impropriety  of  re¬ 
straints  on  the  discretion  of  the  national  legis¬ 
lature  will  be  equally  manifest.  1  he  design  of 


the  objection,  which  has  been  mentioned,  is  to 
preclude  standing  armies  in  time  of  peace, 
though  we  have  never  been  informed  how  far 
it  is  designed  the  prohibition  should  extend: 
whether  to  raising  armies  as  well  as  to  keeping 
them  up  in  a  season  of  tranquillity  or  not.  If 
it  be  confuted  to  the  latter  it  will  have  no  pre¬ 
cise  signification,  and  it  will  be  ineffectual  for 
the  purpose  intended.  When  armies  are  once 
raised  what  shall  be  denominated  “keeping 
them  up,”  contrary  to  the  sense  of  the  Con¬ 
stitution?  What  time  shall  be  requisite  to  as¬ 
certain  the  violation?  Shall  it  be  a  week,  a 
month,  a  year?  Or  shall  we  say  they  may  be 
continued  as  long  as  the  danger  which  oc¬ 
casioned  their  being  raised  continues?  This 
would  be  to  admit  that  they  might  be  kept  up 
in  time  of  peace ,  against  threatening  or  im¬ 
pending  danger,  which  would  be  at  once  to 
deviate  from  the  literal  meaning  of  the  pro¬ 
hibition,  and  to  introduce  an  extensive  lati¬ 
tude  of  construction.  Who  shall  judge  of  the 
continuance  of  the  danger?  This  must  un¬ 
doubtedly  be  submitted  to  the  national  govern¬ 
ment.  and  the  matter  would  then  be  brought 
to  this  issue,  that  the  national  government,  to 
provide  against  apprehended  danger,  might 
in  the  first  instance  raise  troops,  and  might 
afterwards  keep  them  on  foot  as  long  as  they 
supposed  the  peace  or  safety  of  the  community 
was  in  any  degree  of  jeopardy.  It  is  easy  to  per¬ 
ceive  that  a  discretion  so  latitudinary  as  this 
would  afford  ample  room  for  eluding  the  force 
of  the  pros  ision. 

The  supposed  utility  of  a  provision  of  this 
kind  can  only  he  founded  on  the  supposed 
probability,  or  at  least  possibility,  of  a  combi¬ 
nation  between  the  executive  and  the  legisla¬ 
tive.  in  some  scheme  of  usur pation.  Should 
this  at  am  time  happen,  how  easy  would  it  he 
to  fabricate  pretences  of  approaching  clanger! 
Indian  hostilities,  instigated  by  Spain  or  Brit¬ 
ain.  would  always  be  at  hand.  Provocations 
to  produce  the  desired  appearances  might  even 
be  gi\ cii  to  some  foreign  power,  and  appeased 
again  by  timely  concessions.  If  we  can  reason¬ 
ably  presume  such  a  combination  to  have  been 
formed,  and  that  the  rnier]>i  ise  is  warranted 
by  a  sulficient  prospect  of  success,  the  army, 
when  once  raised,  from  whatever  cause,  or  cm 
whatever  pretext,  may  be  applied  to  the  ex¬ 
ec  ut ion  of  the  project. 

If,  to  obviate  this  consequence,  it  should  be 
resolved  to  extend  the  prohibition  to  the  rais¬ 
ing  of  armies  in  time  of  peace,  the  United 
States  would  then  exhibit  the  most  extraordi 


NUMBER  2 


nary  spectacle  which  the  world  has  yet  seen— 
that  of  a  nation  incapacitated  by  its  Constitu¬ 
tion  to  prepare  for  defence,  before  it  was  ac¬ 
tually  invaded.  As  the  ceremony  of  a  formal 
denunciation  of  war  has  of  late  fallen  into  dis¬ 
use,  the  presence  of  an  enemy  within  our  terri¬ 
tories  must  be  waited  for,  as  the  legal  warrant 
to  the  government  to  begin  its  levies  of  men 
for  the  protection  of  the  State.  We  must  re¬ 
ceive  the  blow,  before  we  could  even  prepare 
to  return  it.  All  that  kind  of  policy  by  which 
nations  anticipate  distant  danger,  and  meet 
the  gathering  storm,  must  be  abstained  from, 
as  contrary  to  the  genuine  maxims  of  a  free 
government.  We  must  expose  our  property 
and  liberty  to  the  mercy  of  foreign  invaders, 
and  invite  them  by  our  weakness  to  seize  the 
naked  and  defenceless  prey,  because  we  are 
afraid  that  rulers,  created  by  our  choice,  de¬ 
pendent  on  our  will,  might  endanger  that 
liberty,  by  an  abuse  of  the  means  necessary  to 
its  preservation. 

Here  I  expect  we  shall  be  told  that  the 
militia  of  the  country  is  its  natural  bulwark, 
and  would  be  at  all  times  equal  to  the  national 
defence.  This  doctrine,  in  substance,  had  like 
to  have  lost  us  our  independence.  It  costs  mil¬ 
lions  to  the  United  States  that  might  have  been 
saved.  The  facts  which,  from  our  own  experi¬ 
ence,  forbid  a  reliance  of  this  kind,  are  too 
recent  to  permit  us  to  be  the  dupes  of  such  a 
suggestion.  The  steady  operations  of  war 
against  a  regular  and  disciplined  army  can 
only  be  successfully  conducted  by  a  force  of 
the  same  kind.  Considerations  of  economy,  not 
less  than  of  stability  and  vigour,  confirm  this 
position.  The  American  militia,  in  the  course 
of  the  late  war,  have,  by  their  valour  on  numer¬ 
ous  occasions,  erected  eternal  monuments  to 
their  fame;  but  the  bravest  of  them  feel  and 
know  that  the  liberty  of  their  country  could 
not  have  been  established  by  dieir  efforts 
alone,  however  great  and  valuable  they  were. 
War,  like  most  other  things,  is  a  science  to  be 
acquired  and  perfected  by  diligence,  by  per¬ 
severance,  by  time,  and  by  practice. 

All  violent  policy,  as  it  is  contrary  to  the 
natural  and  experienced  course  of  human  af¬ 
fairs,  defeats  itself.  Pennsylvania,  at  this  in¬ 
stant,  affords  an  example  of  the  truth  of  this 
remark.  The  Bill  of  Rights  of  that  State  de¬ 
clares  that  standing  armies  are  dangerous  to 
liberty,  and  ought  not  to  be  kept  up  in  time  of 
peace.  Pennsylvania,  nevertheless,  in  a  time  of 
profound  peace,  from  the  existence  of  partial 
disorders  in  one  or  two  of  her  counties,  has  re¬ 


solved  to  raise  a  body  of  troops;  and  in  all 
probability  will  keep  them  up  as  long  as  there 
is  any  appearance  of  danger  to  the  public  peace. 
The  conduct  of  Massachusetts  affords  a  les¬ 
son  on  the  same  subject,  though  on  different 
ground.  That  State  (without  waiting  for  the 
sanction  of  Congress,  as  the  articles  of  the 
Confederation  require)  was  compelled  to  raise 
troops  to  quell  a  domestic  insurrection,  and 
still  keeps  a  corps  in  pay  to  prevent  a  revival 
of  the  spirit  of  revolt.  The  particular  constitu¬ 
tion  of  Massachusetts  opposed  no  obstacle  to 
the  measure;  but  the  instance  is  still  of  use  to 
instruct  us  that  cases  are  likely  to  occur  under 
our  government,  as  well  as  under  those  of 
other  nations,  which  will  sometimes  render  a 
military  force  in  time  of  peace  essential  to  the 
security  of  the  society,  and  that  it  is  therefore 
improper  in  this  respect  to  control  the  legisla¬ 
tive  discretion.  It  also  teaches  us,  in  its  applica¬ 
tion  to  the  United  States,  how  little  the  rights 
of  a  feeble  government  are  likely  to  be  respected, 
even  by  its  own  constituents.  And  it  teaches  us, 
in  addition  to  the  rest,  how  unequal  parch¬ 
ment  provisions  are  to  a  struggle  with  public 
necessity. 

It  was  a  fundamental  maxim  of  the  Lace¬ 
daemonian  commonwealth,  that  the  post  of  ad¬ 
miral  should  not  be  conferred  twice  on  the 
same  person.  The  Peloponnesian  confederates, 
having  suffered  a  severe  defeat  at  sea  from  the 
Athenians,  demanded  Lysander,  who  had  be¬ 
fore  served  with  success  in  that  capacity,  to 
command  the  combined  fleets.  The  Lacedae¬ 
monians,  to  gratify  their  allies,  and  yet  pre¬ 
serve  the  semblance  of  an  adherence  to  their 
ancient  institutions,  had  recourse  to  the  flimsy 
subterfuge  of  investing  Lysander  with  the  real 
power  of  admiral  under  the  nominal  title  of 
vice-admiral.  This  instance  is  selected  from 
among  a  multitude  that  might  be  cited  to  coil 
firm  the  truth  already  advanced  and  illustrated 
by  domestic  examples;  which  is,  that  nations 
pay  little  regard  to  rules  and  maxims  calcu¬ 
lated  in  their  very  nature  to  run  counter  to  the 
necessities  of  society.  Wise  politicians  will  be 
cautious  about  fettering  the  government  with 
restrictions  that  cannot  be  observed,  because 
they  know  that  every  breach  of  the  fundamen¬ 
tal  laws,  though  dictated  by  necessity,  impairs 
that  sacred  reverence  which  ought  to  be  main¬ 
tained  in  the  breast  of  rulers  towards  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  a  country,  and  forms  a  precedent 
for  other  breaches  where  the  same  plea  of  ne¬ 
cessity  does  not  exist  at  all,  or  is  less  urgent 
and  palpable.  Publius 


92 


THE  FEDERALIST 


Number  26 

[HAMILTON] 

It  was  a  thing  hardly  to  be  expected  that  in  a 
popular  revolution  the  minds  of  men  should 
stop  at  that  happy  mean  which  marks  the  salu¬ 
tary  boundary  between  power  and  privilege, 
and  combines  the  energy  of  government  with 
the  security  of  private  rights.  A  failure  in  this 
delicate  and  important  point  is  thegreat  source 
of  the  inconveniences  we  experience,  and  if  we 
are  not  cautious  to  avoid  a  repetition  of  the  er¬ 
ror.  in  our  future  attempts  to  rectifv  and  amel¬ 
iorate  our  system,  we  may  travel  from  one  chi¬ 
merical  project  to  another;  we  may  try  change 
alter  change;  but  we  shall  never  be  likely  to 
make  any  material  change  for  the  better. 

The  idea  of  restraining  the  legislat  ive  author¬ 
ity,  in  the  means  of  providing  for  the  national 
defence,  is  one  of  those  refinements  which  owe 
their  origin  to  a  zeal  for  liberty  more  ardent 
than  enlightened.  We  have  seen,  however,  that 
it  has  not  had  thusfar an extensiveprevalency; 
that  even  in  this  country,  where  it  made  its  first 
appearance,  Pennsylvania  and  North  Carolina 
are  the  only  two  States  by  which  it  has  been  in 
any  degree  patronised;  and  that  all  the  others 
have  refused  to  give  it  the  least  countenance; 
wisely  judging  that  confidence  must  be  placed 
somewhere;  that  the  necessity  of  doing  it  is  im¬ 
plied  in  the  very  act  of  delegating  power;  and 
that  it  is  better  to  hazard  tiie  abuse  of  that  con- 
iulence  than  to  embarrass  the  government  and 
endanger  the  public  safety  by  impolitic  restric¬ 
tions  on  the  legislative  authority.  The  oppo¬ 
nents  of  the  proposed  Constitution  combat,  in 
this  respect,  the  general  decision  of  America; 
and  instead  of  being  taught  by  experience  the 
propriety  of  <  orrecting  any  extremes  into  which 
we  may  have  heretofore  run.  they  appear  dis¬ 
posed  to  conduct  us  into  others  still  more  dan¬ 
gerous,  and  more  extravagant.  As  if  the  tone 
of  government  had  been  found  too  high,  or 
too  rigid,  the  doctrines  they  teach  are  calcu¬ 
lated  to  induce  11s  to  depress  or  to  relax  it,  by 
expedients  which,  upon  other  occasions,  have 
been  condemned  or  forborne.  It  may  lie  af¬ 
firmed  without  the  imputation  of  invective, 
that  if  the  princ  iples  they  inculcate,  on  various 
points,  could  so  far  obtain  as  to  become  the 
popular  c  reed,  they  would  utterly  unfit  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  this  country  lor  any  species  of  gove  rn¬ 
ment  whatever.  Hut  a  clanger  of  this  kind  is 
not  to  be  apprehended.  Lhe  citizens  of  \mcr- 
ica  have  too  much  discernment  to  be  argued 
into  anarchy.  \nd  1  am  much  mistaken  if  ex¬ 


perience  has  not  wrought  a  deep  and  solemn 
conviction  in  the  public  mind,  that  greater  en¬ 
ergy  of  government  is  essential  to  the  welfare 
and  prosperity  of  the  community. 

It  may  not  be  amiss  in  this  place  concisely  to 
remark  the  origin  and  progress  of  the  idea, 
which  aims  at  the  exclusion  of  military  estab¬ 
lishments  in  time  of  peace.  Though  in  specula¬ 
tive  minds  it  may  arise  from  a  contemplation 
of  the  nature  and  tendency  of  such  institu¬ 
tions,  fortified  by  the  events  that  have  hap¬ 
pened  in  other  ages  and  countries,  yet  as  a  na¬ 
tional  sentiment,  it  must  be  traced  to  those 
habits  of  thinking  which  we  derive  from  the 
nation  from  whom  the  inhabitants  of  these 
States  have  in  general  sprung. 

In  England,  for  a  long  time  after  the  Nor¬ 
man  Conquest,  the  authority  of  the  monarch 
was  almost  unlimited.  Inroads  were  gradually 
made  upon  the  prerogative,  in  favour  of  lib¬ 
erty,  first  by  the  barons,  and  afterwards  by  the 
people,  till  the  greatest  part  of  its  most  formi¬ 
dable  pretensions  became  extinct.  But  it  was 
not  till  the  revolution  in  16S8,  which  elevated 
the  Prince  of  Orange  to  the  throne  of  Great 
Britain,  that  English  liberty  was  completely 
triumphant.  As  incident  to  the  undefined  pow¬ 
er  of  making  war,  an  acknowledged  preroga¬ 
tive  of  the  crown,  Charles  II.  had,  by  his  own 
authority,  kept  on  foot  in  time  of  peace  a  body 
of  5,000  regular  troops.  And  this  number  James 
II.  increased  to  30,000;  who  were  paid  out  of 
his  civil  list.  At  the  revolution,  to  abolish  the 
exercise  of  so  dangerous  an  authority,  it  be¬ 
came  an  article  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  then 
framed,  that  "the  raising  or  keeping  a  standing 
army  within  the  kingdom  in  time  of  peace,  un¬ 
less  with  the  consent  of  Parliament,  was  against 
la  w.” 

In  that  kingdom,  when  the  pulse  of  liberty 
was  at  its  highest  pitch,  no  security  against  the 
danger  of  standing  armies  was  thought  requi¬ 
site,  beyond  a  prohibition  of  their  being  raised 
or  kept  up  by  the  mere  authority  of  the  execu¬ 
tive  magistrate/ 1  he  patriots,  who  ell  ec  ted  that 
memorable  revolution,  were  too  temperate,  too 
well-informed,  to  think  of  any  restraint  on  the 
legislative  discretion.  I  hey  were  aware  that  a 
certain  number  of  troops  for  guards  and  garri¬ 
sons  were  indispensable;  that  no  prec  ise  bounds 
could  be  set  to  the  national  exigencies;  that  a 
power  equal  to  every  possiblcconiingem  y  must 
exist  somewhere  in  the  government:  and  that 
when  they  referred  the  exerc  ise  of  that  power 
to  the  judgment  of  the  legislature,  they  had  ar¬ 
rived  at  the  ultimate  point  of  precaution  which 


NUMBER  26 


was  reconcilable  with  the  safety  of  the  com¬ 
munity. 

From  the  same  source,  the  people  of  Amer¬ 
ica  may  be  said  to  have  derived  an  hereditary 
impression  of  danger  to  liberty,  from  standing 
armies  in  time  of  peace.  The  circumstances  of  a 
revolution  quickened  the  public  sensibility  on 
every  point  connected  with  the  security  of  pop¬ 
ular  rights,  and  in  some  instances  raised  the 
warmth  of  our  zeal  beyond  the  degree  which 
consisted  with  the  due  temperature  of  the  body 
politic.  The  attempts  of  two  of  the  States  to  re¬ 
strict  the  authority  of  the  legislature  in  the  ar¬ 
ticle  of  military  establishments,  areof  the  num¬ 
ber  of  these  instances.  The  principles  which 
had  taught  us  to  be  jealous  of  the  power  of  an 
hereditary  monarch  were  by  an  injudicious  ex¬ 
cess  extended  to  the  representatives  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  in  their  popular  assemblies.  Even  in  some 
of  the  States  where  this  error  was  not  adopted, 
we  find  unnecessary  declarations  that  standing 
armies  ought  not  to  be  kept  up,  in  time  of 
peace,  without  the  consent  of  the  legisla¬ 
ture.  I  call  them  unnecessary,  because  the  rea¬ 
son  which  had  introduced  a  similar  provision 
into  the  English  Bill  of  Rights  is  not  applica¬ 
ble  to  any  of  the  State  constitutions.  The  pow¬ 
er  of  raising  armies  at  all,  under  those  consti¬ 
tutions,  can  by  no  construction  be  deemed  to 
reside  anywhere  else  than  in  the  legislatures 
themselves;  and  it  was  superfluous,  if  not  ab¬ 
surd,  to  declare  that  a  matter  should  not  be 
done  without  the  consent  of  a  body  which  alone 
had  the  power  of  doing  it.  Accordingly,  in  some 
of  those  constitutions,  and  among  others  in 
that  of  this  State  of  New  York,  which  has  been 
justly  celebrated,  both  in  Europe  and  Amer¬ 
ica,  as  one  of  the  best  of  the  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment  established  in  this  country,  there  is  a 
total  silence  upon  the  subject. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  even  in  the  two  States 
which  seem  to  have  meditated  an  interdiction 
of  military  establishments  in  time  of  peace,  the 
mode  of  expression  made  use  of  is  rather  cau¬ 
tionary  than  prohibitory.  It  is  not  said,  that 
standing  armies  shall  not  be  kept  up.  but  that 
they  ought  not  to  be  kept  up,  in  time  of  peace. 
This  ambiguity  of  terms  appears  to  have  been 
the  result  of  a  conflict  between  jealousy  and 
conviction;  between  the  desire  of  excluding 
such  establishments  at  all  events,  and  the  per¬ 
suasion  that  an  absolute  exclusion  would  be 
unwise  and  unsafe. 

Can  it  be  doubted  that  such  a  provision, 
whenever  the  situation  of  public  affairs  was 
understood  to  require  a  departure  from  it, 


93 

would  be  interpreted  by  the  legislature  into  a 
mere  admonition  and  would  be  made  to  yield 
to  the  necessities  or  supposed  necessities  of  the 
State?  Let  the  fact  already  mentioned,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  Pennsylvania,  decide.  What  then  (it 
may  be  asked)  is  the  use  of  such  a  provision,  if 
it  cease  to  operate  the  moment  there  is  an  in¬ 
clination  to  disregard  it? 

Let  us  examine  whether  there  be  any  com¬ 
parison,  in  point  of  efficacy,  between  the  pro¬ 
vision  alluded  to  and  that  which  is  contained 
in  the  new  Constitution,  for  restraining  the 
appropriations  of  money  for  military  purposes 
to  the  period  of  two  years.  The  former,  by  aim¬ 
ing  at  too  much,  is  calculated  to  effect  nothing; 
the  latter,  by  steering  clear  of  an  imprudent 
extreme,  and  by  being  perfectly  compatible 
with  a  proper  provision  for  the  exigencies  of 
the  nation,  will  have  a  salutary  and  powerful 
operation. 

The  legislature  of  the  United  States  will  be 
obliged,  by  this  provision,  once  at  least  in  ev¬ 
ery  two  years,  to  deliberate  upon  the  propriety 
of  keeping  a  military  force  on  foot;  to  come  to 
a  new  resolution  on  the  point;  and  to  declare 
their  sense  of  the  matter,  by  a  formal  vote  in 
the  face  of  their  constituents.  They  are  not  at 
liberty  to  vest  in  the  executive  department  per¬ 
manent  funds  for  the  support  of  an  army,  if 
they  were  even  incautious  enough  to  be  will¬ 
ing  to  repose  in  it  so  improper  a  confidence. 
As  the  spirit  of  party,  in  different  degrees,  must 
be  expected  to  infect  all  political  bodies,  there 
will  be,  no  doubt,  persons  in  the  national  legis¬ 
lature  willing  enough  to  arraign  the  measures 
and  criminate  the  views  of  the  majority.  The 
provision  for  the  support  of  a  military  force 
will  always  be  a  favourable  topic  for  declama¬ 
tion.  As  often  as  the  question  comes  forward, 
the  public  attention  will  be  roused  and  at¬ 
tracted  to  the  subject  by  the  party  in  opposi¬ 
tion;  and  if  the  majority  should  be  really  dis¬ 
posed  to  exceed  the  proper  limits,  the  com¬ 
munity  will  be  warned  of  the  danger,  and  will 
have  an  opportunity  of  taking  measures  to 
guard  against  it.  Independent  of  parties  in  the 
national  legislature  itself,  as  often  as  the  pe¬ 
riod  of  discussion  arrived,  the  State  legisla¬ 
tures,  who  will  always  be  not  only  vigilant  but 
suspicious  and  jealous  guardians  of  the  rights 
of  the  citizens  against  encroachments  from  the 
federal  government,  will  constantly  have  their 
attention  awake  to  the  conduct  of  the  national 
rulers,  and  will  be  ready  enough,  if  anything 
improper  appears,  to  sound  the  alarm  to  the 
people,  and  not  only  to  be  the  voice,  but,  if 


THE  FEDERALIST 


94 

necessary,  the  arm  of  their  discontent. 

Schemes  to  subvert  the  liberties  of  a  great 
community  require  time  to  mature  them  for 
execution.  An  army,  so  large  as  seriously  to 
menace  those  liberties,  could  only  be  formed 
by  progressive  augmentations;  which  would 
suppose,  not  merely  a  temporary  combination 
between  the  legislature  and  executive,  but  a 
continued  conspiracy  for  a  series  of  time.  Is  it 
probable  that  such  a  combination  would  exist 
at  all?  Is  it  probable  that  it  would  be  perse¬ 
vered  in.  and  transmitted  along  through  all 
the  successive  variations  in  a  representative 
body,  which  biennial  elections  would  natu¬ 
rally  produce  in  both  houses?  Is  it  presumable 
that  every  man,  the  instant  he  took  his  seat  in 
the  national  Senate  or  House  of  Representa¬ 
tives,  would  commence  a  traitor  to  his  constit¬ 
uents  and  to  his  country?  Can  it  be  supposed 
that  there  would  not  be  found  one  man  dis¬ 
cerning  enough  to  detect  so  atrocious  a  con¬ 
spiracy,  or  bold  or  honest  enough  to  apprise 
his  constituents  of  their  danger?  If  such  pre¬ 
sumptions  can  fairly  be  made,  there  ought  at 
once  to  be  an  end  of  all  delegated  authority. 
The  people  should  resolve  to  recall  all  the 
powers  they  have  heretofore  parted  with  out 
of  their  own  hands,  and  to  divide  themselves 
into  as  many  States  as  there  are  counties,  in 
order  that  they  mas  be  able  to  manage  their 
own  concerns  in  person. 

If  such  suppositions  could  even  be  reason¬ 
ably  made,  still  the  concealment  of  the  design, 
for  any  duration,  would  be  impracticable.  It 
would  be  announced,  by  the  very  circumstance 
of  augmenting  the  army  to  so  great  an  extent 
in  time  of  profound  peace.  What  colourable 
reason  could  be  assigned,  in  a  country  so  situ¬ 
ated,  for  such  vast  augmentations  of  the  mili¬ 
tary  force?  It  is  impossible  that  the  people 
could  be  long  deceived;  and  the  destruction  of 
the  projet  t,  and  (if  theprojee  tors,  would  quickly 
follow  the  discovery. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  provision  which 
limits  the  appropriation  of  money  for  the  sup¬ 
port  of  an  army  to  the  period  of  two  years 
would  be  unavailing,  because  the  Fxecutive, 
when  mice  possessed  of  a  forte  large  enough  to 
awe  the  people  into  submission,  would  find  re 
sources  in  that  \er\  forte  sullicient  to  enable 
him  to  dispense  with  supplies  from  the  at  is  of 
the  legislature.  Hut  the  question  again  ret  urs, 
upon  what  pretent  e  could  he  be  put  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  a  force  of  that  magnitude  in  time  of 
prate?  If  we  suppose  it  to  base  been  c  react'd  in 
consequence  of  some  domestic  insurrection  or 


foreign  war,  then  it  becomes  a  case  not  within 
the  principles  of  the  objection;  fear  this  is  lev¬ 
elled  against  the  power  of  keeping  up  troops 
in  time  of  peace.  Few  persons  will  be  so  vision¬ 
ary  as  seriously  to  contend  that  military  forces 
ought  not  to  be  raised  to  quell  a  rebellion  or 
resist  an  invasion:  and  if  the  defence  of  the 
community  under  such  circumstances  should 
make  it  necessary  to  have  an  army  so  numer¬ 
ous  as  to  hazard  its  liberty,  this  is  one  of  those 
calamities  for  which  there  is  neither  preventa¬ 
tive  nor  cure.  It  cannot  be  provided  against 
by  any  possible  form  of  government;  it  might 
even  result  from  a  simple  league  offensive  and 
defensive,  if  it  should  ever  be  necessary  for  the 
confederates  or  allies  to  form  an  army  for  com¬ 
mon  defence. 

But  it  is  an  evil  infinitely  less  likely  to  attend 
us  in  a  united  than  in  a  disunited  state;  nay, 
it  may  be  safely  asserted  that  it  is  an  evil  alto¬ 
gether  unlikely  to  attend  us  in  the  latter  situa¬ 
tion.  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  a  possibility  that 
dangers  so  formidable  can  assail  the  whole  Un¬ 
ion  as  to  demand  a  force  considerable  enough 
to  place  our  liberties  in  the  least  jeopardy,  es- 
pcciallv  if  we  take  into  our  view  the  aid  to  be 
derived  from  the  militia,  which  ought  always 
to  be  counted  upon  as  a  valuable  and  power¬ 
ful  auxiliary.  But  in  a  state  of  disunion  (as  has 
been  fully  shown  in  another  place),  the  con¬ 
trary  of  this  supposition  would  become  not  only 
probable,  but  almost  unavoidable.  Publius 

Number  2J 

[HAMILTON] 

It  has  been  urged,  in  di Herein  shapes,  that  a 
Constitution  of  the  kind  proposed  by  the  con¬ 
vention  cannot  operate  without  t lie  aid  of  a 
military  force  to  execute  its  laws.  This,  how¬ 
ever.  like  most  other  things  that  have  been 
alleged  on  that  side,  rests  on  mere  general  as¬ 
sertion,  unsupported  by  any  precise  or  intel¬ 
ligible  designation  of  the  reasons  upon  which 
it  is  founded.  As  lar  as  1  have  been  able  to  di¬ 
vine  the  latent  meaning  of  the  objettors.  it 
seems  to  originate  in  a  presupposition  that  the 
people  will  be  disinclined  to  the  exert  ise  of 
federal  authority  in  any  matter  of  an  internal 
nature.  Waiving  any  exception  that  might  be 
taken  to  the  inat  curat  y  or  inexplit  it  ness  of  the 
distiutiion  between  iutern.il  and  external,  let 
us  inquire  what  ground  there  is  to  presuppose 
that  tlisint  filiation  in  the  people.  Unless  we 
presume  at  the  same  time  that  the  powers  of 
the  general  go\ eminent  will  be  worse  admin* 


NUMBER  27 


istered  than  those  of  the  State  government, 
there  seems  to  be  no  room  for  the  presumption 
of  ill  -will,  disaffection,  or  opposition  in  the 
people.  I  believe  it  may  be  laid  down  as  a  gen¬ 
eral  rule  that  their  confidence  in  and  obedi¬ 
ence  to  a  government  will  commonly  be  pro¬ 
portioned  to  the  goodness  or  badness  of  its 
administration.  It  must  be  admitted  that  there 
are  exceptions  to  this  rule;  but  these  excep¬ 
tions  depend  so  entirely  on  accidental  causes, 
that  they  cannot  be  considered  as  having  any 
relation  to  the  intrinsic  merits  or  demerits  of 
a  constitution.  These  can  only  be  judged  of  by 
general  principles  and  maxims. 

Various  reasons  have  been  suggested,  in  the 
course  of  these  papers,  to  induce  a  probability 
that  the  general  government  will  be  better  ad¬ 
ministered  than  the  particular  governments: 
the  principal  of  which  reasons  are  that  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  the  spheres  of  election  will  present 
a  greater  option,  or  latitude  of  choice,  to  the 
people:  that  through  the  medium  of  the  State 
legislatures— which  are  select  bodies  of  men,  and 
which  are  to  appoint  the  members  of  the  na¬ 
tional  Senate— there  is  reason  to  expect  that  this 
branch  will  generally  be  composed  with  pecul¬ 
iar  care  and  judgment;  that  these  circumstances 
promise  greater  knowledge  and  more  extensive 
information  in  the  national  councils,  and  that 
they  will  be  less  apt  to  be  tainted  by  the  spirit 
of  faction,  and  more  out  of  the  reach  of  those 
occasional  ill-humours,  or  temporary  prejudices 
and  propensities,  which,  in  smaller  societies, 
frequently  contaminate  the  public  councils,  be¬ 
get  injustice  and  oppression  of  a  part  of  the  com¬ 
munity,  and  engender  schemes  which,  though 
they  gratify  a  momentary  inclination  or  desire, 
terminate  in  general  distress,  dissatisfaction, 
and  disgust.  Several  additional  reasons  of  con¬ 
siderable  force,  to  fortify  that  probability,  will 
occur  when  we  come  to  survey,  with  a  more 
critical  eye,  the  interior  structure  of  the  edifice 
which  we  are  invited  to  erect.  It  will  be  suffi¬ 
cient  here  to  remark,  that  until  satisfactory  rea¬ 
sons  can  be  assigned  to  justify  an  opinion,  that 
the  federal  government  is  likely  to  be  adminis¬ 
tered  in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  it  odious 
or  contemptible  to  the  people,  there  can  be 
no  reasonable  foundation  for  the  supposition 
that  the  laws  of  the  Union  will  meet  with  any 
greater  obstruction  from  them,  or  will  stand 
in  need  of  any  other  methods  to  enforce  their 
execution,  than  the  laws  of  the  particular 
members. 

The  hope  of  impunity  is  a  strong  incitement 
to  sedition;  the  dread  of  punishment,  a  pro- 


portionably  strong  discouragement  to  it.  Will 
not  the  government  of  the  Union  which,  if  pos¬ 
sessed  of  a  due  degree  of  power,  can  call  to  its 
aid  the  collective  resources  of  the  whole  Con¬ 
federacy  be  more  likely  to  repress  the  former 
sentiment  and  to  inspire  the  latter ,  than  that 
of  a  single  State,  which  can  only  command  the 
resources  within  itself?  A  turbulent  faction  in 
a  State  may  easily  suppose  itself  able  to  con¬ 
tend  with  the  friends  to  the  government  in 
that  State;  but  it  can  hardly  be  so  infatuated 
as  to  imagine  itself  a  match  for  the  combined 
efforts  of  the  Union.  If  this  reflection  be  just, 
there  is  less  danger  of  resistance  from  irregular 
combinations  of  individuals  to  the  authority 
of  the  Confederacy  than  to  that  of  a  single 
member. 

I  will,  in  this  place,  hazard  an  observation, 
which  will  not  be  the  less  just  because  to  some 
it  may  appear  new;  which  is,  that  the  more  the 
operations  of  the  national  authority  are  inter¬ 
mingled  in  the  ordinary  exercise  of  govern¬ 
ment,  the  more  the  citizens  are  accustomed  to 
meet  with  it  in  the  common  occurrences  of  their 
political  life,  the  more  it  is  familiarised  to  their 
sight  and  to  their  feelings,  the  further  it  enters 
into  those  objects  which  touch  the  most  sensi¬ 
ble  chords  and  put  in  motion  the  most  active 
springs  of  the  human  heart,  the  greater  will  be 
the  probability  that  it  will  conciliate  the  re¬ 
spect  and  attachment  of  the  community.  Man 
is  very  much  a  creature  of  habit.  A  thing  that 
rarely  strikes  his  senses  will  generally  have  but 
little  influence  upon  his  mind.  A  government 
continually  at  a  distance  and  out  of  sight  can 
hardly  be  expected  to  interest  the  sensations 
of  the  people.  The  inference  is,  that  the  au¬ 
thority  of  the  Union,  and  the  affections  of  the 
citizens  towards  it,  will  be  strengthened,  rather 
than  weakened,  by  its  extension  to  what  are 
called  matters  of  internal  concern;  and  will 
have  less  occasion  to  recur  to  force,  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  familiarity  and  comprehensiveness 
of  its  agency.  The  more  it  circulates  through 
those  channels  and  currents  in  which  the  pas¬ 
sions  of  mankind  naturally  flow,  the  less  will  it 
require  the  aid  of  the  violent  and  perilous  ex¬ 
pedients  of  compulsion. 

One  thing,  at  all  events,  must  be  evident, 
that  a  government  like  the  one  proposed  would 
bid  much  fairer  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  using 
force,  than  that  species  of  league  contended 
for  by  most  of  its  opponents;  the  authority  of 
which  should  only  operate  upon  the  States  in 
their  political  or  collective  capacities.  It  ha» 
been  shown  that  in  such  a  Confederacy  there 


96  THE  FEDERALIST 


can  be  no  sanction  for  the  laws  but  force;  that 
frequent  delinquencies  in  the  members  are 
the  natural  offspring  of  the  very  frame  of  the 
government;  and  that  as  often  as  these  happen, 
they  can  only  be  redressed,  if  at  all,  by  war  and 
violence. 

The  plan  reported  by  the  convention,  by  ex¬ 
tending  the  authority  of  the  federal  head  to 
the  individual  citizens  of  the  several  States,  will 
enable  the  government  to  employ  the  ordinary 
magistracy  of  each,  in  the  execution  of  its  laws. 
It  is  easy  to  perceive  that  this  will  tend  to  de¬ 
stroy.  in  the  common  apprehension,  all  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  sources  from  which  they 
might  proceed;  and  will  give  the  federal  gov¬ 
ernment  the  same  advantage  for  securing  a  due 
obedience  to  its  authority  which  is  enjoyed  by 
the  government  of  eacli  State,  in  addition  to 
the  influence  on  public  opinion  which  will  re¬ 
sult  from  the  important  consideration  of  its 
having  power  to  call  to  its  assistance  and  sup¬ 
port  the  resources  of  the  whole  Union.  It  mer¬ 
its  particular  attention  in  this  place,  that  the 
laws  of  the  Confederacy,  as  to  the  enumerated 
and  legitimate  objects  of  its  jurisdiction,  will 
become  the  supreme  law  of  the  land;  to  the 
observance  of  which  all  officers,  legislative,  ex¬ 
ecutive,  and  judicial,  in  each  State,  will  be 
bound  by  the  sanctity  of  an  oath.  Thus  the  leg¬ 
islatures,  courts,  and  magistrates, of  the  respec¬ 
tive  members,  will  be  incorporated  into  the 
operations  of  the  national  government  as  far 
as  its  just  and  constitutional  authority  extends; 
and  will  be  rendered  auxiliary  to  the  enforce¬ 
ment  of  its  laws.1  Any  man  who  will  pursue,  by 
hisown  reflections,  the  consequences  of  this  sit¬ 
uation,  will  perceive  that  there  is  good  ground 
to  calculate  upon  a  regular  and  peaceable  ex¬ 
ecution  of  the  laws  of  the  Union,  if  its  powers 
are  administered  with  a  common  share  of  pru¬ 
dence.  If  we  will  arbitrarily  suppose  the  con¬ 
trary,  we  may  deduce  any  inferences  we  please 
from  the  supposition;  for  it  is  certainly  pos¬ 
sible,  by  an  injudicious  exerc isc  of  the  authori¬ 
ties  of  the  best  government  that  ever  was,  or 
ever  can  be  instituted,  to  provoke  and  precipi¬ 
tate  the  people  into  the  wildest  excesses.  But 
though  the  adversaries  of  the  proposed  Consti¬ 
tution  should  presume  that  the  national  rulers 
would  be  insensible  to  the  motives  of  public 
good,  or  to  the  obligations  of  duty,  I  would 
still  ask  them  how  the  interests  of  ambition,  or 

1  1  he  sophist! \  which  has  been  employed,  to 
show  that  this  will  lend  to  tin*  destruction  of  the 
State  governments,  will,  in  its  pinper  plate,  be 
fulls  detected,— !*i  hi  n  s 


the  views  of  encroachment,  can  be  promoted 
by  such  a  conduct?  Publius 

Number  28 

[HAMILTON] 

That  there  may  happen  cases  in  which  the 
national  government  may  be  necessitated  to 
resort  to  force,  cannot  be  denied.  Our  own  ex¬ 
perience  has  corroborated  the  lessons  taught 
by  the  examples  of  other  nations;  that  emer¬ 
gencies  of  this  sort  will  sometimes  arise  in  all 
societies,  however  constituted;  that  seditions 
and  insurrections  are,  unhappily,  maladies  as 
inseparable  from  the  body  politic  as  tumours 
and  eruptions  from  the  natural  body;  that  the 
idea  of  governing  at  all  times  bv  the  simple 
force  of  law  (which  we  have  been  told  is  the 
only  admissible  principle  of  republican  gov¬ 
ernment)  has  no  place  but  in  the  reveries  of 
those  political  doctors  whose  sagacity  dis¬ 
dains  the  admonitions  of  experimental  in¬ 
struction. 

Should  such  emergenciesat anytime  happen 
under  the  national  government,  there  could 
be  no  remedy  but  force.  The  means  to  be  em¬ 
ployed  must  be  proportioned  to  the  extent  of 
the  mischief.  If  it  should  be  a  slight  commo¬ 
tion  in  a  small  part  of  a  State,  the  militia  of 
the  residue  would  be  adequate  to  its  suppres¬ 
sion!  and  the  natural  presumption  is  that  they 
would  be  ready  to  do  their  duty.  An  insurrec¬ 
tion,  whatever  may  be  its  immediate  cause, 
eventually  endangers  ail  government.  Regard 
to  the  public  peace,  if  not  to  the  rights  of  the 
Union,  would  engage  the  citizens  to  whom  the 
contagion  had  not  communicated  itself  to  op¬ 
pose  the  insurgents;  and  if  the  general  govern¬ 
ment  should  be  found  in  practice  conducive  to 
the  prosperity  and  felicity  of  the  people,  it 
were  irrational  to  believe  that  thev  would  be 
disinclined  to  its  support. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  insurrection  should 
pervade  a  whole  State,  or  a  principal  part  of  it, 
the  employment  of  a  different  kind  of  force 
might  become  unavoidable.  It  appears  that 
Massachusetts  found  it  necessary  to  raise  troops 
for  repressing  the  disorders  within  that  State; 
that  Pennsylvania,  from  the  mere  apprehen¬ 
sion  of  commotions  among  a  part  of  her  citi¬ 
zens,  has  thought  proper  to  have  recourse  to 
the  same  measure.  Suppose  the  State  of  New 
York  had  been  inclined  to  re-establish  her  lost 
jurisdiction  over  the  inhabitants  of  Vermont, 
could  she  have  hoped  for  success  in  such  an 


NUMBER  28 


enterprise  from  the  efforts  of  the  militia  alone? 
Would  she  not  have  been  compelled  to  raise 
and  to  maintain  a  more  regular  force  for  the 
execution  of  her  design?  If  it  must  then  be  ad¬ 
mitted  that  the  necessity  of  recurring  to  a  force 
different  from  the  militia,  in  cases  of  this  ex¬ 
traordinary  nature,  is  applicable  to  the  State 
governments  themselves,  why  should  the  pos¬ 
sibility  that  the  national  government  might  be 
under  a  like  necessity,  in  similar  extremities,  be 
made  an  objection  to  its  existence?  Is  it  not 
surprising  that  men  who  declare  an  attach¬ 
ment  to  the  Union  in  the  abstract,  should  urge 
as  an  objection  to  the  proposed  Constitution 
what  applies  with  tenfold  weight  to  the  plan 
for  which  they  contend;  and  what,  as  far  as  it 
has  any  foundation  in  truth,  is  an  inevitable 
consequence  of  civil  society  upon  an  enlarged 
scale?  Who  would  not  prefer  that  possibility 
to  the  unceasing  agitations  and  frequent  rev¬ 
olutions  which  are  the  continual  scourges  of 
petty  republics? 

Let  us  pursue  this  examination  in  another 
light.  Suppose,  in  lieu  of  one  general  system, 
two,  or  three,  or  even  four  Confederacies  were 
to  be  formed,  would  not  the  same  difficulty  op¬ 
pose  itself  to  the  operations  of  either  of  these 
Confederacies?  Would  not  each  of  them  be  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  same  casualties;  and  when  these 
happened,  be  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the 
same  expedients  for  upholding  its  authority 
which  are  objected  to  in  a  government  for  all 
the  States?  Would  the  militia,  in  this  supposi¬ 
tion,  be  more  ready  or  more  able  to  support 
the  federal  authority  than  in  the  case  of  a  gen¬ 
eral  union?  All  candid  and  intelligent  men 
must,  upon  due  consideration,  acknowledge 
that  the  principle  of  the  objection  is  equally 
applicable  to  either  of  the  two  cases;  and  that 
whether  we  have  one  government  for  all  the 
States,  or  different  governments  for  different 
parcels  of  them,  or  even  if  there  should  be  an 
entire  separation  of  the  States,1  there  might 
sometimes  be  a  necessity  to  make  use  of  a  force 
constituted  differently  from  the  militia,  to  pre¬ 
serve  the  peace  of  the  community  and  to  main¬ 
tain  the  just  authority  of  the  laws  against  those 
violent  invasions  of  them  which  amount  to  in¬ 
surrections  and  rebellions. 

Independent  of  all  other  reasonings  upon 
the  subject,  it  is  a  full  answer  to  those  who  re¬ 
quire  a  more  peremptory  provision  against  mil¬ 
itary  establishments  in  time  of  peace,  to  say 
that  the  whole  power  of  the  proposed  govern- 

]In  the  revised  text,  “or  if  there  should  be  as 
many  unconnected  governments  as  there  are  States.” 


97 

ment  is  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the  representa¬ 
tives  of  the  people.  This  is  the  essential,  and, 
after  all,  only  efficacious  security  for  the  rights 
and  privileges  of  the  people,  which  is  attain¬ 
able  in  civil  society.2 

If  the  representatives  of  the  people  betray 
their  constituents,  there  is  then  no  resource 
left  but  in  the  exertion  of  that  original  right  of 
self-defence  which  is  paramount  to  all  positive 
forms  of  government,  and  which  against  the 
usurpations  of  the  national  rulers,  may  be  ex¬ 
erted  with  infinitely  better  prospect  of  success 
thanagainst  thoseof  therulersof  an  individual 
State.  In  a  single  State,  if  the  persons  intrusted 
with  supreme  power  become  usurpers,  the  dif¬ 
ferent  parcels,  subdivisions,  or  districts  of  which 
it  consists,  having  no  distinct  government  in 
each,  can  take  no  regular  measures  for  defence. 
The  citizens  must  rush  tumultuously  to  arms, 
without  concert,  without  system,  without  re¬ 
source;  except  in  their  courage  and  despair. 
The  usurpers,  clothed  with  the  forms  of  legal 
authority,  can  too  often  crush  the  opposition 
in  embryo.  The  smaller  the  extent  of  the  terri¬ 
tory,  the  more  difficult  will  it  be  for  the  people 
to  form  a  regular  or  systematic  plan  of  opposi¬ 
tion,  and  the  more  easy  will  it  be  to  defeat  their 
early  efforts.  Intelligence  can  be  more  speedih 
obtained  of  their  preparations  and  movements, 
and  the  military  force  in  the  possession  of  the 
usurpers  can  be  more  rapidly  directed  against 
the  part  where  the  opposition  has  begun.  In 
this  situation  there  must  be  a  peculiar  coinci 
dence  of  circumstances  to  insure  success  to  the 
popular  resistance. 

The  obstacles  to  usurpation  and  the  facili¬ 
ties  of  resistance  increase  with  the  increased 
extent  of  the  state,  provided  the  citizens  un¬ 
derstand  their  rights  and  are  disposed  to  de¬ 
fend  them.  The  natural  strength  of  the  people 
in  a  large  community,  in  proportion  to  the  ar¬ 
tificial  strength  of  the  government,  is  greater 
than  in  a  small,  and  of  course  more  competent 
to  a  struggle  with  the  attempts  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  to  establish  a  tyranny.  But  in  a  confeder¬ 
acy  the  people,  without  exaggeration,  may  be 
said  to  be  entirely  the  masters  of  their  own  fate. 
Power  being  almost  always  the  rival  of  power, 
the  general  government  will  at  all  times  stand 
ready  to  check  the  usurpations  of  the  state  gov¬ 
ernments,  and  these  will  have  the  same  disposi¬ 
tion  towards  the  general  government.  The  peo¬ 
ple,  by  throwing  themselves  into  either  scale, 
will  infallibly  make  it  preponderate.  If  their 

3 Its  full  efficacy  will  be  examined  hereafter.— 
Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


rights  arc  invaded  by  cither,  they  can  make  use 
of  the  other  as  the  instrument  of  redress.  How 
wise  will  it  be  in  them  by  cherishing  the  union 
to  preserve  to  themselves  an  advantage  which 
can  never  be  too  highly  prized! 

It  may  safely  be  received  as  an  axiom  in  our 
political  system,  that  the  State  governments 
will,  in  all  possible  contingencies,  afford  com¬ 
plete  security  against  invasions  of  the  public  lib¬ 
erty  by  the  national  authority.  Projects  of  usur¬ 
pation  cannot  be  masked  under  pretences  so 
likely  to  escape  the  penetration  of  select  bod¬ 
ies  of  men.  as  of  the  people  at  large.  The  legis¬ 
latures  will  have  better  means  of  information. 
They  can  discover  the  danger  at  a  distance;  and 
possessing  all  the  organs  of  civil  power  and  the 
confidence  of  the  people,  they  can  at  once  adopt 
a  regular  plan  of  opposition,  in  which  they 
can  combine  all  the  resources  of  the  commu¬ 
nity.  They  can  readily  communicate  with  each 
other  in  the  different  States,  and  unite  their 
common  forces  for  the  protection  of  their  com¬ 
mon  liberty. 

I  he  great  extent  of  the  country  is  a  further 
security.  We  have  already  experienced  its  util¬ 
ity  against  the  attacks  of  a  foreign  power.  And 
it  would  have  precisely  the  same  elfect  against 
the  enterprises  of  ambitious  rulers  in  the  na¬ 
tional  councils.  If  the  federal  army  should  be 
able  to  quell  the  resistance  of  one  State,  the 
distant  States  would  have  it  in  their  power  to 
make  head  with  fresh  forces.  The  advantages 
obtained  in  one  place  must  be  abandoned  to 
subdue  the  opposition  in  others;  and  the  mo¬ 
ment  the  part  which  had  been  reduced  to  sub¬ 
mission  was  left  to  itself,  its  efforts  would  be 
renewed,  and  its  resistance  revive. 

We  should  recollect  that  the  extent  of  the 
military  force  must,  at  all  events,  be  regulated 
by  the  resources  of  the  country.  For  a  long  time 
to  come,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  maintain  a 
large  army;  and  as  the  means  of  doing  this  in¬ 
crease*.  the  population  and  natural  strength  of 
the  community  will  proport ionably  increase. 
When  will  the  time  arrive  that  the  federal  gov¬ 
ernment  can  raise  and  maintain  an  army  capa¬ 
ble  of  ercc  ting  a  despotism  over  the  great  body 
of  the  people  of  an  immense  empire,  who  are 
in  a  situation,  through  the  medium  of  their 
State  governments,  to  take*  measures  for  their 
ouii  defence,  with  all  the*  celerity,  regularity, 
and  system  of  independent  nations?  The  ap¬ 
prehension  may  be  consideiccl  as  a  disease,  for 
which  there  can  be  found  no  cure  in  the  re¬ 
sources  of  argument  and  reasoning. 

Punt  n  s 


Number  2g' 

[HAMILTON] 

The  power  of  regulating  the  militia,  and  of 
commanding  its  services  in  times  of  insurrec¬ 
tion  and  invasion  are  natural  incidents  to  the 
duties  of  superintending  the  common  defence, 
and  of  watching  over  the  internal  peace  of  the 
Confederacy. 

It  requires  no  skill  in  the  science  of  war  to 
discern  that  uniformity  in  theorganisation  and 
discipline  of  the  militia  would  be  attended 
with  the  most  beneficial  effects,  whenever  they 
were  called  into  service  for  the  public  defence. 
It  would  enable  them  to  discharge  the  duties 
of  the  camp  and  of  the  field  with  mutual  intel¬ 
ligence  and  concert— an  advantage  of  peculiar 
moment  in  the  operations  of  an  army;  and  it 
would  fit  them  much  sooner  to  acquire  the  de¬ 
gree  of  proficiency  in  military  functions  which 
would  be  essential  to  their  usefulness.  This  de¬ 
sirable  uniformity  can  only  be  accomplished 
by  confiding  the  regulation  of  the  militia  to 
the  direction  of  the  national  authority.  It  is, 
therefore,  with  the  most  evident  propriety,  that 
the  plan  of  the  convention  proposes  to  em¬ 
power  the  Union  “to  provide  for  organising, 
arming,  and  disciplining  the  militia,  and  for 
governing  such  part  of  them  as  may  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  service  of  the  United  States. 
reservi  Jig  to  the  States  res  pect  i  vely  t  h  e  a  p  po  int- 
ment  of  the  officers,  and  the  authority  of  train¬ 
ing  the  tnilitia  according  to  the  discipline  pre¬ 
scribed  by  Congress .” 

Of  the  different  grounds  which  have  been 
taken  in  opposition  to  the  plan  of  the  conven¬ 
tion,  there  is  none  that  was  so  little  to  have 
been  expected,  or  is  so  untenable  in  itself,  as 
the  one  from  which  this  particular  provision 
has  been  attacked.  If  a  well-regulated  militia 
be  the  most  natural  defence  of  a  free  country, 
it  ought  certainly  to  be  under  the  regulation 
and  at  the  disposal  of  that  body  which  is  con¬ 
stituted  the  guardian  of  the  national  security. 
1 1  standing  armies  are  dangerous  to  liberty,  an 
ellic ac  ions  power  ov  er  the  militia,  in  the  body 
to  whose  care  the  protection  of  the  State  is 
committed,  ought,  as  far  as  possible,  to  take 
away  the  inducement  and  the  pretext  to  such 
unfriendly  institutions.  11  the  lederal  govern- 

’  I  his  css;iv  appeared  as  Number  4Sr>  •  die  orig 
in. (I  publication  in  die  newspapers,  and  is  thru*- 
fore  here  misplaced  (’homologically.  In  tin*  lust 
edition  of  )7SS.  howevei .  it  is  piinied  as  Num¬ 
ber  which  gives  it  iis  propel  place  aaoiding 
to  subject,  and  for  this  reason  the  oidei  of  the 
li rst  edition  has  been  followed. 


NUMBER  29 


ment  can  command  the  aid  of  the  militia  in 
those  emergencies  which  call  for  the  military 
arm  in  support  of  the  civil  magistrate,  it  can  the 
better  dispense  with  the  employment  of  a  dif¬ 
ferent  kind  of  force.  If  it  cannot  avail  itself  of 
the  former,  it  will  be  obliged  to  recur  to  the  lat¬ 
ter.  To  render  an  army  unnecessary,  will  be  a 
more  certain  method  of  preventing  its  existence 
than  a  thousand  prohibitions  upon  paper. 

In  order  to  cast  an  odium  upon  the  power 
of  calling  forth  the  militia  to  execute  the  laws 
of  the  Union,  it  has  been  remarked  that  there 
is  nowhere  any  provision  in  the  proposed  Con¬ 
stitution  for  calling  out  the  posse  comitatus 
to  assist  the  magistrate  in  the  execution  of  his 
duty;  whence  it  has  been  inferred  that  military 
force  was  intended  to  be  his  only  auxiliary. 
There  is  a  striking  incoherence  in  the  objec¬ 
tions  which  have  appeared,  and  sometimes  even 
from  the  same  quarter,  not  much  calculated  to 
inspire  a  very  favourable  opinion  of  the  sin¬ 
cerity  or  fair  dealing  of  their  authors.  The  same 
persons  who  tell  us  in  one  breath  that  the  pow¬ 
ers  of  the  federal  government  will  be  despotic 
and  unlimited,  inform  us  in  the  next  that  it 
has  not  authority  sufficient  even  to  call  out  the 
posse  comitatus.  The  latter,  fortunately,  is  as 
much  short  of  the  truth  as  the  former  exceeds 
it.  It  would  be  as  absurd  to  doubt  that  a  right 
to  pass  all  laws  necessary  and  proper  to  execute 
its  declared  powers,  would  include  that  of  re¬ 
quiring  the  assistance  of  the  citizens  to  the  of¬ 
ficers  who  may  be  intrusted  with  the  execution 
of  those  laws,  as  it  would  be  to  believe  that  a 
right  to  enact  laws  necessary  and  proper  for 
the  imposition  and  collection  of  taxes  would 
involve  that  of  varying  the  rules  of  descent 
and  of  the  alienation  of  landed  property,  or  of 
abolishing  the  trial  by  jury  in  cases  relating  to 
it.  It  being  therefore  evident  that  the  supposi¬ 
tion  of  a  want  of  power  to  require  the  aid  of 
the  posse  comitatus  is  entirely  destitute  of  col¬ 
our, itwill  followthat  the  conclusion  which  has 
been  drawn  from  it,  in  its  application  to  the 
authority  of  the  federal  government  over  the 
militia,  is  as  uncandid  as  it  is  illogical.  What 
reason  could  there  be  to  infer  that  force  was 
intended  to  be  the  sole  instrument  of  author¬ 
ity,  merely  because  there  is  a  power  to  make 
use  of  it  when  necessary?  What  shall  we  think 
of  the  motives  which  could  induce  men  of 
sense  to  reason  in  this  manner?  How  shall  we 
prevent  a  conflict  between  charity  and  judg¬ 
ment? 

By  a  curious  refinement  upon  the  spirit  of 
republican  jealousy,  we  are  even  taught  to  ap¬ 


prehend  danger  from  the  militia  itself,  in  the 
hands  of  the  federal  government.lt  is  observed 
that  select  corps  may  be  formed,  composed  of 
the  young  and  ardent,  who  may  be  rendered 
subservient  to  the  views  of  arbitrary  power. 
What  plan  for  the  regulation  of  the  militia  may 
be  pursued  by  the  national  government  is  im¬ 
possible  to  be  foreseen.  But  so  far  from  view¬ 
ing  the  matter  in  the  same  light  with  those 
who  object  to  select  corps  as  dangerous,  were 
the  Constitution  ratified,  and  were  I  to  deliver 
my  sentiments  to  a  member  of  the  federal  leg¬ 
islature  from  the  State  on  the  subject  of  a  mili¬ 
tia  establishment,  I  should  hold  to  him,  in  sub¬ 
stance,  the  following  discourse: 

“The  project  of  disciplining  all  the  militia 
of  the  United  States  is  as  futile  as  it  would  be 
injurious,  if  it  were  capable  of  being  carried 
into  execution.  A  tolerable  expertness  in  mili¬ 
tary  movements  is  a  business  that  requires  time 
and  practice.  It  is  not  a  day,  or  even  a  week, 
that  will  suffice  for  the  attainment  of  it.  To 
oblige  the  great  body  of  the  yeomanry,  and  of 
the  other  classes  of  the  citizens,  to  be  under 
arms  for  the  purpose  of  going  through  military 
exercises  and  evolutions,  as  often  as  might  be 
necessary  to  acquire  the  degree  of  perfection 
which  would  entitle  them  to  the  character  of  a 
well-regulated  militia,  would  be  a  real  griev¬ 
ance  to  the  people,  and  a  serious  public  incon¬ 
venience  and  loss.  It  would  form  an  annual 
deduction  from  the  productive  labour  of  the 
country,  to  an  amount  which, calculating  upon 
the  present  numbers  of  the  people,  would  not 
fall  far  short  of  the  whole  expense  of  the  civil 
establishments  of  all  the  States.  To  attempt  a 
thing  which  would  abridge  the  mass  of  labour 
and  industry  to  so  considerable  an  extent,  would 
be  unwise:  and  the  experiment,  if  made,  could 
not  succeed,  because  it  would  not  long  be  en¬ 
dured.  Little  more  can  reasonably  be  aimed  at, 
with  respect  to  the  people  at  large,  than  to 
have  them  properly  armed  and  equipped;  and 
in  order  to  see  that  this  be  not  neglected,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  assemble  them  once  or  twice  in 
the  course  of  a  year. 

“But  though  the  scheme  of  disciplining  the 
whole  nation  must  be  abandoned  as  mischie¬ 
vous  or  impracticable;  yet  it  is  a  matter  of  the 
utmost  importance  that  a  well-digested  plan 
should,  as  soon  as  possible,  be  adopted  for  the 
proper  establishment  of  the  militia.  The  at¬ 
tention  of  the  government  ought  particularly 
to  be  directed  to  the  formation  of  a  select  corps 
of  moderate  extent,  upon  such  principles  as 
will  really  fit  them  for  service  in  case  of  need. 


THE  FEDERAL1S  7 


By  thus  circumscribing  the  plan,  it  will  be  pos¬ 
sible  to  have  an  excellent  body  of  well-trained 
militia  ready  to  take  the  field  whenever  the 
defence  of  the  State  shall  require  it.  This  will 
not  only  lessen  the  call  for  military  establish¬ 
ments,  but  if  circumstances  should  at  any  time 
oblige  the  government  to  form  an  army  of  any 
magnitude,  that  army  can  never  be  formidable 
to  the  liberties  of  the  people  while  there  is  a 
large  body  of  citizens,  little,  if  at  all,  inferior 
to  them  in  discipline  and  the  use  of  arms,  who 
stand  ready  to  defend  their  own  rights  and 
those  of  their  fellow-citizens.  This  appears  to 
me  the  only  substitute  that  can  be  devised  for 
a  standing  army,  and  the  best  possible  security 
against  it,  if  it  should  exist.” 

Thus  differently  from  the  adversaries  of  the 
proposed  Constitution  should  I  reason  on  the 
same  subject,  deducing  arguments  of  safety 
from  the  very  sources  which  they  represent  as 
fraught  with  danger  and  perdition.  But  how 
the  national  legislature  may  reason  on  the  point 
is  a  thing  which  neither  they  nor  I  can  foresee. 

There  is  something  so  far-fetched  and  so  ex¬ 
travagant  in  the  idea  of  danger  to  liberty  from 
the  militia,  that  one  is  at  a  loss  whether  to  treat 
it  with  gravity  or  with  raillery:  whether  to  con¬ 
sider  it  as  a  mere  trial  of  skill,  like  the  para¬ 
doxes  of  rhetoricians;  as  a  disingenuous  arti¬ 
fice  to  instil  prejudices  at  any  price;  or  as  the 
scriousoffspringof  political  fanaticism.  Where, 
in  the  name  of  common  sense,  arc  our  fears  to 
end  if  we  may  not  trust  our  sons,  our  brothers, 
our  neighbours,  our  fellow-citizens?  What  shad¬ 
ow  of  danger  can  there  be  from  men  who  are 
daily  mingling  with  the  rest  of  their  country¬ 
men,  and  who  participate  with  them  in  the 
same  feelings,  sentiments,  ha  bits,  and  interests? 
What  reasonable  cause  of  apprehension  can 
be  inferred  from  a  power  in  the  Union  to  pre- 
si  ribe  regulations  for  the  militia,  and  to  com¬ 
mand  its  services  when  necessary,  while  the 
particular  States  are  to  have  the  sole  and  ex¬ 
clusive  appointment  of  the  officers?  If  it  were 
possible  seriously  to  indulge  a  jealousy  of  the 
militia  upon  any  conceivable  establishment  un¬ 
der  the  federal  government,  the  circumstance 
of  the  officers  being  in  the  appointment  of  the 
States  ought  at  once  to  extinguish  it.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  this  circumstance  will  al¬ 
ways  secure  to  them  a  preponderating  infill- 
cm  e  over  the  militia. 

In  reading  maiiv  of  the  publications  against 
the  Constitution,  a  man  is  apt  to  imagine  that 
he  is  perusing  some  ill-written  talc*  or  romance, 
which,  instead  of  natural  and  agreeable  im¬ 


ages,  exhibits  to  the  mind  nothing  but  fright¬ 
ful  and  distorted  shapes— 

Gorgons,  hydras,  and  chuneras  dire: 

discolouring  and  disfiguring  whatever  it  repre¬ 
sents,  and  transforming  everything  it  touches 
into  a  monster. 

A  sample  of  this  is  to  be  observed  in  the  ex¬ 
aggerated  and  improbable  suggestions  which 
have  taken  place  respecting  the  power  of  call¬ 
ing  for  the  services  of  the  militia.  That  of  New 
Hampshire  is  to  be  marched  to  Georgia,  of 
Georgia  to  New  Hampshire,  of  New  York  to 
Kentucky,  and  of  Kentucky  to  Lake  Champlain. 
Nay,  the  debts  due  to  the  French  and  Dutch 
are  to  be  paid  in  militiamen  instead  of  louis 
d'ors  and  ducats.  At  one  moment  there  is  to  be 
a  large  army  to  lay  prostrate  the  liberties  of  the 
people;  at  another  moment  the  militia  of  Vir¬ 
ginia  are  to  be  dragged  from  their  homes  five 
or  six  hundred  miles  to  tame  the  republican 
contumacy  of  Massachusetts;  and  that  of  Mas¬ 
sachusetts  is  to  be  transported  an  equal  dis¬ 
tance  to  subdue  the  refractory  haughtiness  of 
the  aristocratic  Virginians.  Do  the  persons  who 
rave  at  this  rate  imagine  that  their  art  or  their 
eloquence  can  impose  any  conceits  or  absurdi¬ 
ties  upon  the  people  of  America  for  infallible 
truths? 

If  there  should  be  an  army  to  be  made  use 
of  as  the  engine  of  despotism,  what  need  of  the 
militia?  If  there  should  be  no  army,  whither 
would  the  militia,  irritated  by  being  called  up¬ 
on  to  undertake  a  distant  and  hopeless  expedi¬ 
tion  for  the  purpose  of  riveting  the  chains  of 
slavery  upon  a  part  of  their  countrymen,  direct 
their  course,  but  to  the  seat  of  the  tyrants,  who 
had  meditated  so  foolish  as  well  as  so  wicked  a 
project,  to  crush  them  in  their  imagined  in* 
trcnchments  of  power,  and  to  make  them  an 
example  of  the  just  vengeance  of  an  abused 
and  incensed  people?  Is  this  the  way  in  which 
usurpers  stride  to  dominion  over  a  numerous 
and  enlightened  nation?  Do  they  begin  by  ex¬ 
citing  the  detestation  of  the  very  instruments 
of  their  intended  usurpations?  Do  they  usually 
commence  their  career  by  wanton  and  disgust 
ful  acts  ol  power,  calculated  to  answer  no  end. 
but  to  draw  upon  themselves  universal  hatred 
and  execration?  Arc  suppositions  of  this  sort 
t he  sober  admonitions  of  discerning  patriots 
to  a  discerning  people?  Or  arc  they  the  inflam¬ 
matory  ravings  of  incendiaries  or  distempered 
enthusiasts?  If  we  were  even  to  suppose  the  na¬ 
tional  rulers  actuated  by  the  most  ungovern¬ 
able  ambition,  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that 


101 


NUMBER  30 


they  would  employ  such  preposterous  means 
to  accomplish  their  designs. 

In  times  of  insurrection,  or  invasion,  it  would 
be  natural  and  proper  that  the  militia  of  a 
neighbouring  State  should  be  marched  into 
another,  to  resist  a  common  enemy,  or  to 
guard  the  republic  against  the  violence  of  fac¬ 
tion  or  sedition.  This  was  frequently  the  case, 
in  respect  to  the  first  object,  in  the  course  of 
the  late  war;  and  this  mutual  succour  is,  indeed, 
a  principal  end  of  our  political  association.  If 
the  power  of  affording  it  be  placed  under  the 
direction  of  the  Union,  there  will  be  no  dan¬ 
ger  of  a  supine  and  listless  inattention  to  the 
dangers  of  a  neighbour,  till  its  near  approach 
had  superadded  the  incitements  of  self-preser¬ 
vation  to  the  too  feeble  impulses  of  duty  and 
sympathy.  Publius 

Number  jo 

[HAMILTON] 

It  has  been  already  observed  that  the  federal 
government  ought  to  possess  the  power  of  pro¬ 
viding  for  the  support  of  the  national  forces; 
in  which  proposition  was  intended  to  be  in¬ 
cluded  the  expense  of  raising  troops,  of  build- 
ingand  equippingfleets,  andaliother  expenses 
in  any  wise  connected  with  military  arrange¬ 
ments  and  operations.  But  these  are  not  the 
only  objects  to  which  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Union,  in  respect  to  revenue,  must  necessarily 
be  empowered  to  extend.  It  must  embrace  a 
provision  for  the  support  of  the  national  civil 
list;  for  the  payment  of  the  national  debts  con¬ 
tracted,  or  that  may  be  contracted:  and,  in 
general,  for  all  those  matters  which  will  call 
for  disbursements  out  of  the  national  treasury. 
The  conclusion  is,  that  there  must  be  inter¬ 
woven.  in  the  frame  of  the  government,  a  gen¬ 
eral  power  of  taxation,  in  one  shapeor  another. 

Money  is,  with  propriety,  considered  as  the 
vital  principle  of  the  body  politic;  as  that  which 
sustains  its  life  and  motion,  and  enables  it  to 
perform  its  most  essential  functions.  A  com¬ 
plete  power,  therefore,  to  procure  a  regular  and 
adequate  supply  of  it,  as  far  as  the  resources 
of  the  community  will  permit,  may  be  regarded 
as  an  indispensable  ingredient  in  every  con¬ 
stitution.  From  a  deficiency  in  this  particular, 
one  of  two  evils  must  ensue;  either  the  people 
must  be  subjected  to  continual  plunder,  as  a 
substitute  for  a  more  eligible  mode  of  supply¬ 
ing  the  public  wants,  or  the  government  must 
sink  into  a  fatal  atrophy,  and,  in  a  short  course 
of  time,  perish. 


In  the  Ottoman  or  Turkish  empire,  the  sov¬ 
ereign,  though  in  other  respects  absolute  mas¬ 
ter  of  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  his  subjects,  has 
no  right  to  impose  a  new  tax.  The  consequence 
is  that  he  permits  the  bashaws  or  governors  of 
provinces  to  pillage  the  people  without  mercy; 
and,  in  turn,  squeezes  out  of  them  the  sums  of 
which  he  stands  in  need,  to  satisfy  his  own  ex¬ 
igencies  and  those  of  the  state.  In  America, 
from  a  like  cause,  the  government  of  the  Un¬ 
ion  has  gradually  dwindled  into  a  state  of  de¬ 
cay,  approaching  nearly  to  annihilation.  Who 
can  doubt  that  the  happiness  of  the  people  in 
both  countries  would  be  promoted  by  compe¬ 
tent  authorities  in  the  proper  hands,  to  pro¬ 
vide  the  revenues  which  the  necessities  of  the 
public  might  require? 

The  present  Confederation,  feeble  as  it  is, 
intended  to  repose  in  the  United  States  an  un¬ 
limited  power  of  providing  for  the  pecuniary 
wants  of  the  Union.  But  proceeding  upon  an 
erroneous  principle,  it  has  been  done  in  such  a 
manner  as  entirely  to  have  frustrated  the  in¬ 
tention.  Congress,  by  the  articles  which  com¬ 
pose  that  compact  (as  has  already  been  stated), 
are  authorised  to  ascertain  and  call  for  any 
sums  of  money  necessary,  in  their  judgment, 
to  the  service  of  the  United  States;  and  their 
requisitions,  if  conformable  to  the  rule  of  ap¬ 
portionment,  are  in  every  constitutional  sense 
obligatory  upon  the  States.  These  have  no  right 
to  question  the  propriety  of  the  demand;  no 
discretion  beyond  that  of  devising  the  ways 
and  means  of  furnishing  the  sums  demanded. 
But  though  this  be  strictly  and  truly  the  case; 
though  the  assumption  of  such  a  right  would 
be  an  infringement  of  the  articles  of  Union; 
though  it  may  seldom  or  never  have  been  avow¬ 
edly  claimed,  yet  in  practice  it  has  been  con¬ 
stantly  exercised,  and  would  continue  to  be  so, 
as  long  as  the  revenues  of  the  Confederacy 
should  remain  dependent  on  the  intermediate 
agency  of  its  members.  What  the  consequences 
of  this  system  have  been,  is  within  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  every  man  the  least  conversant  in  our 
public  affairs,  and  has  been  amply  unfolded  in 
different  parts  of  these  inquiries.  It  is  this  which 
has  chiefly  contributed  to  reduce  us  to  a  situa¬ 
tion  which  affords  ample  cause  both  of  mortifi¬ 
cation  to  ourselves,  and  of  triumph  to  our  en¬ 
emies. 

What  remedy  can  there  be  for  this  situation, 
but  in  a  change  of  the  system  which  has  pro¬ 
duced  it— in  a  change  of  the  fallacious  and  de¬ 
lusive  system  of  quotas  and  requisitions?  What 
substitute  can  there  be  imagined  for  this  ignis 


THE  FEDERALIST 


fatuus  in  finance,  but  that  of  permitting  the 
national  government  to  raise  its  own  revenues 
by  the  ordinary  methods  of  taxation  author¬ 
ised  in  every  well-ordered  constitution  of  civil 
government?  Ingenious  men  may  declaim  with 
plausibility  on  any  subject;  but  no  human  in¬ 
genuity  can  point  out  any  other  expedient  to 
rescue  us  from  the  inconveniences  and  embar¬ 
rassments  naturally  resulting  from  defective 
supplies  of  the  public  treasury. 

The  more  intelligent  adversaries  of  the  new 
Constitution  admit  the  force  of  this  reasoning; 
but  they  qualify  their  admission  by  a  distinc¬ 
tion  between  what  they  call  internal  and  ex¬ 
ternal  Vdxatkm.'Yhe  former  they  would  reserve 
to  the  State  governments;  the  latter,  which  they 
explain  into  commercial  imposts,  or  rather 
duties  on  imported  articles,  they  declare  them¬ 
selves  willing  to  concede  to  the  federal  head. 
This  distinction,  however,  would  violate  the 
maxim  of  good  sense  and  sound  policy,  which 
dictates  that  every  powkr  ought  to  be  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  its  object;  and  would  still  leave  the 
general  government  in  a  kind  of  tutelage  to 
the  State  governments,  inconsistent  with  every 
idea  of  vigour  or  efficiency.  Who  can  pretend 
that  commercial  imposts  are,  or  would  be,  alone 
equal  to  the  present  and  future  exigencies  of 
the  Union?  Taking  into  the  account  the  exist¬ 
ing  debt,  foreign  and  domestic,  upon  any  plan 
of  extinguishment  which  a  man  moderately 
impressed  with  the  importance  of  public  jus¬ 
tice  and  public  credit  could  approve,  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  the*  establishments  which  all  parties  will 
acknowledge  to  be  necessary,  we  could  not  rea¬ 
sonably  flatterourselves  that  this  resource  alone, 
upon  the  most  improved  scale,  would  even  suf¬ 
fice  for  its  present  necessities.  Its  future  neces¬ 
sities  admit  not  of  calculation  or  limitation; 
and  upon  the  print  iple,  more  than  once  ad¬ 
verted  to,  the  power  of  making  provision  for 
them  as  they  arise  ought  to  hr  equally  uncon- 
fmed.  1  believe  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  position 
warranted  by  the  history  of  mankind,  that,  in 
the  usual  progress  of  things,  the  necessities  of  a 
nation,  in  every  stage  of  its  existence,  will  he 
found  at  least  etjual  to  its  resources. 

f  o  say  that  defit  ien<  ies  may  be  provided  for 
by  requisitions  upon  the  States  is  on  the  one 
hand  to  acknowledge  that  this  system  cannot 
be  depended  upon,  and  on  the  other  hand  lo 
depend  upon  it  for  everything  beyond  a  cer¬ 
tain  limit.  Those  who  have  carefully  attended 
to  its  vices  and  deformities  as  they  have  been 
exhibited  by  experience  or  delineated  in  the 
course  of  these  papers,  must  feel  invincible  re¬ 


pugnancy  to  trusting  the  national  interests  in 
any  degree  to  its  operation.  Its  inevitable  tend¬ 
ency,  whenever  it  is  brought  into  activity, must 
be  to  enfeeble  the  Union,  and  sow  the  seeds  of 
discord  and  contention  between  the  federal 
head  and  its  members,  and  between  the  mem¬ 
bers  themselves.  Can  it  be  expected  that  the 
deficiencies  would  be  better  supplied  in  this 
mode  than  the  total  wants  of  the  Union  have 
heretofore  been  supplied  in  the  same  mode?  It 
ought  to  be  recollected  that  if  less  will  be  re¬ 
quired  from  the  States,  they  will  have  propor¬ 
tionally  less  means  to  answer  the  demand.  If 
the  opinions  of  those  who  contend  for  the  dis¬ 
tinction  which  has  been  mentioned  were  to  he* 
received  as  evidence  of  truth,  one  would  be  led 
to  conclude  that  there  was  some  knowm  point 
in  the  economy  of  national  affairs  at  which  it 
would  be  safe  to  stop  and  to  say:  Thus  far  the 
ends  of  public  happiness  will  be  promoted  by 
supplying  the  wants  of  government,  and  all 
beyond  this  is  unworthy  of  our  care  or  anxiety. 
How  is  it  possible  that  a  government  half  sup¬ 
plied  and  always  necessitous,  can  fulfil  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  its  institution,  can  provide  for  the  se¬ 
curity,  advance  the  prosperity,  or  support  the 
reputation  of  the  commonwealth?  How*  can  it 
ever  possess  either  energy  or  stability,  dignity 
or  credit,  confidence  at  home  or  respectability 
abroad?  How  can  its  administration  be  any¬ 
thing  else  than  a  succession  of  expedients  tem¬ 
porising,  impotent,  disgraceful?  How  will  it  be 
able  to  avoid  a  frequent  sacrifice  of  its  engage¬ 
ments  to  immediate  necessity?  How  can  it  un¬ 
dertake  or  exccutcany  liberal  or  enlarged  plans 
of  public  good? 

Let  us  attend  to  what  would  be  the  effects  of 
this  situation  in  the  very  first  war  in  which  we 
should  happen  to  beengaged.  We  will  presume, 
for  argument’s  sake,  that  the  revenue  arising 
from  the  impost  duties  answers  the  purposes 
of  a  provision  for  the  public  debt  and  of  a 
peace  establishment  for  the  Union.  Thus  cir 
cumstanced,  a  war  breaks  out.  What  would  be 
the  probable  conduct  of  the  government  in 
Midi  an  emergency?  Taught  b\  experience  that 
proper  dependence  could  not  be  plated  on  the 
success  of  requisitions,  unable  by  its  own  au¬ 
thority  to  la)  hold  of  fiesh  resource's,  and  urged 
hy  considerations  of  national  danger,  would  it 
not  be  driven  to  the  expedient  ol  diverting  the 
funds  already  appropriated  from  their  proper 
objects  to  tin*  defence1  of  the  State?  It  is  not 
ras\  to  see  how  a  step  of  this  kind  could  be 
avoided;  and  if  it  should  be  taken,  it  is  evident 
that  it  would  prove  the*  destruction  of  public 


NUMBER  ii 


credit  at  the  very  moment  that  it  was  becom¬ 
ing  essential  to  the  public  safety.  To  imagine 
that  at  such  a  crisis  credit  might  be  dispensed 
with,  would  be  the  extreme  of  infatuation.  In 
the  modern  system  of  war,  nations  the  most 
wealthy  are  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  large 
loans.  A  country  so  little  opulent  as  ours  must 
feel  this  necessity  in  a  much  stronger  degree. 
But  who  would  lend  to  a  government  that  pref¬ 
aced  its  overtures  for  borrowing  by  an  act 
which  demonstrated  that  no  reliance  could  be 
placed  on  the  steadiness  of  its  measures  for  pay¬ 
ing?  The  loans  it  might  be  able  to  procure 
would  be  as  limited  in  their  extent  as  burden¬ 
some  in  their  conditions.  They  would  be  made 
upon  the  same  principles  that  usurers  com¬ 
monly  lend  to  bankrupt  and  fraudulent  debt¬ 
ors— with  a  sparing  hand  and  at  enormous  pre¬ 
miums. 

It  may  perhaps  be  imagined  that,  from  the 
scantiness  of  the  resources  of  the  country,  the 
necessity  of  diverting  the  established  funds  in 
the  case  supposed  would  exist,  though  the 
national  government  should  possess  an  unre¬ 
strained  power  of  taxation.  But  two  considera¬ 
tions  will  serve  to  quiet  all  apprehension  on 
this  head:  one  is,  that  we  are  sure  the  resources 
of  the  community,  in  their  full  extent,  will  be 
brought  into  activity  for  the  benefit  of  the  Un¬ 
ion;  the  other  is,  that  whatever  deficiencies 
there  may  be,  can  without  difficulty  be  sup¬ 
plied  by  loans. 

The  power  of  creating  new  funds  upon  new 
objects  of  taxation,  by  its  own  authority,  would 
enable  the  national  government  to  borrow  as 
far  as  its  necessities  might  require.  Foreign¬ 
ers,  as  well  as  the  citizens  of  America,  could 
then  reasonably  repose  confidence  in  its  engage¬ 
ments;  but  to  depend  upon  a  government  that 
must  itself  depend  upon  thirteen  other  govern¬ 
ments  for  the  means  of  fulfilling  its  contracts, 
when  once  its  situation  is  clearly  understood, 
would  require  a  degree  of  credulity  not  often 
to  be  met  with  in  the  pecuniary  transactions  of 
mankind, and  little  reconcilable  with  the  usual 
sharp-sightedness  of  avarice. 

Reflections  of  this  kind  may  have  trifling 
weight  with  men  who  hope  to  see  realised  in 
America  the  halcyon  scenes  of  the  poetic  or 
fabulous  age;  but  to  those  who  believe  we  are 
likely  to  experience  a  common  portion  of  the 
vicissitudes  and  calamities  which  have  fallen  to 
the  lot  of  other  nations,  they  must  appear  en- 
|  titled  to  serious  attention.  Such  men  must  be- 
i  hold  the  actual  situation  of  their  country  with 
painful  sol  icitude,  and  deprecate  the  evils  which 


ambition  or  revenge  might,  with  too  much  fa¬ 
cility,  inflict  upon  it.  Publius 

Number  ji 

[HAMILTON] 

In  disquisitions  of  every  kind,  there  are  cer¬ 
tain  primary  truths,  or  first  principles,  upon 
which  all  subsequent  reasonings  must  depend. 
These  contain  an  internal  evidence  which,  an¬ 
tecedent  to  all  reflection  or  combination,  com¬ 
mands  the  assent  of  the  mind.  Where  it  pro¬ 
duces  not  this  effect,  it  must  proceed  either  from 
some  defect  or  disorder  in  the  organs  of  per¬ 
ception,  or  from  the  influence  of  some  strong 
interest,  or  passion,  or  prejudice.  Of  this  na¬ 
ture  are  the  maxims  in  geometry,  that  “the 
whole  is  greater  than  its  part;  things  equal  to 
the  same  are  equal  to  one  another;  two  straight 
lines  cannot  enclose  a  space;  and  all  right  an¬ 
gles  are  equal  to  each  other.”  Of  the  same  na¬ 
ture  are  these  other  maxims  in  ethics  and  poli¬ 
tics,  that  there  cannot  be  an  effect  without  a 
cause;  that  the  meansought  to  be  proportioned 
to  the  end;  that  every  power  ought  to  be 
commensurate  with  its  object;  that  there  ought 
to  be  no  limitation  of  a  power  destined  to  ef¬ 
fect  a  purpose  which  is  itself  incapable  of  limi¬ 
tation.  And  there  are  other  truths  in  the  two 
latter  sciences  which,  if  they  cannot  pretend  to 
rank  in  the  class  of  axioms,  are  yet  such  direct 
inferences  from  them,  and  so  obvious  in  them¬ 
selves,  and  so  agreeable  to  the  natural  and  un¬ 
sophisticated  dictates  of  common  sense,  that 
they  challenge  the  assent  of  a  sound  and  un¬ 
biased  mind,  with  a  degree  of  force  and  convic¬ 
tion  almost  equally  irresistible. 

The  objects  of  geometrical  inquiry  are  so  en¬ 
tirely  abstracted  from  those  pursuits  which  stir 
up  and  put  in  motion  the  unruly  passions  of 
the  human  heart,  that  mankind,  without  diffi¬ 
culty,  adopt  not  only  the  more  simple  theo¬ 
rems  of  the  science,  but  even  those  abstruse 
paradoxes  which,  however  they  may  appear  sus¬ 
ceptible  of  demonstration,  are  at  variance  with 
the  natural  conceptions  which  the  mind,  with¬ 
out  the  aid  of  philosophy,  would  be  led  to  en¬ 
tertain  upon  the  subject.  The  infinite  divisi¬ 
bility  of  matter,  or,  in  other  words,  the  in¬ 
finite  divisibility  of  a  finite  thing,  extending 
even  to  the  minutest  atom,  is  a  point  agreed 
among  geometricians,  though  not  less  incom¬ 
prehensible  to  common  sense  than  any  of  those 
mysteries  in  religion  against  which  the  bat¬ 
teries  of  infidelity  have  been  so  industriously 
levelled. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


But  in  the  sciences  of  morals  and  politics, 
men  are  found  far  less  tractable.  To  a  certain 
degree,  it  is  right  and  useful  that  this  should 
be  the  case.  Caution  and  investigation  are  a 
necessary  armour  against  error  and  imposition. 
But  this  untractablencss  may  be  carried  too 
far,  and  may  degenerate  into  obstinacy,  per¬ 
verseness,  or  disingenuity.  Though  it  cannot 
be  pretended  that  the  principles  of  moral  and 
political  knowledge  have,  in  general,  the  same 
degree  of  certainty  with  those  of  the  mathe¬ 
matics,  yet  they  have  much  better  claims  in  this 
respect  than,  to  judge  from  the  conduct  of  men 
in  particular  situations,  we  should  be  disposed 
to  allow  them.  The  obscurity  is  much  oftener 
in  the  passions  and  prejudices  of  the  reasoner 
than  in  the  subject.  Men,  upon  too  many  oc¬ 
casions,  do  not  give  their  own  understandings 
fair  play;  but,  yielding  to  some  untoward  bias, 
they  entangle  themselves  in  words  and  con¬ 
found  themselves  in  subtleties. 

How  else  could  it  happen  (if  we  admit  the 
objectors  to  be  sincere  in  their  opposition)  that 
positions  so  clear  as  those  which  manifest  the 
necessity  of  a  general  power  of  taxation  in  the 
government  of  the  Union,  should  have  to  en¬ 
counter  any  adversaries  among  men  of  discern¬ 
ment?  Though  these  positions  have  been  else¬ 
where  fully  stated,  they  will  perhaps  not  be  im¬ 
properly  recapitulated  in  this  place,  as  intro¬ 
ductory  to  an  examination  of  what  may  have 
been  offered  by  way  of  objection  to  them.  They 
arc  in  substance  as  follows; 

A  government  ought  to  contain  in  itself  ev¬ 
ery  power  requisite  to  the  full  accomplishment 
of  the  objects  committed  to  its  care,  and  to  the 
complete  execution  of  the  trusts  for  which  it 
is  responsible,  free  from  every  other  control  but 
a  regard  to  the  public  good  and  to  the  sense 
of  the  people. 

As  the  duties  of  superintending  the  national 
defence  and  of  securing  the  public  peace  against 
foreign  or  domestic  violence  involve  a  provi¬ 
sion  for  casualties  and  dangers  to  which  no 
possible  limits  can  be  assigned,  the  power  of 
making  that  provision  ought  to  know  no  other 
bounds  than  the  exigencies  of  the  nation  and 
the  resources  of  the  community. 

As  revenue  is  the  essential  engine  by  which 
tiie  means  of  answering  the  national  exigen¬ 
cies  must  be  procured,  the  power  of  procuring 
that  article  in  its  full  extent  must  necessarily 
be  comprehended  in  that  of  providingfor  those 
exigent  ics. 

As  theory  and  practice  conspire  to  prove 
that  the  power  of  procuring  revenue  is  una¬ 


vailing  when  exercised  over  the  States  in  their 
collective  capacities,  the  federal  government 
must  of  necessity  be  invested  with  an  unquali¬ 
fied  power  of  taxation  in  the  ordinary  modes. 

Did  not  experience  evince  the  contrary,  it 
would  be  natural  to  conclude  that  the  propri¬ 
ety  of  a  general  power  of  taxation  in  the  na¬ 
tional  government  might  safely  be  permitted 
to  rest  on  the  evidence  of  these  propositions, 
unassisted  by  any  additional  arguments  or  il¬ 
lustrations.  But  we  find,  in  fact,  that  the  antag¬ 
onists  of  theproposed Constitution, so  farfrom 
acquiescing  in  their  justness  or  truth,  seem  to 
make  their  principal  and  most  zealous  effort 
against  this  part  of  the  plan.  It  may  therefore 
be  satisfactory  to  analyse  the  arguments  with 
which  they  combat  it. 

Those  of  them  which  have  been  most  la¬ 
boured  with  that  view,  seem  in  substance  to 
amount  to  this:  “It  is  not  true,  because  the 
exigencies  of  the  Union  may  not  be  susceptible 
of  limitation,  that  its  power  of  laying  taxes 
ought  to  be  unconfined.  Revenue  is  as  requi¬ 
site  to  the  purposes  of  the  local  administra¬ 
tions  as  to  those  of  the  Union;  and  the  former 
are  at  least  of  equal  importance  with  the  latter 
to  the  happiness  of  the  people.  It  is,  therefore, 
as  necessary  that  the  State  governments  should 
be  able  to  command  the  means  of  supplying 
their  wants,  as  that  the  national  government 
should  possess  the  like  faculty  in  respect  to  the 
wants  of  the  Union.  But  an  indefinite  power 
of  taxation  in  the  latter  might,  and  probably 
would  in  time,  deprive  the  former  of  the  means 
of  providing  for  their  own  necessities:  and 
would  subject  them  entirely  to  the  mercy  of  the 
national  legislature.  As  the  laws  of  the  Union 
are  to  become  t lie  supreme  law  of  the  land,  as 
it  is  to  have  power  to  pass  all  laws  that  may  be 
NF.ctssARY  for  carrying  into  execution  the  au¬ 
thorities  with  which  it  is  proposed  to  vest  it,  the 
national  government  might  at  any  time  abol¬ 
ish  the  taxes  imposed  for  State  objects  upon 
the  pretence  of  an  interference  with  its  own.  It 
might  allege  a  necessity  of  doing  this  in  order 
to  give  efficacy  to  the  national  revenues.  And 
thus  all  the  resources  of  taxation  might  by  de¬ 
grees  become  the  subjects  of  federal  monop¬ 
oly,  to  the  entire  exclusion  and  destruction  of 
the  State  governments.” 

This  mode  of  reasoning  appears  sometimes 
to  turn  upon  the  supposition  of  usurpation  in 
the  national  government;  at  other  times  it  seems 
to  be  designed  only  as  a  deduction  from  the 
constitutional  operation  of  its  intended  powers. 
It  is  only  in  the  latter  light  that  it  can  be  ad- 


NUMBER  32 


mitted  to  have  any  pretensions  to  fairness.  The 
moment  we  launch  into  conjectures  about  the 
usurpations  of  the  federal  government,  we  get 
into  an  unfathomable  abyss,  and  fairly  put 
ourselves  out  of  the  reach  of  all  reasoning. 
Imagination  may  range  at  pleasure  till  it  gets 
bewildered  amidst  the  labyrinths  of  an  en¬ 
chanted  castle,  and  knows  not  on  which  side 
to  turn  to  extricate  itself  from  the  perplexities 
into  which  it  has  so  rashly  adventured.  What¬ 
ever  may  be  then  limits  or  modifications  of 
the  powers  of  the  Union,  it  is  easy  to  imagine 
an  endless  train  of  possible  dangers;  and  by 
indulging  an  excess  of  jealousy  and  timidity, 
we  may  bring  ourselves  to  a  state  of  absolute 
scepticism  and  irresolution.  I  repeat  here  what 
l  have  observed  in  substance  in  another  place, 
that  all  observations  founded  upon  the  danger 
of  usurpation  ought  to  be  referred  to  the  com¬ 
position  and  structure  of  the  government,  not 
to  the  nature  or  extent  of  its  powers.  The 
State  governments,  by  their  original  constitu¬ 
tions,  are  invested  with  complete  sovereignty. 
In  what  does  our  security  consist  against  usur¬ 
pation  from  that  quarter?  Doubtless  in  the 
manner  of  their  formation,  and  in  a  due  de¬ 
pendence  of  those  who  are  to  administer  them 
upon  the  people.  If  the  proposed  construction 
of  the  federal  government  be  found,  upon  an 
impartial  examination  of  it,  to  be  such  as  to 
afford,  to  a  proper  extent,  the  same  species  of 
security,  all  apprehensions  on  the  score  of  usur¬ 
pation  ought  to  be  discarded. 

It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  a  disposition 
in  the  State  governments  to  encroach  upon  the 
rights  of  the  Union  is  quite  as  probable  as  a 
disposition  in  the  Union  to  encroach  upon  the 
rights  of  the  State  governments.  What  side 
would  be  likely  to  prevail  in  such  a  conflict 
must  depend  on  the  means  which  the  contend¬ 
ing  parties  could  employ  towards  insuring  suc¬ 
cess.  As  in  republics  strength  is  always  on  the 
side  of  the  people,  and  as  there  are  weighty 
reasons  to  induce  a  belief  that  the  State  gov¬ 
ernments  will  commonly  possess  most  influ¬ 
ence  over  them,  the  natural  conclusion  is  that 
such  contests  will  be  most  apt  to  end  to  the  dis¬ 
advantage  of  the  Union;  and  that  there  is  great¬ 
er  probability  of  encroachments  by  the  mem¬ 
bers  upon  the  federal  head,  than  by  the  federal 
head  upon  the  members.  But  it  is  evident  that 
all  conjectures  of  this  kind  must  be  extremely 
vague  and  fallible:  and  that  it  is  by  far  the 
safest  course  to  lay  them  altogether  aside,  and 
to  confine  our  attention  wholly  to  the  nature 
and  extent  of  the  powers  as  they  are  delin¬ 


eated  in  the  Constitution.  Everything  beyond 
this  must  be  left  to  the  prudence  and  firmness 
of  the  people;  who,  as  they  will  hold  the  scales 
in  their  own  hands,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will  al¬ 
ways  take  care  to  preserve  the  constitutional 
equilibrium  between  the  general  and  the  State 
governments.  Upon  this  ground,  which  is  evi¬ 
dently  the  true  one,  it  will  not  be  difficult  to 
obviate  the  objections  which  have  been  made 
loan  indefinite  power  of  taxation  in  theUnited 
States.  Publius 

JV  umber  32 

[HAMILTON] 

Although  I  am  of  opinion  that  there  would 
be  no  real  danger  of  the  consequences  which 
seem  to  be  apprehended  to  the  State  govern¬ 
ments  from  a  power  in  the  Union  to  control 
them  in  the  levies  of  money,  because  I  am  per¬ 
suaded  that  the  sense  of  the  people,  the  ex¬ 
treme  hazard  of  provoking  the  resentments 
of  the  State  governments,  and  a  conviction  of 
the  utility  and  necessity  of  local  administra¬ 
tions  for  local  purposes,  would  be  a  complete 
barrier  against  the  oppressive  use  of  such  a 
power;  yet  I  am  willing  here  to  allow,  in  its 
full  extent,  the  justness  of  the  reasoning  which 
requires  that  the  individual  States  should  pos¬ 
sess  an  independent  and  uncontrollable  au¬ 
thority  to  raise  their  own  revenues  for  the 
supply  of  their  own  wants.  And  making  this 
concession,  I  affirm  that  (with  the  sole  excep¬ 
tion  of  duties  on  imports  and  exports)  they 
would,  under  the  plan  of  the  convention,  retain 
that  authority  in  the  most  absolute  and  un¬ 
qualified  sense;  and  that  an  attempt  on  the 
part  of  the  national  government  to  abridge 
them  in  the  exercise  of  it,  would  be  a  violent 
assumption  of  power,  unwarranted  by  any 
article  or  clause  of  its  Constitution. 

An  entire  consolidation  of  the  States  into 
one  complete  national  sovereignty  would  im¬ 
ply  an  entire  subordination  of  the  parts;  and 
whatever  powers  might  remain  in  them,  would 
be  altogether  dependent  on  the  general  will. 
But  as  the  plan  of  the  convention  aims  only  at 
a  partial  union  or  consolidation,  the  State  gov¬ 
ernments  would  clearly  retain  all  the  rights  of 
sovereignty  which  they  before  had,  and  which 
were  not,  by  that  act,  exclusively  delegated  to 
the  United  States.  This  exclusive  delegation, 
or  rather  this  alienation,  of  State  sovereignty, 
would  only  exist  in  three  cases:  where  the  Con¬ 
stitution  in  express  terms  granted  an  exclusive 
authority  to  the  Union;  where  it  granted  in 


1  o  6  THE  FED  ERA  LIS  T 


one  instance  an  authority  to  the  Union,  and  in 
another  prohibited  the  States  from  exercising 
the  1  ike  authority:  and  where  it  granted  an  au¬ 
thority  to  the  Union,  to  which  a  similar  au¬ 
thority  in  the  States  would  be  absolutely  and 
to t a  1 1  \  co nt ra dictory  and  repugnant. 1  use  these 
terms  to  distinguish  this  last  case  from  another 
which  might  appear  to  resemble  it,  but  which 
would,  in  fact,  be  essentially  different:  1  mean 
where  the  exercise  of  a  concurrent  jurisdiction 
might  be productiveof  occasional  interferences 
in  the  policy  of  any  branch  of  administration, 
but  would  not  imply  any  direct  contradiction 
of  repugnancy  in  point  of  constitutional  au¬ 
thority.  These  three  cases  of  exclusive  jurisdic¬ 
tion  in  the  federal  government  may  be  exem¬ 
plified  by  the  following  instances:  T  he  last 
clause  but  one  in  the  eighth  section  of  the  first 
article  provides  expressly  that  Congress  shall 
exercise  “ exclusive  legislation ”  over  the  dis¬ 
trict  to  be  appropriated  as  the  scat  of  govern¬ 
ment.  This  answers  to  the  first  case.  The  first 
clause  of  the  same  section  empowers  Congress 
"to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and 
excises  ':  and  the  second  clause  of  the  tenth  sec¬ 
tion  of  the  same  article  declares  that,  "no  State 
shall,  without  the  consent  of  Congress,  lay  any 
imposts  or  duties  on  imports  or  exports,  except 
for  the  purpose  of  executing  its  inspection 
laws."  Hence  would  result  an  exclusive  power 
in  the  Union  to  lay  duties  on  imports  and  ex¬ 
ports,  with  the  particular  exception  mentioned: 
but  this  power  is  abridged  by  another  clause, 
which  declares  that  no  tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid 
on  articles  exported  from  any  State:  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  which  qualification,  it  now  only  ex¬ 
tends  to  the  duties  on  imports.  This  answers  to 
the  second  case.  1  he  third  will  lx*  lound  ill 
that  clause  which  declares  that  Congress  shall 
have  power  "to  establish  an  imi  orm  rule  of 
naturalisation  throughout  the  United  States." 
This  must  necessarily  he  exclusive:  because  if 
each  State  had  power  to  prescribe  a  distinct 
rci  r,  there  could  not  be  a  ijmiorm  rim. 

\  case  which  may  perhaps  he  thought  to  re¬ 
semble  the  latter,  hut  which  is  in  fact  widely 
different,  alieds  the  question  immediately  uu 
der  consideration.  I  mean  the  power  ol  impos¬ 
ing  taxes  on  all  artic  les  other  than  exports  and 
imports.  I  bis,  I  contend,  is  manifestly  a  con¬ 
current  and  coequal  authority  in  the  1  nited 
States  and  in  the  individual  States.  1  here  is 
phiinh  no  expiession  in  the  granting  clause 
which  makes  that  power  rxdituvr  in  the  Uu 
ion.  I  here  is  no  independent  clause  or  sen 
tent c  which  ptohibits  the  States  from  exert  is 


ing  it.  So  far  is  this  from  being  the  case  that  a 
plain  and  conclusive  argument  to  the  contrary 
is  to  be  deduced  from  the  restraint  laid  upon 
the  States  in  relation  to  duties  on  imports  and 
exports.  This  restriction  implies  an  admission 
that,  if  it  were  not  inserted,  the  States  would 
possess  the  power  it  excludes;  and  it  implies  a 
further  admission,  that  as  to  all  other  taxes, 
the  authority  of  the  States  remains  undimin- 
ished.  In  any  other  view  it  would  be  both  un¬ 
necessary  and  dangerous;  it  would  be  unneces¬ 
sary,  because  if  the  grant  to  the  Union  of  the 
power  of  laving  such  duties  implied  the  exclu¬ 
sion  of  the  States,  or  even  their  subordination 
in  tli is  particular,  there  could  he  no  need  of 
such  a  restriction;  it  would  be  dangerous,  be¬ 
cause  the  introduction  of  it  leads  directly  to 
the  conclusion  which  has  been  mentioned,  and 
which,  if  the  reasoning  of  the  objectors  he  just, 
could  not  have  been  intended;  I  mean  that  the 
States,  in  all  cases  to  which  the  restriction  did 
not  apply,  would  have  a  concurrent  power  of 
taxation  with  the  Union.  The  restriction  in 
question  amounts  to  what  lawyers  call  a  nkga- 
tive pregnant— that  is.a  negation  of  one  thing, 
and  an  affirmance  of  another;  a  negation  of 
the  authority  of  the  States  to  impose  taxes  on 
imports  and  exports,  and  an  alfinnance  of  their 
authority  to  impose  them  on  all  other  articles. 
It  would  be  mere  sophistry  to  argue  that  it  was 
meant  to  exclude  them  absolutely  from  the  im¬ 
position  of  taxes  of  the  former  kind,  and  to 
leave  them  at  liberty  to  lay  others  subject  to 
the  control  of  the  national  legislature.  The  re¬ 
straining  or  prohibitory  clause  only  says,  that 
they  shall  not,  without  the  consent  of  Con¬ 
gress,  lay  such  duties;  and  if  we  are  to  under¬ 
stand  this  in  the  sense  last  mentioned,  the  Con¬ 
stitution  would  then  be  made  to  introduce'  a 
formal  provision  for  the  sake  of  a  very  absurd 
conclusion;  which  is,  that  the  States,  with  the 
consent  of  the'  national  legislature,  might  tax 
imports  and  exports;  and  that  they  might  tax 
every  other  article,  unless  controlled  by  the 
s:une  body.  If  this  was  the  intention,  why  not 
leave  it,  in  the  first  instance-,  to  what  is  alleged 
to  he  the  natural  operation  of  the  original 
e  lause,  conferring  a  general  power  of  taxation 
upon  the  Union?  It  is  evident  that  this  could 
not  have  been  the  intention,  and  that  it  will 
not  hear  a  e  oust  rue  t  ion  of  the  kind. 

As  to  ,i  supposition  of  repugnancy  between 
the-  power  of  taxation  in  the  States  and  in  the 
Union,  it  cannot  be  supported  in  that  sense 
wliie  h  would  be  reejuisite  to  work  an  exe  hision 
of  the*  States,  It  is,  indeed,  possible  that  a  tax 


NUMBER  33 


might  be  laid  on  a  particular  article  by  a  State 
which  might  render  it  inexpedient  that  thus  a 
further  tax  should  be  laid  on  the  same  article 
by  the  Union;  but  it  would  not  imply  a  consti¬ 
tutional  inability  to  impose  a  further  tax.  The 
quantity  of  the  imposition,  the  expediency  or 
inexpediency  of  an  increase  on  either  side, 
would  be  mutually  questions  of  prudence;  but 
there  would  be  involved  no  direct  contradic¬ 
tion  of  power.  The  particular  policy  of  the  na¬ 
tional  and  of  the  State  systems  of  finance  might 
now  and  then  not  exactly  coincide,  and  might 
require  reciprocal  forbearances.  It  is  not,  how¬ 
ever,  a  mere  possibility  of  inconvenience  in  the 
exercise  of  powers,  but  an  immediate  consti¬ 
tutional  repugnancy  that  can  by  implication 
alienate  and  extinguish  a  pre-existing  right  of 
sovereignty. 

The  necessity  of  a  concurrent  jurisdiction  in 
certain  cases  results  from  the  division  of  the 
sovereign  power;  and  the  rule  that  all  authori¬ 
ties,  of  which  the  States  are  not  explicitly  di¬ 
vested  in  favour  of  the  Union,  remain  with 
them  in  full  vigour,  is  not  a  theoretical  conse¬ 
quence  of  that  division,  but  is  clearly  admitted 
by  the  whole  tenor  of  the  instrument  which 
contains  the  articles  of  the  proposed  Constitu¬ 
tion.  We  there  find  that,  notwithstanding  the 
affirmative  grants  of  general  authorities,  there 
has  been  the  most  pointed  care  in  those  cases 
where  it  was  deemed  improper  that  the  like 
authorities  should  reside  in  the  States,  to  insert 
negative  clauses  prohibiting  the  exercise  of 
them  by  the  States.  The  tenth  section  of  the 
first  article  consists  altogether  of  such  provi¬ 
sions.  This  circumstance  is  a  clear  indication 
of  the  sense  of  the  convention,  and  furnishes  a 
rule  of  interpretation  out  of  the  body  of  the 
act,  which  justifies  the  position  I  have  advanced 
and  refutes  every  hypothesis  to  the  contrary. 

Publius 

Number  jj 

[HAMILTON] 

The  residue  of  the  argument  against  the  pro¬ 
visions  of  the  Constitution  in  respect  to  taxa¬ 
tion  is  ingrafted  upon  the  following  clause.1 
The  last  clause  of  the  eighth  section  of  the  first 
article  of  the  plan  under  consideration  author¬ 
ises  the  national  legislature  “to  make  all  laws 
which  shall  be  necessary  and  proper  for  carry- 

1  This  was  the  point  at  which  No.  XXXI.  of  the 
original  newspaper  essays  was  divided,  and  this 
opening  sentence  appeared  in  the  McLean  edi¬ 
tion  of  1788. 


ing  into  execution  the  powers  by  that  Consti¬ 
tution  vested  in  the  government  of  the  United 
States,  or  in  any  department  or  officer  there¬ 
of”;  and  the  second  clause  of  the  sixth  article 
declares,  “that  the  Constitution  and  the  laws  of 
the  United  States  made  in  pursuance  thereof , 
and  the  treaties  made  by  their  authority  shall 
be  the  suprerne  law  of  the  land,  anything  in 
the  constitution  or  laws  of  any  State  to  the  con¬ 
trary  notwithstanding.” 

These  two  clauses  have  been  the  source  of 
much  virulent  invective  and  petulant  declama¬ 
tion  against  the  proposed  Constitution.  They 
have  been  held  up  to  the  people  in  all  the  ex¬ 
aggerated  colours  of  misrepresentation  as  the 
pernicious  engines  by  which  their  local  gov¬ 
ernments  were  to  be  destroyed  and  their  lib¬ 
erties  exterminated;  as  the  hideous  monster 
whose  devouring  jaws  would  spare  neither  sex 
nor  age,  nor  high  nor  low,  nor  sacred  nor  pro¬ 
fane;  and  yet,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  after 
all  this  clamour,  to  those  who  may  not  have  hap¬ 
pened  to  contemplate  them  in  the  same  light, 
it  may  be  affirmed  with  perfect  confidence  that 
the  constitutional  operation  of  the  intended 
government  would  be  precisely  the  same  if 
these  clauses  were  entirely  obliterated  as  if  they 
were  repeated  in  every  article.  They  are  only 
declaratory  of  a  truth  which  would  have  re¬ 
sulted  by  necessary  and  unavoidable  implica¬ 
tion  from  the  very  act  of  constituting  a  federal 
government,  and  vesting  it  with  certain  speci¬ 
fied  powers.  This  is  so  clear  a  proposition, 
that  moderation  itself  can  scarcely  listen  to  the 
railings  which  have  been  so  copiously  vented 
against  this  part  of  the  plan,  without  emotions 
that  disturb  its  equanimity. 

What  is  a  power,  but  the  ability  or  faculty  of 
doing  a  thing?  What  is  the  ability  to  do  a  thing 
but  the  power  of  employing  the  means  neces¬ 
sary  to  its  execution?  What  is  a  legislative 
power  but  a  power  of  making  laws?  What  are 
the  means  to  execute  a  legislative  power  but 
laws?  What  is  the  power  of  laying  and  collect¬ 
ing  taxes,  but  a  legislative  power,  or  a  power 
of  making  laws,  to  lay  and  collect  taxes?  What 
are  the  proper  means  of  executing  such  a  pow¬ 
er  but  necessary  and  proper  laws? 

This  simple  train  of  inquiry  furnishes  us  at 
once  with  a  test  by  which  to  judge  of  the  true 
nature  of  the  clause  complained  of.  It  con¬ 
ducts  us  to  this  palpable  truth,  that  a  power  to 
lay  and  collect  taxes  must  be  a  power  to  pass  all 
laws  necessary  and  proper  for  the  execution  of 
that  power;  and  what  does  the  unfortunate  and 
calumniated  provision  in  question  do  more 


,o8  THE  FEDERALIST 


than  declare  the  same  truth,  to  wit,  that  the 
national  legislature,  to  whom  the  power  of  lay¬ 
ing  and  collecting  taxes  had  been  previously 
given,  might,  in  the  execution  of  that  power, 
pass  all  laws  necessary  and  proper  to  carry  it 
into  effect?  I  have  applied  these  observations 
thus  particularly  to  the  power  of  taxation,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  the  immediate  subject  under  consid¬ 
eration,  and  because  it  is  the  most  important 
of  the  authorities  proposed  to  be  conferred 
upon  theUnion.But  the  same  process  will  lead 
to  the  same  result  in  relation  to  all  other  pow¬ 
ers  declared  in  the  Constitution.  And  it  is  ex¬ 
pressly  to  execute  these  powers  that  the  sweep¬ 
ing  clause,  as  it  has  been  affectedly  called,  au¬ 
thorises  the  national  legislature  to  pass  all 
necessary  and  proper  laws.  If  there  is  any  thing 
exceptionable,  it  must  be  sought  for  in  the 
specific  powers  upon  which  this  general  dec¬ 
laration  is  predicated.  The  declaration  itself, 
though  it  may  be  chargeable  with  tautology  or 
redundancy,  is  at  least  perfectlv  harmless. 

But  suspicion  may  ask.  Why  then  was  it  in¬ 
troduced?  The  answer  is,  that  it  could  only 
have  been  done  for  greater  caution,  and  to 
guard  against  all  cavilling  refinements  in  those 
who  might  hereafter  feel  a  disposition  to  cur¬ 
tail  and  evade  the  legitimate  authorities  of  the 
Union.  The  Convention  probably  foresaw, 
what  it  has  been  a  principal  aim  of  these  papers 
toinculcate,  that  the  danger  which  most  threat¬ 
ens  our  political  welfare  is  that  the  State  gov¬ 
ernments  will  finally  sap  the  foundations  of 
the  Union;  and  might  therefore  think  it  neces¬ 
sary,  in  so  cardinal  a  point,  to  leave  nothing  to 
construction.  Whatever  ma\  have  been  the  in¬ 
ducement  to  it,  the  wisdom  of  the  precaution 
is  evident  from  the  cry  which  has  been  raised 
against  it;  as  that  very  cry  betrays  a  disposition 
to  question  the  great  and  essential  truth  which 
it  is  manifestly  the  object  of  that  provision  to 
declare. 

But  it  may  be  again  asked.  Who  is  to  judge 
of  the  necessity  and  propriety  of  the  laws  to  be 
passed  for  executing  the  powers  of  the  Union? 
I  answer,  first,  that  this  question  arises  as  well 
and  as  fully  upon  the  simple  grant  of  those 
powers  as  upon  the  declaratory  clause;  and  I 
answer,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  national 
government,  like  every  other,  must  judge,  in  the 
first  instance,  of  the  proper  exercise  of  its  pow¬ 
ers.  and  its  constituents  in  the  last.  II  the  fed¬ 
eral  government  should  overpass  the  just 
bounds  of  its  authority  and  make  a  tyrannical 
use  ol  its  powers,  the  people,  whose  creature 
it  is,  must  appeal  to  the  standard  they  have 


formed,  and  take  such  measures  to  redress  the 
injury  done  to  the  Constitution  as  the  exigency 
may  suggest  and  prudence  justify.  The  pro¬ 
priety  of  a  law.  in  a  constitutional  light,  must 
always  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  the 
powers  upon  which  it  is  founded.  Suppose, 
by  some  forced  constructions  of  its  authority 
(which,  indeed,  cannot  easily  be  imagined), 
the  Federal  legislature  should  attempt  to  vary 
the  law  of  descent  in  any  State,  would  it  not 
be  evident  that,  in  making  such  an  attempt,  it 
had  exceeded  its  jurisdiction  and  infringed 
upon  that  of  the  State?  Suppose,  again,  that 
upon  the  pretence  of  an  interference  with  its 
revenues,  it  should  undertake  to  abrogate  a 
land-tax  imposed  by  the  authority  of  a  State; 
would  it  not  be  equally  evident  that  this  was 
an  invasion  of  that  concurrent  jurisdiction  in 
respect  to  this  species  of  tax,  which  its  Con¬ 
stitution  plainly  supposes  to  exist  in  the  State 
governments?  If  there  ever  should  be  a  doubt 
on  this  head,  the  credit  of  it  will  be  entirely 
due  to  those  reasoners  who,  in  the  imprudent 
zeal  of  their  animosity  to  the  plan  of  the  con¬ 
vention.  have  laboured  to  envelop  it  in  a  cloud 
calculated  to  obscure  the  plainest  and  simplest 
truths. 

But  it  is  said  that  the  laws  of  the  Union  are 
to  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land.  But  what  in¬ 
ference  can  be  drawn  from  this,  or  what  would 
thevamount  to,  if  theywerenot  to  be  supreme? 
It  is  evident  they  would  amount  to  nothing.  A 
law,  by  the  very  meaning  of  the  term,  includes 
supremacy.  It  is  a  rule  which  those  to  whom  it 
is  prescribed  are  bound  to  observe.  This  results 
from  every  political  association.  If  individuals 
enter  into  a  state  of  society,  the  laws  of  that  so¬ 
ciety  must  be  the  supreme  regulator  of  their 
conduct.  If  a  number  of  political  societies  enter 
into  a  larger  political  society,  the  laws  which 
the  latter  may  enact,  pursuant  to  the  powers  in¬ 
trusted  to  it  by  its  constitution,  must  necessa¬ 
rily  be  supreme  over  those  societies,  and  the  in¬ 
dividuals  of  whom  they  are  composed.  It  would 
otherwise  be  a  mere  treaty,  dependent  on  the 
good  faith  of  the  parties,  and  not  a  govern¬ 
ment,  which  is  only  another  word  for  political 
POWKR  AND  SUPREMACY.  Blit  it  will  UOt  follow 
from  this  doctrine  that  acts  of  the  larger  soci¬ 
ety  which  arc  not  pursuant  to  its  constitutional 
powers,  but  which  are  invasions  of  the  residu¬ 
ary  authorities  of  the  smaller  societies,  will  be¬ 
come  the  supreme  law  of  the  land.  T  hese  will 
be  merely  acts  of  usurpation,  and  will  deserve 
to  be  treated  as  such.  Hence  we  perceive  that 
the  clause  width  declares  the  supremacy  of  the 


NUMBER  34 


laws  of  the  Union,  like  the  one  we  have  just  be¬ 
fore  considered,  only  declares  a  truth,  which 
flows  immediately  and  necessarily  from  the  in¬ 
stitution  of  a  federal  government.  It  will  not, 
I  presume,  have  escaped  observation,  that  it 
expressly  confines  this  supremacy  to  laws  made 
pursuant  to  the  Constitution;  which  I  mention 
merely  as  an  instance  of  caution  in  the  conven¬ 
tion;  since  that  limitation  would  have  been  to 
be  understood,  though  it  had  not  been  ex¬ 
pressed. 

Though  a  law,  therefore,  laying  a  tax  for  the 
use  of  the  United  States  would  be  supreme  in 
its  nature,  and  could  not  legally  be  opposed  or 
controlled,  yet  a  law  for  abrogating  or  prevent¬ 
ing  the  collection  of  a  tax  laid  by  the  authority 
of  the  State  (unless  upon  imports  and  exports), 
would  not  be  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  but 
a  usurpation  of  power  not  granted  by  the  Con¬ 
stitution.  As  far  as  an  improper  accumulation 
of  taxes  on  the  same  object  might  tend  to  ren¬ 
der  the  collection  difficult  or  precarious,  this 
would  be  a  mutual  inconvenience,  not  arising 
from  a  superiority  or  defect  of  power  on  either 
side,  but  from  an  injudicious  exercise  of  pow¬ 
er  by  one  or  the  other,  in  a  manner  equally  dis¬ 
advantageous  to  both.  It  is  to  be  hoped  and 
presumed,  however,  that  mutual  interest  would 
dictate  a  concert  in  this  respect  which  would 
avoid  any  material  inconvenience.  The  infer¬ 
ence  from  the  whole  is,  that  the  individual 
States  would,  under  the  proposed  Constitu¬ 
tion,  retain  an  independent  and  uncontrolla¬ 
ble  authority  to  raise  revenue  to  any  extent  of 
which  they  may  stand  in  need,  by  every  kind 
of  taxation,  except  duties  on  imports  and  ex¬ 
ports.  It  will  be  shown  in  the  next  paper  that 
this  concurrent  jurisdiction  in  the  article  of 
taxation  was  the  only  admissible  substitute 
for  an  entire  subordination,  in  respect  to  this 
branch  of  power,  of  the  State  authority  to  that 
of  the  Union.  Publius 

Number  34 

[HAMILTON] 

I  flatter  myself  it  has  been  clearly  shown  in 
my  last  number  that  the  particular  States,  un¬ 
der  the  proposed  Constitution,  would  have  co¬ 
equal  authority  with  the  Union  in  the  article 
of  revenue,  except  as  to  duties  on  imports.  As 
this  leaves  open  to  the  States  far  the  greatest 
part  of  the  resources  of  the  community  there 
can  be  no  colour  for  the  assertion  that  they 
would  not  possess  means  as  abundant  as  could 
be  desired  for  the  supply  of  their  own  wants, 


independent  of  all  external  control.  That  the 
field  is  sufficiently  wide  will  more  fully  appear 
when  we  come  to  advert  to  the  inconsiderable 
share  of  the  public  expenses  for  which  it  will 
fall  to  the  lot  of  the  State  governments  to  pro¬ 
vide. 

To  argue  upon  abstract  principles  that  this 
co-ordinate  authority  cannot  exist,  is  to  set  up 
supposition  and  theory  against  fact  and  reality. 
However  proper  such  reasonings  might  be  to 
show  that  a  thing  ought  not  to  exist ,  they  are 
wholly  to  be  rejected  when  they  are  made  use 
of  to  prove  that  it  does  not  exist  contrary  to 
the  evidence  of  the  fact  itself.  It  is  well  known 
that  in  the  Roman  republic  the  legislative  au¬ 
thority,  in  the  last  resort,  resided  for  ages  in 
two  different  political  bodies— not  as  branches 
of  the  same  legislature,  but  as  distinct  and  in¬ 
dependent  legislatures,  in  each  of  which  an 
opposite  interest  prevailed:  in  one  the  patri¬ 
cian;  in  the  other,  the  plebeian.  Many  argu¬ 
ments  might  have  been  adduced  to  prove  the 
unfitness  of  two  such  seemingly  contradictory 
authorities,  each  having  power  to  annul  or  re¬ 
peal  the  acts  of  the  other.  But  a  man  would 
have  been  regarded  as  frantic  who  should  have 
attempted  at  Rome  to  disprove  their  existence. 
It  will  be  readily  understood  that  I  allude  to  the 

COMIT1A  CENTURIATA  and  the  COM1TIA  TRIBUTA. 

The  former,  in  which  the  people  voted  by  cen¬ 
turies,  were  so  arranged  as  to  give  a  superiority 
to  the  patrician  interest;  in  the  latter,  in  which 
numbers  prevailed,  the  plebeian  interest  had 
an  entire  predominancy.  And  yet  these  two  leg¬ 
islatures  co-existed  for  ages,  and  the  Roman 
republic  attained  to  the  utmost  height  of  hu¬ 
man  greatness. 

In  the  case  particularly  under  consideration, 
there  is  no  such  contradiction  as  appears  in  the 
example  cited;  there  is  no  power  on  either  side 
to  annul  the  acts  of  the  other.  And  in  practice 
there  is  little  reason  to  apprehend  any  incon¬ 
venience;  because,  in  a  short  course  of  time, 
the  wants  of  the  States  will  naturally  reduce 
themselves  within  a  very  narrow  compass ;  and 
in  the  interim,  the  United  States  will,  in  all 
probability,  find  it  convenient  to  abstain  wholly 
from  those  objects  to  which  the  particular 
States  would  be  inclined  to  resort. 

To  form  a  more  precise  judgment  of  the  true 
merits  of  this  question,  it  will  be  well  to  advert 
to  the  proportion  between  the  objects  that  will 
require  a  federal  provision  in  respect  to  reve¬ 
nue,  and  those  which  will  require  a  State  pro¬ 
vision.  We  shall  discover  that  the  former  are 
altogether  unlimited,  and  that  the  latter  are 


THE  FEDERALIST 


circumscribed  within  very  moderate  bounds. 
In  pursuing  this  inquiry,  we  must  bear  in  mind 
that  we  are  not  to  confine  our  view  to  the  pres¬ 
ent  period,  but  to  look  forward  to  remote  fu¬ 
turity.  Constitutions  of  civil  government  are 
not  to  be  framed  upon  a  calculation  of  exist- 
ingexigencies,  but  upon  a  combination  of  these 
with  the  probable*  exigencies  of  ages,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  natural  and  tried  course  of  human 
affairs.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  more  falla¬ 
cious  than  to  infer  the  extent  of  any  power, 
proper  to  be  lodged  in  the  national  govern¬ 
ment,  from  an  estimate  of  its  immediate  neces¬ 
sities.  There  ought  to  be  a  capacity  to  provide 
for  future  contingencies  as  they  may  happen, 
and  as  these  are  illimitable  in  their  nature,  it 
is  impossible  safely  to  limit  that  capacity.  It  is 
true,  perhaps,  that  a  computation  might  be 
made  with  sufficient  accuracy  to  answer  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  the  quantity  of  revenue  requisite  to 
discharge  the  subsisting  engagements  of  the 
Union,  and  to  maintain  those  establishments 
which,  for  some  time  to  come,  would  suffice  in 
lime  of  peace.  Hut  would  it  be  wise,  or  would 
it  not  rather  be  the  extreme  of  folly,  to  stop  at 
this  point,  and  to  leave  the  government  in¬ 
trusted  with  the  care  of  the  national  defence 
in  a  state  of  absolute  incapacity  to  provide  for 
the  protection  of  the  community  against  fu¬ 
ture  invasions  of  the  public  peace  by  foreign 
war  or  domestic  convulsions?  If,  on  the  con- 
trarv,  we  ought  to  exceed  this  point,  where  can 
we  stop,  short  of  an  indefinite  power  of  provid¬ 
ing  for  emergencies  as  they  may  arise?  Though 
it  is  easy  to  assert,  in  general  terms,  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  forming  a  rational  judgment  of  a 
due  provision  against  probable  dangers,  yet 
we  may  safely  challenge  those  who  make  the 
assertion  to  bring  forward  their  data,  and  may 
alFirm  that  they  would  be  found  as  vague  and 
uncertain  as  any  that  could  be  produced  to  es¬ 
tablish  the  probable  duration  of  the  world. 
Observations  confined  to  the  mere  prospect  of 
internal  attacks  can  deserve  no  weight;  though 
even  these  will  admit  of  no  satisfactory  calcu¬ 
lation:  but  if  wc  mean  to  be  a  commercial  peo¬ 
ple.  it  must  form  a  part  of  our  policy  to  be  able 
one  clay  to  defend  that  commerce.  The  support 
of  a  navy  and  of  naval  wars  would  involve  con¬ 
tingent  ies  that  must  badle  all  the  efforts  of  po¬ 
litical  arithmetic. 

Admitting  that  we  ought  to  try  the  novel 
and  absurd  experiment  in  politics  of  lying  up 
the  hands  of  government  from  offensive  war 
founded  upon  reasons  o!  State,  yet  certainly  wc 
ought  not  to  disable  it  from  guarding  the  com¬ 


munity  against  the  ambition  or  enmity  of  oth¬ 
er  nations.  A  cloud  has  been  for  some  time 
hanging  over  the  European  world.  If  it  should 
break  forth  into  a  storm,  who  can  insure  us 
that  in  its  progress  a  part  of  its  fury  would  not 
be  spent  upon  us?  No  reasonable  man  would 
hastily  pronounce  that  we  are  entirely  out  of 
its  reach.  Or  if  the  combustible  materials  that 
now  seem  to  be  collecting  should  be  dissipated 
without  coming  to  maturity,  or  il  a  flame  should 
be  kindled  without  extending  to  us,  what  secu¬ 
rity  can  we  have  that  our  tranquillity  will  long 
remain  undisturbed  from  some  other  cause  or 
from  some  other  quarter?  Let  us  recollect  that 
peace  or  war  will  not  always  be  left  to  our  op¬ 
tion;  that  however  moderate  or  unambitious 
we  may  be,  wc  cannot  count  upon  the  modera¬ 
tion.  or  hope  to  extinguish  the  ambition  of 
others.  Who  could  have  imagined  at  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  the  last  war  that  France  and  Britain, 
wearied  and  exhausted  as  they  both  were,  would 
so  soon  have  looked  with  so  hostile  an  aspect 
upon  each  other?  To  judge  from  the  history  of 
mankind,  we  shall  be  compelled  to  conclude 
that  the  fieiy  and  destructive  passions  of  war 
reign  in  the  human  breast  with  much  more 
powerful  sway  than  the  mild  and  beneficent 
sentiments  of  peace:  and  that  to  model  our  po¬ 
litical  systems  upon  speculationsof  lastingtran- 
quillity  is  to  calculate  on  the  weaker  springs  of 
the  human  character. 

What  are  the  chief  sources  of  expense  in 
every  government?  What  has  occasioned  that 
enormous  accumulation  of  debts  with  which 
several  of  the  European  nations  are  oppress¬ 
ed?  The  answer  plainly  is.  wars  and  rebellions; 
the  support  of  those  institutions  which  are  nec¬ 
essary  to  guard  the  body  politic  against  those 
two  most  mortal  diseases  of  society.  1  he  ex¬ 
penses  arising  from  those  institutions  which 
are  relative  to  the  mere  domestic  police  of  a 
State,  to  the  support  of  its  legislative,  execu¬ 
tive,  and  judicial  departments,  with  their  dif¬ 
ferent  appendages,  and  to  the  encouragement 
of  agriculture  and  manufactures  (which  will 
comprehend  almost  all  the  objects  of  state 
expenditure),  are  insignificant  in  compar¬ 
ison  with  those  which  relate  to  the  national 
defence. 

In  the  kingdom  of  Great  Britain,  where  all 
the  ostentatious  apparatus  of  monarchy  is  to 
he  provided  for.  not  above  a  fifteenth  part  of 
the  annual  income  of  the  nation  is  appropri¬ 
ated  to  the  class  of  expenses  last  mentioned; 
the  other  fourteen  fifteenths  are  absorbed  in 
the  payment  of  the  interest  of  debts  contracted 


NUMBER  34 


for  carrying  on  the  wars  in  which  that  country 
has  been  engaged,  and  in  the  maintenance  of 
fleets  and  armies.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  it  should 
be  observed  that  the  expenses  incurred  in  the 
prosecution  of  the  ambitious  enterprises  and 
vainglorious  pursuits  of  a  monarchy  are  not  a 
proper  standard  by  which  to  judge  of  those 
which  might  be  necessary  in  a  republic,  it  ought, 
on  the  other  hand,  to  be  remarked  that  there 
should  be  as  great  a  disproportion  between  the 
profusion  and  extravagance  of  a  wealthy  king¬ 
dom  in  its  domestic  administration,  and  the 
frugality  and  economy  which  in  that  particu¬ 
lar  become  the  modest  simplicity  of  republi¬ 
can  government.  If  we  balance  a  proper  de¬ 
duction  from  one  side  against  that  which  it  is 
supposed  ought  to  be  made  from  the  other, 
the  proportion  may  still  be  considered  as  hold¬ 
ing  good. 

But  let  us  advert  to  the  large  debt  which  we 
have  ourselves  contracted  in  a  single  war,  and 
let  us  only  calculate  on  a  common  share  of  the 
events  which  disturb  the  peace  of  nations,  and 
we  shall  instantly  perceive,  without  the  aid  of 
any  elaborate  illustration,  that  there  must  al¬ 
ways  be  an  immense  disproportion  between 
the  objects  of  federal  and  state  expenditures. 
It  is  true  that  several  of  the  States,  separately, 
are  encumbered  with  considerable  debts,  which 
are  an  excrescence  of  the  late  war.  But  this  can¬ 
not  happen  again,  if  the  proposed  system  be 
adopted;  and  when  these  debts  are  discharged, 
the  only  call  for  revenue  of  any  consequence, 
which  the  State  governments  will  continue  to 
experience,  will  be  for  the  mere  support  of 
their  respective  civil  lists;  to  which,  if  we  add 
all  contingencies,  the  total  amount  in  every 
State  ought  to  fall  considerably  short  of  two 
hundred  thousand  pounds. 

In  framing  a  government  for  posterity  as 
well  as  ourselves,  we  ought,  in  those  provisions 
which  are  designed  to  be  permanent,  to  cal¬ 
culate,  not  on  temporary,  but  on  permanent 
causes  of  expense.  If  this  principle  be  a  just 
one,  our  attention  would  be  directed  to  a  pro¬ 
vision  in  favour  of  the  State  governments  for 
an  annual  sum  of  about  two  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  pounds;  while  the  exigencies  of  the  Un¬ 
ion  could  be  susceptible  of  no  limits,  even  in 
imagination.  In  this  view  of  the  subject,  by 
what  logic  can  it  be  maintained  that  the  local 
governments  ought  to  command,  in  perpetu¬ 
ity,  an  exclusive  source  of  revenue  for  any 
sum  beyond  the  extent  of  two  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  pounds?  To  extend  its  power  further,  in 
exclusion  of  the  authority  of  the  Union,  would 


be  to  take  the  resources  of  the  community  out 
of  those  hands  which  stood  in  need  of  them 
for  the  public  welfare,  in  order  to  put  them 
into  other  hands  which  could  have  no  just  or 
proper  occasion  for  them. 

Suppose,  then,  the  convention  had  been  in¬ 
clined  to  proceed  upon  the  principle  of  a  re¬ 
partition  of  the  objects  of  revenue,  between 
the  Union  and  its  members,  in  proportion  to 
their  comparative  necessities;  what  particular 
fund  could  have  been  selected  for  the  use  of 
the  States  that  would  not  either  have  been  too 
much  or  too  little— too  little  for  their  present, 
too  much  for  their  future  wants?  As  to  the  line 
of  separation  between  external  and  internal 
taxes,  this  would  leave  to  the  States,  at  a  rough 
computation,  the  command  of  two  thirds  of 
the  resources  of  the  community  to  defray  from 
a  tenth  to  a  twentieth  part  of  its  expenses;  and 
to  the  Union,  one  third  of  the  resources  of  the 
community,  to  defray  from  nine  tenths  tonine- 
teen  twentieths  of  its  expenses.  If  we  desert 
this  boundary  and  content  ourselves  with  leav¬ 
ing  to  the  States  an  exclusive  power  of  taxing 
houses  and  lands,  there  would  still  be  a  great 
disproportion  between  the  means  and  the  end; 
the  possession  of  one  third  of  the  resources  of 
the  community  to  supply,  at  most,  one  tenth 
of  its  wants.  If  any  fund  could  have  been  se¬ 
lected  and  appropriated,  equal  to  and  not 
greater  than  the  object,  it  would  have  been  in¬ 
adequate  to  the  discharge  of  the  existing  debts 
of  the  particular  States,  and  would  have  left 
them  dependent  on  the  Union  for  a  provision 
for  this  purpose. 

The  preceding  train  of  observation  will  jus¬ 
tify  the  position  which  has  been  elsewhere  laid 
down,  that  “a  concurrent  jurisdiction  in  the 
article  of  taxation  was  the  only  admissible  sub¬ 
stitute  for  an  entire  subordination,  in  respect 
to  this  branch  of  power,  of  State  authority  to 
that  of  the  Union.”  Any  separation  of  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  revenue  that  could  have  been  fallen 
upon  would  have  amounted  to  a  sacrifice  of  the 
great  interests  of  the  Union  to  the  power  of 
the  individual  States.  The  convention  thought 
the  concurrent  jurisdiction  preferable  to  that 
subordination;  and  it  is  evident  that  it  has  at 
least  the  merit  of  reconciling  an  indefinite  con¬ 
stitutional  power  of  taxation  in  the  Federal 
government  with  an  adequate  and  independ¬ 
ent  power  in  the  States  to  provide  for  their  own 
necessities.  There  remain  a  few  other  lights,  in 
which  this  important  subject  of  taxation  will 
claim  a  further  consideration. 


Publius 


1  12 


THE  FEDERALIST 


Number  3 j 

[HAMILTON] 

Before  we  proceed  to  examine  any  other  ob¬ 
jections  to  an  indefinite  power  of  taxation  in 
the  Union,  I  shall  make  one  general  remark; 
which  is.  that  if  the  jurisdiction  of  the  national 
government,  in  the  article  of  re\enue,  should 
be  restricted  to  particular  objects,  it  would 
natur  !1\  occasion  an  undue  proportion  of  the 
public  burdens  to  fall  upon  those  objects.  d  wo 
evils  would  spring  from  this  source:  the  op¬ 
pression  of  particular  branches  of  industry; 
and  an  unequal  distribution  of  the  taxes,  as 
well  among  the  several  Slates  as  among  the 
citizens  of  the  same  State. 

Suppose,  as  has  been  contended  for.  the  fed¬ 
eral  power  of  taxation  were  to  be  confined  to 
duties  on  imports,  it  is  evident  that  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  for  want  of  being  able  to  command 
other  resources,  would  frequently  be  tempted 
to  extend  these  duties  to  an  injurious  excess. 
There  are  persons  who  imagine  that  they  can 
never  be  carried  to  too  great  a  length;  since  the 
higher  they  are  the  more  it  is  alleged  they  will 
tend  to  discourage  an  extravagant  consump¬ 
tion,  to  produce  a  favourable  balance  of  trade, 
and  to  promote  domestic  manufactures.  But 
all  extremes  are  pernicious  in  various  ways. 
Exorbitant  duties  on  imported  articles  would 
beget  a  general  spirit  of  smuggling;  which  is  al¬ 
ways  prejudicial  to  the  fair  trader,  and  even¬ 
tually  to  the  revenue  itself:  they  tend  to  render 
other  ( lasses  of  the  community  tributary,  in  an 
improper  degree,  to  the  manufacturing  classes, 
to  whom  theygivea  premature  monopoly  of  the 
markets;  they  sometimes  lone  industry  out  of 
its  more  natural  channels  into  others  in  which 
it  Hows  with  less  advantage;  and  in  the  last 
plate,  they  oppress  the  merchant,  who  is  often 
obliged  to  pay  them  himself  without  any  retri¬ 
bution  from  the  consumer.  When  the  demand 
is  equal  to  the  quantity  of  goods  at  market,  the 
(onsumer  generally  pays  the  duty:  but  when 
the  markets  happen  to  be  overstot  ked.  a  great 
proportion  falls  upon  the  merchant,  and  some¬ 
times  not  only  exhausts  his  profits,  but  breaks 
in  upon  his  capital.  1  am  apt  to  think  that  a 
division  of  the  duty,  between  the  seller  and 
the  buyer,  more  often  happens  than  is  com¬ 
monly  imagined.  It  is  not  always  possible  to 
raise  the  price  of  a  commodity  in  exact  pro¬ 
portion  to  every  additional  imposition  laid 
upon  it.  I  he  merchant,  especially  in  a  coun¬ 
try  of  small  commerc  ial  capital,  is  often  under 
a  necessity  of  keeping  prices  down  in  order 


to  a  more  expeditious  sale. 

The  maxim  that  the  consumer  is  the  payer, 
is  so  much  oftener  true  than  the  reverse  of  the 
proposition,  that  it  is  far  more  equitable  that 
the  duties  on  imports  should  go  into  a  com¬ 
mon  stock,  than  that  they  should  redound  to 
the  exclusive  benefit  of  the  importing  States. 
But  it  is  not  so  generally  true  as  to  render  it 
equitable,  that  those  duties  should  form  the 
only  national  fund.  When  they  are  paid  by 
the  merchant  they  operate  as  an  additional  tax 
upon  the  importing  State,  whose  citizens  pa\ 
their  proportion  of  them  in  the  character  of 
consumers.  In  this  view  they  are  productive  of 
inequality  among  the  States;  which  inequality 
would  be  increased  with  the  increased  extent 
of  the  duties.  The  confinement  of  the  national 
re\  enues  to  this  species  of  imposts  would  be  at¬ 
tended  with  inequality,  from  a  different  cause, 
between  the  manufacturing  and  the  non¬ 
manufacturing  States.  The  States  which  can  go 
farthest  towards  the  supply  of  their  own  wants, 
by  their  own  manufactures,  will  not,  according 
to  their  numbers  or  wealth,  consume  so  great  a 
proportion  of  imported  articles  as  those  States 
which  are  not  in  the  same  favourable  situation. 
They  would  not,  therefore,  in  this  mode  alone 
contribute  to  the  public  treasury  in  a  ratio  to 
their  abilities.  To  make  them  do  this  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  that  recourse  be  had  to  excises,  the  prop¬ 
er  objects  of  which  are  particular  kinds  of  man¬ 
ufactures.  New  York  is  more  deeply  interested 
in  these  considerations  than  such  of  her  citi¬ 
zens  as  contend  for  limiting  the  power  of  the 
Union  to  external  taxation  may  be  aware  of. 
New  York  is  an  importing  State,  and  is  not 
likely  speedily  to  be,  to  any  great  extent,'  a 
manufacturing  State.  She  would,  of  course,  sul 
fer  in  a  double  light  from  restraining  the  juris¬ 
diction  of  the  Union  to  commercial  imposts. 

So  far  as  these  observations  tend  to  inculcate 
a  danger  of  the  import  duties  being  extended 
to  an  injurious  extreme  it  may  be  observed, 
conformably  to  a  remar  k  made  in  another  part 
of  these  papers,  that  the  interest  of  the  reve¬ 
nue  itself  would  he  a  sufficient  guard  against 
sue  hail  extreme.  1  readily  admit  that  thisyvould 
be  thccase,  as  longasothcr  resources  were  open; 
but  it  the  avenues  to  them  were  dosed,  hope. 
stimulated  by  necessity,  would  beget  experi¬ 
ments.  fortified  by  rigorous  precautions  and 
additional  penalties,  which,  for  a  time,  woidd 
hay e  the-  intended  ellect.  till  there  had  been 

’In  the  i e vised  text,  "and  from  a  greater  dis 
proportion  between  her  population  and  territory 
is  unlikeb  speedily  to  he,  to  am  gie.u  extent." 


NUMBER  35 


leisure  to  contrive  expedients  to  elude  these 
new  precautions.  The  first  success  would  be  apt 
to  inspire  false  opinions,  which  it  might  require 
a  long  course  of  subsequent  experience  to  cor¬ 
rect.  Necessity,  especially  in  politics,  often  oc¬ 
casions  false  hopes,  false  reasonings,  and  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  measures  correspondingly  erroneous. 
But  even  if  this  supposed  excess  should  not  be 
a  consequence  of  the  limitation  of  the  federal 
power  of  taxation,  the  inequalities  spoken  of 
would  still  ensue,  though  not  in  the  same  de¬ 
gree,  from  the  other  causes  that  have  been  no¬ 
ticed.  Let  us  now  return  to  the  examination  of 
objections. 

One  which,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  fre¬ 
quency  of  its  repetition,  seems  most  to  be  re¬ 
lied  on,  is,  that  the  House  of  Representatives 
is  not  sufficiently  numerous  for  the  reception 
of  all  the  different  classes  of  citizens,  in  order 
to  combine  the  interests  and  feelings  of  every 
part  of  the  community,  and  to  produce  a  due 
sympathy  between  the  representative  body  and 
its  constituents.  This  argument  presents  itself 
under  a  very  specious  and  seducing  form;  and 
is  well  calculated  to  lay  hold  of  the  prejudices 
of  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  But  when  we 
come  to  dissect  it  with  attention,  it  will  appear 
to  be  made  up  of  nothing  but  fair-sounding 
words.  The  object  it  seems  to  aim  at  is,  in  the 
first  place,  impracticable,  and  in  the  sense  in 
which  it  is  contended  for,  is  unnecessary.  I  re¬ 
serve  for  another  place  the  discussion  of  the 
question  which  relates  to  the  sufficiency  of  the 
representative  body  in  respect  to  numbers,  and 
shall  content  myself  with  examining  here  the 
particular  use  which  has  been  made  of  a  con¬ 
trary  supposition,  in  reference  to  the  immedi¬ 
ate  subject  of  our  inquiries. 

The  idea  of  an  actual  representation  of  all 
classes  of  the  people,  by  persons  of  each  class, 
is  altogether  visionary.  Unless  it  were  express¬ 
ly  provided  in  the  Constitution,  that  each  dif¬ 
ferent  occupation  should  send  one  or  more 
members,  the  thing  would  never  take  place  in 
practice.  Mechanics  and  manufacturers  will  al¬ 
ways  be  inclined,  with  few  exceptions,  to  give 
their  votes  to  merchants,  in  preference  to  per¬ 
sons  of  their  own  professions  or  trades.  Those 
discerning  citizens  are  well  aware  that  the  me¬ 
chanic  and  manufacturing  arts  furnish  the  ma¬ 
terials  of  mercantile  enterprise  and  industry. 
Many  of  them,  indeed,  are  immediately  con¬ 
nected  with  the  operations  of  commerce.  They 
know  that  the  merchant  is  their  natural  pa¬ 
tron  and  friend;  and  they  are  aware,  that  how¬ 
ever  great  the  confidence  they  may  justly  feel 


in  their  own  good  sense,  their  interests  can  be 
more  effectually  promoted  by  the  merchant 
than  by  themselves.  They  are  sensible  that  their 
habits  in  life  have  not  been  such  as  to  give  them 
those  acquired  endowments,  without  which,  in 
a  deliberative  assembly,  the  greatest  natural 
abilities  are  for  the  most  part  useless;  and  that 
the  influence  and  weight,  and  superior  acquire¬ 
ments  of  the  merchants  render  them  more 
equal  to  a  contest  with  any  spirit  which  might 
happen  to  infuse  itself  into  the  public  coun¬ 
cils,  unfriendly  to  the  manufacturing  and  trad¬ 
ing  interests.  These  considerations,  and  many 
others  that  might  be  mentioned,  prove,  and  ex¬ 
perience  confirms  it,  that  artisans  and  manu¬ 
facturers  will  commonly  be  disposed  to  bestow 
their  votes  upon  merchants  and  those  whom 
they  recommend.  We  must  therefore  consider 
merchants  as  the  natural  representatives  of  all 
these  classes  of  the  community. 

With  regard  to  the  learned  professions,  lit¬ 
tle  need  be  observed;  they  truly  form  no  dis¬ 
tinct  interest  in  society,  and  according  to  their 
situation  and  talents,  will  be  indiscriminately 
the  objects  of  the  confidence  and  choice  of  each 
other,  and  of  other  parts  of  the  community. 

Nothingremainsbut  the  landed  interest;  and 
this,  in  a  political  view,  and  particularly  in  re¬ 
lation  to  taxes,  I  take  to  be  perfectly  united, 
from  the  wealthiest  landlord  down  to  the  poor¬ 
est  tenant.  No  tax  can  be  laid  on  land  which 
will  not  affect  the  proprietor  of  millions  of 
acres  as  well  as  the  proprietor  of  a  single  acre. 
Every  landholder  will  therefore  have  a  com¬ 
mon  interest  to  keep  the  taxes  on  land  as  low 
as  possible;  and  common  interest  may  always 
be  reckoned  upon  as  the  surest  bond  of  sym¬ 
pathy.  But  if  we  even  could  suppose  a  distinc¬ 
tion  of  interest  between  the  opulent  landhold¬ 
er  and  the  middling  farmer,  what  reason  is 
there  to  conclude,  that  the  first  would  stand  a 
better  chance  of  being  deputed  to  the  national 
legislature  than  the  last?  If  we  take  fact  as  our 
guide,  and  look  into  our  own  senate  and  as¬ 
sembly,  we  shall  find  that  moderate  proprie¬ 
tors  of  land  prevail  in  both;  nor  is  this  less  the 
case  in  the  senate  which  consists  of  a  smaller 
number  than  in  the  assembly  which  is  com¬ 
posed  of  a  greater  number.  Where  the  qualifi¬ 
cations  of  the  electors  are  the  same,  whether 
they  have  to  choose  a  small  or  a  large  number, 
their  votes  will  fall  upon  those  in  whom  they 
have  most  confidence;  whether  these  happen 
to  be  men  of  large  fortunes,  or  of  moderate 
property,  or  of  no  property  at  all. 

It  is  said  to  be  necessary,  that  all  classes  of 


THE  FEDERALIST 


citizens  should  have  some  of  their  own  num¬ 
ber  in  the  representative  body,  in  order  that 
their  feelings  and  interests  may  be  the  better 
understood  and  attended  to.  But  we  have  seen 
that  this  will  never  happen  under  any  arrange¬ 
ment  that  leaves  the  votes  of  the  people  free. 
Where  this  is  the  case,  the  representative  body, 
with  too  few  exceptions  to  have  any  influence 
on  the  spirit  of  the  government,  will  be  com¬ 
posed  of  landholders,  merchants,  and  men  of 
the  learned  professions.  But  where  is  the  dan¬ 
ger  that  the  interests  and  feelings  of  the  dif¬ 
ferent  classes  of  citizens  will  not  be  understood 
or  attended  to  by  these  three  descriptions  of 
men?  Will  not  the  landholder  know  and  feel 
whatever  will  promote  or  insure  the  interest 
of  landed  property?  And  will  he  not.  from  his 
own  interest  in  that  species  of  property,  be  suf¬ 
ficiently  prone  to  resist  every  attempt  to  prej¬ 
udice  or  encumber  it?  Will  not  the  merchant 
understand  and  be  disposed  to  cultivate,  as  far 
as  may  be  proper,  the  interests  of  the  mechanic 
and  manufacturingarts,  to  which  his  commerce 
is  so  nearly  allied?  Will  not  the  man  of  the 
learned  profession,  who  will  feel  a  neutrality 
to  the  rivalships  between  the  different  branches 
of  industry,  be  likely  to  prose  an  impartial  ar¬ 
biter  between  them,  ready  to  promote  either, 
so  far  as  it  shall  appear  to  him  conducive  to 
the  general  interests  of  the  society? 

If  we  take  into  the  account  the  momentary 
humours  or  dispositions  which  may  happen  to 
prevail  in  particular  parts  of  the  society,  and 
to  which  a  wise  administration  will  never  be 
inattentive,  is  the  man  whose  situation  leads 
to  extensive  inquiry  and  information  less  like¬ 
ly  to  be  a  competent  judge  of  their  nature,  ex¬ 
tent,  and  foundation  than  one  whose  observa¬ 
tion  does  not  travel  beyond  the  circle  of  his 
neighbours  and  acquaintances?  Is  it  not  nat¬ 
ural  that  a  man  who  is  a  candidate  for  the  fa- 
vourof  the  people,  and  who  independent  on  the 
suffrages  of  his  fellow-c  iti/ens  for  t lie  continu¬ 
ance  of  his  public  honours,  should  take  care  to 
inform  himself  of  their  disposition  sand  inclina¬ 
tions, and  should  be  willingtoallow  them  their 
proper  degree  of  influence  upon  his  conduct? 
This  dependence,  and  the  necessity  of  being 
bound  himself,  and  his  posterity,  by  the  laws 
to  which  he  gives  his  assent,  are  the  true,  and 
they  are  the  strong  chords  of  sympathy  be¬ 
tween  the  representative  and  the  constituent. 

There  is  no  part  of  the  administration  ol 
government  that  requires  extensive  informa¬ 
tion  and  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  priu* 
ciplesof  political  economy,  so  much  as  the  busi¬ 


ness  of  taxation.  The  man  who  understands 
those  principles  best  will  be  least  likely  to  re¬ 
sort  to  oppressive  expedients,  or  to  sacrifice 
any  particular  class  of  citizens  to  the  procure¬ 
ment  of  revenue.  It  might  be  demonstrated 
that  the  most  productive  system  of  finance  will 
always  be  the  least  burdensome.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  in  order  to  [obtain]  a  judicious 
exercise  of  the  power  of  taxation,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  the  person  in  whose  hands  it  isshould 
be  acquainted  with  the  general  genius,  habits, 
and  modes  of  thinking  of  the  people  at  large, 
and  with  the  resources  of  the  country.  And 
this  is  all  that  can  be  reasonably  meant  by  a 
knowledge  of  the  interests  and  feelings  of  the 
people.  In  any  other  sense  the  proposition  has 
either  no  meaning,  or  an  absurd  one.  And  in 
that  sense  let  every  considerate  citizen  judge 
for  himself  where  the  requisite  qualification  is 
most  likely  to  be  found.  Pumuus 

Number  j6 

[HAMILTON] 

We  have  seen  that  the  result  of  the  observa¬ 
tions.  to  which  the  foregoing  number  has  been 
principally  devoted,  is,  that  from  the  natural 
operation  of  the  different  interests  and  views 
of  the  various  classes  of  the  community,  wheth¬ 
er  the  representation  of  the  people  be  more  or 
less  numerous,  it  will  consist  almost  entirely 
of  proprietors  of  land,  of  merchants,  and  of 
members  of  the  learned  professions,  who  will 
truly  represent  all  those  different  interests  and 
views.  If  it  should  be  objected  that  we  have 
seen  other  descriptions  of  men  in  the  local 
legislatures,  1  answer  that  it  is  admitted  there 
are  exceptions  to  the  rule,  but  not  in  sufficient 
number  to  influence  the  general  complexion 
or  character  of  the  government.  There  are 
strong  minds  in  every  walk  of  life  that  will  rise 
superior  to  the  disadvantages  of  situation,  and 
will  command  the  tribute  due  to  their  merit, 
not  only  from  the  classes  to  which  they  par¬ 
ticularly  belong,  but  from  the  society  in  gen¬ 
eral.  The  door  ought  to  be  equally  open  to  all; 
and  I  trust,  for  the  credit  of  human  nature, 
that  we  shall  see  examples  of  such  vigorous 
plants  flourishing  in  the  soil  of  federal  as  well 
as  of  State  legislation;  but  occasional  instances 
of  this  sort  will  not  render  the  reasoning, 
founded  upon  the  general  course  ol  things,  less 
conclusive. 

The  subjec  t  might  he  placed  in  several  other 
lights  that  would  all  lead  to  the  same  result: 
and  in  particular  it  might  be  asked.  What 


NUMBER  36 


greater  affinity  or  relation  of  interest  can  be 
conceived  between  the  carpenter  and  black¬ 
smith,  and  the  linen  manufacturer  or  stocking- 
weaver,  than  between  the  merchant  and  either 
of  them?  It  is  notorious  that  there  are  often  as 
great  rivalships  between  different  branches  of 
the  mechanic  or  manufacturing  arts  as  there 
are  between  any  of  the  departments  of  labour 
and  industry;  so  that,  unless  the  representative 
body  were  to  be  far  more  numerous  than 
would  be  consistent  with  any  idea  of  regularity 
or  wisdom  in  its  deliberations,  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  that  what  seems  to  be  the  spirit  of  the 
objection  we  have  been  considering  should 
ever  be  realised  in  practice.  But  I  forbear  to 
dwell  any  longer  on  a  matter  which  has  hither¬ 
to  worn  too  loose  a  garb  to  admit  even  of 
an  accurate  inspection  of  its  real  shape  or 
tendency. 

There  is  another  objection  of  a  somewhat 
more  precise  nature  that  claims  our  attention. 
It  has  been  asserted  that  a  power  of  internal 
taxation  in  the  national  legislature  could  never 
be  exercised  with  advantage,  as  well  from  the 
want  of  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  local  circum¬ 
stances,  as  from  an  interference  between  the 
revenue  laws  of  the  Union  and  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  States.  The  supposition  of  a  want  of 
proper  knowledge  seems  to  be  entirely  desti¬ 
tute  of  foundation.  If  any  question  is  depend¬ 
ing  in  a  State  legislature  respecting  one  of  the 
counties,  which  demands  a  knowledge  of  local 
details,  how  is  it  acquired?  No  doubt  from  the 
information  of  the  members  of  the  county. 
Cannot  the  like  knowledge  be  obtained  in  the 
national  legislature  from  the  representatives 
of  each  State?  And  is  it  not  to  be  presumed 
that  the  men  who  will  generally  be  sent  there 
will  be  possessed  of  the  necessary  degree  of  in¬ 
telligence  to  be  able  to  communicate  that  in¬ 
formation?  Is  the  knowledge  of  local  circum¬ 
stances,  as  applied  to  taxation,  a  minute  topo¬ 
graphical  acquaintance  with  all  the  mountains, 
rivers,  streams,  highways,  and  by-paths  in  each 
State;  or  is  it  a  general  acquaintance  with  its 
situation  and  resources,  with  the  state  of  its 
agriculture,  commerce,  manufactures,  with  the 
nature  of  its  products  and  consumptions,  with 
the  different  degrees  and  kinds  of  its  wealth, 
property,  and  industry? 

Nations  in  general,  even  under  governments 
of  the  more  popular  kind,  usually  commit  the 
administration  of  their  finances  to  single  men 
or  to  boards  composed  of  a  few  individuals, 
who  digest  and  prepare,  in  the  first  instance, 
the  plans  of  taxation,  which  are  afterwards 


passed  into  laws  by  the  authority  of  the  sov¬ 
ereign  or  legislature. 

Inquisitive  and  enlightened  statesmen  are 
deemed  everywhere  best  qualified  to  make  a  ju¬ 
dicious  selection  of  the  objects  proper  for  reve¬ 
nue;  which  is  a  clear  indication,  as  far  as  the 
sense  of  mankind  can  have  weight  in  the  ques¬ 
tion,  of  the  species  of  knowledge  of  local  circum¬ 
stances  requisite  to  the  purposes  of  taxation. 

The  taxes  intended  to  be  comprised  under 
the  general  denomination  of  internal  taxes 
may  be  subdivided  into  those  of  the  direct  and 
those  of  the  indirect  kind.  Though  the  objec¬ 
tion  be  made  to  both,  yet  the  reasoning  upon 
it  seems  to  be  confined  to  the  former  branch. 
And  indeed,  as  to  the  latter,  by  which  must  be 
understood  duties  and  excises  on  articles  of 
consumption,  one  is  at  a  loss  to  conceive  what 
can  be  the  nature  of  the  difficulties  appre¬ 
hended.  The  knowledge  relating  to  them  must 
evidently  be  of  a  kind  that  will  either  be  sug¬ 
gested  by  the  nature  of  the  article  itself,  or  can 
easily  be  procured  from  any  well-informed 
man,  especially  of  the  mercantile  class.  The 
circumstances  that  may  distinguish  its  situa¬ 
tion  in  one  State  from  its  situation  in  another 
must  be  few,  simple,  and  easy  to  be  compre¬ 
hended.  The  principal  thing  to  be  attended  to 
would  be  to  avoid  those  articles  which  had 
been  previously  appropriated  to  the  use  of  a 
particular  State;  and  there  could  be  no  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  ascertaining  the  revenue  system  of 
each.  T  his  could  always  be  known  from  the  re¬ 
spective  codes  of  laws,  as  well  as  from  the  infor¬ 
mation  of  the  members  from  the  several  States. 

The  objection,  when  applied  to  real  prop¬ 
erty  or  to  houses  and  lands,  appears  to  have, 
at  first  sight,  more  foundation,  but  even  in  this 
view  it  will  not  bear  a  close  examination. 
Land-taxes  are  commonly  laid  in  one  of  two 
inodes,  either  by  actual  valuations,  permanent 
or  periodical,  or  by  occasional  assessments,  at 
the  discretion,  or  according  to  the  best  judg¬ 
ment,  of  certain  officers  whose  duty  it  is  to 
make  them.  In  either  case,  the  execution  of 
the  business,  which  alone  requires  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  local  details,  must  be  devolved  upon 
discreet  persons  in  the  character  of  commis¬ 
sioners  or  assessors,  elected  by  the  people  or 
appointed  by  the  government  for  the  purpose. 
All  that  the  law  can  do  must  be  to  name  the 
persons  or  to  prescribe  the  manner  of  their 
election  or  appointment,  to  fix  their  numbers 
and  qualifications  and  to  draw  the  general  out¬ 
lines  of  their  powers  and  duties.  And  what  is 
there  in  all  this  that  cannot  as  well  be  per- 


n6  THE  FEDERALIST 


formed  b\  the  national  legislature  as  by  a  Slate 
legislature?  The  attention  of  either  ran  only 
reach  to  general  principles:  local  details,  as 
alreadv  observed,  must  be  referred  to  those 
who  are  to  execute  the  plan. 

But  there  is  a  simple  point  of  view  in  which 
this  matter  may  be  placed  that  must  be  alto¬ 
gether  satisfactory .  The  national  legislature 
can  make  use  of  the  system  of  each  State  within 
that  State.  The  method  of  laying  and  collect¬ 
ing  this  species  of  taxes  in  each  State  can,  in 
all  its  parts,  be  adopted  and  employed  by  the 
federal  government. 

Let  it  be  recollected  that  the  proportion  of 
these  taxes  is  not  to  be  left  to  the  discretion  of 
the  national  legislature,  but  is  to  be  deter¬ 
mined  b\  the  numbers  of  each  State,  as  de¬ 
scribed  in  the  second  section  of  the  first  article. 
An  actual  census  or  enumeration  of  the  people 
must  furnish  the  rule,  a  circumstance  which 
effectually  shuts  the  door  to  partiality  or  op¬ 
pression.  The  abuse  of  this  power  of  taxation 
seems  to  have  been  provided  against  with 
guarded  circumspection.  In  addition  to  the 
precaution  just  mentioned,  there  is  a  provi 
sion  that  "all  duties,  imposts,  and  excises  shall 
be  cm i  or m  throughout  the  United  Slates." 

It  has  been  verv  properly  observed  by  dif¬ 
ferent  speakers  and  writers  on  the  side  of  (he 
Constitution,  that  if  the  exercise  of  the  power 
of  internal  taxation  by  the  Union  should  be 
discovered  on  experiment  to  be  really  incon- 
\enicnt.  the  federal  government  may  then  for¬ 
bear  the  use  ol  it.  and  have  recourse  to  reejuisi- 
tions  in  its  stead  By  wav  of  answer  to  this,  it 
has  been  triumphantly  asked.  Why  not  in  the 
first  instance  omit  that  ambiguous  power,  and 
rely  upon  the  latter  resource?  Two  solid  an¬ 
swers  mav  be  given.  The  first  is.  that  the  ex 
etc  ise  of  that  power,  if  c  onvenient,  will  be  pref¬ 
erable,  because  it  will  be  more  effect ual;  and 
it  is  impossible  to  prose  in  theory,  or  other¬ 
wise  than  by  the  experiment,  that  it  cannot  be 
ad\ antageously  exercised.  I  he  contrary,  in¬ 
deed.  appears  most  probable.  1  he  second  an 
swer  is.  that  the  existence  of  such  a  power  in 
the  Constitution  will  have  a  -strong  influence 
in  gi\  ing  efficacv  to  requisitions.  When  the 
Slates  know  that  the  Union  can  apply  itsell 
without  their  agents,  it  will  be  a  powerful 
motive  for  exertion  on  their  part. 

\s  to  the  i  11 1 c*i  fert  ile  e  of  the  rev  eime  laws  ol 
the  l  uion.ancl  of  its  members,  we  base  alreadv 
seen  that  there  can  be  no  (lashing  or  iepug- 
n. nx  \  oi  authority.  I  he  laws  cannot,  there¬ 
fore,  in  a  legal  sense,  interfere  with  each  other, 


and  it  is  far  from  impossible  to  avoid  an  inter¬ 
ference  even  in  the  policy  of  their  different  sys¬ 
tems.  An  effectual  expedient  for  this  purpose 
will  be  mutually  to  abstain  from  those  objects 
which  either  side  may  have  first  had  recourse 
to.  As  neither  can  control  the  oilier,  each  will 
have  an  obvious  and  sensible  interest  in  this 
reciprocal  forbearance.  And  where  there  is  an 
immediate  common  interest,  we  may  safely 
count  upon  its  operation.  When  the  particular 
debts  of  the  States  are  done  away,  and  their  ex¬ 
penses  come  to  be  limited  within  their  natural 
compass,  the  possibilitv  almost  of  interference 
will  vanish.  A  small  land-tax  will  answer  the 
purpose  of  the  States,  and  will  be  their  most 
simple  and  most  fit  resource. 

Main  spectres  have  been  raised  out  of  this 
power  of  internal  taxation,  to  excite  the  appre¬ 
hensions  ol  the  people:  double  sets  of  revenue 
oiheers.  a  duplication  of  their  burdens  by 
double  taxations,  and  the  frightful  forms  of 
odious  and  oppressive  poll-taxes,  base  been 
played  off  with  all  the  ingenious  dexterity  of 
political  legerdemain. 

As  to  the  first  point  there  are  two  cases  in 
which  there  can  be  no  room  for  double  sets  ol 
officers:  one,  where  the  right  of  imposing  the 
tax  is  exclusively  vested  in  the  Union,  which 
applies  to  the  duties  on  imports:  the  other, 
where  the  object  has  not  fallen  under  any  State 
regulation  or  provision,  which  may  be  appli¬ 
cable  to  a  \ ariety  of  objects.  In  other  cases,  the 
probability  is  that  the  United  States  will  either 
wholly  abstain  from  the  objects  preoccupied 
for  local  purposes,  or  will  make  use  of  the  State 
officers  and  State  regulations  for  collecting  the 
additional  imposition.  I  bis  will  best  answer 
the  \  iews  ol  revenue,  bec  ause  it  will  save  ex¬ 
pense  in  the  c  ollec  lion,  and  will  best  avoid  any 
occasion  of  disgust  to  the  State  governments 
and  to  the  people.  At  all  events,  here  is  a  prac¬ 
ticable  expedient  for  avoiding  such  an  incon¬ 
venience:  and  nothing  more  can  be  required 
than  to  show  that  evils  predicted  do  not  neces 
sarilv  result  from  the  plan. 

As  to  any  argument  derived  Iroin  a  supposed 
s\ stem  of  influence,  it  is  a  sufficient  answer  to 
say  that  it  ought  not  to  be*  presumed;  but  the 
supposition  is  sum  eptible  ol  a  more  precise  an 
swer.  If  sue  h  a  spirit  should  infest  the  comic  ils 
of  the  Union,  the  most  certain  load  to  the  ac¬ 
complishment  ol  its  aim  would  he  to  emplov 
(lie  State  officers  as  much  as  possible,  and  to 
attach  them  t<>  the  Union  1>\  an  accumulation 
of  their  emoluments.  I  Ins  would  serve  to  turn 
the  tide-  of  State  influence  into  the  channels  of 


NUMBER  37  117 


the  national  government,  instead  of  making 
federal  influence  flow  in  an  opposite  and  ad¬ 
verse  current.  But  all  suppositions  of  this  kind 
are  invidious,  and  ought  to  be  banished  from 
the  consideration  of  the  great  question  before 
the  people.  They  can  answer  no  other  end  than 
to  cast  a  mist  over  the  truth. 

As  to  the  suggestion  of  double  taxation,  the 
answer  is  plain.  The  wants  of  the  Union  are  to 
be  supplied  in  one  way  or  another;  if  to  be 
done  by  the  authority  of  the  federal  govern¬ 
ment,  it  will  not  be  to  be  done  by  that  of  the 
State  government.  The  quantity  of  taxes  to  be 
paid  by  the  community  must  be  the  same  in 
either  case;  with  this  advantage,  if  the  provi¬ 
sion  is  to  be  made  by  the  Union— that  the  capi¬ 
tal  resource  of  commercial  imposts,  which  is 
the  most  convenient  branch  of  revenue,  can 
be  prudently  improved  to  a  much  greater  ex¬ 
tent  under  federal  than  under  State  regula¬ 
tion,  and  of  course  will  render  it  less  necessary 
to  recur  to  more  inconvenient  methods;  and 
with  this  further  advantage,  that  as  far  as  there 
may  be  any  real  difficulty  in  the  exercise  of  the 
power  of  internal  taxation,  it  will  impose  a 
disposition  to  greater  care  in  the  choice  and 
arrangement  of  the  means;  and  must  naturally 
tend  to  make  it  a  fixed  point  of  policy  in  the 
national  administration  to  go  as  far  as  may  be 
practicable  in  making  the  luxury  of  the  rich 
tributary  to  the  public  treasury,  in  order  to  di¬ 
minish  the  necessity  of  those  impositions  which 
might  create  dissatisfaction  in  the  poorer  and 
most  numerous  classes  of  the  society.  Happy 
it  is  when  the  interest  which  the  government 
has  in  the  preservation  of  its  own  power,  coin¬ 
cides  with  a  proper  distribution  of  the  public 
burdens,  and  tends  to  guard  the  least  wealthy 
part  of  the  community  from  oppression! 

As  to  poll-taxes,  I,  without  scruple,  confess 
my  disapprobation  of  them;  and  though  they 
have  prevailed  from  an  early  period  in  those 
States1  which  have  uniformly  been  the  most 
tenacious  of  their  rights,  I  should  lament  to  see 
them  introduced  into  practice  under  the  na¬ 
tional  government.  But  does  it  follow  because 
there  is  a  power  to  lay  them,  that  they  will  ac¬ 
tually  be  laid?  Every  State  in  the  Union  has 
power  to  impose  taxes  of  this  kind;  and  yet  in 
several  of  them  they  are  unknown  in  practice. 
Are  the  State  governments  to  be  stigmatised  as 
tyrannies  because  they  possess  this  power?  If 
they  are  not,  with  what  propriety  can  the  like 
power  justify  such  a  charge  against  the  na- 

1  The  New  England  States.— Publius 


tional  government,  or  even  be  urged  as  an  ob¬ 
stacle  to  its  adoption?  As  little  friendly  as  1 
am  to  the  species  of  imposition,  I  still  feel  a 
thorough  conviction  that  the  power  of  having 
recourse  to  it  ought  to  exist  in  the  federal 
government.  There  are  certain  emergencies  of 
nations  in  which  expedients,  that  in  the  ordi¬ 
nary  state  of  things  ought  to  be  forborne,  be¬ 
come  essential  to  the  public  weal.  And  the 
government,  from  the  possibility  of  such  emer¬ 
gencies,  ought  ever  to  have  the  option  of  mak¬ 
ing  use  of  them.  The  real  scarcity  of  objects  in 
this  country,  which  may  be  considered  as  pro¬ 
ductive  sources  of  revenue,  is  a  reason  peculiar 
to  itself,  for  not  abridging  the  discretion  of  the 
national  councils  in  this  respect.  There  may 
exist  certain  critical  and  tempestuous  con¬ 
junctures  of  the  State,  in  which  a  poll-tax  may 
become  an  inestimable  resource.  And  as  I 
know  nothing  to  exempt  this  portion  of  the 
globe  from  the  common  calamities  that  have 
befallen  other  parts  of  it,  I  acknowledge  my 
aversion  to  every  project  that  is  calculated  to 
disarm  the  government  of  a  single  weapon, 
which  in  any  possible  contingency  might  be 
usefully  employed  for  the  general  defence  and 
security. 

I  have  now  gone  through  the  examination 
of  such  of  the  powers  proposed  to  be  vested  in 
the  United  States,  which  may  be  considered  as 
having  an  immediate  relation  to  the  energy  of 
the  government;  and  have  endeavoured  to  an¬ 
swer  the  principal  objections  which  have  been 
made  to  them.  I  have  passed  over  in  silence 
those  minor  authorities,  which  are  either  too 
inconsiderable  to  have  been  thought  worthy  of 
the  hostilities  of  the  opponents  of  the  Con¬ 
stitution,  or  of  too  manifest  propriety  to  ad¬ 
mit  of  controversy.  The  mass  of  judiciary 
power,  however,  might  have  claimed  an  in¬ 
vestigation  under  this  head,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  consideration  that  its  organisation  and 
its  extent  may  be  more  advantageously  con¬ 
sidered  in  connection.  This  has  determined 
me  to  refer  it  to  the  branch  of  our  inquiries 
upon  which  we  shall  next  enter.  Publius 

Number  37 

[MADISON] 

In  reviewing  the  defects  of  the  existing  Con¬ 
federation,  and  showing  that  they  cannot  be 
supplied  by  a  government  of  less  energy  than 
that  before  the  public,  several  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  principles  of  the  latter  fell  of  course 
under  consideration.  But  as  the  ultimate  ob- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


1 18 

ject  of  these  papers  is  to  determine  clearly  and 
fully  the  merits  of  this  Constitution,  and  the 
expediency  of  adopting  it,  our  plan  cannot  be 
complete  without  taking  a  more  critical  and 
thorough  survey  of  the  work  of  the  conven¬ 
tion,  without  examining  it  in  all  its  sides,  com¬ 
paring  it  in  all  its  parts,  and  calculating  its 
probable  effects. 

That  this  remaining  task  may  be  executed 
under  impressions  conducive  to  a  just  and  fair 
result,  some  reflections  must  in  this  place  be 
indulged,  which  candour  previously  suggests. 

It  is  a  misfortune,  inseparable  from  human 
affairs,  that  public  measures  are  rarely  investi¬ 
gated  with  that  spirit  of  moderation  which  is 
essential  to  a  just  estimate  of  their  real  tend¬ 
ency  to  advance  or  obstruct  the  public  good; 
and  that  this  spirit  is  more  apt  to  be  dimin¬ 
ished  than  promoted  by  those  occasions  which 
require  an  unusual  exercise  of  it.  To  those 
who  have  been  led  by  experience  to  attend  to 
this  consideration,  it  could  not  appear  sur¬ 
prising  that  the  act  of  the  convention,  which 
recommends  so  many  important  changes  and 
innovations,  which  may  be  viewed  in  so  many 
lights  and  relations,  and  which  touches  the 
springs  of  so  many  passions  and  interests, 
should  find  or  excite  dispositions  unfriendly, 
both  on  one  side  and  on  the  other,  to  a  fair 
discussion  and  accurate  judgment  of  its  merits. 
In  some,  it  has  been  too  evident  from  their 
own  publications,  that  they  have  scanned  the 
proposed  Constitution,  not  only  with  a  pre¬ 
disposition  to  censure,  but  with  a  predetermi¬ 
nation  to  condemn;  as  the  language  held  by 
others  betrays  an  opposite  predetermination 
or  bias,  which  must  render  their  opinions  also 
of  little  moment  in  the  question.  In  placing, 
however,  these  different  characters  on  a  level, 
with  respect  to  the  weight  of  their  opinions,  1 
wish  not  to  insinuate  that  there  may  not  be  a 
material  difference  in  the  purity  of  their  in¬ 
tentions.  It  is  but  just  to  remark  in  favour  of 
the  latter  description,  that  as  our  situation  is 
universally  admitted  to  be  peculiarly  critical, 
and  to  require  indispensably  that  something 
should  be  done  for  our  relief,  the  predeter¬ 
mined  patron  of  what  has  been  actually  clone 
may  have  taken  his  bias  from  the  weight  of 
these  considerations,  as  well  as  from  considera¬ 
tions  of  a  sinister  nature.  The  predetermined 
adversary,  on  the  other  hand,  can  have  been 
governed  bv  no  venial  motive  whatever.  I  he 
intentions  of  the  first  may  be  upright,  as  they 
may  on  the  contrary  he  c  ulpnble.  1  he  views  of 
the  last  cannot  be  upright,  and  must  be  cul¬ 


pable.  But  the  truth  is,  that  these  papers  are  not 
addressed  to  persons  falling  under  either  of 
these  characters.  They  solicit  the  attention  of 
those  only  who  add  to  a  sincere  zeal  for  the 
happiness  of  their  country  a  temper  favour¬ 
able  to  a  just  estimate  of  the  means  of  promot- 
ingit. 

Persons  of  this  character  will  proceed  to  an 
examination  of  the  plan  submitted  by  the  con¬ 
vention,  not  only  without  a  disposition  to 
find  or  to  magnify  faults;  but  will  see  the  pro¬ 
priety  of  reflecting  that  a  faultless  plan  was 
not  to  he  expected.  Nor  will  they  barely  make 
allowances  for  the  errors  which  may  be  charge¬ 
able  on  the  fallibility  to  which  the  convention, 
as  a  body  of  men,  were  liable;  but  will  keep  in 
mind  that  they  themselves  also  are  but  men, 
and  ought  not  to  assume  an  infallibility  in  re¬ 
judging  the  fallible  opinions  of  others. 

With  equal  readiness  will  it  be  perceived, 
that  besides  these  inducements  to  candour, 
many  allowances  ought  to  be  made  for  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
undertaking  referred  to  the  convention. 

The  novelty  of  the  undertaking  immediately 
strikes  us.  It  has  been  shown  in  the  course  of 
these  papers,  that  the  existing  Confederation 
is  founded  on  principles  which  are  fallacious; 
that  we  must  consequently  change  this  first 
foundation. and  with  it  the  superstructure  rest¬ 
ing  upon  it.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  other 
confederacies  which  could  be  consulted  as  prec¬ 
edents  have  been  vitiated  by  the  same  erro¬ 
neous  principles,  and  can  therefore  furnish  no 
other  light  than  that  of  beacons  which  give 
warning  of  the  course  to  be  shunned,  without 
pointing  out  that  which  ought  to  he  pursued. 
The  most  that  the  convention  could  do  in  such 
a  situation,  was  to  avoid  the  errors  suggested 
by  the  past  experience  of  other  countries,  as 
well  as  of  our  own;  and  to  provide  a  con¬ 
venient  mode  of  rectifying  their  own  errors, 
as  future  experience  may  unfold  them. 

Among  the  dilfu  ultics  encountered  by  the 
convention,  a  very  important  one  must  have 
lain  in  combining  the  requisite  stability  and 
energy  in  go\ eminent  with  tin4  inviolable  at¬ 
tention  due  to  liberty  and  to  (he  republican 
form.  Without  substantially  a<  complishing  this 
part  of  their  undertaking,  they  would  have 
very  imperfectly  fulfilled  the  object  of  their 
appointment,  or  the*  expec  tation  of  the  public; 
yet  that  it  could  not  be  easily  accomplished 
will  be  denied  by  no  one  who  is  unwilling  to 
betray  bis  ignorance  of  the  subject.  I.neigy  in 
government  is  essential  to  that  security  against 


NUMBER  57 


external  and  internal  danger,  and  to  that 
prompt  and  salutary  execution  of  the  laws 
which  enter  into  the  very  definition  of  good 
government.  Stability  in  government  is  essen¬ 
tial  to  national  character  and  to  the  advantages 
annexed  to  it,  as  well  as  to  that  repose  and 
confidence  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  which 
are  among  the  chief  blessings  of  civil  society. 
An  irregular  and  mutable  legislation  is  not 
more  an  evil  in  itself  than  it  is  odious  to  the 
people;  and  it  may  be  pronounced  with  as¬ 
surance  that  the  people  of  this  country,  en¬ 
lightened  as  they  are  with  regard  to  the  nature, 
and  interested,  as  the  great  body  of  them  are, 
in  the  effects  of  good  government,  will  never 
be  satisfied  till  some  remedy  be  applied  to  the 
vicissitudes  and  uncertainties  which  character¬ 
ise  the  State  administrations.  On  comparing, 
however,  these  valuable  ingredients  with  the 
vital  principles  of  liberty,  we  must  perceive 
at  once  the  difficulty  of  mingling  them  to¬ 
gether  in  their  due  proportions.  The  genius 
of  republican  liberty  seems  to  demand  on  one 
side  not  only  that  all  power  should  be  derived 
from  the  people,  but  that  those  intrusted  with 
it  should  be  kept  in  dependence  on  the  people, 
by  a  short  duration  of  their  appointments;  and 
that  even  during  this  short  period  the  trust 
should  be  placed  not  in  a  few,  but  a  number 
of  hands.  Stability,  on  the  contrary,  requires 
that  the  hands  in  which  power  is  lodged 
should  continue  for  a  length  of  time  the  same. 
A  frequent  change  of  men  will  result  from  a 
frequent  return  of  elections;  and  a  frequent 
change  of  measures  from  a  frequent  change  of 
men:  whilst  energy  in  government  requires 
not  only  a  certain  duration  of  power,  but  the 
execution  of  it  by  a  single  hand. 

How  far  the  convention  may  have  succeeded 
in  this  part  of  their  work,  will  better  appear 
on  a  more  accurate  view  of  it.  From  the  cur¬ 
sory  view  here  taken,  it  must  clearly  appear  to 
have  been  an  arduous  part. 

Not  less  arduous  must  have  been  the  task 
of  marking  the  proper  line  of  partition  be¬ 
tween  the  authority  of  the  general  and  that  of 
the  State  governments.  Every  man  will  be  sen¬ 
sible  of  this  difficulty,  in  proportion  as  he  has 
been  accustomed  to  contemplate  and  discrimi¬ 
nate  objects  extensive  and  complicated  in  their 
nature.  The  faculties  of  the  mind  itself  have 
never  yet  been  distinguished  and  defined,  with 
satisfactory  precision,  by  all  the  efforts  of  the 
most  acute  and  metaphysical  philosophers. 
Sense,  perception,  judgment,  desire,  volition, 
memory,  imagination,  are  found  to  be  sepa¬ 


rated  by  such  delicate  shades  and  minute  gra¬ 
dations  that  their  boundaries  have  eluded  the 
most  subtle  investigations,  and  remain  a  preg¬ 
nant  source  of  ingenious  disquisition  and  con¬ 
troversy.  The  boundaries  between  the  great 
kingdom  of  nature,  and,  still  more,  between 
the  various  provinces  and  lesser  portions  into 
which  they  are  subdivided,  afford  another  il¬ 
lustration  of  the  same  important  truth.  The 
most  sagacious  and  laborious  naturalists  have 
never  yet  succeeded  in  tracing  with  certainty 
the  line  which  separates  the  district  of  vege¬ 
table  life  from  the  neighbouring  region  of  un¬ 
organised  matter,  or  which  marks  the  termina¬ 
tion  of  the  former  and  the  commencement  of 
the  animal  empire.  A  still  greater  obscurity 
lies  in  the  distinctive  characters  by  which  the 
objects  in  each  of  these  great  departments  of 
nature  have  been  arranged  and  assorted. 

When  we  pass  from  the  works  of  nature,  in 
which  all  the  delineations  are  perfectly  accu¬ 
rate,  and  appear  to  be  otherwise  only  from  the 
imperfection  of  the  eye  which  surveys  them, 
to  the  institutions  of  man,  in  which  the  ob¬ 
scurity  arises  as  well  from  the  object  itself  as 
from  the  organ  by  which  it  is  contemplated, 
we  must  perceive  the  necessity  of  moderating 
still  further  our  expectations  and  hopes  from 
the  efforts  of  human  sagacity.  Experience  has 
instructed  us  that  no  skill  in  the  science  of 
government  has  yet  been  able  to  discriminate 
and  define,  with  sufficient  certainty,  its  three 
great  provinces— the  legislative,  executive,  and 
judiciary;  or  even  the  privileges  and  powers  of 
the  different  legislative  branches.  Questions 
daily  occur  in  the  course  of  practice  wdiich 
prove  the  obscurity  which  reigns  in  these  sub¬ 
jects,  and  which  puzzle  the  greatest  adepts  in 
political  science. 

The  experience  of  ages,  with  the  continued 
and  combined  labours  of  the  most  enlightened 
legislators  and  jurists,  has  been  equally  unsuc¬ 
cessful  in  delineating  the  several  objects  and 
limits  of  different  codes  of  laws  and  different 
tribunals  of  justice.  The  precise  extent  of  the 
common  law,  and  the  statute  lawT,  the  maritime 
law,  the  ecclesiastical  law^,  the  law  of  corpora¬ 
tions,  and  other  local  laws  and  customs,  re¬ 
mains  still  to  be  clearly  and  finally  established 
in  Great  Britain,  where  accuracy  in  such  sub¬ 
jects  has  been  more  industriously  pursued  than 
in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  The  jurisdic¬ 
tion  of  her  several  courts,  general  and  local,  of 
law,  of  equity,  of  admiralty,  etc.,  is  not  less  a 
source  of  frequent  and  intricate  discussions, 
sufficiently  denoting  the  indeterminate  limits 


20 


THE  FEDERALIST 


In  which  they  are  respectivelv  circuimc ribed. 
\  1 1  new  laws,  though  penned  with  the  greatest 
technical  skill,  and  passed  on  the  fullest  and 
most  mature  deliberation,  are  considered  as 
more  or  less  obscure  and  equivocal,  until  their 
meaning  be  liquidated  and  ascertained  by  a 
scries  of  particular  discussions  and  adjudica¬ 
tions.  Besides  the  obscuritv  arising  from  the 
complexity  of  objects,  and  the  imperfection 
of  the  human  faculties,  the  medium  through 
which  the  conceptions  of  men  arc  convened  to 
each  other  adds  a  fresh  embarrassment.  The 
use  of  words  is  to  express  ideas.  Perspicuity, 
therefore,  requires  not  only  that  the  ideas 
should  be  distinct!)  formed,  but  that  they 
should  be  expressed  by  words  distinctly  and 
exclusivel}  appropriate  to  them.  But  no  lan¬ 
guage  is  so  copious  as  to  supply  words  and 
phrases  for  ever)  complex  idea,  or  so  correct 
as  not  to  include  many  equivocal!)  denoting 
diifcrent  ideas.  Hence  it  must  happen  that 
however  accurately  objects  may  be  discrimi¬ 
nated  in  themselves,  and  however  accurately 
the  discrimination  may  be  considered,  the 
definition  of  them  mas  be  rendered  inaccurate 
b\  the  inaccuracy  of  the  terms  in  which  it  is  de¬ 
lis  ered.  And  this  unavoidable  inaccuracy  must 
be  greater  or  less,  according  to  the  complexit) 
and  novelty  of  the  objects  defined.  When  the 
\lmightv  himself  condescends  to  address  man¬ 
kind  in  their  own  language,  his  meaning, 
luminous  as  it  must  be,  is  rendered  dim  and 
doubtful  b\  the  cloudy  medium  through  which 
it  is  communicated. 

Here.  then,  are  three  sources  of  vague  and 
incorrect  definitions:  indistinctness  of  the  ob¬ 
ject.  imperfection  of  the  organ  of  conception, 
inadequateness  of  the  vehicle  of  ideas.  Any 
one  of  these  must  produce  a  certain  degree  of 
obscurity.  The  convention.  in  delineating  the 
boundar)  between  the  federal  and  State  juris¬ 
dictions,  must  have  experienced  the  full  ellect 
ol  them  all. 

Io  the  dilficulties  already  mentioned  may 
be  added  the  interfering  pretensions  of  the 
larger  and  smaller  States.  We  cannot  err  in 
'Opposing  that  the  former  would  contend  for 
a  participation  in  the  government,  lull)  pro 
portioned  to  their  superior  wealth  and  im¬ 
portance:  and  that  the-  latter  would  not  be  less 
tenacious  ol  the*  equality  at  present  enjoved 
bv  them.  We*  max  well  suppose  that  neither 
side  would  cut  ire*  i  \  vie*  Id  to  the  other,  and  con¬ 
sequently  that  the  snuggle  could  be  termi¬ 
nated  only  by  compromise.  It  is  extremely 
probable,  also,  that  alter  the  ratio  of  represen¬ 


tation  had  been  adjusted,  this  very  compro¬ 
mise  must  have  produced  a  fresh  struggle  be¬ 
tween  the  same  parties,  to  give  such  a  turn  to 
the  organisation  of  the  government,  and  to 
the  distribution  of  its  powers,  as  would  in¬ 
crease  the  importance  of  the  branches,  in  form¬ 
ing  which  they  had  respectively  obtained  the 
greatest  share  of  influence.  There  arc  features 
in  the  Constitution  which  warrant  each  of 
these  suppositions;  and  as  far  as  cither  of  them 
is  well  founded,  it  shows  that  the  convention 
must  have  been  compelled  to  sacrifice  theo¬ 
retical  propriety  to  the  force  of  extraneous 
considerations. 

Nor  could  it  have  been  the  large  and  small 
Stales  only,  which  would  marshal  themselves 
in  opposition  to  each  other  on  various  points. 
Other  combinations,  resulting  from  a  differ¬ 
ence  of  local  position  and  policy,  must  have 
created  additional  difficulties.  As  every  State 
may  be  divided  into  different  districts,  and  its 
citizens  into  different  classes,  which  give  birth 
to  contending  interests  and  local  jealousies,  so 
the  different  parts  of  the  United  States  are  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  each  other  by  a  variety  of  cir¬ 
cumstances  which  produce  a  like  cflcct  on  a 
larger  scale.  And  although  this  variety  of  inter¬ 
ests.  for  reasons  sufficiently  explained  in  a 
former  paper,  may  have  a  salutary  influence  on 
the  administration  of  the  government  when 
formed,  yet  every  one  must  be  sensible  of  the 
contrary  influence  which  must  have  been  ex¬ 
perienced  in  the  task  of  forming  it. 

Would  it  be  wonderful  if.  under  the  pres¬ 
sure  of  all  these  dilficulties,  the  convention 
should  have  been  forced  into  some  deviations 
from  that  artificial  struc  ture  and  regular  sym¬ 
metry  which  an  abstract  view  of  the  subject 
might  lead  an  ingenious  theorist  to  bestow  on 
a  Constitution  planned  in  bis  closet  or  in  bis 
imagination?  The  real  wonder  is  that  so  mam 
difficulties  should  have  been  surmounted,  and 
surmounted  with  a  unanimity  almost  as  un¬ 
precedented  as  it  must  have  been  unexpected. 
It  is  impossible  for  any  man  of  candour  to  re¬ 
flet  inn  this  c  ire  must  am  e  without  partaking  of 
the  astonishment.  It  is  impossible  for  the  man 
ol  pious  relict  tinn  not  to  perceive  in  it  a  finger 
ol  that  Almighty  hand  which  lias  been  so  fre¬ 
quently  and  signally  extended  to  our  relief  in 
the  critical  stages  ol  the  revolution. 

We  had  occasion,  in  a  funner  paper,  to  lake 
notice  of  the  repeated  trials  which  have  been 
inisuc  <  esslulh  made  in  the  United  Nether- 
lauds  fot  leformiiig  the  banelul  and  notorious 
vices  of  their  constitution.  The  historv  ol  al 


121 


NUMBER  38 


most  all  the  great  councils  and  consultations 
held  among  mankind  for  reconciling  their  dis¬ 
cordant  opinions,  assuaging  their  mutual  jeal¬ 
ousies,  and  adjusting  their  respective  interests, 
is  a  history  of  factions,  contentions,  and  disap¬ 
pointments,  and  may  be  classed  among  the  most 
dark  and  degraded  pictures  which  display  the 
infirmities  and  depravities  of  the  human  char¬ 
acter.  If,  in  a  few  scattered  instances,  a  brighter 
aspect  is  presented,  they  serve  only  as  excep¬ 
tions  to  admonish  us  of  the  general  truth;  and 
by  their  lustre  to  darken  the  gloom  of  the  ad¬ 
verse  prospect  to  which  they  are  contrasted.  In 
revolving  the  causes  from  which  these  excep¬ 
tions  result,  and  applying  them  to  the  partic¬ 
ular  instances  before  us,  we  are  necessarily 
led  to  two  important  conclusions.  The  first  is, 
that  the  convention  must  have  enjoyed,  in  a 
very  singular  degree,  an  exemption  from  the 
pestilential  influence  of  party  animosities— the 
disease  most  incident  to  deliberative  bodies, 
and  most  apt  to  contaminate  their  proceed¬ 
ings.  The  second  conclusion  is  that  all  the 
deputations  composing  the  convention  were 
satisfactorily  accommodated  by  the  final  act, 
or  were  induced  to  accede  to  it  by  a  deep  con¬ 
viction  of  the  necessity  of  sacrificing  private 
opinions  and  partial  interests  to  the  public 
good,  and  by  a  despair  of  seeing  this  necessity 
diminished  by  delays  or  by  new  experiments. 

Publius 

Number 

[MADISON] 

It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  in  every  case 
reported  by  ancient  history,  in  which  govern¬ 
ment  has  been  established  with  deliberation 
and  consent,  the  task  of  framing  it  has  not 
been  committed  to  an  assembly  of  men,  but 
has  been  performed  by  some  individual  citizen 
of  pre-eminent  wisdom  and  approved  integ¬ 
rity. 

Minos,  we  learn,  was  the  primitive  founder 
of  the  government  of  Crete,  as  Zaleucus  was 
of  that  of  the  Locrians.  Theseus  first,  and  after 
him  Draco  and  Solon,  instituted  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Athens.  Lycurgus  was  the  lawgiver  of 
Sparta.  The  foundation  of  the  original  govern¬ 
ment  of  Rome  was  laid  by  Romulus,  and  the 
work  completed  by  two  of  his  elective  succes¬ 
sors,  Numa  and  Tullius  Hostilius.  On  the  ab¬ 
olition  of  royalty  the  consular  administration 
was  substituted  by  Brutus,  who  stepped  for¬ 
ward  with  a  project  for  such  a  reform,  which, 
he  alleged,  had  been  prepared  by  Tullius  Hos¬ 


tilius,  and  to  which  his  address  obtained  the 
assent  and  ratification  of  the  senate  and  peo¬ 
ple.  This  remark  is  applicable  to  confederate 
governments  also.  Amphictyon,  we  are  told, 
was  the  author  of  that  which  bore  his  name. 
The  Achaean  league  received  its  first  birth  from 
Achseus,  and  its  second  from  Aratus. 

What  degree  of  agency  these  reputed  law¬ 
givers  might  have  in  their  respective  establish¬ 
ments,  or  how  far  they  might  be  clothed  with 
the  legitimate  authority  of  the  people,  cannot 
in  every  instance  be  ascertained.  In  some,  how¬ 
ever,  the  proceeding  was  strictly  regular.  Draco 
appears  to  have  been  intrusted  by  the  people 
of  Athens  with  indefinite  powers  to  reform  its 
government  and  laws.  And  Solon,  according 
to  Plutarch,  was  in  a  manner  compelled,  by 
the  universal  suffrage  of  his  fellow-citizens,  to 
take  upon  him  the  sole  and  absolute  power 
of  new-modelling  the  constitution.  The  pro¬ 
ceedings  under  Lycurgus  were  less  regular;  but 
as  far  as  the  advocates  for  a  regular  reform 
could  prevail,  they  all  turned  their  eyes  towards 
the  single  efforts  of  that  celebrated  patriot 
and  sage,  instead  of  seeking  to  bring  about  a 
revolution  by  the  intervention  of  a  delibera¬ 
tive  body  of  citizens. 

Whence  could  it  have  proceeded  that  a  peo¬ 
ple,  jealous  as  the  Greeks  were  of  their  liberty, 
should  so  far  abandon  the  rules  of  caution  as 
to  place  their  destiny  in  the  hands  of  a  single 
citizen?  Whence  could  it  have  proceeded  that 
the  Athenians,  a  people  who  would  not  suffer 
an  army  to  be  commanded  by  fewer  than  ten 
generals,  and  who  required  no  other  proof  of 
danger  to  their  liberties  than  the  illustrious 
merit  of  a  fellow-citizen,  should  consider  one 
illustrious  citizen  as  a  more  eligible  depositary 
of  the  fortunes  of  themselves  and  their  pos¬ 
terity  than  a  select  body  of  citizens  from  whose 
common  deliberations  more  wisdom,  as  well 
as  more  safety,  might  have  been  expected? 
These  questions  cannot  be  fully  answered 
without  supposing  that  the  fears  of  discord  and 
disunion  among  a  number  of  counsellors  ex¬ 
ceeded  the  apprehension  of  treachery  or  in¬ 
capacity  in  a  single  individual.  History  in¬ 
forms  us,  likewise,  of  the  difficulties  with  which 
these  celebrated  reformers  had  to  contend,  as 
well  as  the  expedients  which  they  were  obliged 
to  employ  in  order  to  carry  their  reforms  into 
effect.  Solon,  who  seems  to  have  indulged  a 
more  temporising  policy,  confessed  that  he  had 
not  given  to  his  countrymen  the  government 
best  suited  to  their  happiness,  but  most  toler¬ 
able  to  their  prejudices.  And  Lycurgus,  more 


THE  FEDERALIST 


true  to  his  object,  was  under  the  necessity  of 
mixing  a  portion  of  violence  with  the  author¬ 
ity  of  superstition,  and  of  securing  his  final  suc¬ 
cess  by  a  voluntary  renunciation,  first  of  his 
country,  and  then  of  his  life.  If  these  lessons 
teach  us.  on  one  hand,  to  admire  the  improve¬ 
ment  made  by  America  on  the  ancient  mode 
of  preparing  and  establishing  regular  plans  of 
government,  they  serve  not  less,  on  the  other, 
to  admonish  us  of  the  hazards  and  difficulties 
incident  to  such  experiments,  and  of  the  great 
imprudence  of  unnecessarily  multiplying  them. 

Is  it  an  unreasonable  conjecture  that  the 
errors  which  may  be  contained  in  the  plan  of 
the  convention  are  such  as  have  resulted  rather 
from  the  defect  of  antecedent  experience  on 
this  complicated  and  difficult  subject,  than 
from  a  want  of  accuracy  or  care  in  the  investi¬ 
gation  of  it;  and.  consequently,  such  as  will 
not  be  ascertained  until  an  actual  trial  shall 
have  pointed  them  out?  This  conjecture  is 
rendered  probable,  not  only  by  many  consider¬ 
ations  of  a  general  nature,  but  by  the  partic¬ 
ular  case  of  the  Articles  of  Confederation.  It  is 
observable  that  among  the  numerous  objec¬ 
tions  and  amendments  suggested  by  the  several 
States,  when  these  articles  were  submitted  for 
their  ratification,  not  one  is  found  which  al¬ 
ludes  to  the  great  and  radical  error  which  on 
actual  trial  has  discovered  itself.  And  if  we 
except  the  observations  which  New  Jersey  was 
led  to  make,  rather  by  her  local  situation  than 
by  her  peculiar  foresight,  may  be  questioned 
whether  a  single  suggestion  was  of  sufficient 
moment  to  justify  a  revision  of  the  system. 
There  is  abundant  reason,  nevertheless,  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  immaterial  as  these  objections  were, 
thev  would  have  been  adhered  to  with  a  very 
dangerous  inflexibility,  in  some  States,  had  not 
a  /cal  for  their  opinions  and  supposed  interest 
been  stilled  by  the  more  powerful  sentiment 
of  self-preservation.  One  State,  we  may  re¬ 
member.  persisted  for  several  years  in  refusing 
her  ( oik  urrence, although  the  enemy  remained 
the  whole  period  at  our  gates,  or  rather  in  the 
very  bowels  of  our  country.  Nor  was  her  pli¬ 
ant  y  in  the  end  effected  by  a  less  motive  than 
the  fear  of  being  chargeable  with  protracting 
the  public  calamities,  and  endangering  the 
event  of  the  (oincst.  I  very  candid  reader  will 
make  the  proper  reflections  on  these  impor¬ 
tant  lac  ts. 

A  patient  who  finds  his  disorder  daily  grow¬ 
ing  worse,  and  that  an  efficacious  remedy  can 
no  longer  he  delayed  without  extreme  clanger, 
after  coolly  resolving  his  situation,  and  the 


characters  of  different  physicians,  selects  and 
calls  in  such  of  them  as  he  judges  most  capable 
of  administering  relief,  and  best  entitled  to  his 
confidence.  The  physicians  attend;  the  case  of 
the  patient  is  carefully  examined;  a  consulta¬ 
tion  is  held;  they  are  unanimously  agreed  that 
the  symptoms  are  critical,  but  that  the  case, 
with  proper  and  timely  relief,  so  far  from  be¬ 
ing  desperate,  that  it  may  be  made  to  issue  in 
an  improvement  of  his  constitution.  They  arc 
equally  unanimous  in  prescribing  the  remcd\, 
by  which  this  happy  effect  is  to  be  produced. 
The  prescription  is  no  sooner  made  known, 
however,  than  a  number  of  persons  interpose, 
and.  without  denying  the  reality  or  danger  of 
the  disorder,  assure  the  patient  that  the  pre¬ 
scription  will  he  poison  to  his  constitution, 
and  forbid  him,  under  pain  of  certain  death, 
to  make  use  of  it.  Might  not  the  patient  reason¬ 
ably  demand,  before  he  ventured  to  follow  this 
advice,  that  the  authors  of  it  should  at  least 
agree  among  themselves  on  some  other  remedy 
to  be  substituted?  And  if  he  found  them  dif¬ 
fering  as  much  from  one  another  as  from  his 
first  counsellors,  would  he  not  act  prudently 
in  trying  the  experiment  unanimously  recom¬ 
mended  by  the  latter,  rather  than  be  hearken¬ 
ing  to  those  who  could  neither  deny  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  a  speedy  remedy,  nor  agree  in  proposing 
one? 

Such  a  patient  and  in  such  a  situation  is 
America  at  this  moment.  She  has  been  sensible 
of  her  malady.  She  has  obtained  a  regular  and 
unanimous  advice  from  men  of  her  own  de¬ 
liberate  choice.  And  she  is  warned  by  others 
against  following  (his  advice  under  pain  of  the 
most  fatal  consequences.  Do  the  monitors  deny 
the  reality  of  her  danger?  No.  Do  they  deny 
the  necessity  of  some  speedy  and  powerful 
remedy?  No.  Are  they  agreed,  are  any  two  of 
them  agreed,  in  their  objections  to  the  remedy 
proposed,  or  in  the  proper  one  to  he  .substi¬ 
tuted?  Let  (hem  speak  for  themselves.  1  his 
one  tells  us  that  the  proposed  Constitution 
ought  to  he*  rejected,  because  it  is  not  a  con¬ 
federation  of  the  States,  but  a  government  over 
individuals.  Another  admits  that  it  ought  to 
he  a  government  over  individuals  to  a  certain 
extent,  but  by  no  means  to  the  extent  pro¬ 
posed  A  third  does  not  object  to  the  govern 
meni  over  individuals,  nr  to  the  extent  pro¬ 
posed,  but  to  the  want  of  a  hill  of  lights.  A 
fourth  concurs  in  the  absolute  necessity  of  a 
bill  of  rights,  but  contends  that  it  ought  to 
he  declaratory,  not  of  the  personal  rights  of 
individuals,  hut  of  the  rights  reserved  to  the 


NUMBER  38 


States  in  their  political  capacity.  A  fifth  is  of 
opinion  that  a  bill  of  rights  of  any  sort  would 
be  superfluous  and  misplaced,  and  that  the 
plan  would  be  unexceptionable  but  for  the 
fatal  power  of  regulating  the  times  and  places 
of  election.  An  objector  in  a  large  State  ex¬ 
claims  loudly  against  the  unreasonable  equal¬ 
ity  of  representation  in  the  Senate.  An  objec¬ 
tor  in  a  small  State  is  equally  loud  against  the 
dangerous  inequality  in  the  House  of  Repre¬ 
sentatives.  From  this  quarter,  we  are  alarmed 
with  the  amazing  expense,  from  the  number  of 
persons  who  are  to  administer  the  new  govern¬ 
ment.  From  another  quarter,  and  sometimes 
from  the  same  quarter,  on  another  occasion, 
the  cry  is  that  the  Congress  will  be  but  a 
shadow  of  a  representation,  and  that  the  gov¬ 
ernment  would  be  far  less  objectionable  if  the 
number  and  the  expense  were  doubled.  A  pa¬ 
triot  in  a  State  that  does  not  import  or  export 
discerns  insuperable  objections  against  the 
power  of  direct  taxation.  The  patriotic  adver¬ 
sary  in  a  State  of  great  exports  and  imports  is 
not  less  dissatisfied  that  the  whole  burden  of 
taxes  may  be  thrown  on  consumption.  This 
politician  discovers  in  the  Constitution  a  di¬ 
rect  and  irresistible  tendency  to  monarchy; 
that  is  equally  sure  it  will  end  in  aristocracy. 
Another  is  puzzled  to  say  which  of  these  shapes 
it  will  ultimately  assume,  but  sees  clearly  it 
must  be  one  or  other  of  them;  whilst  a  fourth 
is  not  wanting,  who  with  no  less  confidence 
affirms  that  the  Constitution  is  so  far  from 
having  a  bias  towards  either  of  these  dangers, 
that  the  weight  on  that  side  will  not  be  suf¬ 
ficient  to  keep  it  upright  and  firm  against  its 
opposite  propensities.  With  another  class  of 
adversaries  to  the  Constitution  the  language 
is  that  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary 
departments  are  intermixed  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  contradict  all  the  ideas  of  regular  gov¬ 
ernment  and  all  the  requisite  precautions  in 
favour  of  liberty.  Whilst  this  objection  circu¬ 
lates  in  vague  and  general  expressions,  there 
are  but  a  few  who  lend  their  sanction  to  it. 
Let  each  one  come  forward  with  his  particular 
explanation,  and  scarce  any  two  are  exactly 
agreed  upon  the  subject.  In  the  eyes  of  one 
the  junction  of  the  Senate  with  the  President 
in  the  responsible  function  of  appointing  to 
offices,  instead  of  vesting  this  executive  power 
in  the  Executive  alone,  is  the  vicious  part  of 
the  organisation.  To  another,  the  exclusion  of 
the  House  of  Representatives,  whose  numbers 
alone  could  be  a  due  security  against  corrup¬ 
tion  and  partiality  in  the  exercise  of  such  a 


power,  is  equally  obnoxious.  With  another, 
the  admission  of  the  President  into  any  share 
of  a  power  which  must  ever  be  a  dangerous 
engine  in  the  hands  of  the  executive  magis¬ 
trate,  is  an  unpardonable  violation  of  the 
maxims  of  republican  jealousy.  No  part  of  the 
arrangement,  according  to  some,  is  more  inad¬ 
missible  than  the  trial  of  impeachments  by 
the  Senate,  which  is  alternately  a  member  both 
of  the  legislative  and  executive  departments, 
when  this  power  so  evidently  belonged  to  the 
judiciary  department.  “We  concur  fully,”  re¬ 
ply  others,  “in  the  objection  to  this  part  of 
the  plan,  but  we  can  never  agree  that  a  refer¬ 
ence  of  impeachments  to  the  judiciary  author¬ 
ity  would  be  an  amendment  of  the  error.  Our 
principal  dislike  to  the  organisation  arises 
from  the  extensive  powers  already  lodged  in 
that  department.”  Even  among  the  zealous 
patrons  of  a  council  of  state  the  most  irrecon¬ 
cilable  variance  is  discovered  concerning  the 
mode  in  which  it  ought  to  be  constituted.  The 
demand  of  one  gentleman  is,  that  the  council 
should  consist  of  a  small  number  to  be  ap¬ 
pointed  by  the  most  numerous  branch  of  the 
legislature.  Another  would  prefer  a  larger  num¬ 
ber,  and  considers  it  as  a  fundamental  condi¬ 
tion  that  the  appointment  should  be  made  by 
the  President  himself. 

As  it  can  give  no  umbrage  to  the  writers 
against  the  plan  of  the  federal  Constitution, 
let  us  suppose  that  as  they  are  the  most  zealous, 
so  they  are  also  the  most  sagacious  of  those  who 
think  the  late  convention  were  unequal  to  the 
task  assigned  them,  and  that  a  wiser  and  better 
plan  might  and  ought  to  be  substituted.  Let 
us  further  suppose  that  their  country  should 
concur,  both  in  this  favourable  opinion  of 
their  merits,  and  in  their  unfavourable  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  convention;  and  should  accordingly 
proceed  to  form  them  into  a  second  conven¬ 
tion,  with  full  powers,  and  for  the  express  pur¬ 
pose  of  revising  and  remoulding  the  work  of 
the  first.  Were  the  experiment  to  be  seriously 
made,  though  it  required  some  effort  to  view 
it  seriously  even  in  fiction,  I  leave  it  to  be  de¬ 
cided  by  the  sample  of  opinions  just  exhibited, 
whether,  with  all  their  enmity  to  their  prede¬ 
cessors,  they  would,  in  any  one  point,  depart 
so  widely  from  their  example,  as  in  the  discord 
and  ferment  that  would  mark  their  own  de¬ 
liberations;  and  whether  the  Constitution  now 
before  the  public  would  not  stand  as  fair  a 
chance  for  immortality  as  Lycurgus  gave  to 
that  of  Sparta,  by  making  its  change  to  depend 
on  his  own  return  from  exile  and  death,  if  it 


THE  FEDERAL! SI 


were  to  be  immediately  adopted,  and  were  to 
continue  in  force,  not  until  a  better,  but  un¬ 
til  another  should  be  agreed  upon  by  this 
new  assembly  of  lawgivers. 

It  is  a  matter  both  of  wonder  and  regret  that 
those  who  raise  so  many  objections  against  the 
new  Constitution  should  never  call  to  mind 
the  defects  of  that  which  is  to  be  exchanged 
for  it.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  former  should 
be  perfect:  it  is  sufficient  that  the  latter  is  more 
imperfect.  No  man  would  refuse  to  give  brass 
for  silver  or  gold,  because  the  latter  had  some 
allov  in  it.  Xo  man  would  refuse  to  quit  a  shat¬ 
tered  and  tottering  habitation  for  a  firm  and 
commodious  building,  because  the  latter  had 
not  a  porch  to  it,  or  because  some  of  the  rooms 
might  be  a  little  larger  or  smaller,  or  the  ceil¬ 
ing  a  little  higher  or  lower  than  his  fancy 
would  have  planned  them.  But  waiving  illus¬ 
trations  of  this  sort,  is  it  not  manifest  that  most 
of  the  capital  objections  urged  against  the  new 
svstem  lie  with  tenfold  weight  against  the  ex¬ 
isting  Confederation?  Is  an  indefinite  power 
to  raise  money  dangerous  in  the  hands  of  the 
federal  government?  Fhe  present  Congress  can 
make  requisitions  to  any  amount  they  please, 
and  the  States  are  constitutionally  bound  to 
furnish  them;  they  can  emit  bills  of  credit  as 
long  as  they  will  pay  for  the  paper;  they  can 
borrow,  both  abroad  and  at  home,  as  long  as 
a  shilling  will  be  lent.  Is  an  indefinite  power 
to  raise  troops  dangerous?  The  Confederation 
gives  to  Congress  that  power  also;  and  they 
have  already  begun  to  make  use  of  it.  Is  it  im¬ 
proper  and  unsafe  to  intermix  the  different 
powers  of  government  in  the  same  body  of 
men?  Congress,  a  single  body  of  men,  are  the 
sole  depositary  of  all  the  federal  powers.  Is  it 
particularly  dangerous  to  give  the  keys  of  the 
treasury,  and  the  command  of  the  army,  into 
i he  same  hands?  The  Confederation  places 
them  both  in  the  hands  of  Congress.  Is  a  bill 
ot  rights  essential  to  liberty?  1  he  Confedera¬ 
tion  has  no  bill  of  rights.  Is  it  an  objection 
against  the  new  Constitution  that  it  empowers 
the  Senate,  with  tin*  ( oik  urrence  of  the  Kxccu- 
live,  to  make  treaties  which  are  to  be*  the 
laws  of  the  land?  The  existing  Congress,  with 
out  am  stub  control,  can  make  treaties  which 
they  themselves  have  declared,  and  most  of 
the  States  have  ret  ogni/ecl,  to  be  the  supreme 
law  of  the  land.  Is  the  importation  of  slaves 
permitted  by  the  new  Constitution  for  twenty 
years?  Bv  the  old  it  is  permitted  lor  ever. 

I  shall  be  told  that  however  dangerous  this 
mixture  of  powers  may  be  in  theory,  it  is  ren¬ 


dered  harmless  bv  the  dependence  of  Congress 
on  the  Stales  for  the  means  of  carrying  them 
into  practice;  that  however  large  the  mass  of 
powers  may  be,  it  is  in  fact  a  lifeless  mass. 
Then,  say  I,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  Con¬ 
federation  is  chargeable  with  the  still  greater 
folly  of  declaring  certain  powers  in  the  federal 
government  to  be  absolutely  necessary,  and  at 
the  same  time  rendering  them  absolutely  nuga¬ 
tory;  and,  in  the  next  place,  that  if  the  Union 
is  to  continue,  and  no  better  government  be 
substituted,  effective  powers  must  either  be 
granted  to,  or  assumed  by,  the  existing  Con¬ 
gress;  in  either  of  which  events,  the  contrast 
just  stated  will  hold  good.  But  this  is  not  all. 
Out  of  this  lifeless  mass  has  already  grown  an 
excrescent  power,  which  tends  to  realise  all 
the  dangers  that  can  be  apprehended  from  a 
defective  construction  of  the  supreme  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  Union.  It  is  now  no  longer  a  point 
of  speculation  and  hope  that  the  Western  ter¬ 
ritory  is  a  mine  of  vast  wealth  to  the  United 
States;  and  although  it  is  not  of  such  a  nature 
as  to  extricate  them  from  their  present  dis¬ 
tresses,  or,  for  some  time  to  come,  to  yield  any 
regular  supplies  for  the  public  expenses,  yet 
must  it  hereafter  be  able,  under  proper  man¬ 
agement.  both  to  effect  a  gradual  discharge  of 
the  domestic  debt,  and  to  furnish,  for  a  cer¬ 
tain  period,  liberal  tributes  to  the  federal 
treasury.  A  very  large  proportion  of  this  fund 
has  been  already  surrendered  by  individual 
States;  and  it  may  with  reason  be  expected  that 
the  remaining  States  will  not  persist  in  with¬ 
holding  similar  proofs  of  their  equity  and  gen¬ 
erosity.  We  may  calculate,  therefore,  that  a 
rich  and  fertile  country,  of  an  area  equal  to 
the  inhabited  extent  of  the  United  States,  will 
soon  become  a  national  stock.  Congress  have 
assumed  the  administration  of  this  stock.  I  hey 
have  begun  to  render  it  productive.  Congress 
have  undertaken  to  do  more:  they  have  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  form  new  States,  to  erect  temporary 
governments,  to  appoint  officers  for  them,  and 
to  prescribe  the  conditions  on  which  silt  h 
States  shall  be  admitted  into  the  Confederacy. 
All  this  has  been  done;  and  done  without  the 
least  colour  of  constitutional  authority.  Vet  no 
blame  has  been  whispered;  no  alarm  has  been 
sounded.  \  oRKAf  and  im>fpeni>im  fund  of 
revenue  is  passing  into  tlu*  hands  of  a  sinoi.f 
uonv  of  men.  who  can  raise  troops  to  an  in 
on  inch  m  miii  r,  and  appropriate  money  to 
their  support  lor  an  indefinite  period  or 
i ime.  And  vet  there  are  men  who  have  not 
on ] v'  been  silent  spectators  of  this  prospect, 


NUMBER  3 a 


but  who  are  advocates  for  the  system  which 
exhibits  it;  and,  at  the  same  time,  urge  against 
the  new  system  the  objections  which  we  have 
heard.  Would  they  not  act  with  more  consist¬ 
ency,  in  urging  the  establishment  of  the  lat¬ 
ter,  as  no  less  necessary  to  guard  the  Union 
against  the  future  powers  and  resources  of  a 
body  constructed  like  the  existing  Congress, 
than  to  save  it  from  the  dangers  threatened  by 
the  present  impotency  of  that  Assembly? 

I  mean  not,  by  anything  here  said,  to  throw 
censure  on  the  measures  which  have  been  pur¬ 
sued  by  Congress.  I  am  sensible  they  could  not 
have  done  otherwise.  The  public  interest,  the 
necessity  of  the  case,  imposed  upon  them  the 
task  of  overleaping  their  constitutional  limits. 
But  is  not  the  fact  an  alarming  proof  of  the 
danger  resulting  from  a  government  which 
does  not  possess  regular  powers  commensurate 
to  its  objects?  A  dissolution  or  usurpation  is 
the  dreadful  dilemma  to  which  it  is  continually 
exposed.  Publius 

Number  jg 

[MADISON] 

The  last  paper  having  concluded  the  obser¬ 
vations  which  were  meant  to  introduce  a  can¬ 
did  survey  of  the  plan  of  government  reported 
by  the  convention,  we  now  proceed  to  the  ex¬ 
ecution  of  that  part  of  our  undertaking. 

The  first  question  that  offers  itself  is,  whether 
the  general  form  and  aspect  of  the  government 
be  strictly  republican.  It  is  evident  that  no 
other  form  would  be  reconcilable  with  the 
genius  of  the  people  of  America;  with  the  fun¬ 
damental  principles  of  the  Revolution;  or 
with  that  honourable  determination  which  ani¬ 
mates  every  votary  of  freedom,  to  rest  all  our 
political  experiments  on  the  capacity  of  man¬ 
kind  for  self-government.  If  the  plan  of  the  con¬ 
vention,  therefore,  be  found  to  depart  from 
the  republican  character,  its  advocates  must 
abandon  it  as  no  longer  defensible. 

What,  then,  are  the  distinctive  characters  of 
the  republican  form?  Were  an  answer  to  this 
question  to  be  sought,  not  by  recurring  to 
principles,  but  in  the  application  of  the  term 
by  political  writers,  to  the  constitutions  of 
different  States,  no  satisfactory  one  would  ever 
be  found.  Holland,  in  which  no  particle  of  the 
supreme  authority  is  derived  from  the  people, 
has  passed  almost  universally  under  the  de¬ 
nomination  of  a  republic.  The  same  title 
has  been  bestowed  on  Venice,  where  absolute 
power  over  the  great  body  of  the  people  is  ex¬ 


ercised,  in  the  most  absolute  manner,  by  a 
small  body  of  hereditary  nobles.  Poland,  which 
is  a  mixture  of  aristocracy  and  of  monarchy  in 
their  worst  forms,  has  been  dignified  with  the 
same  appellation.  The  government  of  England, 
which  has  one  republican  branch  only,  com¬ 
bined  with  an  hereditary  aristocracy  and  mon¬ 
archy,  has,  with  equal  impropriety,  been  fre¬ 
quently  placed  on  the  list  of  republics.  These 
examples,  which  are  nearly  as  dissimilar  to 
each  other  as  to  a  genuine  republic,  show  the 
extreme  inaccuracy  with  which  the  term  has 
been  used  in  political  disquisitions. 

If  we  resort  for  a  criterion  to  the  different 
principles  on  which  different  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment  are  established,  we  may  define  a  republic 
to  be,  or  at  least  may  bestow  that  name  on,  a 
government  which  derives  all  its  powers  direct¬ 
ly  or  indirectly  from  the  great  body  of  the 
people,  and  is  administered  by  persons  holding 
their  offices  during  pleasure,  for  a  limited 
period,  or  duringgood  behaviour.  It  is  essential 
to  such  a  government  that  it  be  derived  from 
the  great  body  of  the  society,  not  from  an  in¬ 
considerable  proportion,  or  a  favoured  class  of 
it;  otherwise  a  handful  of  tyrannical  nobles, 
exercising  their  oppressions  by  a  delegation  of 
their  powers,  might  aspire  to  the  rank  of  re¬ 
publicans,  and  claim  for  their  government  the 
honourable  title  of  republic.  It  is  sufficient  for 
such  a  government  that  the  persons  adminis¬ 
tering  it  be  appointed,  either  directly  or  in¬ 
directly,  by  the  people;  and  that  they  hold 
their  appointments  by  either  of  the  tenures  just 
specified;  otherwise  every  government  in  the 
United  States,  as  well  as  every  other  popular 
government  that  has  been  or  can  be  well  organ¬ 
ised  or  well  executed,  would  be  degraded  from 
the  republican  character.  According  to  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  every  State  in  the  Union,  some  one 
or  other  of  the  officers  of  government  are  ap¬ 
pointed  indirectly  only  by  the  people.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  most  of  them,  the  chief  magistrate  him¬ 
self  is  so  appointed.  And  according  to  one,  this 
mode  of  appointment  is  extended  to  one  of  the 
co-ordinate  branches  of  the  legislature.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  all  the  constitutions,  also,  the  tenure  of 
the  highest  offices  is  extended  to  a  definite 
period,  and  in  many  instances,  both  within  the 
legislative  and  executive  departments,  to  a 
period  of  years.  According  to  the  provisions  of 
most  of  the  constitutions,  again,  as  well  as 
according  to  the  most  respectable  and  received 
opinions  on  the  subject,  the  members  of  the 
judiciary  department  are  to  retain  their  offices 
by  the  firm  tenure  of  good  behaviour. 


126  the  federalist 


On  comparing  the  Constitution  planned  by 
the  convention  with  the  standard  here  fixed, 
we  perceive  at  once  that  it  is,  in  the  most  rigid 
sense,  conformable  to  it.  The  House  of  Repre¬ 
sentatives,  like  that  of  one  branch  at  least  of 
all  the  State  legislatures,  is  elected  immedi¬ 
ately  bv  the  great  bodv  of  the  people.  The  Sen¬ 
ate,  like  the  present  Congress,  and  the  Senate 
of  Maryland,  derives  its  appointment  indi¬ 
rectly  from  the  people.  The  President  is  indi¬ 
rectly  derived  from  the  choice  of  the  people, 
according  to  the  example  in  most  of  the  States. 
Even  the  judges,  with  all  other  officers  of  the 
Union,  will,  as  in  the  several  States,  be  the 
choice,  though  a  remote  choice,  of  the  people 
themselves.  The  duration  of  the  appointments 
is  equally  conformable  to  the  republican  stand¬ 
ard,  and  to  the  model  of  State  constitutions. 
The  House  of  Representatives  is  periodically 
elective,  as  in  all  the  States;  and  for  the  period 
of  two  years,  as  in  the  State  of  South  Carolina. 
The  Senate  is  elective,  for  the  period  of  six 
years;  which  is  but  one  year  more  than  the 
period  of  the  Senate  of  Maryland,  and  but  two 
more  than  that  of  the  Senates  of  New  York  and 
Virginia.  The  President  is  to  continue  in  office 
for  the  period  of  four  years;  as  in  New  York 
and  Delaware  the  thief  magistrate  is  elected 
for  three  years,  and  in  South  Carolina  for  two 
years.  In  the  other  States  the  election  is  annual. 
In  several  of  the  States,  however,  no  constitu¬ 
tional  provision  is  made  for  the  impeachment 
of  the  chief  magistrate.  And  in  Delaware  and 
Virginia  he  is  not  impeachable  till  out  of  office. 
The  President  of  the  United  States  is  impeach¬ 
able  at  any  time  during  his  continuance  in 
office.  'The  tenure  by  which  the  judges  are  to 
hold  their  places  is,  as  it  unquestionably  ought 
to  be,  that  of  good  behaviour.  The  tenure  of 
the  ministerial  ol tiers  generally  will  be  a  sub¬ 
ject  of  legal  regulation,  conformably  to  the 
reason  of  the  case  and  the  example  of  the  State 
constitutions. 

Could  any  further  proof  be  required  of  the 
republican  complexion  of  this  system,  the  most 
decisive  one  might  be  found  in  its  absolute 
prohibition  of  titles  of  nobility,  both  under 
the  federal  and  the  State  go\ernments;  and  in 
its  express  guarantee  of  the  republic  an  form 
to  eat h  of  the  latter. 

“Pul  it  was  not  sufficient,"  say  the  adversa¬ 
ries  of  (he  proposed  Constitution,  "for  the  con¬ 
vention  toadhere  to  the  republican  form.  1  hey 
ought,  with  equal  care,  to  have  preserved  (he 
federal  form,  which  regards  the  Union  as  a 
Confederacy  of  sovereign  states;  instead  of 


which,  they  have  framed  a  national  govern¬ 
ment,  which  regards  the  Union  as  a  consolida¬ 
tion  of  the  States."  And  it  is  asked  by  what 
authority  this  bold  and  radical  innovation  was 
undertaken?  The  handle  which  has  been  made 
of  this  objection  requires  that  it  should  be 
examined  with  some  precision. 

Without  inquiring  into  the  accuracy  of  the 
distinction  on  which  the  objection  is  founded, 
it  will  be  necessary  to  a  just  estimate  of  its 
force,  first,  to  ascertain  the  real  character  of 
the  government  in  question;  secondly,  to  in¬ 
quire  how  far  the  convention  were  authorised 
to  propose  such  a  government;  and  thirdh. 
how  far  the  duty  they  owed  to  their  country 
could  supply  any  defect  of  regular  authority. 

First.— In  order  to  ascertain  the  real  charac¬ 
ter  of  the  government,  it  may  be  considered  in 
relation  to  the  foundation  on  which  it  is  to 
be  established;  to  the  sources  from  which  its 
ordinary  powers  are  to  be  drawn;  to  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  those  powers;  to  the  extent  of  them; 
and  to  the  authority  by  which  future  changes 
in  the  government  are  to  be  introduced. 

On  examining  the  first  relation,  it  appears, 
on  one  hand,  that  the  Constitution  is  to  be 
founded  on  the  assent  and  ratification  of  the 
people  of  America,  given  by  deputies  elected 
for  the  special  purpose;  but,  on  the  other,  that 
this  assent  and  ratification  is  to  be  given  by  the 
people,  not  as  individuals  composing  one  en¬ 
tire  nation,  but  as  composing  the  distinct  and 
independent  States  to  which  they  respective!) 
belong.  It  is  to  be  the  assent  and  ratification  of 
the  several  States,  derived  from  the  supreme 
authority  in  each  State,— the  authority  of  the 
people  themselves.  The  act,  therefore,  estab¬ 
lishing  the  Constitution, will  not  be  a  national, 
but  a  federal  act. 

That  it  will  be  a  federal  and  not  a  national 
act,  as  these  terms  arc  understood  by  the  ob¬ 
jectors;  the  act  of  (lie  people,  as  forming  so 
many  independent  States,  not  as  forming  one 
aggregate  nation,  is  obvious  from  this  single 
consideration,  that  it  is  to  result  neither  from 
the  de<  ision  of  a  majority  of  the  people  of  the 
Union,  noi  from  that  of  a  majority  of  the 
States.  It  must  result  from  the  unanimous 
assent  of  the  several  States  that  are  parties  to 
it,  dilfering  no  otherwise  from  their  ordinary 
assent  than  in  its  being  expressed,  not  by  the 
legislative  authority,  but  by  that  of  the  people 
themselves.  Weic  the  people  regarded  in  this 
transaction  as  lorming  one  nation,  the  will  of 
the  majority  ol  the  whole  people  ol  the  U nited 
States  would  bind  the  minority,  in  the*  same 


NUMBER  39  127 


manner  as  the  majority  in  each  State  must 
bind  the  minority;  and  the  will  of  the  major¬ 
ity  must  be  determined  either  by  a  comparison 
of  the  individual  votes,  or  by  considering  the 
will  of  the  majority  of  the  States  as  evidence 
of  the  will  of  a  majority  of  the  people  of  the 
United  States.  Neither  of  these  rules  has  been 
adopted.  Each  State,  in  ratifying  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  is  considered  as  a  sovereign  body,  inde¬ 
pendent  of  all  others,  and  only  to  be  bound 
by  its  own  voluntary  act.  In  this  relation,  then, 
the  new  Constitution  will,  if  established,  be 
a  federal ,  and  not  a  national ,  constitution. 

The  next  relation  is  to  the  sources  from 
which  the  ordinary  powers  of  government  are 
to  be  derived.  The  House  of  Representatives 
will  derive  its  powers  from  the  people  of  Amer¬ 
ica;  and  the  people  will  be  represented  in  the 
same  proportion,  and  on  the  same  principle, 
as  they  are  in  the  legislature  of  a  particular 
State.  So  far  the  government  is  national ,  not 
federal.  The  Senate,  on  the  other  hand,  will 
derive  its  powers  from  the  States,  as  political 
and  coequal  societies;  and  these  will  be  repre¬ 
sented  on  the  principle  of  equality  in  the  Sen¬ 
ate,  as  they  now  are  in  the  existing  Congress. 
So  far  the  government  is  federal ,  not  national. 
The  executive  power  will  be  derived  from  a 
very  compound  source.  The  immediate  election 
of  the  President  is  to  be  made  by  the  States  in 
their  political  characters.  The  votes  allotted 
to  them  are  in  a  compound  ratio,  which  con¬ 
siders  them  partly  as  distinct  and  coequal  socie¬ 
ties,  partly  as  unequal  members  of  the  same 
society.  The  eventual  election,  again,  is  to  be 
made  by  that  branch  of  the  legislature  which 
consists  of  the  national  representatives;  but 
in  this  particular  act  they  are  to  be  thrown  into 
the  form  of  individual  delegations,  from  so 
many  distinct  and  coequal  bodies  politic.  From 
this  aspect  of  the  government,  it  appears  to  be 
of  a  mixed  character,  presenting  at  least  as 
many  federal  as  national  features. 

The  difference  between  a  federal  and  na¬ 
tional  government,  as  it  relates  to  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  the  government ,  is  supposed  to  consist 
in  this,  that  in  the  former  the  powers  operate 
on  the  political  bodies  composing  the  Confed¬ 
eracy,  in  their  political  capacities;  in  the  latter, 
on  the  individual  citizens  composing  the  na¬ 
tion,  in  their  individual  capacities.  On  trying 
the  Constitution  by  this  criterion,  it  falls  under 
the  national ,  not  the  federal  character;  though 
perhaps  not  so  completely  as  has  been  under¬ 
stood.  In  several  cases,  and  particularly  in  the 
trial  of  controversies  to  which  States  may  be 


parties,  they  must  be  viewed  and  proceeded 
against  in  their  collective  and  political  capaci¬ 
ties  only.  So  far  the  national  countenance  of 
the  government  on  this  side  seems  to  be  dis¬ 
figured  by  a  few  federal  features.  But  this 
blemish  is  perhaps  unavoidable  in  any  plan; 
and  the  operation  of  the  government  on  the 
people,  in  their  individual  capacities,  in  its 
ordinary  and  most  essential  proceedings,  may, 
on  the  whole,  designate  it,  in  this  relation,  a 
national  government. 

But  if  the  government  be  national  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  operation  of  its  powers,  it  changes 
its  aspect  again  when  we  contemplate  it  in 
relation  to  the  extent  of  its  powers.  The  idea 
of  a  national  government  involves  in  it,  not 
only  an  authority  over  the  individual  citizens, 
but  an  indefinite  supremacy  over  all  persons 
and  things,  so  far  as  they  are  objects  of  lawful 
government.  Among  a  people  consolidated 
into  one  nation,  this  supremacy  is  completely 
vested  in  the  national  legislature.  Among  com¬ 
munities  united  for  particular  purposes,  it  is 
vested  partly  in  the  general  and  partly  in  the 
municipal  legislatures.  In  the  former  case,  all 
local  authorities  are  subordinate  to  the  su¬ 
preme;  and  may  be  controlled,  directed,  or 
abolished  by  it  at  pleasure.  In  the  latter,  the 
local  or  municipal  authorities  form  distinct  and 
independent  portions  of  the  supremacy,  no 
more  subject,  within  their  respective  spheres, 
to  the  general  authority  than  the  general  au¬ 
thority  is  subject  to  them  within  its  own  sphere. 
In  this  relation,  then,  the  proposed  govern¬ 
ment  cannot  be  deemed  a  national  one;  since 
its  jurisdiction  extends  to  certain  enumerated 
objects  only,  and  leaves  to  the  several  states  a 
residuary  and  inviolable  sovereignty  over  all 
other  objects.  It  is  true  that  in  controversies  re¬ 
lating  to  the  boundary  between  the  two  juris¬ 
dictions,  the  tribunal  which  is  ultimately  to 
decide,  is  to  be  established  under  the  general 
government.  But  this  does  not  change  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  the  case.  The  decision  is  to  be  impar¬ 
tially  made,  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Con¬ 
stitution;  and  all  the  usual  and  most  effectual 
precautions  are  taken  to  secure  this  impartial¬ 
ity.  Some  such  tribunal  is  clearly  essential  to 
prevent  an  appeal  to  the  sword  and  a  dissolu¬ 
tion  of  the  compact;  and  that  it  ought  to  be  es¬ 
tablished  under  the  general  rather  than  under 
the  local  governments,  or,  to  speak  more  prop¬ 
erly,  that  it  could  be  safely  established  under 
the  first  alone,  is  a  position  not  likely  to  be 
combated. 

If  we  try  the  Constitution  by  its  last  rela- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


tion  to  the  authority  by  which  amendments  are 
to  be  made,  we  find  it  neither  wholly  national 
nor  wholly  federal.  Were  it  wholly  national, 
the  supreme  and  ultimate  authority  would 
reside  in  the  majority  of  the  people  of  the 
Union;  and  this  authority  would  be  compe¬ 
tent  at  all  times,  like  that  of  a  majority  of 
every  national  society,  to  alter,  or  abolish  its 
established  government.  Were  it  wholly  fed¬ 
eral.  on  the  other  hand,  the  concurrence  of 
each  State  in  the  Union  would  be  essential  to 
every  alteration  that  would  be  binding  on  all. 
The  mode  provided  by  the  plan  of  the  con¬ 
vention  is  not  founded  on  either  of  these  prin¬ 
ciples.  In  rccjuiring  more  than  a  majority,  and 
particularly  in  computing  the  proportion  by 
States,  not  by  citizens ,  it  departs  from  the 
national  and  advances  towards  the  federal 
character:  in  rendering  the  concurrence  of  less 
than  the  whole  number  of  States  sufficient,  it 
loses  again  the  federal  and  partakes  of  the  na¬ 
tional  character. 

The  proposed  Constitution,  therefore,  is,  in 
strictness,  neither  a  national  nor  a  federal  Con¬ 
stitution,  but  a  composition  of  both.  In  its 
foundation  it  is  federal,  not  national;  in  the 
sources  from  which  the  ordinary  powers  of  the 
government  are  drawn,  it  is  partly  federal  and 
partly  national;  in  the  operation  of  these  pow¬ 
ers,  it  is  national,  not  federal;  in  the  extent  of 
them,  again,  it  is  federal,  not  national;  and, 
finally,  in  the  authoritative  mode  of  introduc¬ 
ing  amendments,  it  is  neither  wholly  federal 
nor  wholly  national.  Publius 

Number  40 

[.MADISON] 

The  second  point  to  be  examined  is,  whether 
the  convention  were  authorised  to  frame  and 
propose  this  mixed  Constitution. 

The  powers  of  the  convention  ought,  in 
strictness,  to  be  determined  by  an  inspection 
of  the  commissions  given  to  the  members  by 
their  respective  constituents.  As  all  of  these, 
however,  had  reference,  either  to  the  recom¬ 
mendation  from  the  meeting  at  Annapolis,  in 
September  1786,  or  to  that  from  Congress,  in 
February  1787,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  recur  to 
these  particular  acts. 

The  act  from  Annapolis  recommends  the 
"appointment  of  commissioners  to  take  into 
consideration  the  situation  of  the  United 
States;  todevisc  such  further  provisions  as  shall 
appear  to  them  necessary  to  render  the  Con¬ 
stitution  of  the  federal  government  adequate 


to  the  exigencies  of  the  Union;  and  to  report 
such  an  act  for  that  purpose,  to  the  United 
States  in  Congress  assembled,  as  when  agreed 
to  by  them,  and  afterwards  confirmed  by  the 
legislature  of  every  State,  will  effectually  pro¬ 
vide  for  the  same." 

The  recommendatory  act  of  Congress  is  in 
the  words  following:  "Whereas,  there  is  pro¬ 
vision  in  the  articles  of  Confederation  and  per¬ 
petual  Union,  for  making  alterations  therein, 
by  the  assent  of  a  Congress  of  the  Uni  ted  States, 
and  of  the  legislatures  of  the  several  States; 
and  whereas  experience  hath  evinced  that  there 
are  defects  in  the  present  Confederation;  as  a 
mean  to  remedy  which,  several  of  the  States, 
and  particularly  the  State  of  A rew  York,  by  ex¬ 
press  instructions  to  their  delegates  in  Congress, 
have  suggested  a  convention  for  the  purposes 
expressed  in  the  following  resolution;  and  such 
convention  appearing  to  be  the  most  probable 
mean  of  establishing  in  these  States  a  firm  na¬ 
tional  government : 

ft Resolved  — That  in  the  opinion  of  Con¬ 
gress  it  is  expedient,  that  on  the  second  Mon¬ 
day  of  May  next  a  convention  of  delegates 
who  shall  have  been  appointed  by  the  several 
States,  be  held  at  Philadelphia,  for  the  sole 
and  express  purpose  of  revising  the  articles  of 
Confederation,  and  reporting  to  Congress  and 
the  several  legislatures  such  alterations  and 
provisions  therein,  as  shall,  when  agreed  to  in 
Congress,  and  confirmed  by  the  States,  render 
the  federal  Constitution  adequate  to  the  exi¬ 
gencies  of  government  and  the  preseivation 
of  the  Union.” 

From  these  two  acts,  it  appears,  1st,  that 
the  object  of  the  convention  was  to  establish, 
in  these  States,  a  firm  national  government; 
2nd,  that  this  government  was  to  be  such  as 
would  be  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  govern¬ 
ment  and  the  preservation  of  the  Union;  3rd. 
that  these  purposes  were  to  be  effected  by  alter¬ 
ations  and  proxnsions  in  the  articles  of  Con¬ 
federation,  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  act  of  Con¬ 
gress,  or  by  such  further  provisions  as  should 
appear  necessary,  as  it  stands  in  the  recom¬ 
mendatory  act  from  Annapolis;  4th.  that  the 
alterations  and  provisions  were  to  be  reported 
to  Congress,  and  to  the  States,  in  order  to  be 
agreed  to  by  the  former  and  confirmed  by  the 
latter. 

From  a  comparison  and  fair  construction  of 
these  several  modes  of  expression  is  to  be  de¬ 
duced  the  authority  under  which  the  conven¬ 
tion  acted.  I  hey  were  to  frame  a  national  gov¬ 
ernment,  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  gov ■ 


NUMBER  40  129 


ernment,  and  of  the  Union ;  and  to  reduce  the 
articles  of  Confederation  into  such  form  as  to 
accomplish  these  purposes. 

There  are  two  rules  of  construction,  dictated 
by  plain  reason,  as  well  as  founded  on  legal 
axioms.  The  one  is,  that  every  part  of  the  ex¬ 
pression  ought,  if  possible,  to  be  allowed  some 
meaning,  and  be  made  to  conspire  to  some 
common  end.  The  other  is,  that  where  the 
several  parts  cannot  be  made  to  coincide,  the 
less  important  should  give  way  to  the  more 
important  part:  the  means  should  be  sacri¬ 
ficed  to  the  end,  rather  than  the  end  to  the 
means. 

Suppose,  then,  that  the  expressions  defining 
the  authority  of  the  convention  were  irrecon¬ 
cilably  at  variance  with  each  other;  that  a 
national  and  adequate  government  could  not 
possibly,  in  the  judgment  of  the  convention, 
be  effected  by  alterations  and  provisions  in  the 
articles  of  Confederation ;  which  part  of  the 
definition  ought  to  have  been  embraced,  and 
which  rejected?  Which  was  the  more  impor¬ 
tant,  which  the  less  important  part?  Which 
the  end;  which  the  means?  Let  the  most  scrup¬ 
ulous  expositors  of  delegated  powers;  let  the 
most  inveterate  objector  against  those  exer¬ 
cised  by  the  convention,  answer  these  ques¬ 
tions.  Let  them  declare,  whether  it  was  of  most 
importance  to  the  happiness  of  the  people  of 
America,  that  the  articles  of  Confederation 
should  be  disregarded,  and  an  adequate  gov¬ 
ernment  be  provided,  and  the  Union  pre¬ 
served;  or  that  an  adequate  government  should 
be  omitted,  and  the  articles  of  Confederation 
preserved.  Let  them  declare  whether  the  pres¬ 
ervation  of  these  articles  was  the  end  for  secur¬ 
ing  which  a  reform  of  the  government  was  to 
be  introduced  as  the  means;  or  whether  the 
establishment  of  a  government,  adequate  to 
the  national  happiness,  was  the  end  at  which 
these  articles  themselves  originally  aimed,  and 
to  which  they  ought,  as  insufficient  means,  to 
have  been  sacrificed. 

But  is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  these  ex¬ 
pressions  are  absolutely  irreconcilable  to  each 
other;  that  no  alterations  or  provisions  in  the 
articles  of  the  Confederation  could  possibly 
mould  them  into  a  national  and  adequate  gov¬ 
ernment;  into  such  a  government  as  has  been 
proposed  by  the  convention? 

No  stress,  it  is  presumed,  will,  in  this  case, 
be  laid  on  the  title;  a  change  of  that  could 
never  be  deemed  an  exercise  of  ungranted 
power.  Alterations  in  the  body  of  the  instru¬ 
ment  are  expressly  authorised.  New  provisions 


therein  are  also  expressly  authorised.  Here 
then  is  a  power  to  change  the  title;  to  insert 
new  articles;  to  alter  old  ones.  Must  it  of  neces¬ 
sity  be  admitted  that  this  power  is  infringed, 
so  long  as  a  part  of  the  old  articles  remain? 
Those  who  maintain  the  affirmative  ought  at 
least  to  mark  the  boundary  between  author¬ 
ised  and  usurped  innovations;  between  that 
degree  of  change  which  lies  within  the  com¬ 
pass  of  alterations  a?id  further  provisions,  and 
that  which  amounts  to  a  transmutation  of  the 
government.  Will  it  be  said  that  the  alterations 
ought  not  to  have  touched  the  substance  of 
the  Confederation?  The  States  would  never 
have  appointed  a  convention  with  so  much 
solemnity,  nor  described  its  objects  with  so 
much  latitude,  if  some  substantial  reform  had 
not  been  in  contemplation.  Will  it  be  said 
that  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Con¬ 
federation  were  not  within  the  purview  of 
the  convention,  and  ought  not  to  have  been 
varied?  I  ask.  What  are  these  principles?  Do 
they  require  that,  in  the  establishment  of  the 
Constitution,  the  States  should  be  regarded  as 
distinct  and  independent  sovereigns?  They  are 
so  regarded  by  the  Constitution  proposed.  Do 
they  require  that  the  members  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  should  derive  their  appointment  from 
the  legislatures,  not  from  the  people  of  the 
States?  One  branch  of  the  new  government  is 
to  be  appointed  by  these  legislatures;  and 
under  the  Confederation,  the  delegates  to  Con¬ 
gress  may  all  be  appointed  immediately  by 
the  people,  and  in  two  States1  are  actually  so 
appointed.  Do  they  require  that  the  powers  of 
the  government  should  act  on  the  States,  and 
not  immediately  on  individuals?  In  some  in¬ 
stances,  as  has  been  shown,  the  powers  of  the 
new  government  will  act  on  the  States  in  their 
collective  characters.  In  some  instances,  also, 
those  of  the  existing  government  act  immedi¬ 
ately  on  individuals.  In  cases  of  capture;  of 
piracy;  of  the  post-office;  of  coins,  weights,  and 
measures;  of  trade  with  the  Indians;  of  claims 
under  grants  of  land  by  different  States;  and, 
above  all,  in  the  case  of  trials  by  courts-martial 
in  the  army  and  navy,  by  which  death  may  be 
inflicted  without  the  intervention  of  a  jury,  or 
even  of  a  civil  magistrate;— in  all  these  cases 
the  powers  of  the  Confederation  operate  im¬ 
mediately  on  the  persons  and  interests  of  indi¬ 
vidual  citizens.  Do  these  fundamental  princi¬ 
ples  require,  particularly,  that  no  tax  should 
be  levied  without  the  intermediate  agency  of 
the  States?  The  Confederation  itself  author- 
1  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


ises  a  direct  tax,  to  a  certain  extent,  on  the 
post-office.  The  power  of  coinage  has  been  so 
construed  by  Congress  as  to  levy  a  tribute 
immediately  from  that  source  also.  But  preter- 
mitting  these  instances,  was  it  not  an  acknowl¬ 
edged  object  of  the  convention  and  the  univer¬ 
sal  expectation  of  the  people  that  the  regu¬ 
lation  of  trade  should  be  submitted  to  the 
general  government  in  such  a  form  as  would 
render  it  an  immediate  source  of  general  reve¬ 
nue?  Had  not  Congress  repeatedly  recommend¬ 
ed  this  measure  as  not  inconsistent  with  the 
fundamental  principles  of  the  Confederation? 
Had  not  every  State  but  one:  had  not  New 
York  herself,  so  far  complied  with  the  plan  of 
Congress  as  to  recognise  the  principle  of  the 
innovation?  Do  these  principles,  in  fine,  re¬ 
quire  that  the  powers  of  the  general  govern¬ 
ment  should  be  limited,  and  that,  beyond  this 
limit,  the  States  should  be  left  in  possession  of 
their  sovereignty  and  independence?  We  have 
seen  that  in  the  new  government,  as  in  the 
old,  the  general  powers  are  limited;  and  that 
the  States,  in  all  unenumerated  cases,  are  left 
in  the  enjoyment  of  their  sovereign  and  in¬ 
dependent  jurisdiction. 

The  truth  is,  that  the  great  principles  of  the 
Constitution  proposed  by  the  convention  may 
be  considered  less  as  absolutely  new,  than  as 
the  expansion  of  principles  which  are  found 
in  the  articles  of  Confederation.  The  misfor¬ 
tune  under  the  latter  system  has  been,  that 
these  principles  are  so  feeble  and  confined  as 
to  justify  all  the  charges  of  inefficiency  which 
have  been  urged  against  it,  and  to  require  a 
degree  of  enlargement  which  gives  to  the  new 
system  the  aspect  of  an  entire  transformation 
of  the  old. 

In  one  particular  it  is  admitted  that  the  con¬ 
vention  have  departed  from  the  tenor  of  their 
commission.  Instead  of  reporting  a  plan  re¬ 
quiring  the  confirmation  of  the  legislatures  of 
all  the  States,  they  have  reported  a  plan  which 
is  to  be  confirmed  by  the  people,  and  may  be 
carried  into  effect  by  nine  States  only.  It  is 
worthy  of  remark  that  this  objection,  though 
the  most  plausible,  has  been  the  least  urged  in 
the  publications  which  ha\c  swarmed  against 
the  convention.  The  forbearance  can  only  have 
proceeded  from  an  irresistible  conviction  of 
the  absurdity  ol  subjecting  the  fate  of  twelve 
States  to  the  perverseness  or  corruption  of 
a  thirteenth:  from  the  example  of  indexible 
opposition  given  by  a  majority  of  one  sixtieth 
of  the  people  of  America  to  a  measure  ap¬ 
proved  and  called  for  by  the  voice  of  twelve 


States,  comprising  fifty-nine  sixtieths  of  the 
people— an  example  still  fresh  in  the  memory 
and  indignation  of  every  citizen  who  has  felt 
for  the  wounded  honour  and  prosperity  of  his 
country.  As  this  objection,  therefore,  has  been 
in  a  manner  waived  by  those  who  have  criti¬ 
cised  the  powers  of  the  convention,  I  dismiss 
it  without  further  observation. 

The  third  point  to  be  inquired  into  is,  how 
far  considerations  of  duty  arising  out  of  the 
case  itself  could  have  supplied  any  defect  of 
regular  authority. 

In  the  preceding  inquiries  the  powers  of  the 
convention  have  been  analysed  and  tried  with 
the  same  rigour,  and  by  the  same  rules,  as  if 
they  had  been  real  and  final  powers  for  the 
establishment  of  a  Constitution  for  the  United 
States.  We  have  seen  in  what  manner  they  have 
borne  the  trial  even  on  that  supposition.  It 
is  time  now  to  recollect  that  the  powers  were 
merely  advisory  and  recommendatory;  that 
they  were  so  meant  by  the  States,  and  so  under¬ 
stood  by  the  convention;  and  that  the  latter 
have  accordingly  planned  and  proposed  a 
Constitution  which  is  to  be  of  no  more  con¬ 
sequence  than  the  paper  on  which  it  is  written, 
unless  it  be  stamped  with  the  approbation  of 
those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  This  reflection 
places  the  subject  in  a  point  of  view  altogether 
different,  and  will  enable  us  to  judge  with 
propriety  of  the  course  taken  by  the  conven¬ 
tion. 

Let  us  view  the  ground  on  which  the  con¬ 
vention  stood.  It  may  be  collected  from  their 
proceedings,  that  they  were  deeply  and  unani¬ 
mously  impressed  with  the  crisis  which  had 
led  theircountry  almost  with  one  voice  to  make 
so  singular  and  solemn  an  experiment  for  cor¬ 
recting  the  errors  of  a  system  by  which  this 
crisis  had  been  produced;  that  they  were  no 
less  deeply  and  unanimously  convinced  that 
such  a  reform  as  they  have  proposed  was  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary  to  effect  the  purposes  of  their 
appointment.  It  <  mild  not  be  unknown  tothem 
that  the  hopes  and  expectations  of  the  great 
body  of  citizens,  throughout  this  great  empire, 
were  turned  with  the  keenest  anxiety  to  the 
event  of  their  deliberations.  1  hey  had  every 
reason  to  believe  that  the  contrary  sentiments 
agitated  the  minds  and  bosoms  of  every  ex¬ 
ternal  and  internal  foe  to  the  liberty  and  pros¬ 
perity  of  the  United  States.  1  hey  had  seen  in 
the  origin  and  progress  of  t lie  experiment,  the 
alacrity  with  which  the  proposition ,  made'  In 
a  single*  State  (Virginia),  towards  a  partial 
amendment  of  the  Confederation,  had  been 


NUMBER  40  131 


attended  to  and  promoted.  They  had  seen 
the  liberty  assumed  by  a  very  few  deputies  from 
a  very  few  States,  convened  at  Annapolis,  of 
recommending  a  great  and  critical  object, 
wholly  foreign  to  their  commission,  not  only 
justified  by  the  public  opinion,  but  actually 
carried  into  effect  by  twelve  out  of  the  thirteen 
States.  They  had  seen,  in  a  variety  of  instances, 
assumptions  by  Congress,  not  only  of  recom¬ 
mendatory,  but  of  operative,  powers,  warrant¬ 
ed,  in  the  public  estimation,  by  occasions  and 
objects  infinitely  less  urgent  than  those  by 
which  their  conduct  was  to  be  governed.  They 
must  have  reflected,  that  in  all  great  changes  of 
established  governments,  forms  ought  to  give 
way  to  substance;  that  a  rigid  adherence  in 
such  cases  to  the  former,  would  render  nom¬ 
inal  and  nugatory  the  transcendent  and  pre¬ 
cious  right  of  the  people  to  “abolish  or  alter 
their  governments  as  to  them  shall  seem  most 
likely  to  effect  their  safety  and  happiness,”1 
since  it  is  impossible  for  the  people  spontane¬ 
ously  and  universally  to  move  in  concert  to¬ 
wards  their  object;  and  it  is  therefore  essential 
that  such  changes  be  instituted  by  some  in¬ 
formal  and  unauthorised  propositions ,  made 
by  some  patriotic  and  respectable  citizen  or 
number  of  citizens.  They  must  have  recollected 
that  it  was  by  this  irregular  and  assumed  priv¬ 
ilege  of  proposing  to  the  people  plans  for  their 
safety  and  happiness,  that  the  States  were  first 
united  against  the  danger  with  which  they 
were  threatened  by  their  ancient  government; 
that  committees  and  congresses  were  formed 
for  concentrating  their  efforts  and  defending 
their  rights;  and  that  conventions  were  elected 
in  the  several  States  for  establishing  the  con¬ 
stitutions  under  which  they  are  now  governed; 
nor  could  it  have  been  forgotten  that  no  little 
ill-timed  scruples,  no  zeal  for  adhering  to  or¬ 
dinary  forms,  were  anywhere  seen,  except  in 
those  who  wished  to  indulge,  under  these 
masks,  their  secret  enmity  to  the  substance 
contended  for.  They  must  have  borne  in  mind 
that  as  the  plan  to  be  framed  and  proposed 
was  to  be  submitted  to  the  people  themselves, 
the  disapprobation  of  this  supreme  authority 
would  destroy  it  for  ever;  its  approbation  blot 
out  antecedent  errors  and  irregularities.  It 
might  even  have  occurred  to  them,  that  where 
a  disposition  to  cavil  prevailed,  their  neglect 
to  execute  the  degree  of  power  vested  in  them, 
and  still  more  their  recommendation  of  any 
measure  whatever,  not  warranted  by  their  com¬ 
mission,  would  not  less  excite  animadversion, 
1  Declaration  of  Independence.— Publius 


than  a  recommendation  at  once  of  a  measure 
fully  commensurate  to  the  national  exigencies. 

Had  the  convention,  under  all  these  impres¬ 
sions,  and  in  the  midst  of  all  these  considera¬ 
tions,  instead  of  exercising  a  manly  confidence 
in  their  country,  by  whose  confidence  they  had 
been  so  peculiarly  distinguished,  and  of  point¬ 
ing  out  a  system  capable,  in  their  judgment, 
of  securing  its  happiness,  taken  the  cold  and 
sullen  resolution  of  disappointing  its  ardent 
hopes,  of  sacrificing  substance  to  forms,  of  com¬ 
mitting  the  dearest  interest  of  their  country 
to  the  uncertainties  of  delay  and  the  hazard  of 
events,  let  me  ask  the  man  who  can  raise  his 
mind  to  one  elevated  conception,  who  can 
awaken  in  his  bosom  one  patriotic  emotion, 
what  judgment  ought  to  have  been  pronounc¬ 
ed  by  the  impartial  world,  by  the  friends  of 
mankind,  by  every  virtuous  citizen,  on  the  con¬ 
duct  and  character  of  this  assembly?  Or  if  there 
be  a  man  whose  propensity  to  condemn  is 
susceptible  of  no  control,  let  me  then  ask  what 
sentence  he  has  in  reserve  for  the  twelve  States 
who  usurped  the  power  of  sending  deputies  to 
the  convention,  a  body  utterly  unknown  to 
their  constitutions;  for  Congress,  who  recom¬ 
mended  the  appointment  of  this  body,  equally 
unknown  to  the  Confederation;  and  for  the 
State  of  New  York,  in  particular,  which  first 
urged  and  then  complied  with  this  unauthor¬ 
ised  interposition? 

But  that  the  objectors  may  be  disarmed  of 
every  pretext,  it  shall  be  granted  for  a  moment 
that  the  convention  were  neither  authorised 
by  their  commission,  nor  justified  by  circum¬ 
stances  in  proposing  a  Constitution  for  their 
country:  does  it  follow  that  the  Constitution 
ought,  for  that  reason  alone,  to  be  rejected? 
If,  according  to  the  noble  precept,  it  be  lawful 
to  accept  good  advice  even  from  an  enemy, 
shall  we  set  the  ignoble  example  of  refusing 
such  advice  even  when  it  is  offered  by  our 
friends?  The  prudent  inquiry,  in  all  cases, 
ought  surely  to  be,  not  so  much  from  whom  the 
advice  comes,  as  whether  the  advice  be  good . 

The  sum  of  what  has  been  here  advanced 
and  proved  is,  that  the  charge  against  the  con¬ 
vention  of  exceeding  their  powers,  except  in 
one  instance  little  urged  by  the  objectors,  has 
no  foundation  to  support  it;  that  if  they  had 
exceeded  their  powers,  they  were  not  only  war¬ 
ranted,  but  required,  as  the  confidential  serv¬ 
ants  of  their  country,  by  the  circumstances  in 
which  they  were  placed,  to  exercise  the  liberty 
which  they  assumed;  and  that  finally,  if  they 
had  violated  both  their  powers  and  their  obli- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


gations,  in  proposing  a  Constitution,  this 
ought  nevertheless  to  be  embraced,  if  it  be 
calculated  to  accomplish  the  views  and  happi¬ 
ness  of  the  people  of  America.  How  far  this 
character  is  due  to  the  Constitution,  is  the  sub¬ 
ject  under  investigation.  Publius 

Number  41 

[madison] 

The  Constitution  proposed  by  the  convention 
may  be  considered  under  two  general  points 
of  view.  The  first  relates  to  the  sum  or  quan¬ 
tity  of  power  which  it  vests  in  the  government, 
including  the  restraints  imposed  on  the  States. 
The  second,  to  the  particular  structure  of  the 
government,  and  the  distribution  of  this  pow¬ 
er  among  its  several  branches. 

Under  the  first  view  of  the  subject,  two  im¬ 
portant  questions  arise:  1  .Whether  any  part  of 
the  powers  transferred  to  the  general  govern¬ 
ment  be  unnecessary  or  improper?  2.  Whether 
the  entire  mass  of  them  be  dangerous  to  the 
portion  of  jurisdiction  left  in  the  several 
States? 

Is  the  aggregate  power  of  the  general  gov¬ 
ernment  greater  than  ought  to  have  been 
vested  in  it?  This  is  the  first  question. 

It  cannot  have  escaped  those  who  have  at¬ 
tended  with  candour  to  the  arguments  em¬ 
ployed  against  the  extensive  powers  of  the 
government,  that  the  authors  of  them  have 
very  little  considered  how  far  these  powers 
were  necessary  means  of  attaining  a  necessary 
end.  They  have  chosen  rather  to  dwell  on  the 
inconveniences  which  must  be  unavoidably 
blended  with  all  political  advantages;  and  on 
the  possible  abuses  which  must  be  incident  to 
every  power  or  trust,  of  which  a  beneficial  use 
can  be  made.  This  method  of  handling  the 
subject  cannot  impose  on  the  good  sense  of 
the  people  of  America.  It  may  display  the  sub¬ 
tlety  of  the  writer;  it  may  open  a  boundless 
field  for  rhetoric  and  declamation;  it  may  in¬ 
flame  the  passions  of  the  unthinking,  and  may 
confirm  the  prejudices  of  the  misthinking: 
but  cool  and  candid  people  will  at  once  re¬ 
flect,  that  the  purest  of  human  blessings  must 
have  a  portion  of  alloy  in  them;  that  the  choice 
must  always  be  made,  if  not  of  the  lesser  evil, 
at  least  of  the  greater,  not  the  perfect,  good; 
and  that  in  every  political  institution,  a  power 
to  advant c  the  public  happiness  involves  a  dis- 
cretion  which  may  be  misapplied  and  abused. 
They  will  sec,  therefore,  that  in  all  cases  where 


power  is  to  be  conferred,  the  point  first  to  be 
decided  is,  whether  such  a  power  be  necessary 
to  the  public  good;  as  the  next  will  be,  in  case 
of  an  affirmative  decision,  to  guard  as  effec¬ 
tually  as  possible  against  a  perversion  of  the 
power  to  the  public  detriment. 

That  we  may  form  a  correct  judgment  on 
this  subject,  it  will  be  proper  to  review  the 
several  powers  conferred  on  the  government 
of  the  Union;  and  that  this  may  be  the  more 
conveniently  done  they  may  be  reduced  into 
different  classes  as  they  relate  to  the  following 
different  objects:  1.  Security  against  foreign 
danger;  2.  Regulation  of  the  intercourse  with 
foreign  nations;  3.  Maintenance  of  harmony 
and  proper  intercourse  among  the  States;  4. 
Certain  miscellaneous  objects  of  general  util¬ 
ity;  5.  Restraint  of  the  States  from  certain  in¬ 
jurious  acts;  6.  Provisions  for  giving  due  effi¬ 
cacy  to  all  these  powers. 

The  powers  falling  within  the  first  class  are 
those  of  declaring  war  and  granting  letters  of 
marque;  of  providing  armies  and  fleets;  of  reg¬ 
ulating  and  calling  forth  the  militia;  of  levy¬ 
ing  and  borrowing  money. 

Security  against  foreign  danger  is  one  of  the 
primitive  objects  of  civil  society.  It  is  an  avow¬ 
ed  and  essential  object  of  the  American  Union. 
The  powers  requisite  for  attaining  it  must  be 
effectually  confided  to  the  federal  councils. 

Is  the  power  of  declaring  war  necessary?  No 
man  will  answer  this  question  in  the  negative. 
It  would  be  superfluous,  therefore,  to  enter 
into  a  proof  of  the  affirmative.  The  existing 
Confederation  establishes  this  power  in  the 
most  ample  form. 

Is  the  power  of  raising  armies  and  equip¬ 
ping  fleets  necessary?  This  is  involved  in  the 
foregoing  power.  It  is  involved  in  the  power  of 
self-defence. 

But  was  it  necessary  to  give  an  indefinite 
power  of  raising  troops,  as  well  as  providing 
fleets;  and  of  maintaining  both  in  peace,  as 
well  as  in  war? 

The  answer  to  these  questions  has  been  too 
far  anticipated  in  another  place  to  admit  an 
extensive  discussion  of  them  in  this  place.  The 
answer  indeed  seems  to  be  so  obvious  and  con¬ 
clusive  as  scarcely  to  justify  such  a  discussion 
in  any  place.  With  what  colour  of  propriety 
could  the  force  necessary  for  defence  be  lim¬ 
ited  by  those  who  cannot  limit  the  force  of 
offence?  If  a  federal  Constitution  could  chain 
the  ambition  or  set  bounds  to  the  exertions  of 
all  other  nations,  then  indeed  might  it  pru¬ 
dently  chain  the  discretion  of  its  own  govern- 


NUMBER  41 


ment,  and  set  bounds  to  the  exertions  for  its 
own  safety. 

How  could  a  readiness  for  war  in  time  of 
peace  be  safely  prohibited,  unless  we  could 
prohibit,  in  like  manner,  the  preparations  and 
establishments  of  every  hostile  nation?  The 
means  of  security  can  only  be  regulated  by  the 
means  and  the  danger  of  attack.  They  will,  in 
fact,  be  ever  determined  by  these  rules,  and 
by  no  others.  It  is  in  vain  to  oppose  constitu¬ 
tional  barriers  to  the  impulse  of  self-preserva¬ 
tion.  It  is  worse  than  in  vain;  because  it  plants 
in  the  Constitution  itself  necessary  usurpa¬ 
tions  of  power,  every  precedent  of  which  is  a 
germ  of  unnecessary  and  multiplied  repeti¬ 
tions.  If  one  nation  maintains  constantly  a 
disciplined  army,  ready  for  the  service  of  ambi¬ 
tion  or  revenge,  it  obliges  the  most  pacific  na¬ 
tions  who  may  be  within  the  reach  of  its  enter¬ 
prises  to  take  corresponding  precautions.  The 
fifteenth  century  was  the  unhappy  epoch  of 
military  establishments  in  the  time  of  peace. 
They  were  introduced  by  Charles  VII.  of 
France.  All  Europe  has  followed,  or  been  forc¬ 
ed  into,  the  example.  Had  the  example  not 
been  followed  by  other  nations  all  Europe  must 
long  ago  have  worn  the  chains  of  a  universal 
monarch.  Were  every  nation  except  France 
now  to  disband  its  peace  establishments,  the 
same  event  might  follow.  The  veteran  legions 
of  Rome  were  an  overmatch  for  the  undis¬ 
ciplined  valour  of  all  other  nations,  and  ren¬ 
dered  her  the  mistress  of  the  world. 

Not  the  less  true  is  it,  that  the  liberties  of 
Rome  proved  the  final  victim  to  her  military 
triumphs;  and  that  the  liberties  of  Europe,  as 
far  as  they  ever  existed,  have,  with  few  excep¬ 
tions,  been  the  price  of  her  military  establish¬ 
ments.  A  standing  force,  therefore,  is  a  dan¬ 
gerous,  at  the  same  time  that  it  may  be  a 
necessary,  provision.  On  the  smallest  scale  it 
has  its  inconveniences.  On  an  extensive  scale 
its  consequences  may  be  fatal.  On  any  scale  it 
is  an  object  of  laudable  circumspection  and 
precaution.  A  wise  nation  will  combine  all 
these  considerations;  and,  whilst  it  does  not 
rashly  preclude  itself  from  any  resource  which 
may  become  essential  to  its  safety,  will  exert 
all  its  prudence  in  diminishing  both  the  neces¬ 
sity  and  the  danger  of  resorting  to  one  which 
may  be  inauspicious  to  its  liberties. 

The  clearest  marks  of  this  prudence  are 
stamped  on  the  proposed  Constitution.  The 
Union  itself,  which  it  cements  and  secures, 
destroys  every  pretext  for  a  military  establish¬ 
ment  which  could  be  dangerous.  America 


united,  with  a  handful  of  troops,  or  without  a 
single  soldier,  exhibits  a  more  forbidding  pos¬ 
ture  to  foreign  ambition  than  America  dis¬ 
united,  with  a  hundred  thousand  veterans 
ready  for  combat.  It  was  remarked  on  a  former 
occasion,  that  the  want  of  this  pretext  had 
saved  the  liberties  of  one  nation  in  Europe. 
Being  rendered  by  her  insular  situation  and 
her  maritime  resources  impregnable  to  the 
armies  of  her  neighbours,  the  rulers  of  Great 
Britain  have  never  been  able,  by  real  or  arti¬ 
ficial  dangers,  to  cheat  the  public  into  an  ex¬ 
tensive  peace  establishment.  The  distance  of 
the  United  States  from  the  powerful  nations 
of  the  world  gives  them  the  same  happy  secu¬ 
rity.  A  dangerous  establishment  can  never  be 
necessary  or  plausible,  so  long  as  they  con¬ 
tinue  a  united  people.  But  let  it  never,  for  a 
moment,  be  forgotten  that  they  are  indebted 
for  this  advantage  to  the  Union  alone.  The 
moment  of  its  dissolution  will  be  the  date  of  a 
new  order  of  things.  The  fears  of  the  weaker, 
or  the  ambition  of  the  stronger  States,  or  Con¬ 
federacies,  will  set  the  same  example  in  the 
New  as  Charles  VII.  did  in  the  Old  World. 
The  example  will  be  followed  here  from  the 
same  motives  which  produced  universal  imi¬ 
tation  there.  Instead  of  deriving  from  our 
situation  the  precious  advantage  which  Great 
Britain  has  derived  from  hers,  the  face  of 
America  will  be  but  a  copy  of  that  of  the  con¬ 
tinent  of  Europe.  It  will  present  liberty  every¬ 
where  crushed  between  standing  armies  and 
perpetual  taxes.  The  fortunes  of  disunited 
America  will  be  even  more  disastrous  than 
those  of  Europe.  The  sources  of  evil  in  the  lat¬ 
ter  are  confined  to  her  own  limits.  No  superior 
powers  of  another  quarter  of  the  globe  in¬ 
trigue  among  her  rival  nations,  inflame  their 
mutual  animosities,  and  render  them  the  in¬ 
struments  of  foreign  ambition,  jealousy,  and 
revenge.  In  America  the  miseries  springing 
from  her  internal  jealousies,  contentions,  and 
wars,  would  form  a  part  only  of  her  lot.  A 
plentiful  addition  of  evils  would  have  their 
source  in  that  relation  in  which  Europe  stands 
to  this  quarter  of  the  earth,  and  which  no 
other  quarter  of  the  earth  bears  to  Europe. 

This  picture  of  the  consequences  of  dis¬ 
union  cannot  be  too  highly  coloured,  or  too 
often  exhibited.  Every  man  who  loves  peace,  ev¬ 
ery  man  who  loves  his  country,  every  man  who 
loves  liberty,  ought  to  have  it  ever  before  his 
eyes,  that  he  may  cherish  in  his  heart  a  due  at¬ 
tachment  to  the  Union  of  America,  and  be  able 
to  set  a  due  value  on  the  means  of  preserving  it. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


Next  to  the  effectual  establishment  of  the 
Union,  the  best  possible  precaution  against 
danger  from  standing  armies  is  a  limitation  of 
the  term  for  which  revenue  may  be  appropri¬ 
ated  to  their  support.  This  precaution  the  Con¬ 
stitution  has  prudently  added.  I  will  not  re¬ 
peat  here  the  observations  which  I  Hatter 
myself  have  placed  this  subject  in  a  just  and 
satisfactory  light.  But  it  may  not  be  improper 
to  lake  notice  of  an  argument  against  this 
part  of  the  Constitution  which  has  been  drawn 
from  the  policy  and  practice  of  Great  Britain. 
It  is  said  that  the  continuance  of  an  army  in 
that  kingdom  requires  an  annual  vote  of  the 
legislature;  whereas  the  American  Constitu¬ 
tion  has  lengthened  this  critical  period  to  two 
years.  This  is  the  form  in  which  the  compari¬ 
son  is  usually  stated  to  the  public:  but  is  it  a 
just  form?  Is  it  a  fair  comparison?  Does  the 
British  Constitution  restrain  the  parliamen¬ 
tary  discretion  to  one  year?  Does  the  American 
impose  on  the  Congress  appropriations  for 
two  years?  On  the  contrary,  it  cannot  be  un¬ 
known  to  the  authors  of  the  fallacy  themselves, 
that  the  British  Constitution  fixes  no  limit 
whatever  to  the  discretion  of  the  legislature, 
and  that  the  American  ties  down  the  legisla¬ 
ture  to  two  years,  as  the  longest  admissible 
term. 

Had  the  argument  from  the  British  example 
been  truly  stated,  it  would  have  stood  thus: 
The  term  for  which  supplies  may  be  appro¬ 
priated  to  the  army  establishment,  though  un¬ 
limited  by  the  British  Constitution,  has  never¬ 
theless,  in  practice,  been  limited  by  parlia¬ 
mentary  discretion  to  a  single  year.  Now,  if  in 
Great  Britain,  where  the  House  of  Commons 
is  elected  for  seven  years;  where  so  great  a 
proportion  of  the  members  are  elected  by  so 
small  a  proportion  of  the  people;  where  t lie 
electors  arc  so  corrupted  by  the  representa¬ 
tives,  and  the  representatives  so  corrupted  by 
the  Crown,  the  rcprcscntatiie  body  can  possess 
a  power  to  make  appropriations  to  the  army 
for  an  indefinite  term,  without  desiring,  or 
without  daring,  to  extend  the  term  beyond  a 
single  year,  ought  not  suspicion  herself  to 
blush,  in  pretending  that  the  representatives 
of  the  United  States,  elet  ted  irkii.y  by  the 
WHOM-,  lionv  of  the  people,  every  si  cond  ykar, 
cannot  be  safely  intrusted  with  the  discretion 
over  smh  appropriations,  expressly  limited  to 
the  short  period  of  two  y cars? 

\  bad  cause  seldom  fails  to  betray  itself.  Of 
this  truth,  the  management  of  the  opposition 
to  the  federal  government  is  an  unvaried  ex¬ 


emplification.  But  among  all  the  blunders 
which  have  been  committed,  none  is  more 
striking  than  the  attempt  to  enlist  on  that  side 
the  prudent  jealousy  entertained  by  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  standing  armies.  The  attempt  has  awak¬ 
ened  fully  the  public  attention  to  that  im¬ 
portant  subject;  and  has  led  to  investigations 
which  must  terminate  in  a  thorough  and  uni¬ 
versal  conviction,  not  only  that  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  has  provided  the  most  effectual  guards 
against  danger  from  that  quarter,  but  that 
nothing  short  of  a  Constitution  fully  adequate 
to  the  national  defence  and  the  preservation 
of  the  Union  can  save  America  from  as  many 
standing  armies  as  it  may  be  split  into  States 
or  Confederacies,  and  from  such  a  progressive 
augmentation  of  these  establishments  in  each 
as  will  render  them  as  burdensome  to  the 
properties  and  ominous  to  the  liberties  of  the 
people  as  any  establishment  that  can  become 
necessary,  under  a  united  and  efficient  gov¬ 
ernment,  must  be  tolerable  to  the  former  and 
safe  to  the  latter. 

The  palpable  necessity  of  the  power  to 
provide  and  maintain  a  navy  has  protected 
that  part  of  the  Constitution  against  a  spirit 
of  censure,  which  has  spared  few  other  parts. 
It  must,  indced.be  numbered  among  the  great¬ 
est  blessings  of  America,  that  as  her  Union  will 
be  the  only  source  of  her  maritime  strength, 
so  this  will  be  a  principal  source  of  her  secu¬ 
rity  against  danger  from  abroad.  In  this  respect 
our  situation  bears  another  likeness  to  the  in¬ 
sular  advantage  of  Great  Britain.  I  hc  bat¬ 
teries  most  capable  of  repelling  foreign  enter¬ 
prises  on  our  safety  are  happily  such  as  can 
never  be  turned  by  a  perfidious  government 
against  our  liberties. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Atlantic  frontier  arc 
all  of  them  deeply  interested  in  this  provision 
for  naval  protection,  and  if  they  have  hitherto 
been  suffered  to  sleep  quietly  in  their  beds; 
if  their  property  has  remained  safe  against  the 
predatory  spirit  of  licentious  adventurers;  if 
their  maritime  towns  have  not  yet  been  com¬ 
pelled  to  ransom  themselves  from  the  terrors 
of  a  conflagration,  by  yielding  to  the  exactions 
of  daring  and  sudden  invaders,  these  instances 
of  good  fortune  are  not  to  be  ascribed  to  the 
capacity  of  the  existing  government  for  the 
protection  of  those  from  whom  it  claims  al¬ 
legiance,  but  to  causes  that  are  fugitive  and 
fallacious.  If  we  except  perhaps  Virginia  and 
Maryland,  which  arc  peculiarly  vulnerable  on 
their  eastern  frontiers,  no  part  of  the  Union 
ought  to  feel  more  anxiety  on  this  subject 


NUMBER  41  135 


than  New  York.  Her  sea-coast  is  extensive.  A 
very  important  district  of  the  State  is  an  island. 
The  State  itself  is  penetrated  by  a  large  naviga¬ 
ble  river  for  more  than  fifty  leagues.  The  great 
emporium  of  its  commerce,  the  great  reservoir 
of  its  wealth,  lies  every  moment  at  the  mercy 
of  events,  and  may  almost  be  regarded  as  a 
hostage  for  ignominious  compliances  with  the 
dictates  of  a  foreign  enemy,  or  even  with  the 
rapacious  demands  of  pirates  and  barbarians. 
Should  a  war  be  the  result  of  the  precarious 
situation  of  European  affairs,  and  all  the  un¬ 
ruly  passions  attending  it  be  let  loose  on  the 
ocean,  our  escape  from  insults  and  depreda¬ 
tions,  not  only  on  that  element,  but  every  part 
of  the  other  bordering  on  it,  will  be  truly  mi¬ 
raculous.  In  the  present  condition  of  America, 
the  States  more  immediately  exposed  to  these 
calamities  have  nothing  to  hope  from  the 
phantom  of  a  general  government  which  now 
exists;  and  if  their  single  resources  were  equal 
to  the  task  of  fortifying  themselves  against  the 
danger,  the  object  to  be  protected  would  be 
almost  consumed  by  the  means  of  protecting 
them. 

The  power  of  regulating  and  calling  forth 
the  militia  has  been  already  sufficiently  vindi¬ 
cated  and  explained. 

The  power  of  levying  and  borrowing  money, 
being  the  sinew  of  that  which  is  to  be  exerted 
in  the  national  defence,  is  properly  thrown 
into  the  same  class  with  it.  This  power,  also, 
has  been  examined  already  with  much  atten¬ 
tion,  and  has,  I  trust,  been  clearly  shown  to 
be  necessary,  both  in  the  extent  and  form 
given  to  it  by  the  Constitution.  I  will  address 
one  additional  reflection  only  to  those  who 
contend  that  the  power  ought  to  have  been 
restrained  to  external  taxation— by  which  they 
mean  taxes  on  articles  imported  from  other 
countries.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  this  will 
always  be  a  valuable  source  of  revenue;  that 
for  a  considerable  time  it  must  be  a  principal 
source;  that  at  this  moment  it  is  an  essential 
one.  But  we  may  form  very  mistaken  ideas  on 
this  subject  if  we  do  not  call  to  mind  in  our 
calculations  that  the  extent  of  revenue  drawn 
from  foreign  commerce  must  vary  with  the 
variations,  both  in  the  extent  and  the  kind  of 
imports;  and  that  these  variations  do  not 
correspond  with  the  progress  of  population, 
which  must  be  the  general  measure  of  the 
public  wants.  As  long  as  agriculture  continues 
the  sole  field  of  labour,  the  importation  of 
manufactures  must  increase  as  the  consumers 
multiply.  As  soon  asdomesticmanufactures  are 


begun  by  the  hands  not  called  for  by  agricul¬ 
ture,  the  imported  manufactures  will  decrease 
as  the  numbers  of  people  increase.  In  a  more 
remote  stage,  the  imports  may  consist  in  a  con¬ 
siderable  part  of  raw  materials,  which  will  be 
wrought  into  articles  for  exportation,  and  will, 
therefore,  require  rather  the  encouragement 
of  bounties  than  to  be  loaded  with  discourag¬ 
ing  duties.  A  system  of  government,  meant  for 
duration,  ought  to  contemplate  these  revolu¬ 
tions,  and  be  able  to  accommodate  itself  to 
them. 

Some,  who  have  not  denied  the  necessity  of 
the  power  of  taxation,  have  grounded  a  very 
fierce  attack  against  the  Constitution  on  the 
language  in  which  it  is  defined.  It  has  been 
urged  and  echoed  that  the  power  “to  lay  and 
collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts,  and  excises,  to 
pay  the  debts,  and  provide  for  the  common 
defence  and  general  welfare  of  the  United 
States,”  amounts  to  an  unlimited  commission 
to  exercise  every  power  which  may  be  alleged 
to  be  necessary  for  the  common  defence  or 
general  welfare.  No  stronger  proof  could  be 
given  of  the  distress  under  which  these  writers 
labour  for  objections,  than  their  stooping  to 
such  a  misconstruction. 

Had  no  other  enumeration  or  definition  of 
the  powers  of  the  Congress  been  found  in  the 
Constitution  than  the  general  expressions  just 
cited,  the  authors  of  the  objection  might  have 
had  some  colour  for  it;  though  it  would  have 
been  difficult  to  find  a  reason  for  so  awkward 
a  form  of  describing  an  authority  to  legislate 
in  all  possible  cases.  A  power  to  destroy  the 
freedom  of  the  press,  the  trial  by  jury,  or  even 
to  regulate  the  course  of  descents,  or  the  forms 
of  conveyances,  must  be  very  singularly  ex¬ 
pressed  by  the  terms  “to  raise  money  for  the 
general  welfare.” 

But  what  colour  can  the  objection  have 
when  a  specification  of  the  objects  alluded  to 
by  these  general  terms  immediately  follows, 
and  is  not  even  separated  by  a  longer  pause 
than  a  semicolon?  If  the  different  parts  of  the 
same  instrument  ought  to  be  so  expounded,  as 
to  give  meaning  to  every  part  which  will  bear 
it,  shall  one  part  of  the  same  sentence  be  ex¬ 
cluded  altogether  from  a  share  in  the  mean¬ 
ing;  and  shall  the  more  doubtful  and  indefi¬ 
nite  terms  be  retained  in  their  full  extent, 
and  the  clear  and  precise  expressions  be  de¬ 
nied  any  signification  whatsoever?  For  what 
purpose  could  the  enumeration  of  particular 
powers  be  inserted,  if  these  and  all  others 
were  meant  to  be  included  in  the  preceding 


THE  FEDERALIST 


general  power?  Nothing  is  more  natural  nor 
common  than  first  to  use  a  general  phrase,  and 
then  to  explain  and  qualify  it  by  a  recital  of 
particulars.  But  the  idea  of  an  enumeration  of 
particulars  which  neither  explain  nor  qualify 
the  general  meaning,  and  can  have  no  other 
effect  than  to  confound  and  mislead,  is  an  ab- 
surdity,  which,  as  we  are  reduced  to  the  di¬ 
lemma  of  charging  either  on  the  authors  of 
the  objection  or  on  the  authors  of  the  Consti¬ 
tution.  we  must  take  the  liberty  of  supposing, 
had  not  its  origin  with  the  latter. 

The  objection  here  is  the  more  extraordi¬ 
nary,  as  it  appears  that  the  language  used  by 
the  convention  is  a  copy  from  the  articles 
of  Confederation.  The  objects  of  the  Union 
among  the  States,  as  described  in  article  third, 
are,  “their  common  defence,  security  of  their 
liberties,  and  mutual  and  general  welfare.” 
The  terms  of  article  eighth  are  still  more 
identical:  “All  charges  of  war  and  all  other 
expenses  that  shall  be  incurred  for  the  com¬ 
mon  defence  or  general  welfare,  and  allowed 
by  the  United  States  in  Congress,  shall  be  de¬ 
frayed  out  of  a  common  treasury,”  etc.  A 
similar  language  again  occurs  in  article  ninth. 
Construe  either  of  these  articles  by  the  rules 
which  would  justify  the  construction  put  on 
the  new  Constitution,  and  they  vest  in  the 
existing  Congress  a  power  to  legislate  in  all 
cases  whatsoever.  But  what  would  have  been 
thought  of  that  assembly,  if,  attaching  them¬ 
selves  to  these  general  expressions,  and  disre¬ 
garding  the  specifications  which  ascertain  and 
limit  their  import,  they  had  exercised  an  un¬ 
limited  power  of  providing  for  the  common 
defence  and  general  welfare?  I  appeal  to  the 
objectors  themselves,  whether  they  would  in 
that  case  have  employed  the  same  reasoning  in 
justification  of  Congress  as  they  now  make 
use  of  against  the  convention,  flow  difficult 
it  is  for  error  to  escape  its  own  condemnation! 

Puulius 

Number  42 

|  MADISON] 

I  1  if  scforid  c  lass  ol  powers,  lodged  in  the  gen¬ 
eral  government,  consist  of  those  which  regu¬ 
late  the  intercourse  with  foreign  nations,  to 
wit:  to  make  treaties:  to  send  and  receive  am¬ 
bassadors,  other  public  ministers,  and  consuls; 
to  define  and  punish  pirac  iesand  felonies  com¬ 
mitted  on  the  high  seas,  and  offences  against 
the  law  of  nations;  to  regulate  foreign  com¬ 
merce,  inc  hiding  a  power  to  prohibit,  after  the 


year  1808.  the  importation  of  slaves,  and  to  lay 
an  intermediate  duty  of  ten  dollars  per  head, 
as  a  discouragement  to  such  importations. 

This  class  of  powers  forms  an  obvious  and 
essential  branch  of  the  federal  administration. 
If  we  are  to  be  one  nation  in  any  respect,  it 
clearly  ought  to  be  in  respect  to  other  nations. 

The  powers  to  make  treaties  and  to  send  and 
receive  ambassadors  speak  their  own  propri¬ 
ety.  Both  of  them  are  comprised  in  the  articles 
of  Confederation,  with  this  difference  only, 
that  the  former  is  disembarrassed,  by  the  plan 
of  the  convention,  of  an  exception,  under 
which  treaties  might  be  substantially  frustrat¬ 
ed  by  regulations  of  the  States:  and  that  a 
power  of  appointing  and  receiving  “other  pub¬ 
lic  ministers  and  consuls,”  is  expressly  and 
very  properly  added  to  the  former  provision 
concerning  ambassadors.  The  term  ambassa¬ 
dor,  if  taken  strictly,  as  seems  to  be  required 
by  the  second  of  the  articles  of  Confederation, 
comprehends  the  highest  grade  only  of  public 
ministers,  and  excludes  the  grades  which  the 
United  States  will  be  most  likely  to  prefer, 
where  foreign  embassies  may  be  necessary.  And 
under  no  latitude  of  construction  will  the  term 
comprehend  consuls.  Vet  it  has  been  found 
expedient,  and  has  been  the  practice  of  Con¬ 
gress,  to  employ  the  inferior  grades  of  public 
ministers,  and  to  send  and  receive  consuls. 

It  is  true  that  where  treaties  of  commerce 
stipulate  for  the  mutual  appointment  of  con¬ 
suls,  whose  functions  are  connected  with  com¬ 
merce,  the  admission  of  foreign  consuls  may 
fall  within  the  power  of  making  commercial 
treaties;  and  that  where  no  such  treaties  exist, 
the  mission  of  American  consuls  into  foreign 
countries  may  perhaps  be  covered  under  the 
authority,  given  by  the  ninth  article  of  the 
Confederation,  to  appoint  all  such  civil  officers 
as  may  be  necessary  for  managing  the  general 
affairs  of  the  United  States.  But  the  admission 
of  consuls  into  the  United  States,  where  no 
previous  treaty  has  stipulated  it,  seems  to  have 
been  nowhere  provided  for.  A  supply  of  the 
omission  is  one  of  the  lesser  instances  in  which 
the  convention  have  improved  on  the  model 
before  them.  But  the  most  minute  provisions 
become  important  when  they  tend  to  obviate 
the  necessity  or  the  pretext  for  gradual  and 
unobserved  usurpations  of  power.  A  list  of 
the  cases  in  which  Congress  have  been  be¬ 
trayed,  or  forced  by  the  defects  of  the  Con¬ 
federation,  into  violations  of  their  chartered 
authorities,  would  not  a  little  surprise  those 
who  have  paid  no  attention  to  the  subject;  and 


NUMBER  42 


would  be  no  inconsiderable  argument  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  new  Constitution,  which  seems  to 
have  provided  no  less  studiously  for  the  lesser, 
than  the  more  obvious  and  striking  defects  of 
the  old. 

The  power  to  define  and  punish  piracies 
and  felonies  committed  on  the  high  seas,  and 
offences  against  the  law  of  nations,  belongs 
with  equal  propriety  to  the  general  govern¬ 
ment,  and  is  a  still  greater  improvement  on 
the  articles  of  Confederation.  These  articles 
contain  no  provision  for  the  case  of  offences 
against  the  law  of  nations;  and  consequently 
leave  it  in  the  power  of  any  indiscreet  member 
to  embroil  the  Confederacy  with  foreign  na¬ 
tions.  The  provision  of  the  federal  articles  on 
the  subject  of  piracies  and  felonies  extends 
no  further  than  to  the  establishment  of  courts 
for  the  trial  of  these  offences.  The  definition  of 
piracies  might,  perhaps,  without  inconven- 
iency,  be  left  to  the  law  of  nations;  though  a 
legislative  definition  of  them  is  found  in  most 
municipal  codes.  A  definition  of  felonies  on 
the  high  seas  is  evidently  requisite.  Felony  is 
a  term  of  loose  signification,  even  in  the  com¬ 
mon  law  of  England;  and  of  various  import 
in  the  statute  law  of  that  kingdom.  But  neither 
the  common  nor  the  statute  law  of  that,  or  of 
any  other  nation,  ought  to  be  a  standard  for 
the  proceedings  of  this,  unless  previously  made 
its  own  by  legislative  adoption.  The  meaning 
of  the  term,  as  defined  in  the  codes  of  the  sev¬ 
eral  States,  would  be  as  impracticable  as  the 
former  would  be  a  dishonourable  and  ille¬ 
gitimate  guide.  It  is  not  precisely  the  same  in 
any  two  of  the  States;  and  varies  in  each  with 
every  revision  of  its  criminal  laws.  For  the 
sake  of  certainty  and  uniformity,  therefore, 
the  power  of  defining  felonies  in  this  case  was 
in  every  respect  necessary  and  proper. 

The  regulation  of  foreign  commerce,  hav¬ 
ing  fallen  within  several  views  which  have 
been  taken  of  this  subject,  has  been  too  fully 
discussed  to  need  additional  proofs  here  of  its 
being  properly  submitted  to  the  federal  ad¬ 
ministration. 

It  were  doubtless  to  be  wished  that  the 
power  of  prohibiting  the  importation  of  slaves 
had  not  been  postponed  until  the  year  1808, 
or  rather  that  it  had  been  suffered  to  have  im¬ 
mediate  operation.  But  it  is  not  difficult  to  ac¬ 
count,  either  for  this  restriction  on  the  gen¬ 
eral  government,  or  for  the  manner  in  which 
the  whole  clause  is  expressed.  It  ought  to  be 
considered  as  a  great  point  gained  in  favour 
of  humanity,  that  a  period  of  twenty  years 


may  terminate  for  ever,  within  these  States,  a 
traffic  which  has  so  long  and  so  loudly  up¬ 
braided  the  barbarism  of  modern  policy;  that 
within  that  period  it  will  receive  a  consider¬ 
able  discouragement  from  the  federal  govern¬ 
ment,  and  may  be  totally  abolished  by  a  con¬ 
currence  of  the  few  States  which  continue  the 
unnatural  traffic  in  the  prohibitory  example 
which  has  been  given  by  so  great  a  majority  of 
the  Union.  Happy  would  it  be  for  the  un¬ 
fortunate  Africans,  if  an  equal  prospect  lay 
before  them  of  being  redeemed  from  the  op¬ 
pressions  of  their  European  brethren! 

Attempts  have  been  made  to  pervert  this 
clause  into  an  objection  against  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  by  representing  it  on  one  side  as  a  crimi¬ 
nal  toleration  of  an  illicit  practice,  and  on  an¬ 
other  as  calculated  to  prevent  voluntary  and 
beneficial  emigrations  from  Europe  to  Amer¬ 
ica.  I  mention  these  misconstructions,  not  with 
a  view  to  give  them  an  answer,  for  they  de¬ 
serve  none,  but  as  specimens  of  the  manner 
and  spirit  in  which  some  have  thought  fit  to 
conduct  their  opposition  to  the  proposed  gov¬ 
ernment. 

The  powers  included  in  the  third  class  are 
those  which  provide  for  the  harmony  and  prop¬ 
er  intercourse  among  the  States. 

Under  this  head  might  be  included  the  par¬ 
ticular  restraints  imposed  on  the  authority  of 
the  States,  and  certain  powers  of  the  judicial 
department;  but  the  former  are  reserved  for 
a  distinct  class,  and  the  latter  will  be  par¬ 
ticularly  examined  when  we  arrive  at  the 
structure  and  organisation  of  the  government. 
I  shall  confine  myself  to  a  cursory  review  of  the 
remaining  powers  comprehended  under  this 
third  description,  to  wit:  to  regulate  com¬ 
merce  among  the  several  States  and  the  Indian 
tribes;  to  coin  money,  regulate  the  value  there¬ 
of,  and  of  foreign  coin;  to  provide  for  the 
punishment  of  counterfeiting  the  current  coin 
and  securities  of  the  United  States;  to  fix 
the  standard  of  weights  and  measures;  to  es¬ 
tablish  a  uniform  rule  of  naturalisation,  and 
uniform  laws  of  bankruptcy;  to  prescribe  the 
manner  in  which  the  public  acts,  records,  and 
judicial  proceedings  of  each  State  shall  be 
proved,  and  the  effect  they  shall  have  in  other 
States;  and  to  establish  post-offices  and  post¬ 
roads. 

The  defect  of  power  in  the  existing  Con¬ 
federacy  to  regulate  the  commerce  between 
its  several  members  is  in  the  number  of  those 
which  have  been  clearly  pointed  out  by  ex¬ 
perience.  To  the  proofs  and  remarks  which 


THE  FEDERALIST 


former  papers  have  brought  into  view  on  this 
subject,  it  may  be  added  that,  without  this 
supplemental  provision,  the  great  and  essen¬ 
tial  power  of  regulating  foreign  commerce 
would  have  been  incomplete  and  ineffectual. 
A  very  material  object  of  this  power  was  the 
relief  of  the  States  which  import  and  export 
through  other  States  from  the  improper  con¬ 
tributions  levied  on  them  by  the  latter.  Were 
these  at  liberty  to  regulate  the  trade  between 
State  and  State,  it  must  be  foreseen  that  ways 
would  be  found  out  to  load  the  articles  of  im¬ 
port  and  export,  during  the  passage  through 
their  jurisdiction,  with  duties  which  would 
fall  on  the  makers  of  the  latter  and  the  con¬ 
sumers  of  the  former.  We  may  be  assured  by 
past  experience,  that  such  a  practice  would 
be  introduced  by  future  contrivances;  and 
both  by  that  and  a  common  knowledge  of 
human  affairs,  that  it  would  nourish  unceas¬ 
ing  animosities  and  not  improbably  terminate 
in  serious  interruptions  of  the  public  tran¬ 
quillity.  To  those  who  do  not  view  the  ques¬ 
tion  through  the  medium  of  passion  or  of  in¬ 
terest,  the  desire  of  the  commercial  States  to 
collect,  in  any  form,  an  indirect  revenue  from 
their  uncommercial  neighbours,  must  appear 
not  less  impolitic  than  it  is  unfair;  since  it 
would  stimulate  the  injured  party,  by  resent¬ 
ment  as  well  as  interest,  to  resort  to  less  con¬ 
venient  channels  for  their  foreign  trade.  But 
the  mild  voice  of  reason,  pleading  the  cause  of 
an  enlarged  and  permanent  interest,  is  but  too 
often  drowned,  before  public  bodies  as  well  as 
individuals,  by  the  clamours  of  an  impatient 
avidity  for  immediate  and  immoderate  gain. 

The  necessity  of  a  superintending  author¬ 
ity  over  the  reciprocal  trade  of  coniederatcd 
States  has  been  illustrated  by  other  examples 
as  well  as  our  own.  In  Switzerland,  where  the 
Union  is  so  very  slight,  each  canton  is  obliged 
to  allow  to  merchandises  a  passage  through  its 
juiisdic  tion  into  other  cantons,  without  an 
augmentation  of  the  tolls.  In  Germany  it  is  a 
law  of  the  empire  that  the  princes  and  states 
shall  not  lay  tolls  or  customs  on  bridges,  rivers, 
or  passages,  without  the  consent  of  the  em¬ 
peror  and  the  diet;  though  it  appears  from  a 
({notation  in  an  antecedent  paper  that  the 
practice  in  this,  as  in  many  other  instances  in 
that  confederacy,  has  not  followed  the  law, 
and  has  produced  there  the  mischiefs  which 
have  been  foreseen  here.  Among  the  restraints 
imposed  by  the  Union  of  the  Netherlands  on 
its  members,  one  is.  that  they  shall  not  estab¬ 
lish  imposts  disadvantageous  to  their  neigh¬ 


bours,  without  the  general  permission. 

The  regulation  of  commerce  with  the  Indian 
tribes  is  very  properly  unfettered  from  two 
limitations  in  the  articles  of  Confederation, 
which  render  the  provision  obscure  and  con¬ 
tradictory.  The  power  is  there  restrained  to 
Indians,  not  members  of  any  of  the  States,  and 
is  not  to  violate  or  infringe  the  legislative  right 
of  any  State  within  its  own  limits.  What  de¬ 
scription  of  Indians  are  to  be  deemed  mem¬ 
bers  of  a  State  is  not  yet  settled,  and  has  been 
a  question  of  frequent  perplexity  and  conten¬ 
tion  in  the  federal  councils.  And  how  the  trade 
with  Indians,  though  not  members  of  a  State, 
yet  residing  within  its  legislative  jurisdiction, 
can  be  regulated  by  an  external  authority, 
without  so  far  intruding  on  the  internal  rights 
of  legislation,  is  absolutely  incomprehensible. 
This  is  not  the  only  case  in  which  the  arti¬ 
cles  of  Confederation  have  inconsiderately  en¬ 
deavoured  to  accomplish  impossibilities;  to 
reconcile  a  partial  sovereignty  in  the  Union, 
with  complete  sovereignty  in  the  States;  to 
subvert  a  mathematical  axiom,  by  taking  away 
a  part,  and  letting  the  whole  remain. 

All  that  need  be  remarked  on  the  power  to 
coin  money,  regulate  the  value  thereof,  and  of 
foreign  com,  is,  that  by  providing  for  this  last 
case,  the  Constitution  has  supplied  a  material 
omission  in  the  articles  of  Confederation.  I  he 
authority  of  the  existing  Congress  is  restrained 
to  the  regulation  of  coin  struck  by  their  own 
authority,  or  that  of  the  respective  States.  It 
must  be  seen  at  once  that  the  proposed  uni¬ 
formity  in  the  value  of  the  current  coin  might 
be  destroyed  by  subjecting  that  of  foreign  coin 
to  the  different  regulations  of  the  different 
States. 

The  punishment  of  counterfeiting  the  pub¬ 
lic  securities,  as  well  as  the  current  coin,  is  sub¬ 
mitted  of  course  to  that  authority  which  is  to 
secure  the  value  of  both. 

The  regulation  of  weights  and  measures  is 
transferred  from  the  articles  of  Confederation, 
and  is  founded  on  like  considerations  with  the 
preceding  power  of  regulating  coin. 

The  dissimilarity  in  the  rules  of  naturalisa¬ 
tion  has  long  been  remarked  as  a  fault  in  our 
system,  and  as  laying  a  foundation  lor  intri 
(ate  and  delicate  questions.  In  the  fourth  arti¬ 
cle  of  the  Confederation  it  is  declared  that 
the  free  inhabitants  ol  each  of  these  States, 
paupers,  vagabonds,  and  fugitives  Irom  justice 
excepted,  shall  be  entitled  to  all  privileges  and 
immunities  of  free  citizens  in  the*  several 
States;  and  the  fieofile  of  each  State  shall,  in 


NUMBER  43 


every  other,  enjoy  all  the  privileges  of  trade 
and  commerce,”  etc.  There  is  a  confusion  of 
language  here  which  is  remarkable.  Why  the 
terms  free  inhabitants  are  used  in  one  part  of 
the  article,  free  citizens  in  another,  and  people 
in  another;  or  what  was  meant  by  superadding 
to  “all  privileges  and  immunities  of  free  citi¬ 
zens,”  “all  the  privileges  of  trade  and  com¬ 
merce,”  cannot  easily  be  determined.  It  seems 
to  be  a  construction  scarcely  avoidable,  how¬ 
ever,  that  those  who  come  under  the  denomi¬ 
nation  of  free  inhabitants  of  a  State,  although 
not  citizens  of  such  State,  are  entitled,  in  every 
other  State,  to  all  the  privileges  of  free  citizens 
of  the  latter;  that  is,  to  greater  privileges  than 
they  may  be  entitled  to  in  their  own  State:  so 
that  it  may  be  in  the  power  of  a  particular 
State,  or  rather  every  State  is  laid  under  a 
necessity,  not  only  to  confer  the  rights  of  citi¬ 
zenship  in  other  States  upon  any  whom  it 
may  admit  to  such  rights  within  itself,  but 
upon  any  whom  it  may  allow  to  become  in¬ 
habitants  within  its  jurisdiction.  But  were  an 
exposition  of  the  term  “inhabitants”  to  be  ad¬ 
mitted  which  would  confine  the  stipulated 
privileges  to  citizens  alone,  the  difficulty  is 
diminished  only,  not  removed.  The  very  im¬ 
proper  power  would  still  be  retained  by  each 
State  of  naturalising  aliens  in  every  other 
State.  In  one  State  residence  for  a  short  term 
confirms  all  the  rights  of  citizenship:  in  an¬ 
other,  qualifications  of  greater  importance  are 
required.  An  alien,  therefore,  legally  incapaci¬ 
tated  for  certain  rights  in  the  latter,  may,  by 
previous  residence  only  in  the  former,  elude 
his  incapacity;  and  thus  the  law  of  one  State 
be  preposterously  rendered  paramount  to  the 
law  of  another,  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
other.  We  owe  it  to  mere  casualty,  that  very 
serious  embarrassments  on  this  subject  have 
been  hitherto  escaped.  By  the  laws  of  several 
States,  certain  descriptions  of  aliens,  who  had 
rendered  themselves  obnoxious,  were  laid  un¬ 
der  interdicts  inconsistent  not  only  with  the 
rights  of  citizenship  but  with  the  privilege  of 
residence.  What  would  have  been  the  conse¬ 
quence,  if  such  persons,  by  residence  or  other¬ 
wise,  had  acquired  the  character  of  citizens 
under  the  laws  of  another  State,  and  then  as¬ 
serted  their  rights  as  such,  both  to  residence 
and  citizenship,  within  the  State  proscribing 
them?  Whatever  the  legal  consequences  might 
have  been,  other  consequences  would  probably 
have  resulted  of  too  serious  a  nature  not  to  be 
provided  against.  The  new  Constitution  has 
accordingly,  with  great  propriety,  made  pro¬ 


vision  against  them,  and  all  others  proceeding 
from  the  defect  of  the  Confederation  on  this 
head,  by  authorising  the  general  government 
to  establish  a  uniform  rule  of  naturalisation 
throughout  the  United  States. 

The  power  of  establishing  uniform  laws  of 
bankruptcy  is  so  intimately  connected  with  the 
regulation  of  commerce,  and  will  prevent  so 
many  frauds  where  the  parties  or  their  prop¬ 
erty  may  lie  or  be  removed  into  different 
States,  that  the  expediency  of  it  seems  not 
likely  to  be  drawn  into  question. 

The  power  of  prescribing  by  general  laws, 
the  manner  in  which  the  public  acts,  records, 
and  judicial  proceedings  of  each  State  shall 
be  proved,  and  the  effect  they  shall  have  in 
other  States,  is  an  evident  and  valuable  im¬ 
provement  on  the  clause  relating  to  this  sub¬ 
ject  in  the  articles  of  Confederation.  The 
meaning  of  the  latter  is  extremely  indetermi¬ 
nate,  and  can  be  of  little  importance  under 
any  interpretation  which  it  will  bear.  The 
power  here  established  may  be  rendered  a  very 
convenient  instrument  of  justice,  and  be  par¬ 
ticularly  beneficial  on  the  borders  of  contigu¬ 
ous  States,  where  the  effects  liable  to  justice 
may  be  suddenly  and  secretly  translated,  in 
any  stage  of  the  process,  within  a  foreign 
jurisdiction. 

The  power  of  establishing  post-roads  must, 
in  every  view,  be  a  harmless  power,  and  may, 
perhaps,  by  judicious  management,  become 
productive  of  great  public  conveniency.  Noth¬ 
ing  which  tends  to  facilitate  the  intercourse 
between  the  States  can  be  deemed  unworthy 
of  the  public  care.  Publius 

Number  43 

[MADISON] 

The  fourth  class  comprises  the  following  mis¬ 
cellaneous  powers: 

1.  A  power  “to  promote  the  progress  of 
science  and  useful  arts,  by  securing,  for  a  lim¬ 
ited  time,  to  authors  and  inventors,  the  ex¬ 
clusive  right  to  their  respective  writings  and 
discoveries.” 

The  utility  of  this  power  will  scarcely  be 
questioned.  The  copyright  of  authors  has  been 
solemnly  adjudged,  in  Great  Britain,  to  be  a 
right  of  common  law.  The  right  to  useful  in¬ 
ventions  seems  with  equal  reason  to  belong 
to  the  inventors.  The  public  good  fully  coin¬ 
cides  in  both  cases  with  the  claims  of  indi¬ 
viduals.  The  States  cannot  separately  make 


THE  FEDERALIST 


effectual  provision  for  either  of  the  cases,  and 
most  of  them  have  anticipated  the  decision  of 
this  point,  by  laws  passed  at  the  instance  of 
Congress. 

2.  “To  exercise  exclusive  legislation,  in  all 
cases  whatsoever,  over  such  district  (not  ex¬ 
ceeding  ten  miles  square)  as  may,  by  cession 
of  particular  States  and  the  acceptance  of 
Congress,  become  the  seat  of  the  government 
of  the  United  States:  and  to  exercise  like  au- 
thority  over  all  places  purchased  by  the  con¬ 
sent  of  the  legislatures  of  the  States  in  which 
the  same  shall  be,  for  the  erection  of  forts, 
magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and  other  need¬ 
ful  buildings.” 

The  indispensable  necessity  of  complete  au¬ 
thority  at  the  seat  of  government  carries  its 
own  evidence  with  it.  It  is  a  power  exercised 
by  every  legislature  of  the  Union,  I  might  say 
of  the  world,  by  virtue  of  its  general  suprem¬ 
acy.  Without  it,  not  only  the  public  authority 
might  be  insulted  and  its  proceedings  inter¬ 
rupted  with  impunity:  but  a  dependence  of 
the  members  of  the  general  government  on  the 
State  comprehending  the  scat  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  for  protection  in  the  exercise  of  their 
duty,  might  bring  on  the  national  councils  an 
imputation  of  awe  or  influence,  equally  dis¬ 
honourable  to  the  government  and  dissatis- 
factorv  to  the  other  members  of  the  Confeder¬ 
acy.  This  consideration  has  the  more  weight, 
as  the  gradual  accumulation  of  public  im¬ 
provements  at  the  stationary  residence  of  the 
government  would  be  both  too  great  a  public 
pledge  to  be  left  in  the  hands  of  a  single  State, 
and  would  create  so  many  obstacles  to  a  re¬ 
moval  of  the  government,  as  still  further  to 
abridge  its  necessary  independence.  The  ex¬ 
tent  of  this  federal  district  is  sufficiently  cir¬ 
cumscribed  to  satisfy  every  jealousy  of  an  op¬ 
posite  nature.  And  as  it  is  to  be  appropriated 
to  this  use  with  the  consent  of  the  State  ceding 
it:  as  the  State  will  no  doubt  provide  in  the 
compact  for  the  rights  and  the  consent  of  the 
citizens  inhabiting  it;  as  the  inhabitants  will 
find  sufficient  inducements  of  interest  to  be¬ 
come  willing  parties  to  the  cession;  as  they  will 
have  had  their  voice  in  the  election  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment  which  is  to  exercise  authority  over 
them;  as  a  municipal  legislature  for  local  pur¬ 
poses,  derived  from  their  own  suffrages,  will  of 
course  be  allowed  them:  and  as  the  authority 
of  the  legislature  of  the  State,  and  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  the  ceded  part  of  it,  to  concur  in 
the  cession,  will  be  derived  from  the  whole  peo¬ 
ple  of  the  State,  in  their  adoption  of  the  Con¬ 


stitution,  every  imaginable  objection  seems  to 
be  obviated. 

The  necessity  of  a  like  authority  over  forts, 
magazines,  etc.,  established  by  the  general 
government,  is  not  less  evident.  The  public 
money  expended  on  such  places,  and  the  pub¬ 
lic  property  deposited  in  them,  require  that 
they  should  be  exempt  from  the  authority  of 
the  particular  State.  Nor  would  it  be  proper 
for  the  places  on  which  the  security  of  the  en¬ 
tire  Union  may  depend  to  be  in  any  degree  de¬ 
pendent  on  a  particular  member  of  it.  All  ob¬ 
jections  and  scruples  are  here  also  obviated, 
by  requiring  the  concurrence  of  the  States  con¬ 
cerned  in  every  such  establishment. 

3.  “To  declare  the  punishment  of  treason, 
but  no  attainder  of  treason  shall  work  corrup¬ 
tion  of  blood,  or  forfeiture,  except  during  the 
life  of  the  person  attainted.” 

As  treason  may  be  committed  against  the 
United  States,  the  authority  of  the  United 
States  ought  to  be  enabled  to  punish  it.  But  as 
new-fangled  and  artificial  treasons  have  been 
the  great  engines  by  which  violent  factions,  the 
natural  offspring  of  free  government, have  usu¬ 
ally  wreaked  their  alternate  malignity  on  each 
other,  the  convention  have,  with  great  judg¬ 
ment,  opposed  a  barrier  to  thispeculiar  danger, 
bv  inserting  a  constitutional  definition  of  the 
crime,  fixing  the  proof  necessary  for  conviction 
of  it,  and  restraining  the  Congress,  even  in  pun¬ 
ishing  it,  from  extending  the  consequences  of 
guilt  beyond  the  person  of  its  author. 

4.  “To  admit  new  States  into  the  Union;  but 
no  new  State  shall  be  formed  or  erected  within 
the  jurisdiction  of  any  other  State;  nor  any 
State  be  formed  by  the  junction  of  two  or  more 
States,  or  parts  of  States,  without  the  consent 
of  the  legislatures  of  the  States  concerned,  as 
well  as  of  the  Congress.” 

In  the  articles  of  Confederation,  no  pro¬ 
vision  is  found  on  this  important  subject. 
Canada  was  to  be  admitted  of  right,  on  her 
joining  in  the  measures  of  the  United  States; 
and  the  other  colonies ,  by  which  were  evi¬ 
dently  meant  the  other  British  colonies,  at  the 
discretion  of  nine  States.  The  eventual  estab¬ 
lishment  of  new  Slates  seems  to  have  been 
overlooked  by  the  compilers  of  that  instru¬ 
ment.  We  have  seen  the  inconvenience  of  this 
omission,  and  the  assumption  of  power  into 
which  Congress  have  been  led  by  it.  \\  ith  great 
propriety,  therefore,  has  the  new  system  sup¬ 
plied  the  defect.  The  general  precaution,  that 
no  new*  States  shall  be  formed  without  the 
concurrence  of  the  federal  authority,  and  that 


NUMBER  43 


of  the  States  concerned,  is  consonant  to  the 
principles  which  ought  to  govern  such  trans¬ 
actions.  The  particular  precaution  against  the 
erection  of  new  States,  by  the  partition  of  a 
State  without  its  consent,  quiets  the  jealousy 
of  the  larger  States;  as  that  of  the  smaller  is 
quieted  by  a  like  precaution,  against  a  junc¬ 
tion  of  States  without  their  consent. 

5.  “To  dispose  of  and  make  all  needful  rules 
and  regulations  respecting  the  territory  or 
other  property  belonging  to  the  United  States, 
with  a  proviso  that  nothing  in  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  shall  be  so  construed  as  to  prejudice  any 
claims  of  the  United  States,  or  of  any  par¬ 
ticular  State.” 

This  is  a  power  of  very  great  importance, 
and  required  by  considerations  similar  to  those 
which  show  the  propriety  of  the  former.  The 
proviso  annexed  is  proper  in  itself,  and  was 
probably  rendered  absolutely  necessary  by 
jealousies  and  questions  concerning  the  West¬ 
ern  territory  sufficiently  known  to  the  public. 

6.  “To  guarantee  to  every  State  in  the 
Union  a  republican  form  of  government;  to 
protect  each  of  them  against  invasion;  and  on 
application  of  the  legislature,  or  of  the  execu¬ 
tive  (when  the  legislature  cannot  be  con¬ 
vened),  against  domestic  violence.” 

In  a  confederacy  founded  on  republican 
principles,  and  composed  of  republican  mem¬ 
bers,  the  superintending  government  ought 
clearly  to  possess  authority  to  defend  the  sys¬ 
tem  against  aristocratic  or  monarchical  inno¬ 
vations.  The  more  intimate  the  nature  of  such 
a  union  may  be,  the  greater  interest  have  the 
members  in  the  political  institutions  of  each 
other;  and  the  greater  right  to  insist  that  the 
forms  of  government  under  which  the  compact 
was  entered  into  should  be  substantially  main¬ 
tained.  But  a  right  implies  a  remedy;  and 
where  else  could  the  remedy  be  deposited  than 
where  it  is  deposited  by  the  Constitution?  Gov¬ 
ernments  of  dissimilar  principles  and  forms 
have  been  found  less  adapted  to  a  federal 
coalition  of  any  sort  than  those  of  a  kindred 
nature.  “As  the  confederate  republic  of  Ger¬ 
many,”  says  Montesquieu,  “consists  of  free 
cities  and  petty  states,  subject  to  different 
princes,  experience  shows  us  that  it  is  more 
imperfect  than  that  of  Holland  and  Switzer¬ 
land.”  “Greece  was  undone,”  he  adds,  “as  soon 
as  the  king  of  Macedon  obtained  a  seat  among 
the  Amphictyons.”  In  the  latter  case,  no  doubt, 
the  disproportionate  force,  as  well  as  the  mon¬ 
archical  form,  of  the  new  confederate,  had  its 
share  of  influence  on  the  events.  It  may  pos¬ 


sibly  be  asked,  what  need  there  could  be  of 
such  a  precaution,  and  whether  it  may  not  be¬ 
come  a  pretext  for  alterations  in  the  State 
governments,  without  the  concurrence  of  the 
States  themselves.  These  questions  admit  of 
ready  answers.  If  the  interposition  of  the  gen- 
eral  government  should  not  be  needed,  the  pro¬ 
vision  for  such  an  event  will  be  a  harmless 
superfluity  only  in  the  Constitution.  But  who 
can  say  what  experiments  may  be  produced  by 
the  caprice  of  particular  States,  by  the  ambi¬ 
tion  of  enterprising  leaders,  or  by  the  intrigues 
and  influence  of  foreign  powers?  To  the  second 
question  it  may  be  answered,  that  if  the  gen¬ 
eral  government  should  interpose  by  virtue  of 
this  constitutional  authority,  it  will  be,  of 
course,  bound  to  pursue  the  authority.  But  the 
authority  extends  no  further  than  to  a  guaran¬ 
tee  of  a  republican  form  of  government,  which 
supposes  a  pre-existing  government  of  the  form 
which  is  to  be  guaranteed.  As  long,  therefore, 
as  the  existing  republican  forms  are  continued 
by  the  States,  they  are  guaranteed  by  the  fed¬ 
eral  Constitution.  Whenever  the  States  may 
choose  to  substitute  other  republican  forms, 
they  have  a  right  to  do  so,  and  to  claim  the 
federal  guarantee  for  the  latter.  The  only  re¬ 
striction  imposed  on  them  is,  that  they  shall 
not  exchange  republican  for  anti-republican 
Constitutions;  a  restriction  which,  it  is  pre¬ 
sumed,  will  hardly  be  considered  as  a  griev¬ 
ance. 

A  protection  against  invasion  is  due  from 
every  society  to  the  parts  composing  it.  The 
latitude  of  the  expression  here  used  seems  to 
secure  each  State,  not  only  against  foreign  hos¬ 
tility,  but  against  ambitiousor  vindictive  enter¬ 
prises  of  its  more  powerful  neighbours.  The 
history,  both  of  ancient  and  modern  confeder¬ 
acies,  proves  that  the  weaker  members  of  the 
union  ought  not  to  be  insensible  to  the  policy 
of  this  article. 

Protection  againstdomestic  violence  is  added 
with  equal  propriety.  It  has  been  remarked 
that  even  among  the  Swiss  cantons,  which, 
properly  speaking,  are  not  under  one  govern¬ 
ment,  provision  is  made  for  this  object;  and 
the  history  of  that  league  informs  us  that  mu¬ 
tual  aid  is  frequently  claimed  and  afforded; 
and  as  well  by  the  most  democratic  as  the  other 
cantons.  A  recentand  well-known  event  among 
ourselves  has  warned  us  to  be  prepared  for 
emergencies  of  a  like  nature. 

At  first  view,  it  might  seem  not  to  square 
with  the  republican  theory,  to  suppose  either 
that  a  majority  have  not  the  right,  or  that  a 


THE  FEDERALIST 


minority  will  have  the  force,  to  subvert  a  gov¬ 
ernment;  and  consequently,  that  the  federal 
interposition  can  never  be  required  but  when 
it  would  be  improper.  But  theoretic  reason¬ 
ing,  in  this  as  in  most  other  cases,  must  be 
qualified  by  the  lessons  of  practice.  Why  may 
not  illicit  combinations,  for  purposes  of  vio¬ 
lence,  be  formed  as  well  by  a  majority  of  a 
State,  especially  a  small  State,  as  by  a  major¬ 
ity  of  a  county,  or  a  district  of  the  same  State; 
and  if  the  authority  of  the  State  ought,  in  the 
latter  case,  to  protect  the  local  magistracy, 
ought  not  the  federal  authority,  in  the  former, 
to  support  the  State  authority?  Besides,  there 
are  certain  parts  of  the  State  constitutions 
which  are  so  interwoven  with  the  federal  Con¬ 
stitution,  that  a  violent  blow  cannot  be  given 
to  the  one  without  communicating  the  wound 
to  the  other.  Insurrections  in  a  State  will  rarely 
induce  a  federal  interposition,  unless  the  num¬ 
ber  concerned  in  them  bear  some  proportion 
to  the  friends  of  government.  It  will  be  much 
better  that  the  violence  in  such  cases  should  be 
repressed  by  the  superintending  power  than 
that  the  majority  should  be  left  to  maintain 
their  cause  by  a  bloody  and  obstinate  con¬ 
test.  The  existence  of  a  right  to  interpose 
will  generally  prevent  the  necessity  of  exert- 
ing  it. 

Is  it  true  that  force  and  right  are  necessarily 
on  the  same  side  in  republican  governments? 
May  not  the  minor  party  possess  such  a  superi¬ 
ority  of  pecuniary  resources,  of  military  talents 
and  experience,  or  of  secret  succours  from 
foreign  powers,  as  will  render  it  superior  also 
in  an  appeal  to  the  sword?  May  not  a  more 
compact  and  advantageous  position  turn  the 
scale  on  the  same  side,  against  a  superior  num¬ 
ber,  so  situated  as  to  be  less  capable  of  a  prompt 
and  collected  exertion  of  its  strength?  Nothing 
can  be  more  chimerical  than  to  imagine  that 
in  a  trial  of  actual  force,  victory  may  be  calcu¬ 
lated  by  the  rules  which  prevail  in  a  census  of 
the  inhabitants,  or  which  determine  the  event 
of  an  election!  May  it  not  happen,  in  fine,  that 
the  minority  of  cnr/KXS  may  become  a  major¬ 
ity  of  ri-RsoNs,  by  the  accession  of  alien  resi¬ 
dents,  of  a  casual  concourse  ol  adventurers,  or 
of  those  whom  the  constitution  ol  the  State  has 
not  admitted  to  the  rights  of  sullrage?  I  take 
no  notice  of  an  unhappy  species  of  popula¬ 
tion  abounding  in  some  of  the  States,  who, 
during  the  calm  ol  regular  government,  are 
sunk  below  the*  level  of  men;  but  who,  in 
the  tempestuous  scenes  of  civil  violence,  may 
emerge  into  the  human  character,  and  give  a 


superiority  of  strength  to  any  party  with  which 
they  may  associate  themselves. 

In  cases  where  it  may  be  doubtful  on  which 
side  justice  lies,  what  better  umpires  could  be 
desired  by  two  violent  factions,  flying  to  arms 
and  tearing  a  State  to  pieces,  than  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  confederate  States  not  heated  by 
the  local  flame?  To  the  impartiality  of  judges 
they  would  unite  the  affection  of  friends. 
Happy  would  it  be  if  such  a  remedy  for  its 
infirmities  could  be  enjoyed  by  all  free  govern¬ 
ments;  if  a  project  equally  effectual  could  be  es¬ 
tablished  for  the  universal  peace  of  mankind! 

Should  it  be  asked,  what  is  to  be  the  redress 
for  an  insurrection  pervading  all  the  States, 
and  comprising  a  superiority  of  the  entire 
force,  though  not  a  constitutional  right?  the 
answer  must  be,  that  such  a  case,  as  it  would 
be  without  the  compass  of  human  remedies, 
so  it  is  fortunately  not  within  the  compass  of 
human  probability;  and  that  it  is  a  sufficient 
recommendation  of  the  federal  Constitution, 
that  it  diminishes  the  risk  of  a  calamity  for 
which  no  possible  constitution  can  provide  a 
cure. 

Among  the  advantages  of  a  confederate 
republic  enumerated  by  Montesquieu,  an  im¬ 
portant  one  is,  “that  should  a  popular  insur¬ 
rection  happen  in  one  of  the  States,  the  others 
are  able  to  quell  it.  Should  abuses  creep  into 
one  part,  they  are  reformed  by  those  that  re¬ 
main  sound.” 

7.  “To  consider  all  debts  contracted,  and 
engagements  entered  into,  before  the  adoption 
of  this  Constitution,  as  being  no  less  valid 
against  the  United  States,  under  this  Constitu¬ 
tion,  than  under  the  Confederation.’ 

This  can  only  be  considered  as  a  declara¬ 
tory  proposition;  and  may  have  been  inserted, 
among  other  reasons,  for  the  satisfaction  of  the 
foreign  creditors  of  the  United  States,  who 
cannot  be  strangers  to  the  pretended  doctrine, 
that  a  change  in  the  political  form  of  civil 
society  has  the  magical  effect  of  dissolving  its 
moral  obligations. 

Among  the  lesser  criticisms  which  have  been 
exercised  on  the  Constitution,  it  has  been  re¬ 
marked  that  the  validity  of  engagements  ought 
to  have  been  asserted  in  fas  our  of  the  United 
States,  as  well  as  against  them;  and  in  the 
spirit  which  usually  characterises  little  critics, 
the  omission  has  been  transformed  and  magni 
(ied  into  a  plot  against  the  national  rights.  The 
authors  of  this  disc o\  cry  ina\  be  told,  what  few 
others  need  to  be  in  formed  of,  that  as  engage¬ 
ments  arc  in  theii  nature  reciprocal,  an  asset- 


NUMBER  43 


tion  of  their  validity  on  one  side,  necessarily 
involves  a  validity  on  the  other  side;  and  that 
as  the  article  is  merely  declaratory,  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  the  principle  in  one  case  is  suffi¬ 
cient  for  every  case.  They  may  be  further  told 
that  every  constitution  must  limit  its  precau¬ 
tions  to  dangers  that  are  not  altogether  imagi¬ 
nary;  and  that  no  real  danger  can  exist  that  the 
government  would  dare,  with,  or  even  with¬ 
out,  this  constitutional  declaration  before  it, 
to  remit  the  debts  justly  due  to  the  public,  on 
the  pretext  here  condemned. 

8.  “To  provide  for  amendments  to  be  rati¬ 
fied  by  three  fourths  of  the  States,  under  two 
exceptions  only.” 

That  useful  alterations  will  be  suggested  by 
experience  could  not  but  be  foreseen.  It  was 
requisite,  therefore,  that  a  mode  for  introduc¬ 
ing  them  should  be  provided.  The  mode  pre¬ 
ferred  by  the  convention  seems  to  be  stamped 
with  every  mark  of  propriety.  It  guards  equally 
against  that  extreme  facility  which  would  ren¬ 
der  the  Constitution  too  mutable;  and  that 
extreme  difficulty,  which  might  perpetuate 
its  discovered  faults.  It,  moreover,  equally  en¬ 
ables  the  general  and  the  State  governments 
to  originate  the  amendment  of  errors,  as  they 
|  may  be  pointed  out  by  the  experience  on  one 
side  or  on  the  other.  The  exception  in  favour 
i  of  the  equality  of  suffrage  in  the  Senate,  was 
probably  meant  as  a  palladium  to  the  residu¬ 
ary  sovereignty  of  the  States,  implied  and  se¬ 
cured  by  that  principle  of  representation  in 
one  branch  of  the  legislature;  and  was  probably 
insisted  on  by  the  States  particularly  attached 
to  that  equality.  The  other  exception  must 
have  been  admitted  on  the  same  considera¬ 
tions  which  produced  the  privilege  defended 
by  it. 

9.  “The  ratification  of  the  conventions  of 
nine  States  shall  be  sufficient  for  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  this  Constitution  between  the  States 
ratifying  the  same.” 

This  article  speaks  for  itself.  The  express 
authority  of  the  people  alone  could  give  due 
validity  to  the  Constitution.  To  have  required 
the  unanimous  ratification  of  the  thirteen 
States  would  have  subjected  the  essential  inter¬ 
ests  of  the  whole  to  the  caprice  or  corruption 
of  a  single  member.  It  would  have  marked  a 
want  of  foresight  in  the  convention  which  our 
own  experience  would  have  rendered  inexcus¬ 
able. 

Two  questions  of  a  very  delicate  nature 
present  themselves  on  this  occasion;  1.  On 
what  principle  the  Confederation,  which  stands 


in  the  solemn  form  of  a  compact  among  the 
States,  can  be  superseded  without  the  unani¬ 
mous  consent  of  the  parties  to  it?  2.  What 
relation  is  to  subsist  between  the  nine  or  more 
States  ratifying  the  Constitution,  and  the  re¬ 
maining  few  who  do  not  become  parties  to  it? 

The  first  question  is  answered  at  once  by 
recurring  to  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  case; 
to  the  great  principle  of  self-preservation;  to 
the  transcendent  law  of  nature  and  of  nature's 
God,  which  declares  that  the  safety  and  happi¬ 
ness  of  society  are  the  objects  at  which  all  po¬ 
litical  institutions  aim,  and  to  which  all  such 
institutions  must  be  sacrificed.  Perhaps,  also, 
an  answer  may  be  found  without  searching 
beyond  the  principles  of  the  compact  itself. 
It  has  been  heretofore  noted  among  the  defects 
of  the  Confederation  that  in  many  of  the  States 
it  had  received  no  higher  sanction  than  a  mere 
legislative  ratification.  The  principle  of  recip- 
rocality  seems  to  require  that  its  obligation  on 
the  other  States  should  be  reduced  to  the  same 
standard.  A  compact  between  independent 
sovereigns,  founded  on  ordinary  acts  of  legis¬ 
lative  authority,  can  pretend  to  no  higher  valid¬ 
ity  than  a  league  or  treaty  between  the  parties. 
It  is  an  established  doctrine  on  the  subject  of 
treaties,  that  all  the  articles  are  mutually  con¬ 
ditions  of  each  other;  that  a  breach  of  any  one 
article  is  a  breach  of  the  whole  treaty;  and  that 
a  breach,  committed  by  either  of  the  parties, 
absolves  the  others,  and  authorises  them,  if 
they  please,  to  pronounce  the  compact  violated 
and  void.  Should  it  unhappily  be  necessary  to 
appeal  to  these  delicate  truths  for  a  justifica¬ 
tion  for  dispensing  with  the  consent  of  partic¬ 
ular  States  to  a  dissolution  of  the  federal  pact, 
will  not  the  complaining  parties  find  it  a  diffi¬ 
cult  task  to  answer  the  multiplied  and  impor¬ 
tant  infractions  with  which  they  may  be  con¬ 
fronted?  The  time  has  been  when  it  was  in¬ 
cumbent  on  us  all  to  veil  the  ideas  which  this 
paragraph  exhibits.  The  scene  is  now  changed, 
and  with  it  the  part  which  the  same  motives 
dictate. 

The  second  question  is  not  less  delicate;  and 
the  flattering  prospect  of  its  being  merely 
hypothetical  forbids  an  over-curious  discussion 
of  it.  It  is  one  of  those  cases  which  must  be 
left  to  provide  for  itself.  In  general,  it  may  be 
observed,  that  although  no  political  relation 
can  subsist  between  the  assenting  and  dissent¬ 
ing  States,  yet  the  moral  relations  will  remain 
uncancelled.  The  claims  of  justice,  both  on 
one  side  and  on  the  other,  will  be  in  force,  and 
must  be  fulfilled;  the  rights  of  humanity  must 


THE  FEDERALIST 


in  all  cases  be  duly  and  mutually  respected; 
whilst  considerations  of  a  common  interest, 
and,  above  all,  the  remembrance  of  the  endear¬ 
ing  scenes  which  are  past,  and  the  anticipa¬ 
tion  of  a  speedy  triumph  over  the  obstacles  to 
reunion,  will,  it  is  hoped,  not  urge  in  vain 
moderation  on  one  side,  and  prudence  on  the 
other.  Publius 

Number  44 

[MADISON] 

A  fifth  class  of  provisions  in  favour  of  the 
federal  authority  consists  of  the  following  re¬ 
strictions  on  the  authority  of  the  several  States: 

1.  “No  State  shall  enter  into  any  treaty,  alli¬ 
ance,  or  confederation;  grant  letters  of  marque 
and  reprisal;  coin  money;  emit  bills  of  credit; 
make  anything  but  gold  and  silver  a  legal  ten¬ 
der  in  payment  of  debts;  pass  any  bill  of  attain¬ 
der,  ex  post  facto  law,  or  law  impairing  the 
obligation  of  contracts;  or  grant  any  title  of 
nobility.” 

The  prohibition  against  treaties,  alliances, 
and  confederations  makes  a  part  of  the  exist¬ 
ing  articles  of  Union;  and  for  reasons  which 
need  no  explanation  is  copied  into  the  new 
Constitution.  The  prohibition  of  letters  of 
marque  is  another  part  of  the  old  system,  but 
is  somewhat  extended  in  the  new.  According 
to  the  former,  letters  of  marque  could  be 
granted  by  the  States  after  a  declaration  of 
war;  according  to  the  latter,  these  licenses  must 
be  obtained,  as  well  during  war  as  previous 
to  its  declaration,  from  the  government  of  the 
United  States.  This  alteration  is  fully  justified 
by  the  advantage  of  uniformity  in  all  points 
which  relate  to  foreign  powers;  and  of  im¬ 
mediate  responsibility  to  the  nation  in  all 
those  for  whose  conduct  the  nation  itself  is 
to  be  responsible. 

The  right  of  coining  money,  which  is  here 
taken  from  the  States,  was  left  in  their  hands 
by  the  Confederation,  as  a  concurrent  right 
with  that  of  Congress,  under  an  exception  in 
favour  of  the  exclusive  right  of  Congress  to 
regulate  the  alloy  and  value.  In  this  instance, 
also,  the  new  provision  is  an  improvement  on 
the  old.  Whilst  the  alloy  and  value  depended 
on  the  general  authority,  a  right  of  coinage  in 
the  particular  States  could  have  no  oilier  elfect 
than  to  multiply  expensive  mints  and  diversity 
t lie  foi  ms  and  weights  ol  the  c i collating  pica  es. 

I  'he  latter  imonveiiiency  (Ideals  one  purpose 
for  whit  h  the  power  was  originally  submitted 
to  the  federal  head;  and  as  far  as  the  former 


might  prevent  an  inconvenient  remittance  of 
gold  and  silver  to  the  central  mint  for  recoin¬ 
age.  the  end  can  be  as  well  attained  by  local 
mints  established  under  the  general  authority. 

The  extension  of  the  prohibition  to  bills  of 
credit  must  give  pleasure  to  every  citizen,  in 
proportion  to  his  love  of  justice  and  his  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  true  springs  of  public  prosperity. 
The  loss  which  America  has  sustained  since 
the  peace  from  the  pestilent  effects  of  paper 
money  on  the  necessary  confidence  between 
man  and  man,  on  the  necessary  confidence  in 
the  public  councils,  on  the  industry  and  morals 
of  the  people  and  on  the  character  ol  republi¬ 
can  government,  constitutes  an  enormous  debt 
against  the  States  chargeable  with  this  unad¬ 
vised  measure,  which  must  long  remain  un¬ 
satisfied;  or  rather  an  accumulation  of  guilt, 
which  can  be  expiated  no  otherwise  than  by  a 
voluntary  sacrifice  on  the  altar  of  justice  of  the 
power  which  has  been  the  instrument  of  it.  In 
addition  to  these  persuasive  considerations,  it 
may  be  observed  that  the  same  reasons  which 
show  the  necessity  of  denying  to  the  States  the 
power  of  regulating  coin,  prove  with  equal 
force  that  they  ought  not  to  be  at  liberty  to 
substitute  a  paper  medium  in  the  place  of  coin. 
Had  every  State  a  right  to  regulate  the  value 
of  its  coin,  there  might  be  as  many  different 
currencies  as  States,  and  thus  the  intercourse 
among  them  would  be  impeded;  retrospective 
alterations  in  its  value  might  be  made,  and 
thus  the  citizens  of  other  States  be  injured,  and 
animosities  be  kindled  among  the  States  them¬ 
selves.  The  subjects  of  foreign  powers  might 
suffer  from  the  same  cause,  and  hence  the 
Union  be  discredited  and  embroiled  by  the 
indiscretion  of  a  single  member.  No  one  of 
these  mischiefs  is  less  incident  to  a  power  in 
the  States  to  emit  paper  money,  than  to  coin 
gold  or  silver.  Hie  power  to  make  anything 
but  gold  and  silver  a  tender  in  payment  of 
debts  is  withdrawn  from  the  States,  on  the 
same  principle  with  that  of  issuing  a  paper 
currency. 

Hills  of  attainder,  ex  post  facto  laws,  and 
laws  impairing  the  obligation  of  contracts,  are 
contrary  to  the  first  principles  of  the  social 
compact,  and  to  every  principle  of  sound  legis¬ 
lation.  1  lie  two  former  are  expressly  prohib¬ 
ited  by  the  dec  larations  prefixed  to  some  of  the 
Stale  constitutions,  and  all  of  them  are  pro¬ 
hibited  b\  the  spirit  and  scope  of  these  fun¬ 
damental  charters.  Our  own  experience  has 
taught  us,  nevertheless,  that  additional  fences 
against  these  dangers  ought  not  to  be  omitted. 


NUMBER  44 


Very  properly,  therefore,  have  the  convention 
added  this  constitutional  bulwark  in  favour 
of  personal  security  and  private  rights;  and  I 
am  much  deceived  if  they  have  not,  in  so  doing, 
as  faithfully  consulted  the  genuine  sentiments 
as  the  undoubted  interests  of  their  constitu¬ 
ents.  The  sober  people  of  America  are  weary 
of  the  fluctuating  policy  which  has  directed  the 
public  councils.  They  have  seen  with  regret 
and  indignation  that  sudden  changes  and  legis¬ 
lative  interferences,  in  cases  affecting  personal 
rights,  become  jobs  in  the  hands  of  enterpris¬ 
ing  and  influential  speculators,  and  snares  to 
the  more-inclustrious  and  less-informed  part  of 
the  community.  They  have  seen,  too,  that  one 
legislative  interference  is  but  the  first  link  of 
a  long  chain  of  repetitions,  every  subsequent 
interference  being  naturally  produced  by  the 
effects  of  the  preceding.  They  very  rightly  in¬ 
fer,  therefore,  that  some  thorough  reform  is 
wanting,  which  will  banish  speculations  on 
public  measures,  inspire  a  general  prudence 
and  industry,  and  give  a  regular  course  to  the 
business  of  society.  The  prohibition  with  re¬ 
spect  to  titles  of  nobility  is  copied  from  the 
articles  of  Confederation,  and  needs  no  com¬ 
ment. 

2.  “No  State  shall,  without  the  consent  of  the 
Congress,  lay  any  imposts  or  duties  on  imports 
or  exports,  except  what  may  be  absolutely  nec¬ 
essary  for  executing  its  inspection  laws,  and  the 
net  produce  of  all  duties  and  imposts  laid  by 
any  State  on  imports  or  exports,  shall  be  for 
the  use  of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States; 
and  all  such  laws  shall  be  subject  to  the  re¬ 
vision  and  control  of  the  Congress.  No  State 
shall,  without  the  consent  of  Congress,  lay  any 
duty  on  tonnage,  keep  troops  or  ships  of  war 
in  time  of  peace,  enter  into  any  agreement  or 
compact  with  another  State,  or  with  a  foreign 
power,  or  engage  in  war  unless  actually  in¬ 
vaded,  or  in  such  imminent  danger  as  will  not 
admit  of  delay.” 

The  restraint  on  the  power  of  the  States  over 
imports  and  exports  is  enforced  by  all  the  ar¬ 
guments  which  prove  the  necessity  of  submit¬ 
ting  the  regulation  of  trade  to  the  federal 
councils.  It  is  needless,  therefore,  to  remark 
further  on  this  head,  than  that  the  manner  in 
which  the  restraint  is  qualified  seems  well  cal¬ 
culated  at  once  to  secure  to  the  States  a  rea¬ 
sonable  discretion  in  providing  for  the  con- 
veniency  of  their  imports  and  exports,  and  to 
the  United  States  a  reasonable  check  against 
the  abuse  of  this  discretion.  The  remaining 
particulars  of  this  clause  fall  within  reasonings 


which  are  either  so  obvious,  or  have  been  so 
fully  developed,  that  they  may  be  passed  over 
without  remark. 

The  sixth  and  last  class  consistsof  theseveral 
powers  and  provisions  by  which  efficacy  is 
given  to  all  the  rest. 

1.  Of  these  the  first  is,  the  “power  to  make 
all  laws  which  shall  be  necessary  and  proper 
for  carrying  into  execution  the  foregoing 
powers,  and  all  other  powers  vested  by  this 
Constitution  in  the  government  of  the  United 
States,  or  in  any  department  or  officer  thereof.” 

Few  parts  of  the  Constitution  have  been 
assailed  with  more  intemperance  than  this; 
yet  on  a  fair  investigation  of  it,  no  part  can 
appear  more  completely  invulnerable.  With¬ 
out  the  substance  of  this  power,  the  whole 
Constitution  would  be  a  dead  letter.  Those 
who  object  to  the  article,  therefore,  as  a  part 
of  the  Constitution,  can  only  mean  that  the 
form  of  the  provision  is  improper.  But  have 
they  considered  whether  a  better  form  could 
have  been  substituted? 

There  are  four  other  possible  methods  which 
the  Constitution  might  have  taken  on  this  sub¬ 
ject.  They  might  have  copied  the  second  article 
of  the  existing  Confederation,  which  would 
have  prohibited  the  exercise  of  any  power  not 
expressly  delegated;  they  might  have  attempted 
a  positive  enumeration  of  the  powers  compre¬ 
hended  under  the  general  terms  “necessary  and 
proper”;  they  might  have  attempted  a  nega¬ 
tive  enumeration  of  them,  by  specifying  the 
powers  excepted  from  the  general  definition; 
they  might  have  been  altogether  silent  on  the 
subject,  leaving  these  necessary  and  proper 
powers  to  construction  and  inference. 

Had  the  convention  taken  the  first  method 
of  adopting  the  second  article  of  Confedera¬ 
tion,  it  is  evident  that  the  new  Congress  would 
be  continually  exposed,  as  their  predecessors 
have  been,  to  the  alternative  of  construing  the 
term  <<expressly,>  with  so  much  rigour,  as  to  dis¬ 
arm  the  government  of  all  real  authority  what¬ 
ever,  or  with  so  much  latitude  as  to  destroy  al¬ 
together  the  force  of  the  restriction.  It  would 
be  easy  to  show,  if  it  were  necessary,  that  no 
important  power  delegated  by  the  articles  of 
Confederation  has  been  or  can  be  executed  by 
Congress  without  recurring  more  or  less  to  the 
doctrine  of  construction  or  Implication.  As  the 
powers  delegated  under  the  new  system  are 
more  extensive,  the  government  which  is  to 
administer  it  would  find  itself  still  more  dis¬ 
tressed  with  the  alternative  of  betraying  the 
public  interests  by  doing  nothing,  or  of  violat- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


ing  the  Constitution  by  exercising  powers  in¬ 
dispensably  necessary  and  proper,  but,  at  the 
same  time,  not  expressly  granted. 

Had  the  convention  attempted  a  positive 
enumeration  of  the  powers  necessary  and 
proper  for  carrying  their  other  powers  into  ef¬ 
fect,  the  attempt  would  have  involved  a  com¬ 
plete  digest  of  laws  on  every  subject  to  which 
the  Constitution  relates;  accommodated  too, 
not  only  to  the  existing  state  of  things,  but  to 
all  the  possible  changes  which  futurity  may  pro¬ 
duce;  for  in  every  new  application  of  a  general 
power,  the  particular  powers ,  which  are  the 
means  of  attaining  the  object  of  the  general 
power,  must  always  necessarily  vary  with  that 
object,  and  be  often  properly  varied  whilst  the 
object  remains  the  same. 

Had  they  attempted  to  enumerate  the  par¬ 
ticular  powers  or  means  not  necessary  or  prop¬ 
er  for  carrying  the  general  powers  into  execu¬ 
tion.  the  task  would  have  been  no  less  chimer¬ 
ical;  and  would  have  been  liable  to  this  further 
objection,  that  every  defect  in  the  enumeration 
would  have  been  equivalent  to  a  positive  grant 
of  authority.  If,  to  avoid  this  consequence,  they 
had  attempted  a  partial  enumeration  of  the 
exceptions,  and  described  the  residue  by  the 
general  terms,  not  necessary  or  proper ,  it  must 
have  happened  that  the  enumeration  would 
comprehend  a  few  of  the  excepted  powers 
only;  that  these  would  be  such  as  would  be 
least  likely  to  be  assumed  or  tolerated,  because 
the  enumeration  would  of  course  select  such 
as  would  be  least  necessary  or  proper;  and  that 
the  unnecessary  and  improper  powers  includ¬ 
ed  in  the  residuum  would  be  less  forcibly  ex¬ 
cepted  than  if  no  partial  enumeration  had  been 
made. 

Had  the  Constitution  been  silent  on  this 
head,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  all  the  par¬ 
ticular  powers  requisite  as  means  of  executing 
the  general  powers  would  have  resulted  to  the 
government,  by  unavoidable  implication.  No 
axiom  is  more  clearly  established  in  law,  or  in 
reason,  than  that  wherever  the  end  is  required, 
the  means  are  authorised;  wherever  a  general 
power  to  do  a  thing  is  given,  every  particular 
power  necessary  for  doing  it  is  int  luded.  Had 
this  last  method,  therefore,  been  pursued  by 
die  convention,  every  objection  now  urged 
against  their  plan  would  remain  in  all  its 
plausibility;  and  the  real  inconvenient  y  would 
be  incurred  of  not  removing  a  pretext  which 
may  be  seized  on  critical  occasions  for  drawing 
into  question  the  essential  powers  of  the 
Union. 


If  it  be  asked  what  is  to  be  the  consequence, 
in  case  the  Congress  shall  misconstrue  this  part 
of  the  Constitution,  and  exercise  powers  not 
warranted  by  its  true  meaning,  I  answer,  the 
same  as  if  they  should  misconstrue  or  enlarge 
any  other  power  vested  in  them;  as  if  the  gen¬ 
eral  power  had  been  reduced  to  particulars, 
and  any  one  of  these  were  to  be  violated;  the 
same,  in  short,  as  if  the  State  legislatures 
should  violate  their  respective  constitutional 
authorities.  In  the  first  instance,  the  success 
of  the  usurpation  will  depend  on  the  execu¬ 
tive  and  judiciary  departments,  which  are  to 
expound  and  give  effect  to  the  legislative  acts; 
and  in  the  last  resort  a  remedy  must  be  ob¬ 
tained  from  the  people,  who  can,  by  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  more  faithful  representatives,  annul 
the  acts  of  the  usurpers.  The  truth  is,  that  this 
ultimate  redress  may  be  more  confided  in 
against  unconstitutional  acts  of  the  federal 
than  of  the  State  legislatures,  for  this  plain  rea¬ 
son,  that  as  every  such  act  of  the  former  will  be 
an  invasion  of  the  rights  of  the  latter,  these 
will  be  ever  ready  to  mark  the  innovation,  to 
sound  the  alarm  to  the  people,  and  to  exert 
their  local  influence  in  effecting  a  change  of 
federal  representatives.  There  being  no  such 
intermediate  body  between  the  State  legisla¬ 
tures  and  the  people  interested  in  watching  the 
conduct  of  the  former,  violations  of  the  State 
constitutions  arc  more  likely  to  remain  un¬ 
noticed  and  unredressed. 

2.  “This  Constitution  and  the  laws  of  the 
United  States  which  shall  be  made  in  pursu¬ 
ance  thereof,  and  all  treaties  made,  or  which 
shall  be  made,  under  the  authority  of  the 
United  States,  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of  the 
land,  and  the  judges  in  every  State  shall  be 
bound  thereby,  anything  in  the  constitution 
or  laws  of  any  State  to  the  contrary  notwith¬ 
standing.” 

The  indiscreet  zeal  of  the  adversaries  to  the 
Constitution  has  betrayed  them  into  an  attack 
on  this  part  of  it  also,  without  which  it  would 
have  been  evidently  and  radically  defective. 
To  be  full)  sensible  of  this,  we  need  only  sup¬ 
pose  for  a  moment  that  the  supremacy  of  the 
State  constitutions  had  been  left  complete  by 
a  saving  clause  in  their  favour. 

In  the  first  place,  as  these  constitutions  in¬ 
vest  the  State  legislatures  with  absolute  sover¬ 
eignty,  in  all  cases  not  excepted  by  the  existing 
articles  of  Confederation,  all  the  authorities 
contained  in  the  proposed  Constitution,  so  far 
as  they  exceed  those  enumerated  in  the  ('.oil- 
federation,  would  have  been  annulled, and  the 


NUMBER  45 


new  Congress  would  have  been  reduced  to  the 
same  impotent  condition  with  their  predeces¬ 
sors. 

In  the  next  place,  as  the  constitutions  of 
some  of  the  States  do  not  even  expressly  and 
fully  recognise  the  existing  powers  of  the  Con¬ 
federacy,  an  express  saving  of  the  supremacy  of 
the  former  would,  in  such  States,  have  brought 
into  question  every  power  contained  in  the 
proposed  Constitution. 

In  the  third  place,  as  the  constitutions  of  the 
States  differ  much  from  each  other,  it  might 
happen  that  a  treaty  or  national  law,  of  great 
and  equal  importance  to  the  States,  would  in¬ 
terfere  with  some  and  not  with  other  constitu¬ 
tions,  and  would  consequently  be  valid  in  some 
of  the  States,  at  the  same  time  that  it  would 
have  no  effect  in  others. 

In  fine,  the  world  would  have  seen,  for  the 
first  time,  a  system  of  government  founded  on 
an  inversion  of  the  fundamental  principles  of 
all  government;  it  would  have  seen  the  author¬ 
ity  of  the  whole  society  everywhere  subordi¬ 
nate  to  the  authority  of  the  parts;  it  would 
have  seen  a  monster  in  which  the  head  was 
under  the  direction  of  the  members. 

3.  “The  Senators  and  Representatives,  and 
the  members  of  the  several  State  legislatures, 
and  all  executive  and  judicial  officers,  both  of 
the  United  States  and  the  several  States,  shall 
be  bound  by  oath  or  affirmation  to  support 
this  Constitution.” 

It  has  been  asked  why  it  was  thought  neces¬ 
sary  that  the  State  magistracy  should  be  bound 
to  support  the  federal  Constitution,  and  un¬ 
necessary  that  a  like  oath  should  be  imposed 
on  the  officers  of  the  United  States,  in  favour 
of  the  State  constitutions. 

Several  reasons  might  be  assigned  for  the  dis¬ 
tinction.  I  content  myself  with  one,  which  is 
obvious  and  conclusive.  The  members  of  the 
federal  government  will  have  no  agency  in 
carrying  theState  constitutions  into  effect. The 
members  and  officers  of  theState  governments, 
on  the  contrary,  will  have  an  essential  agency 
in  giving  effect  to  the  federal  Constitution. 
The  election  of  the  President  and  Senate  will 
depend,  in  all  cases,  on  the  legislatures  of  the 
several  States.  And  the  election  of  the  House 
of  Representatives  will  equally  depend  on  the 
same  authority  in  the  first  instance;  and  will, 
probably,  for  ever  be  conducted  by  the  officers, 
and  according  to  the  laws,  of  the  States. 

4.  Among  the  provisions  for  giving  efficacy 
to  the  federal  powers  might  be  added  those 
which  belong  to  the  executive  and  judiciary 


departments:  but  as  these  are  reserved  for  par¬ 
ticular  examination  in  another  place,  I  pass 
them  over  in  this. 

We  have  now  reviewed,  in  detail,  all  the  ar¬ 
ticles  composing  the  sum  or  quantity  of  power 
delegated  by  the  proposed  Constitution  to  the 
federal  government,  and  are  brought  to  this  un¬ 
deniable  conclusion,  that  no  part  of  the  power 
is  unnecessary  or  improper  for  accomplishing 
the  necessary  objects  of  the  Union.  The  ques¬ 
tion,  therefore,  whether  this  amount  of  power 
shall  be  granted  or  not,  resolves  itself  into 
another  question,  whether  or  not  a  govern¬ 
ment  commensurate  to  the  exigencies  of  the 
Union  shall  be  established;  or,  in  other  words, 
whether  the  Union  itself  shall  be  preserved. 

Publius 

Number  45 

[MADISON] 

Having  shown  that  no  one  of  the  powers  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  federal  government  is  unneces¬ 
sary  or  improper,  the  next  question  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  is,  whether  the  whole  mass  of  them 
will  be  dangerous  to  the  portion  of  authority 
left  in  the  several  States. 

The  adversaries  to  the  plan  of  the  conven¬ 
tion,  instead  of  considering  in  the  first  place 
what  degree  of  power  was  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  purposes  of  the  federal  govern¬ 
ment,  have  exhausted  themselves  in  a  second¬ 
ary  inquiry  into  the  possible  consequences  of 
the  proposed  degree  of  power  to  the  govern¬ 
ments  of  the  particular  States.  But  if  the 
Union,  as  has  been  shown,  be  essential  to  the 
security  of  the  people  of  America  against  for¬ 
eign  danger;  if  it  be  essential  to  their  security 
against  contentions  and  wars  among  the  dif¬ 
ferent  States;  if  it  be  essential  to  guard  them 
against  those  violent  and  oppressive  factions 
which  embitter  the  blessings  of  liberty,  and 
against  those  military  establishments  which 
must  gradually  poison  its  very  fountain;  if,  in 
a  word,  the  Union  be  essential  to  the  happi¬ 
ness  of  the  people  of  America,  is  it  not  pre¬ 
posterous  to  urge  as  an  objection  to  a  govern¬ 
ment,  without  which  the  objects  of  the  Union 
cannot  be  attained,  that  such  a  government 
may  derogate  from  the  importance  of  the  gov¬ 
ernments  of  the  individual  States?  Was,  then, 
the  American  Revolution  effected,  was  the 
American  Confederacy  formed,  was  the  pre¬ 
cious  blood  of  thousands  spilt,  and  the  hard- 
earned  substance  of  millions  lavished,  not  that 
the  people  of  America  should  enjoy  peace, 


THE  FEDERALIST 


liberty,  and  safety,  but  that  the  government  of 
the  individual  States,  that  particular  munici¬ 
pal  establishments,  might  enjoy  a  certain  ex¬ 
tent  of  power,  and  be  arrayed  with  certain 
dignities  and  attributes  of  sovereignty?  We 
have  heard  of  the  impious  doctrine  in  the  Old 
World,  that  the  people  were  made  for  kings, 
not  kings  for  the  people.  Is  the  same  doctrine 
to  be  revived  in  the  New  in  another  shape— 
that  the  solid  happiness  of  the  people  is  to 
be  sacrificed  to  the  views  of  political  institu¬ 
tions  of  a  different  form?  It  is  too  early  for 
politicians  to  presume  on  our  forgetting  that 
the  public  good,  the  real  welfare  of  the  great 
body  of  the  people,  is  the  supreme  object  to 
be  pursued;  and  that  no  form  of  government 
whatever  has  any  other  value  than  as  it  may 
be  fitted  for  the  attainment  of  this  object. 
Were  the  plan  of  the  convention  adverse  to 
the  public  happiness,  my  voice  would  be,  Re¬ 
ject  the  plan.  Were  the  Union  itself  incon¬ 
sistent  with  the  public  happiness,  it  would  be, 
Abolish  the  Union.  In  like  manner,  as  far  as 
the  sovereignty  of  the  States  cannot  be  recon¬ 
ciled  to  the  happiness  of  the  people,  the  voice 
of  every  good  citizen  must  be,  Let  the  former 
be  sacrificed  to  the  latter.  How  far  the  sacri¬ 
fice  is  necessary,  has  been  shown.  How  far  the 
unsacrificed  residue  will  be  endangered,  is  the 
question  before  us. 

Several  important  considerations  have  been 
touched  in  the  course  of  these  papers,  which 
discountenance  the  supposition  that  the  oper¬ 
ation  of  the  federal  government  will  by  degrees 
prove  fatal  to  the  State  governments.  The 
more  I  revolve  the  subject,  the  more  fully  I  am 
persuaded  that  the  balance  is  much  more  likely 
to  be  disturbed  by  the  prcponderancy  of  the 
last  than  of  the  first  scale. 

We  have  seen,  in  all  the  examples  of  ancient 
and  modern  confederacies,  the  strongest  tend¬ 
ency  continually  betraying  itself  in  the  mem¬ 
bers  to  despoil  the  general  government  of  its 
authority  with  a  very  ineffectual  capacity  in 
the  latter  to  defend  itself  against  the  encroach¬ 
ments.  Although,  m  most  of  these  examples, 
the  system  has  been  so  dissimilar  from  that 
under  consideration  as  greatly  to  weaken  any 
inference  concerning  the  latter  from  the  fate 
of  i lie  former,  yet,  as  the  States  will  retain, 
under  the  proposed  Constitution,  a  very  ex¬ 
tensive  portion  of  active  sovereignty,  the  in¬ 
ference  ought  not  to  be  wholly  disregarded. 
In  the  Acha-au  league  it  is  probable  that  the 
federal  head  had  a  degree  and  species  of  power 
which  gave  it  a  considerable  likeness  to  the 


government  framed  by  the  convention.  The 
Lycian  Confederacy,  as  far  as  its  principles 
and  form  are  transmitted,  must  have  borne  a 
still  greater  analogy  to  it.  Yet  history  does  not 
inform  us  that  cither  of  them  ever  degener¬ 
ated,  or  tended  to  degenerate,  into  one  con¬ 
solidated  government.  On  the  contrary,  we 
know  that  the  ruin  of  one  of  them  proceeded 
from  the  incapacity  of  the  federal  authority 
to  prevent  the  dissensions,  and  finally  the  dis¬ 
union,  of  the  subordinate  authorities.  These 
cases  are  the  more  worthy  of  our  attention,  as 
the  external  causes  by  which  the  component 
parts  were  pressed  together  were  much  more 
numerous  and  powerful  than  in  our  case;  and 
consequently  less  powerful  ligaments  within 
would  be  sufficient  to  bind  the  members  to  the 
head,  and  to  each  other. 

In  the  feudal  system,  we  have  seen  a  similar 
propensity  exemplified.  Notwithstanding  the 
want  of  proper  sympathy  in  every  instance  be¬ 
tween  the  local  sovereigns  and  the  people, and 
the  sympathy  in  some  instances  between  the 
general  sovereign  and  the  latter,  it  usually 
happened  that  the  local  sovereigns  prevailed 
in  the  rivalship  for  encroachments.  Had  no 
external  dangers  enforced  internal  harmony 
and  subordination,  and,  particularly,  had  the 
local  sovereigns  possessed  the  affections  of  the 
people,  the  great  kingdoms  in  Europe  would 
at  this  time  consist  of  as  many  independent 
princes  as  there  were  formerly  feudatory  bar¬ 
ons. 

The  State  governments  will  have  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  the  Federal  government,  whether  we 
compare  them  in  respect  to  the  immediate  de¬ 
pendence  of  the  one  on  the  other;  to  the  weight 
of  personal  influence  which  each  side  will  pos¬ 
sess;  to  the  powers  respectively  vested  in  them: 
to  the  predilection  and  probable  support  of 
the  people;  to  the  disposition  and  faculty  of 
resisting  and  frustrating  the  measures  of  each 
other. 

The  State  governments  may  be  regarded  as 
constituent  and  essential  parts  of  the  federal 
government;  whilst  the  latter  is  nowise  essen¬ 
tial  to  the  operation  or  organisation  of  the 
former.  Without  the  intervention  of  the  State 
legislatures,  the  President  of  the  United  States 
cannot  be  elected  at  all.  They  must  in  all  cases 
have  a  great  share  in  his  appointment,  and 
will,  perhaps,  in  most  cases,  of  themselves  de¬ 
termine  it.  l  he  Senate  will  be  elected  abso¬ 
lutely  and  cx(  lusively  by  the  State  legislatures. 
Even  the  House  of  Representatives,  though 
drawn  immediately  from  the  people,  will  he 


NUMBER  45  149 


chosen  very  much  under  the  influence  of  that 
class  of  men,  whose  influence  over  the  people 
obtains  for  themselves  an  election  into  the 
State  legislatures.  Thus,  each  of  the  principal 
branches  of  the  federal  government  will  owe 
its  existence  more  or  less  to  the  favour  of  the 
State  governments,  and  must  consequently 
feel  a  dependence,  which  is  much  more  likely 
to  beget  a  disposition  too  obsequious  than  too 
overbearing  towards  them.  On  the  other  side, 
the  component  parts  of  the  State  governments 
will  in  no  instance  be  indebted  for  their  ap¬ 
pointment  to  the  direct  agency  of  the  federal 
government,  and  very  little,  if  at  all,  to  the 
local  influence  of  its  members. 

The  number  of  individuals  employed  under 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  will  be 
much  smaller  than  the  number  employed  un¬ 
der  the  particular  States.  There  will  conse¬ 
quently  be  less  of  personal  influence  on  the 
side  of  the  former  than  of  the  latter.  The  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary 
departments  of  thirteen  and  more  States,  the 
justices  of  peace,  officers  of  militia,  ministerial 
officers  of  justice,  with  all  the  county,  corpora¬ 
tion,  and  town  officers,  for  three  millions  and 
more  of  people,  intermixed,  and  having  par¬ 
ticular  acquaintance  with  every  class  and  cir¬ 
cle  of  people,  must  exceed,  beyond  all  propor¬ 
tion,  both  in  number  and  influence,  those  of 
every  description  who  will  be  employed  in  the 
administration  of  the  federal  system.  Compare 
the  members  of  the  three  great  departments 
of  the  thirteen  States,  excluding  from  the  ju¬ 
diciary  department  the  justices  of  peace,  with 
the  members  of  the  corresponding  depart¬ 
ments  of  the  single  government  of  the  Union; 
compare  the  militia  officers  of  three  millions 
of  people  with  the  military  and  marine  officers 
of  any  establishment  which  is  within  the  com¬ 
pass  of  probability,  or,  I  may  add,  of  possibil¬ 
ity,  and  in  this  view  alone,  we  may  pronounce 
the  advantage  of  the  States  to  be  decisive.  If 
the  federal  government  is  to  have  collectors  of 
revenue,  the  State  governments  will  have  theirs 
also.  And  as  those  of  the  former  will  be  prin¬ 
cipally  on  the  sea-coast,  and  not  very  numer¬ 
ous,  whilst  those  of  the  latter  will  be  spread 
over  the  face  of  the  country,  and  will  be  very 
numerous,  the  advantage  in  this  view  also  lies 
on  the  same  side.  It  is  true,  that  the  Confeder¬ 
acy  is  to  possess,  and  may  exercise,  the  power 
of  collecting  internal  as  well  as  external  taxes 
throughout  the  States;  but  it  is  probable  that 
this  power  will  not  be  resorted  to  except  for 
supplemental  purposes  of  revenue;  that  an  op¬ 


tion  will  then  be  given  to  the  States  to  supply 
their  quotas  by  previous  collections  of  their 
own;  and  that  the  eventual  collection,  under 
the  immediate  authority  of  the  Union,  will 
generally  be  made  by  the  officers,  and  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  rules,  appointed  by  the  several 
States.  Indeed  it  is  extremely  probable  that  in 
other  instances,  particularly  in  the  organisa¬ 
tion  of  the  judicial  power,  the  officers  of  the 
States  will  be  clothed  with  the  correspondent 
authority  of  the  Union.  Should  it  happen, 
however,  that  separate  collectors  of  internal 
revenue  should  be  appointed  under  the  fed¬ 
eral  government,  the  influence  of  the  whole 
number  would  not  bear  a  comparison  with 
that  of  the  multitude  of  State  officers  in  the 
opposite  scale.  Within  every  district  to  which 
a  federal  collector  would  be  allotted,  there 
would  not  be  less  than  thirty  or  forty,  or  even 
more,  officers  of  different  descriptions,  and 
many  of  them  persons  of  character  and  weight, 
whose  influence  would  lie  on  the  side  of  the 
State. 

The  powers  delegated  by  the  proposed  Con¬ 
stitution  to  the  federal  government  are  few 
and  defined.  Those  which  are  to  remain  in  the 
State  governments  are  numerous  and  in¬ 
definite.  The  former  will  be  exercised  prin¬ 
cipally  on  external  objects,  as  war,  peace,  ne¬ 
gotiation,  and  foreign  commerce;  with  which 
last  the  power  of  taxation  will,  for  the  most 
part,  be  connected.  The  powers  reserved  to 
the  several  States  will  extend  to  all  the  ob¬ 
jects  which,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs, 
concern  the  lives,  liberties,  and  properties  of 
the  people,  and  the  internal  order,  improve¬ 
ment,  and  prosperity  of  the  State. 

The  operations  of  the  federal  government 
will  be  most  extensive  and  important  in  times 
of  war  and  danger;  those  of  the  State  govern¬ 
ments,  in  times  of  peace  and  security.  As  the 
former  periods  will  probably  bear  a  small  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  latter,  the  State  governments 
will  here  enjoy  another  advantage  over  the 
federal  government.  The  more  adequate,  in¬ 
deed,  the  federal  powers  may  be  rendered  to 
the  national  defence,  the  less  frequent  will  be 
those  scenes  of  danger  which  might  favour 
their  ascendancy  over  the  governments  of  the 
particular  States. 

If  the  new  Constitution  be  examined  with 
accuracy  and  candour,  it  will  be  found  that 
the  change  which  it  proposes  consists  much 
less  in  the  addition  of  new  powers  to  the 
Union,  than  in  the  invigoration  of  its  origi¬ 
nal  powers.  The  regulation  of  commerce,  it 


THE  FEDERALIST 


is  true.  is  a  new  power;  but  that  seems  to  be  an 
addition  which  few  oppose,  and  from  which 
no  apprehensions  are  entertained.  The  powers 
relating  to  war  and  peace,  armies  anti  fleets, 
treaties  and  finance,  with  the  other  more  con¬ 
siderable  powers,  arc  all  vested  in  the  existing 
Congress  by  the  articles  of  Confederation.  The 
proposed  change  does  not  enlarge  these  pow¬ 
ers:  it  only  substitutes  a  more  effectual  mode 
of  administering  them.  The  change  relating 
to  taxation  may  be  regarded  as  the  most  im¬ 
portant:  and  yet  the  present  Congress  have  as 
complete  authority  to  riqiirk  of  the  States 
indefinite  supplies  of  money  for  the  common 
defence  and  general  welfare  as  the  future  Con¬ 
gress  will  have  to  require  them  of  individual 
citi/cns;  and  the  latter  will  be  no  more  bound 
than  the  States  themselves  have  been  to  pay 
the  quotas  respectively  taxed  on  them.  Had 
the  States  complied  punctually  with  the  arti¬ 
cles  of  Confederation,  or  could  their  compli¬ 
ance  have  been  enforced  by  as  peaceable  means 
as  may  be  used  with  success  towards  single  per¬ 
sons.  our  past  experience  is  \cry  far  from  coun¬ 
tenancing  an  opinion  that  the  State  govern¬ 
ments  would  have  lost  their  constitutional 
powers,  and  have  gradually  undergone  an  en¬ 
tire  consolidation.  To  maintain  that  such  an 
event  would  have  ensued,  would  be  to  say  at 
once  that  the  existence  of  the  State  govern¬ 
ments  is  incompatible  with  any  system  what¬ 
ever  that  accomplishes  the  essential  purposes 
of  the  Union.  Pt  nut  s 

Number  46 

j  \tAt)ls<)N] 

R  t  st' mi  no  the  subject  of  the  last  paper  I  pro¬ 
ceed  to  inquire  whether  the  federal  govern 
ment  or  the  State  governments  will  have  the 
advantage  with  regard  to  the  predilection  and 
support  of  the  people,  Notwithstanding  the 
different  modes  in  which  they  are  appointed, 
we  must  consider  both  of  them  as  substantially 
dependent  on  the  great  hotly  of  the  citizens  of 
the  1  nited  State’s.  I  assume  this  position  here 
as  it  respects  the  fit  si,  resen  ing  the  prools  for 
another  place.  I  he  fedeial  and  State  govern 
incuts  are  in  fac  t  but  different  agents  and  trus¬ 
tees  of  the  people,  constituted  with  dilfeicnt 
powers,  and  designed  for  different  purposes. 

I  he  atlv ers.iries  of  the  Constitution  seem  In 
ha\  e  lost  sight  of  tin*  people  altogether  in  their 
reasonings  cm  this  subjet  t;  and  to  base  \  iewed 
these  different  establishments,  not  only  as  mu¬ 
tual  ii\als  and  enemies,  but  as  uncontrolled 


by  any  common  superior  in  their  efforts  to 
usurp  the  authorities  of  each  other.  These 
gentlemen  must  here  be  reminded  of  their  er¬ 
ror.  They  must  be  told  that  the  ultimate  au¬ 
thority.  wherever  the  derivative  may  be  found, 
resides  in  the  people  alone,  and  that  it  will  not 
depend  merely  on  thecomparativeambitionor 
address  of  the  different  governments,  whether 
either,  or  which  of  them,  will  be  able  to  en¬ 
large  its  sphere  of  jurisdiction  at  the  expense 
of  the  other.  Truth,  no  less  than  decency,  re¬ 
quires  that  the  event  in  every  case  should  be 
supposed  to  depend  on  the  sentiments  and 
sanction  of  their  common  constituents. 

Many  considerations,  besides  those  suggest¬ 
ed  on  a  former  occasion,  seem  to  place  it  be¬ 
yond  doubt  that  the  first  and  most  natural  at¬ 
tachment  of  the  people  will  be  to  the  govern¬ 
ments  of  their  respective  States.  Into  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  these  a  greater  number  of  indi¬ 
viduals  will  expect  to  rise.  From  the  gift  of 
these  a  greater  number  of  offices  and  emolu¬ 
ments  will  flow.  Ry  the  superintending  care  of 
these,  all  the  more  domestic  and  personal  in¬ 
terests  of  the  people  will  be  regulated  and 
provided  for.  With  the  affairs  of  these,  the  peo¬ 
ple  will  be  more  familiarly  and  minutely  con¬ 
versant.  And  with  the  members  of  these  will 
a  greater  proportion  of  the  people  have  the 
ties  of  personal  acquaintance  and  friend¬ 
ship,  and  of  family  and  party  attachments; 
on  the  side  of  these,  therefore,  the  popular 
bias  may  well  be  expected  most  strongly  to 
incline. 

Experience  speaks  the  same  language  in 
this  case.  The  federal  administration,  though 
hitherto  very  defective  in  comparison  with 
what  may  be  hoped  under  a  better  system,  hail, 
during  the  war,  and  particularly  whilst  the 
independent  fund  of  paper  emissions  was  in 
credit,  an  activity  and  importance  as  great  as 
it  can  well  have  in  any  future  circumstances 
whatever.  It  was  engaged,  too.  in  a  course  of 
measures  which  had  for  their  objec  t  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  ever) thing  that  was  clear,  and  the 
acquisition  of  everything  that  could  be  desir¬ 
able  to  the  people  at  large.  It  was.  neverthe¬ 
less.  invariably  found,  after  the  transient  en¬ 
thusiasm  for  the  early  Congresses  was  o\er, 
that  the  attention  and  attachment  of  the 
people  weie  turned  anew  to  their  own  partic¬ 
ular  governments;  that  the  federal  count  il  was 
at  no  time  the  idol  of  popular  favour;  and  that 
opposition  to  ptoposed  enlargements  of  its 
powers  and  importance  was  the  side  usually 
taken  by  the  men  who  wished  to  build  their 


NUMBER  46  151 


political  consequence  on  the  prepossessions  of 
their  fellow-citizens. 

If,  therefore,  as  has  been  elsewhere  remark¬ 
ed,  the  people  should  in  future  become  more 
partial  to  the  federal  than  to  the  State  gov¬ 
ernments,  the  change  can  only  result  from 
such  manifest  and  irresistible  proofs  of  a  bet¬ 
ter  administration,  as  will  overcome  all  their 
antecedent  propensities.  And  in  that  case,  the 
people  ought  not  surely  to  be  precluded  from 
giving  most  of  their  confidence  where  they  may 
discover  it  to  be  most  due;  but  even  in  that 
case  the  State  governments  could  have  little  to 
apprehend,  because  it  is  only  within  a  certain 
sphere  that  the  federal  power  can,  in  the  nature 
of  things,  be  advantageously  administered. 

The  remaining  points  on  which  I  propose 
to  compare  the  federal  and  State  governments, 
are  the  disposition  and  the  faculty  they  may 
respectively  possess  to  resist  and  frustrate  the 
measures  of  each  other. 

It  has  been  already  proved  that  the  members 
of  the  federal  will  be  more  dependent  on  the 
members  of  the  State  governments,  than  the 
latter  will  be  on  the  former.  It  has  appeared 
also,  that  the  prepossessions  of  the  people,  on 
whom  both  will  depend,  will  be  more  on  the 
side  of  the  State  governments  than  of  the 
federal  government.  So  far  as  the  disposition 
of  each  towards  the  other  may  be  influenced 
by  these  causes,  the  State  governments  must 
clearly  have  the  advantage.  But  in  a  distinct 
and  very  important  point  of  view,  the  advan¬ 
tage  will  lie  on  the  same  side.  The  preposses¬ 
sions,  which  the  members  themselves  will  carry 
into  the  federal  government,  will  generally 
be  favourable  to  the  States;  whilst  it  will  rarely 
happen,  that  the  members  of  the  State  govern¬ 
ments  will  carry  into  the  public  councils  a 
bias  in  favour  of  the  general  government.  A 
local  spirit  will  infallibly  prevail  much  more 
in  the  members  of  Congress  than  a  national 
spirit  will  prevail  in  the  legislatures  of  the 
particular  States.  Every  one  knows  that  a  great 
proportion  of  the  errors  committed  by  the 
State  legislatures  proceeds  from  the  disposi¬ 
tion  of  the  members  to  sacrifice  the  compre¬ 
hensive  and  permanent  interest  of  the  State, 
to  the  particular  and  separate  views  of  the 
counties  or  districts  in  which  they  reside.  And 
if  they  do  not  sufficiently  enlarge  their  policy 
to  embrace  the  collective  welfare  of  their  par¬ 
ticular  State,  how  can  it  be  imagined  that  they 
will  make  the  aggregate  prosperity  of  the 
Union,  and  the  dignity  and  respectability  of 
its  government,  the  objects  of  their  affections 


and  consultations?  For  the  same  reason  that 
the  members  of  the  State  legislatures  will  be 
unlikely  to  attach  themselves  sufficiently  to 
national  objects,  the  members  of  the  federal 
legislature  will  be  likely  to  attach  themselves 
too  much  to  local  objects.  The  States  will  be 
to  the  latter  what  counties  and  towns  are  to 
the  former.  Measures  will  too  often  be  decided 
according  to  their  probable  effect,  not  on  the 
national  prosperity  and  happiness,  but  on  the 
prejudices,  interests,  and  pursuits  of  the  gov¬ 
ernments  and  people  of  the  individual  States. 
What  is  the  spirit  that  has  in  general  char¬ 
acterised  the  proceedings  of  Congress?  A  pe¬ 
rusal  of  their  journals,  as  well  as  the  candid 
acknowledgments  of  such  as  have  had  a  seat 
in  that  assembly,  will  inform  us,  that  the  mem¬ 
bers  have  but  too  frequently  displayed  the 
character,  rather  of  partisans  of  their  respec¬ 
tive  States  than  of  impartial  guardians  of  a 
common  interest;  that  where  on  one  occasion 
improper  sacrifices  have  been  made  of  local 
considerations,  to  the  aggrandisement  of  the 
federal  government,  the  great  interests  of  the 
nation  have  suffered  on  a  hundred,  from  an 
undue  attention  to  the  local  prejudices,  inter¬ 
ests,  and  views  of  the  particular  States.  I  mean 
not  by  these  reflections  to  insinuate,  that  the 
new  federal  government  will  not  embrace  a 
more  enlarged  plan  of  policy  than  the  existing 
government  may  have  pursued;  much  less,  that 
its  views  will  be  as  confined  as  those  of  the 
State  legislatures;  but  only  that  it  will  partake 
sufficiently  of  the  spirit  of  both  to  be  disin¬ 
clined  to  invade  the  rights  of  the  individual 
States,  or  the  prerogatives  of  their  govern¬ 
ments.  The  motives  on  the  part  of  the  State 
governments,  to  augment  their  prerogatives 
by  defalcations  from  the  federal  government, 
will  be  overruled  by  no  reciprocal  predisposi¬ 
tions  in  the  members. 

Were  it  admitted,  however,  that  the  Federal 
government  may  feel  an  equal  disposition  with 
the  State  governments  to  extend  its  power  be¬ 
yond  the  due  limits,  the  latter  would  still  have 
the  advantage  in  the  means  of  defeating  such 
encroachments.  If  an  act  of  a  particular  State, 
though  unfriendly  to  the  national  govern¬ 
ment,  be  generally  popular  in  that  State,  and 
should  not  too  grossly  violate  the  oaths  of  the 
state  officers,  it  is  executed  immediately  and, 
of  course,  by  means  on  the  spot  and  depending 
on  the  State  alone.  The  opposition  of  the  fed¬ 
eral  government,  or  the  interposition  of  fed¬ 
eral  officers,  would  but  inflame  the  zeal  of  all 
parties  on  the  side  of  the  State,  and  the  evil 


152 


THE  FEDERALIST 


could  not  be  prevented  or  repaired,  if  at  all, 
without  the  employment  of  means  which  must 
always  be  resorted  to  with  reluctance  and  dif¬ 
ficulty.  On  the  other  hand,  should  an  unwar¬ 
rantable  measure  of  the  federal  government 
be  unpopular  in  particular  States,  which  would 
seldom  fail  to  be  the  case,  or  even  a  warrant¬ 
able  measure  be  so,  which  may  sometimes  be 
the  case,  the  means  of  opposition  to  it  are  pow¬ 
erful  and  at  hand.  The  disquietude  of  the  peo¬ 
ple;  their  repugnance  and,  perhaps,  refusal  to 
co-operate  with  the  officers  of  the  Union;  the 
frowns  of  the  executive  magistracy  of  the  State; 
the  embarrassments  created  by  legislative  de¬ 
vices,  which  would  often  be  added  on  such  oc¬ 
casions,  would  oppose,  in  any  State,  difficulties 
not  to  be  despised;  would  form,  in  a  large 
State,  very  serious  impediments;  and  where 
the  sentiments  of  several  adjoining  States 
happened  to  be  in  unison,  would  present  ob¬ 
structions  which  the  federal  government  would 
hardly  be  willing  to  encounter. 

But  ambitious  encroachments  of  the  federal 
government,  on  the  authority  of  the  State  gov¬ 
ernments,  would  not  excite  the  opposition  of 
a  single  State,  or  of  a  few  States  only.  They 
would  be  signals  of  general  alarm.  Every  gov¬ 
ernment  would  espouse  the  common  cause.  A 
correspondence  would  be  opened.  Plans  of  re¬ 
sistance  would  be  concerted.  One  spirit  would 
animate  and  conduct  the  whole.  The  same 
combinations,  in  short,  would  result  from  an 
apprehension  of  the  federal,  as  was  produced 
by  the  dread  of  a  foreign,  yoke;  and  unless  the 
projected  innovations  should  be  voluntarily 
renounced,  the  same  appeal  to  a  trial  of  force 
would  be  made  in  the  one  case  as  was  made  in 
the  other.  But  what  degree  of  madness  could 
ever  drive  the  federal  government  to  such  an 
extremity.  In  the  contest  with  Great  Britain, 
one  part  of  the  empire  was  employed  against 
the  other.  The  more  numerous  part  invaded 
the  rights  of  the  less  numerous  part.  The  at¬ 
tempt  was  unjust  and  unwise;  but  it  was  not  in 
speculation  absolutely  chimerical.  But  what 
would  be  the  contest  in  the  case  we  are  sup¬ 
posing?  Who  would  be  the  parties?  A  few  rep¬ 
resentatives  of  the  people  would  be  opposed 
to  the  people  themselves;  or  rather  one  set  of 
representatives  would  be  contending  against 
thirteen  sets  of  representatives,  with  the  whole 
body  of  their  common  constituents  on  the  side 
of  the  latter. 

The  only  refuge  left  for  those  who  proph¬ 
esy  the  downfall  of  the  State  governments  is 
the  visionary  supposition  that  the  federal  gov¬ 


ernment  may  previously  accumulate  a  military 
force  for  the  projects  of  ambition.  The  reason¬ 
ings  contained  in  these  papers  must  have  been 
employed  to  little  purpose  indeed,  if  it  could 
be  necessary  now  to  disprove  the  reality  of  this 
danger.  That  the  people  and  the  States  should, 
for  a  sufficient  period  of  time,  elect  an  uninter¬ 
rupted  succession  of  men  ready  to  betray  both; 
that  the  traitors  should,  throughout  this  pe¬ 
riod,  uniformly  and  systematically  pursue  some 
fixed  plan  for  the  extension  of  the  military 
establishment;  that  the  governments  and  the 
people  of  the  States  should  silently  and  pa¬ 
tiently  behold  the  gathering  storm,  and  con¬ 
tinue  to  supply  the  materials,  until  it  should 
be  prepared  to  burst  on  their  own  heads,  must 
appear  to  every  one  more  like  the  incoherent 
dreams  of  a  delirious  jealousy,  or  the  mis¬ 
judged  exaggerations  of  a  counterfeit  zeal, 
than  like  the  sober  apprehensions  of  genuine 
patriotism.  Extravagant  as  the  supposition  is, 
let  it  however  be  made.  Let  a  regular  army, 
fully  equal  to  the  resources  of  the  country,  be 
formed;  and  let  it  be  entirely  at  the  devotion 
of  the  federal  government;  still  it  would  not 
be  going  too  far  to  say,  that  the  State  govern¬ 
ments,  with  the  people  on  their  side,  would 
be  able  to  repel  the  danger.  The  highest  num¬ 
ber  to  which,  according  to  the  best  computa¬ 
tion,  a  standing  army  can  be  carried  in  any 
country,  does  not  exceed  one  hundreth  part 
of  the  whole  number  of  souls;  or  one  twenty- 
fifth  part  of  the  number  able  to  bear  arms. 
This  proportion  would  not  yield,  in  the  United 
States,  an  army  of  more  than  twenty-five  or 
thirty  thousand  men.  To  these  would  be  op¬ 
posed  a  militia  amounting  to  near  half  a  mil¬ 
lion  of  citizens  with  arms  in  their  hands,  of¬ 
ficered  by  men  chosen  from  among  themselves, 
fighting  for  their  common  liberties,  and  united 
and  conducted  by  governments  possessing 
their  affections  and  confidence.  It  may  well  be 
doubted,  whether  a  militia  thus  circumstanc¬ 
ed  could  ever  be  conquered  by  such  a  propor¬ 
tion  of  regular  troops.  Those  who  are  best  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  last  successful  resistance  of 
this  country  against  the  British  arms  will  be 
most  inclined  to  deny  the  possibility  of  it. 
Besides  the  advantage  of  being  armed,  which 
the  Americans  possess  over  the  people  of  al¬ 
most  every  other  nation,  the  existence  of  sub¬ 
ordinate  governments,  to  which  the  people  are 
attached,  and  by  which  the  militia  officers  are 
appointed,  forms  a  barrier  against  the  enter¬ 
prises  of  ambition,  more  insurmountable  than 
any  which  a  simple  government  of  any  form 


*53 


NUMBER  47 


can  admit  of.  Notwithstanding  the  military  es¬ 
tablishments  in  the  several  kingdoms  of  Eu¬ 
rope,  which  are  carried  as  far  as  the  public  re¬ 
sources  will  bear,  the  governments  are  afraid 
to  trust  the  people  with  arms.  And  it  is  not  cer¬ 
tain  that  with  this  aid  alone  they  would  not  be 
able  to  shake  off  their  yokes.  But  were  the  peo¬ 
ple  to  possess  the  additional  advantages  of 
local  governments  chosen  by  themselves,  who 
could  collect  the  national  will  and  direct  the 
national  force,  and  of  officers  appointed  out 
of  the  militia,  by  these  governments,  and  at¬ 
tached  both  to  them  and  to  the  militia,  it  may 
be  affirmed  with  the  greatest  assurance,  that 
the  throne  of  every  tyranny  in  Europe  would 
be  speedily  overturned  in  spite  of  the  legions 
which  surround  it.  Let  us  not  insult  the  free 
and  gallant  citizens  of  America  with  the  sus¬ 
picion,  that  they  would  be  less  able  to  defend 
the  rights  of  which  they  would  be  in  actual 
possession,  than  the  debased  subjects  of  arbi¬ 
trary  power  would  be  to  rescue  theirs  from  the 
hands  of  their  oppressors.  Let  us  rather  no 
longer  insult  them  with  the  supposition  that 
they  can  ever  reduce  themselves  to  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  making  the  experiment,  by  a  blind 
and  tame  submission  to  the  long  train  of  in¬ 
sidious  measures  which  must  precede  and  pro¬ 
duce  it. 

The  argument  under  the  present  head  may 
be  put  into  a  very  concise  form,  which  appears 
altogether  conclusive.  Either  the  mode  in 
which  the  federal  government  is  to  be  con¬ 
structed  will  render  it  sufficiently  dependent 
on  the  people,  or  it  will  not.  On  the  first  sup¬ 
position,  it  will  be  restrained  by  that  depend¬ 
ence  from  forming  schemes  obnoxious  to  their 
constituents.  On  the  other  supposition,  it  will 
not  possess  the  confidence  of  the  people,  and 
its  schemes  of  usurpation  will  be  easily  de¬ 
feated  by  the  State  governments,  who  will  be 
supported  by  the  people. 

On  summing  up  the  considerations  stated  in 
this  and  the  last  paper,  they  seem  to  amount  to 
the  most  convincing  evidence,  that  the  powers 
proposed  to  be  lodged  in  the  federal  govern¬ 
ment  are  as  little  formidable  to  those  reserved 
to  the  individual  States,  as  they  are  indispen¬ 
sably  necessary  to  accomplish  the  purposes  of 
the  Union;  and  that  all  those  alarms  which 
have  been  sounded,  of  a  meditated  and  conse¬ 
quential  annihilation  of  the  State  govern¬ 
ments,  must,  on  the  most  favourable  interpre¬ 
tation,  be  ascribed  to  the  chimerical  fears  of 
the  authors  of  them. 

Publius 


Number  47 

[MADISON] 

Having  reviewed  the  general  form  of  the  pro¬ 
posed  government  and  the  general  mass  of 
power  allotted  to  it,  I  proceed  to  examine  the 
particular  structure  of  this  government,  and 
the  distribution  of  this  mass  of  power  among 
its  constituent  parts. 

One  of  the  principal  objections  inculcated 
by  the  more  respectable  adversaries  to  the  Con¬ 
stitution  is  its  supposed  violation  of  the  politi¬ 
cal  maxim,  that  the  legislative,  executive,  and 
judiciary  departments  ought  to  be  separate 
and  distinct.  In  the  structure  of  the  federal 
government,  no  regard,  it  is  said,  seems  to  have 
been  paid  to  this  essential  precaution  in  favour 
of  liberty.  The  several  departments  of  power 
are  distributed  and  blended  in  such  a  manner 
as  at  once  to  destroy  all  symmetry  and  beauty 
of  form,  and  to  expose  some  of  the  essential 
parts  of  the  edifice  to  the  danger  of  being 
crushed  by  the  disproportionate  weight  of 
other  parts. 

No  political  truth  is  certainly  of  greater 
intrinsic  value,  or  is  stamped  with  the  author¬ 
ity  of  more  enlightened  patrons  of  liberty, 
than  that  on  which  the  objection  is  founded. 
The  accumulation  of  all  powers,  legislative, 
executive,  and  judiciary,  in  the  same  hands, 
whether  of  one,  a  few,  or  many,  and  whether 
hereditary,  self-appointed,  or  elective,  may 
justly  be  pronounced  the  very  definition  of 
tyranny.  Were  the  federal  Constitution,  there¬ 
fore,  really  chargeable  with  the  accumulation 
of  power,  or  with  a  mixture  of  powers,  having 
a  dangerous  tendency  to  such  an  accumula¬ 
tion,  no  further  arguments  would  be  neces¬ 
sary  to  inspire  a  universal  reprobation  of  the 
system.  I  persuade  myself,  however,  that  it 
will  be  made  apparent  to  every  one  that  the 
charge  cannot  be  supported,  and  that  the  max¬ 
im  on  which  it  relies  has  been  totally  miscon¬ 
ceived  and  misapplied.  In  order  to  form  cor¬ 
rect  ideas  on  this  important  subject,  it  will  be 
proper  to  investigate  the  sense  in  which  the 
preservation  of  liberty  requires  that  the  three 
great  departments  of  power  should  be  sepa¬ 
rate  and  distinct. 

The  oracle  who  is  always  consulted  and 
cited  on  this  subject  is  the  celebrated  Montes¬ 
quieu.  If  he  be  not  the  author  of  this  invalu¬ 
able  precept  in  the  science  of  politics,  he  has 
the  merit  at  least  of  displaying  and  recom¬ 
mending  it  most  effectually  to  the  attention 
of  mankind.  Let  us  endeavour,  in  the  first 


THE  FEDERALIST 


place,  to  ascertain  his  meaning  on  this  point. 

The  British  Constitution  was  to  Montes¬ 
quieu  what  Homer  has  been  to  the  didactic 
writers  on  epic  poetry.  As  the  latter  have  con¬ 
sidered  the  work  of  the  immortal  bard  as  the 
perfect  model  from  which  the  principles  and 
rules  of  the  epic  art  were  to  be  drawn,  and  by 
which  all  similar  works  were  to  be  judged,  so 
this  great  political  critic  appears  to  have  viewed 
the  Constitution  of  England  as  the  standard, 
or  to  use  his  own  expression,  as  the  mirror  of 
political  liberty;  and  to  have  delivered,  in  the 
form  of  elementary  truths,  the  several  char¬ 
acteristic  principles  of  that  particular  system. 
That  we  may  be  sure,  then,  not  to  mistake  his 
meaning  in  this  case,  let  us  recur  to  the  source 
from  which  the  maxim  was  drawn. 

On  the  slightest  view  of  the  British  Consti¬ 
tution,  we  must  perceive  that  the  legislative, 
executive,  and  judiciary  departments  are  by 
no  means  totally  separate  and  distinct  from 
each  other.  The  executive  magistrate  forms  an 
integral  part  of  the  legislative  authority.  He 
alone  has  the  prerogative  of  making  treaties 
with  foreign  sovereigns,  which,  when  made, 
have,  under  certain  limitations,  the  force  of 
legislative  acts.  All  the  members  of  the  judi¬ 
ciary  department  are  appointed  by  him,  can 
be  removed  by  him  on  the  address  of  the  two 
Houses  of  Parliament,  and  form,  when  he 
pleases  to  consult  them,  one  of  his  constitu¬ 
tional  councils.  One  branch  of  the  legislative 
department  forms  also  a  great  constitutional 
council  to  the  executive  chief,  as,  on  another 
hand,  it  is  the  sole  depositary  of  judicial 
power  in  cases  of  impeachment,  and  is  in¬ 
vested  with  the  supreme  appellate  jurisdiction 
in  all  other  cases.  The  judges,  again,  are  so  far 
connected  with  the  legislative  department  as 
often  to  attend  and  participate  in  its  delibera¬ 
tions,  though  not  admitted  to  a  legislative  vote. 

From  these  facts,  by  which  Montesquieu  was 
guided,  it  may  clearly  be  inferred  that,  in  say¬ 
ing  “There  can  be  no  liberty  where  the  legis¬ 
lative  and  executive  powers  arc  united  in  the 
same  person,  or  body  of  magistrates,”  or,  “if 
the  power  of  judging  be  not  separated  from 
the  legislative  and  executive  powers,”  he  did 
not  mean  that  these  departments  ought  to  have 
no  partial  agency  in,  or  no  control  over,  the 
acts  of  each  other.  His  meaning,  as  his  own 
words  import,  and  still  more  conclusively  as 
illustrated  by  the  example  in  his  eye,  can 
amount  to  no  more  than  this,  that  where  the 
whole  power  of  one  department  is  exercised 
by  the  same  hands  which  possess  the  whole 


power  of  another  department,  the  fundamen¬ 
tal  principles  of  a  free  constitution  are  subvert¬ 
ed.  This  would  have  been  the  case  in  the  con¬ 
stitution  examined  by  him,  if  the  king,  who  is 
the  sole  executive  magistrate,  had  possessed 
also  the  complete  legislative  power,  or  the  su¬ 
preme  administration  of  justice;  or  if  the  en¬ 
tire  legislative  body  had  possessed  the  supreme 
judiciary,  or  the  supreme  executive  authority. 
This,  however,  is  not  among  the  vices  of  that 
constitution.  The  magistrate  in  whom  the 
whole  executive  power  resides  cannot  of  him¬ 
self  make  a  law,  though  he  can  put  a  negative 
on  every  law;  nor  administer  justice  in  person, 
though  he  has  the  appointment  of  those  who 
do  administer  it.  The  judges  can  exercise  no 
executive  prerogative,  though  they  are  shoots 
from  the  executive  stock;  nor  any  legislative 
function,  though  they  may  be  advised  with  by 
the  legislative  councils.  The  entire  legislature 
can  perform  no  judiciary  act,  though  by  the 
joint  act  of  two  of  its  branches  the  judges  may 
be  removed  from  their  offices,  and  though  one 
of  its  branches  is  possessed  of  the  judicial 
power  in  the  last  resort.  The  entire  legislature, 
again,  can  exercise  no  executive  prerogative, 
though  one  of  its  branches  constitutes  the  su¬ 
preme  executive  magistracy,  and  another,  on 
the  impeachment  of  a  third,  can  try  and  con¬ 
demn  all  the  subordinate  officers  in  the  execu¬ 
tive  department. 

The  reasons  on  which  Montesquieu  grounds 
his  maxim  are  a  further  demonstration  of  his 
meaning.  “When  the  legislative  and  executive 
powers  are  united  in  the  same  person  or  body,” 
says  he,  “there  can  be  no  liberty,  because  ap¬ 
prehensions  may  arise  lest  the  same  monarch 
or  senate  should  enact  tyrannical  laws  to  exe¬ 
cute  them  in  a  tyrannical  manner.”  Again: 
“Were  the  power  of  judging  joined  with  the 
legislative,  the  life  and  liberty  of  the  subject 
would  be  exposed  to  arbitrary  control,  for  the 
judge  would  then  be  the  legislator.  Were  it 
joined  to  the  executive  power,  the  judge  might 
behave  with  all  the  violence  of  an  oppressor ” 
Some  of  these  reasons  are  more  fully  explained 
in  other  passages;  but  briefly  stated  as  they  are 
here,  they  sulficiently  establish  the  meaning 
which  we  have  put  on  this  celebrated  maxim 
of  this  celebrated  author. 

If  we  look  into  the  constitutions  of  the  sev¬ 
eral  States,  we  find  that,  notwithstanding  the 
cmphatical  and,  in  some  instances,  the  unquali¬ 
fied  terms  in  which  this  axiom  has  been  laid 
down,  there  is  not  a  single  instance  in  which 
the  several  departments  of  power  have  been 


NUMBER  47  155 


kept  absolutely  separate  and  distinct.  New 
Hampshire,  whose  constitution  was  the  last 
formed,  seems  to  have  been  fully  aware  of  the 
impossibility  and  inexpediency  of  avoiding 
any  mixture  whatever  of  these  departments, 
and  has  qualified  the  doctrine  by  declaring 
“that  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary 
powers  ought  to  be  kept  as  separate  from,  and 
independent  of,  each  other  as  the  nature  of  a 
free  government  will  admit ;  or  as  is  consistent 
with  that  chain  of  connection  that  binds  the 
whole  fabric  of  the  constitution  in  one  indis¬ 
soluble  bond  of  unity  and  amity.”  Her  consti¬ 
tution  accordingly  mixes  these  departments  in 
several  respects.  The  Senate,  which  is  a  branch 
of  the  legislative  department,  is  also  a  judicial 
tribunal  for  the  trial  of  impeachments.  The 
president,  who  is  the  head  of  the  executive  de¬ 
partment,  is  the  presiding  member  also  of  the 
Senate;  and,  besides  an  equal  vote  in  all  cases, 
has  a  casting  vote  in  case  of  a  tie.  The  execu¬ 
tive  head  is  himself  eventually  elective  every 
year  by  the  legislative  departmen  t  and  his  coun¬ 
cil  is  every  year  chosen  by  and  from  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  same  department.  Several  of  the  of¬ 
ficers  of  state  are  also  appointed  by  the  legis¬ 
lature.  And  the  members  of  the  judiciary  de¬ 
partment  are  appointed  by  the  executive  de¬ 
partment. 

The  constitution  of  Massachusetts  has  ob¬ 
served  a  sufficient  though  less  pointed  caution, 
in  expressing  this  fundamental  article  of  lib¬ 
erty.  It  declares  “that  the  legislative  depart¬ 
ment  shall  never  exercise  the  executive  and  ju¬ 
dicial  powers,  or  either  of  them;  the  executive 
shall  never  exercise  the  legislative  and  judicial 
powers,  or  either  of  them;  the  judicial  shall 
never  exercise  the  legislative  and  executive 
powers,  or  either  of  them.”  This  declaration 
corresponds  precisely  with  the  doctrine  of 
Montesquieu,  as  it  has  been  explained,  and  is 
not  in  a  single  point  violated  by  the  plan  of 
the  convention.  It  goes  no  farther  than  to  pro¬ 
hibit  any  one  of  the  entire  departments  from 
exercising  the  powers  of  another  department. 
In  the  very  Constitution  to  which  it  is  prefixed, 
a  partial  mixture  of  powers  has  been  admitted. 
The  executive  magistrate  has  a  qualified  nega¬ 
tive  on  the  legislative  body,  and  the  Senate, 
which  is  a  part  of  the  legislature,  is  a  court  of 
impeachment  for  members  both  of  the  execu¬ 
tive  and  judiciary  departments.  The  members 
of  the  judiciary  department,  again,  are  ap- 
pointable  by  the  executive  department,  and 
removable  by  the  same  authority  on  the  ad¬ 
dress  of  the  two  legislative  branches.  Lastly,  a 


number  of  the  officers  of  government  are  an¬ 
nually  appointed  by  the  legislative  depart¬ 
ment.  As  the  appointment  to  offices,  particu¬ 
larly  executive  offices,  is  in  its  nature  an  execu¬ 
tive  function,  the  compilers  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  have,  in  this  last  point  at  least,  violated 
the  rule  established  by  themselves. 

I  pass  over  the  constitutions  of  Rhode  Island 
and  Connecticut,  because  they  were  formed 
prior  to  the  Revolution,  and  even  before  the 
principle  under  examination  had  become  an 
object  of  political  attention. 

The  constitution  of  New  York  contains  no 
declaration  on  this  subject:  but  appears  very 
clearly  to  have  been  framed  with  an  eye  to  the 
danger  of  improperly  blending  the  different 
departments.  It  gives,  nevertheless,  to  the  ex¬ 
ecutive  magistrate,  a  partial  control  over  the 
legislative  department;  and,  what  is  more,  gives 
a  like  control  to  the  judiciary  department;  and 
even  blends  the  executive  and  judiciary  de¬ 
partments  in  the  exercise  of  this  control.  In  its 
council  of  appointment,  members  of  the  legis¬ 
lative  are  associated  with  the  executive  author¬ 
ity,  in  the  appointment  of  officers,  both  execu¬ 
tive  and  judiciary.  And  its  court  for  the  trial 
of  impeachments  and  correction  of  errors  is  to 
consist  of  one  branch  of  the  legislature  and  the 
principal  members  of  the  judiciary  depart¬ 
ment. 

The  constitution  of  New  Jersey  has  blended 
the  different  powers  of  government  more  than 
any  of  the  preceding.  The  governor,  who  is 
the  executive  magistrate,  is  appointed  by  the 
legislature;  is  chancellor  and  ordinary,  or  sur¬ 
rogate  of  the  State;  is  a  member  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Appeals,  and  president,  with  a  cast¬ 
ing  vote,  of  one  of  the  legislative  branches. 
The  same  legislative  branch  acts  again  as  ex¬ 
ecutive  council  of  the  governor,  and  with  him 
constitutes  the  Court  of  Appeals.  The  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  judiciary  department  are  appointed 
by  the  legislative  department,  and  removable 
by  one  branch  of  it  on  the  impeachment  of  the 
other. 

According  to  the  constitution  of  Pennsyl¬ 
vania,  the  president,  who  is  the  head  of  the 
executive  department,  is  annually  elected  by 
a  vote  in  which  the  legislative  department  pre¬ 
dominates.  In  conjunction  with  an  executive 
council,  he  appoints  the  members  of  the  ju¬ 
diciary  department,  and  forms  a  court  of  im¬ 
peachment  for  trial  of  all  officers,  judiciary  as 
well  as  executive.  The  judges  of  the  Supreme 
Court  and  justices  of  the  peace  seem  also  to 
be  removable  by  the  legislature;  and  the  execu- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


156 

tive  power  of  pardoning  in  certain  cases  to  be 
referred  to  the  same  department.  The  members 
of  the  executive  council  are  made  ex-officio 
justices  of  peace  throughout  the  State. 

In  Delaware,  the  chief  executive  magistrate 
is  annually  elected  by  the  legislative  depart¬ 
ment.  The  speakers  of  the  two  legislative 
branches  are  vice-presidents  in  the  executive 
department.  The  executive  chief,  with  six 
others,  appointed,  three  by  each  of  the  legisla¬ 
tive  branches,  constitutes  the  Supreme  Court 
of  Appeals;  he  is  joined  with  the  legislative  de¬ 
partment  in  the  appointment  of  the  other 
judges.  Throughout  the  States,  it  appears  that 
the  members  of  the  legislature  may  at  the  same 
time  be  justices  of  the  peace;  in  this  State,  the 
members  of  one  branch  of  it  are  ex-officio 
justices  of  the  peace;  as  are  also  the  members 
of  the  executive  council.  The  principal  officers 
of  the  executive  department  are  appointed  by 
the  legislative;  and  one  branch  of  the  latter 
forms  a  court  of  impeachments.  All  officers 
may  be  removed  on  address  of  the  legislature. 

Maryland  has  adopted  the  maxim  in  the 
most  unqualified  terms;  declaring  that  the 
legislative,  executive,  and  judicial  powers  of 
government  ought  to  be  for  ever  separate  and 
distinct  from  each  other.  Her  constitution,  not¬ 
withstanding,  makes  the  executive  magistrate 
appoi n table  by  the  legislativedepartment;  and 
the  members  of  the  judiciary  by  the  executive 
department. 

The  language  of  Virginia  is  still  more  point¬ 
ed  on  this  subject.  Her  constitution  declares, 
“that  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary 
departments  shall  be  separate  and  distinct;  so 
that  neither  exercise  the  powers  properly  be¬ 
longing  to  the  other;  nor  shall  any  person 
exercise  the  powers  of  more  than  one  of  them 
at  the  same  time,  except  that  the  justices  of 
county  courts  shall  be  eligible  to  cither  House 
of  Assembly.”  Yet  we  find  not  only  this  express 
exception,  with  respect  to  the  members  of  the 
inferior  courts,  but  that  the  chief  magistrate, 
with  his  executive  council,  are  appointablc  by 
the  legislature;  that  two  members  of  the  latter 
are  triennially  displaced  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
legislature;  and  that  all  the  principal  offices, 
both  executive  and  judiciary,  are  filled  by  the 
same  department.  The  executive  prerogative 
of  pardon,  also,  is  in  one  case  vested  in  the 
legislative  department. 

The  constitution  of  North  Carolina,  which 
declares  “that  the  legislative,  executive,  and 
supreme  judicial  powers  of  government  ought 
to  be  for  ever  separate  and  distinct  from  each 


other,”  refers,  at  the  same  time,  to  the  legisla¬ 
tive  department,  the  appointment  not  only  of 
the  executive  chief,  but  all  the  principal  officers 
within  both  that  and  the  judiciary  department. 

In  South  Carolina,  the  constitution  makes 
the  executive  magistracy  eligible  by  the  legisla¬ 
tive  department.  It  gives  to  the  latter,  also,  the 
appointment  of  the  members  of  the  judici¬ 
ary  department,  including  even  justices  of  the 
peace  and  sheriffs;  and  the  appointment  of 
officers  in  the  executive  department,  down  to 
captains  in  the  army  and  navy  of  the  State. 

In  the  constitution  of  Georgia,  where  it  is 
declared  “that  the  legislative,  executive,  and 
judiciary  departments  shall  be  separate  and 
distinct,  so  that  neither  exercise  the  powers 
properly  belonging  to  the  other,”  we  find  that 
the  executive  department  is  to  be  filled  by 
appointments  of  the  legislature;  and  the  execu¬ 
tive  prerogative  of  pardon  to  be  finally  exer¬ 
cised  by  the  same  authority.  Even  justices  of 
the  peace  are  to  be  appointed  by  the  legislature. 

In  citing  these  cases,  in  which  the  legislative, 
executive,  and  judiciary  departments  have  not 
been  kept  totally  separate  and  distinct.  1  wish 
not  to  be  regarded  as  an  advocate  for  the  par¬ 
ticular  organisations  of  the  several  State  gov¬ 
ernments.  I  am  fully  aware  that  among  the 
many  excellent  principles  which  they  exem¬ 
plify,  they  carry  strong  marks  of  the  haste,  and 
still  stronger  of  the  inexperience,  under  which 
they  were  framed.  It  is  but  too  obvious  that  in 
some  instances  the  fundamental  principle  un¬ 
der  consideration  has  been  violated  by  too 
great  a  mixture,  and  even  an  actual  consolida¬ 
tion,  of  the  different  powers;  and  that  in  no 
instance  has  a  competent  pro\  ision  been  made 
for  maintaining  in  practice  the  separation  de¬ 
lineated  on  paper.  What  I  have  wished  to 
evince  is,  that  the  charge  brought  against  the 
proposed  Constitution,  of  violating  the  sacred 
maxim  of  free  government,  is  warranted  neither 
bv  the  real  meaning  annexed  to  that  maxim 
by  its  author,  nor  by  the  sense  in  which  it  has 
hitherto  been  understood  in  America.  This 
interesting  subject  will  be  resumed  in  the  en¬ 
suing  paper.  Publius 

Number  48 

[madison] 

It  was  shown  in  the  last  paper  that  the  politi¬ 
cal  apothegm  there  examined  docs  not  require 
that  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judiciary 
departments  should  be  wholly  unconnected 
with  each  other.  I  shall  undertake,  in  the  next 


NUMBER  48  157 


place,  to  show  that  unless  these  departments 
be  so  far  connected  and  blended  as  to  give  to 
each  a  constitutional  control  over  the  others, 
the  degree  of  separation  which  the  maxim  re¬ 
quires,  as  essential  to  a  free  government,  can 
never  in  practice  be  duly  maintained. 

It  is  agreed  on  all  sides,  that  the  powers 
properly  belonging  to  one  of  the  departments 
ought  not  to  be  directly  and  completely  ad¬ 
ministered  by  either  of  the  other  departments. 
It  is  equally  evident,  that  none  of  them  ought 
to  possess,  directly  or  indirectly,  an  overruling 
influence  over  the  others,  in  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  their  respective  powers.  It  will  not 
be  denied  that  power  is  of  an  encroaching 
nature,  and  that  it  ought  to  be  effectually 
restrained  from  passing  the  limits  assigned  to 
it.  After  discriminating,  therefore,  in  theory, 
the  several  classes  of  power,  as  they  may  in 
their  nature  be  legislative,  executive,  or  judi¬ 
ciary,  the  next  and  most  difficult  task  is  to  pro¬ 
vide  some  practical  security  for  each,  against 
the  invasion  of  the  others.  What  this  security 
ought  to  be  is  the  great  problem  to  be  solved. 

Will  it  be  sufficient  to  mark,  with  precision, 
the  boundaries  of  these  departments,  in  the 
constitution  of  the  government,  and  to  trust  to 
these  parchment  barriers  against  the  encroach¬ 
ing  spirit  of  power?  This  is  the  security  which 
appears  to  have  been  principally  relied  on  by 
the  compilers  of  most  of  the  American  con¬ 
stitutions.  But  experience  assures  us,  that  the 
efficacy  of  the  provision  has  been  greatly  over¬ 
rated;  and  that  some  more  adequate  defence 
is  indispensably  necessary  for  the  more  feeble, 
against  the  more  powerful,  members  of  the 
government.  The  legislative  department  is 
everywhere  extending  the  sphere  of  its  activ¬ 
ity,  and  drawing  all  power  into  its  impetuous 
vortex. 

The  founders  of  our  republics  have  so  much 
merit  for  the  wisdom  which  they  have  dis¬ 
played,  that  no  task  can  be  less  pleasing  than 
that  of  pointing  out  the  errors  into  which 
they  have  fallen.  A  respect  for  truth,  however, 
obliges  us  to  remark  that  they  seem  never  for 
a  moment  to  have  turned  their  eyes  from  the 
danger  to  liberty  from  the  overgrown  and  all- 
grasping  prerogative  of  an  hereditary  magis¬ 
trate,  supported  and  fortified  by  an  hereditary 
branch  of  the  legislative  authority.  They  seem 
never  to  have  recollected  the  danger  from 
legislative  usurpations,  which,  by  assembling 
all  power  in  the  same  hands,  must  lead  to  the 
same  tyranny  as  is  threatened  by  executive 
usurpations. 


In  a  government  where  numerous  and  ex¬ 
tensive  prerogatives  are  placed  in  the  hands  of 
an  hereditary  monarch,  the  executive  depart¬ 
ment  is  very  justly  regarded  as  the  source  of 
danger,  and  watched  with  all  the  jealousy 
which  a  zeal  for  liberty  ought  to  inspire.  In  a 
democracy,  where  a  multitude  of  people  exer¬ 
cise  in  person  the  legislative  functions,  and  are 
continually  exposed,  by  their  incapacity  for 
regular  deliberation  and  concerted  measures, 
to  the  ambitious  intrigues  of  their  executive 
magistrates,  tyranny  may  well  be  apprehended, 
on  some  favourable  emergency,  to  start  up  in 
the  same  quarter.  But  in  a  representative  re¬ 
public,  where  the  executive  magistracy  is  care¬ 
fully  limited,  both  in  the  extent  and  the  dura¬ 
tion  of  its  power;  and  where  the  legislative 
power  is  exercised  by  an  assembly  which  is 
inspired,  by  a  supposed  influence  over  the 
people,  with  an  intrepid  confidence  in  its  own 
strength;  which  is  sufficiently  numerous  to  feel 
all  the  passions  which  actuate  a  multitude, 
yet  not  so  numerous  as  to  be  incapable  of  pur¬ 
suing  the  objects  of  its  passions,  by  means 
which  reason  prescribes;  it  is  against  the  enter¬ 
prising  ambition  of  this  department  that  the 
people  ought  to  indulge  all  their  jealousy  and 
exhaust  all  their  precautions. 

The  legislative  department  derives  a  superi¬ 
ority  in  our  governments  from  other  circum¬ 
stances.  Its  constitutional  powers  being  at  once 
more  extensive,  and  less  susceptible  of  precise 
limits,  it  can,  with  the  greater  facility,  mask, 
under  complicated  and  indirect  measures,  the 
encroachments  which  it  makes  on  the  co-or¬ 
dinate  departments.  It  is  not  unfrequently 
a  question  of  real  nicety  in  legislative  bodies, 
whether  the  operation  of  a  particular  measure 
will,  or  will  not,  extend  beyond  the  legislative 
sphere.  On  the  other  side,  the  executive  power 
being  restrained  within  a  narrower  compass, 
and  being  more  simple  in  its  nature,  and  the 
judiciary  being  described  by  landmarks  still 
less  uncertain,  projects  of  usurpation  by  either 
of  these  departments  would  immediately  be¬ 
tray  and  defeat  themselves.  Nor  is  this  all:  as 
the  legislative  department  alone  has  access  to 
the  pockets  of  the  people,  and  has  in  some 
constitutions  full  discretion,  and  in  all  a  pre¬ 
vailing  influence,  over  the  pecuniary  rewards 
of  those  who  fill  the  other  departments,  a  de¬ 
pendence  is  thus  created  in  the  latter,  which 
gives  still  greater  facility  to  encroachments  of 
the  former. 

I  have  appealed  to  our  own  experience  for 
the  truth  of  what  I  advance  on  this  subject. 


158  THE  FEDERALIST 


Were  it  necessary  to  verify  this  experience  by 
particular  proofs,  they  might  be  multiplied 
without  end.  I  might  find  a  witness  in  every 
citizen  who  has  shared  in,  or  been  attentive 
to,  the  course  of  public  administrations.  I 
might  collect  vouchers  in  abundance  from  the 
records  and  archives  of  every  State  in  the 
Union.  But  as  a  more  concise,  and  at  the  same 
time  equally  satisfactory,  evidence,  I  will  refer 
to  the  example  of  two  States,  attested  by  two 
unexceptionable  authorities. 

The  first  example  is  that  of  Virginia,  a  State 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  has  expressly  declared 
in  its  constitution,  that  the  three  great  depart¬ 
ments  ought  not  to  be  intermixed.  The  author¬ 
ity  in  support  of  it  is  Mr.  Jefferson,  who,  be¬ 
sides  his  other  advantages  for  remarking  the 
operation  of  the  government,  was  himself  the 
chief  magistrate  of  it.  In  order  to  convey  fully 
the  ideas  with  which  his  experience  had  im¬ 
pressed  him  on  this  subject,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  quote  a  passage  of  some  length  from  his 
very  interesting  Notes  on  the  State  of  Virginia, 
p.  195.  “All  the  powers  of  government,  legis¬ 
lative,  executive,  and  judiciary,  result  to  the 
legislative  body.  The  concentrating  these  in 
the  same  hands  is  precisely  the  definition  of 
despotic  government.  It  will  be  no  alleviation, 
that  these  powers  will  be  exercised  by  a  plural¬ 
ity  of  hands,  and  not  by  a  single  one.  One 
hundred  and  seventy-three  despots  would  sure¬ 
ly  be  as  oppressive  as  one.  Let  those  who  doubt 
it  turn  their  eyes  on  the  republic  of  Venice. 
As  little  will  it  avail  us  that  they  are  chosen  by 
ourselves.  An  elective  despotism  was  not  the 
government  we  fought  for;  but  one  which 
should  not  only  be  founded  on  free  principles, 
but  in  which  the  powers  of  government  should 
be  so  divided  and  balanced  among  several 
bodies  of  magistracy,  as  that  no  one  could 
transcend  their  legal  limit,  without  heingeffec- 
tually  checked  and  restrained  by  the  others. 
For  this  reason,  that  convention  which  passed 
the  ordinance  of  government,  laid  its  founda¬ 
tion  on  this  basis,  that  the  legislative,  execu¬ 
tive,  and  judiciary  departments  should  be  sepa¬ 
rate  and  distinct,  so  that  no  person  should 
exercise  the  powers  of  more  than  one  of  them 
at  the  same  time.  But  no  barrier  was  provided 
between  these  several  powers.  The  judiciary 
and  the  executive  members  were  left  depend¬ 
ent  on  the  legislative  for  their  subsistence  in 
office,  and  some  of  them  for  their  continuance 
in  it.  If,  therefore,  the  legislature  assumes  ex¬ 
ecutive  and  judiciary  powers,  no  opposition 
is  likely  to  be  made;  nor,  if  made,  can  be  effec¬ 


tual;  because  in  that  case  they  may  put  their 
proceedings  into  the  form  of  acts  of  Assembly, 
which  will  render  them  obligatory  on  the  other 
branches.  They  have  accordingly,  in  many 
instances,  decided  rights  which  should  have 
been  left  to  judiciary  controversy ,  and  the  di¬ 
rection  of  the  executive, during  the  whole  time 
of  their  session,  is  becoming  habitual  and 
familiar.'* 

The  other  State  which  I  shall  take  for  an 
example  is  Pennsylvania;  and  the  other  au¬ 
thority,  the  Council  of  Censors,  which  assem¬ 
bled  in  the  years  1783  and  1784.  A  part  of  the 
duty  of  this  body,  as  marked  out  by  the  con¬ 
stitution,  was  “to  inquire  whether  the  consti¬ 
tution  had  been  preserved  inviolate  in  every 
part,  and  whether  the  legislative  and  execu¬ 
tive  branches  of  government  had  performed 
their  duty  as  guardians  of  the  people,  or  as¬ 
sumed  to  themselves,  or  exercised,  other  or 
greater  powers  than  they  are  entitled  to  by 
the  constitution.’'  In  the  execution  of  this 
trust,  the  council  were  necessarily  led  to  a 
comparison  of  both  the  legislative  and  execu¬ 
tive  proceedings  with  the  constitutional  pow¬ 
ers  of  these  departments;  and  from  the  facts 
enumerated,  and  to  the  truth  of  most  of  which 
both  sides  in  the  council  subscribed,  it  appears 
that  the  constitution  had  been  flagrantly  vio¬ 
lated  by  the  legislature  in  a  variety  of  impor¬ 
tant  instances. 

A  great  number  of  laws  had  been  passed, 
violating,  without  any  apparent  necessity,  the 
rule  requiring  that  all  bills  of  a  public  nature 
shall  be  previously  printed  for  the  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  people;  although  this  is  one  of  the 
precautions  chiefly  relied  on  by  the  constitu¬ 
tion  against  improper  acts  of  the  legislature. 

The  constitutional  trial  by  jury  had  been 
violated,  and  powers  assumed  which  had  not 
been  delegated  by  the  constitution. 

Executive  powers  had  been  usurped. 

The  salaries  of  the  judges,  which  the  consti¬ 
tution  expressly  requires  to  be  fixed,  had  been 
occasionally  varied;  and  cases  belonging  to  the 
judiciary  department  frequently  drawn  within 
legislative  cognisance  and  determination. 

Those  who  wish  to  see  the  several  partic¬ 
ulars  falling  under  each  of  these  heads  may 
consult  the  journals  of  the  council,  which  are 
in  print.  Some  of  them,  it  will  be  found,  may 
be  imputable  to  peculiar  circumstances  con¬ 
nected  with  the  war;  but  the  greater  part  of 
them  may  be  considered  as  the  spontaneous 
shoots  of  an  ill-constituted  government. 

It  appears,  also,  that  the  executive  depart- 


NUMBER  49  *59 


ment  had  not  been  innocent  of  frequent 
breaches  of  the  constitution.  There  are  three 
observations,  however,  which  ought  to  be  made 
on  this  head;  first ,  a  great  proportion  of  the 
instances  were  either  immediately  produced 
by  the  necessities  of  the  war,  or  recommended 
by  Congress  or  the  commander-in-chief;  sec¬ 
ondly ,  in  most  of  the  other  instances,  they  con¬ 
formed  either  to  the  declared  or  the  known 
sentiments  of  the  legislative  department; 
thirdly ,  the  executive  department  of  Penn¬ 
sylvania  is  distinguished  from  that  of  the  other 
States  by  the  number  of  members  composing 
it.  In  this  respect  it  has  as  much  affinity  to  a 
legislative  assembly  as  to  an  executive  council. 
And  being  at  once  exempt  from  the  restraint 
of  an  individual  responsibility  for  the  acts  of 
the  body,  and  deriving  confidence  from  mu¬ 
tual  example  and  joint  influence,  unauthor¬ 
ised  measures  would,  of  course,  be  more  freely 
hazarded  than  where  the  executive  depart¬ 
ment  is  administered  by  a  single  hand,  or  by  a 
few  hands. 

The  conclusion  which  I  am  warranted  in 
drawing  from  these  observations  is,  that  a  mere 
demarcation  on  parchment  of  the  constitution¬ 
al  limits  of  the  several  departments  is  not  a 
sufficient  guard  against  those  encroachments 
which  lead  to  a  tyrannical  concentration  of  all 
the  powers  of  government  in  the  same  hands. 

Publius 

Number  49 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

The  author  of  the  Notes  on  the  State  of 
Virginia,  quoted  in  the  last  paper,  has  sub¬ 
joined  to  that  valuable  work  the  draught  of 
a  constitution,  which  had  been  prepared  in 
order  to  be  laid  before  a  convention  expected 
to  be  called  in  1783  by  the  legislature  for  the 
establishment  of  a  constitution  for  that  com¬ 
monwealth.  The  plan,  like  everything  from 
the  same  pen,  marks  a  turn  of  thinking,  origi¬ 
nal,  comprehensive,  and  accurate;  and  is  the 
more  worthy  of  attention  as  it  equally  displays 
a  fervent  attachment  to  republican  govern¬ 
ment  and  an  enlightened  view  of  the  danger¬ 
ous  propensities  against  which  it  ought  to  be 
guarded.  One  of  the  precautions  which  he  pro¬ 
poses,  and  on  which  he  appears  ultimately  to 
rely  as  a  palladium  to  the  weaker  departments 
of  power  against  the  invasions  of  the  stronger, 
is  perhaps  altogether  his  own,  and  as  it  im¬ 
mediately  relates  to  the  subject  of  our  present 
inquiry,  ought  not  to  be  overlooked. 


His  proposition  is,  “that  whenever  any  two 
of  the  three  branches  of  government  shall  con¬ 
cur  in  opinion,  each  by  the  voices  of  two  thirds 
of  their  whole  number,  that  a  convention  is 
necessary  for  altering  the  constitution,  or  cor¬ 
recting  breaches  of  it,  a  convention  shall  be 
called  for  the  purpose.” 

As  the  people  are  the  only  legitimate  foun¬ 
tain  of  power,  and  it  is  from  them  that  the 
constitutional  charter,  under  which  the  several 
branches  of  government  hold  their  power,  is 
derived,  it  seems  strictly  consonant  to  the  re¬ 
publican  theory,  to  recur  to  the  same  original 
authority,  not  only  whenever  it  may  be  neces¬ 
sary  to  enlarge,  diminish,  or  new-model  the 
powers  of  the  government,  but  also  whenever 
any  one  of  the  departments  may  commit  en¬ 
croachments  on  the  chartered  authorities  of 
the  others.  The  several  departments  being  per¬ 
fectly  co-ordinate  by  the  terms  of  their  com¬ 
mon  commission,  none  of  them,  it  is  evident, 
can  pretend  to  an  exclusive  or  superior  right 
of  settling  the  boundaries  between  their  re¬ 
spective  powers;  and  how  are  the  encroach¬ 
ments  of  the  stronger  to  be  prevented,  or  the 
wrongs  of  the  weaker  to  be  redressed,  without 
an  appeal  to  the  people  themselves,  who,  as 
the  grantors  of  the  commission,  can  alone  de¬ 
clare  its  true  meaning,  and  enforce  its  observ¬ 
ance? 

There  is  certainly  great  force  in  this  reason¬ 
ing,  and  it  must  be  allowed  to  prove  that 
a  constitutional  road  to  the  decision  of  the 
people  ought  to  be  marked  out  and  kept  open, 
for  certain  great  and  extraordinary  occasions. 
But  there  appear  to  be  insuperable  objections 
against  the  proposed  recurrence  to  the  people, 
as  a  provision  in  all  cases  for  keeping  the 
several  departments  of  power  within  their  con¬ 
stitutional  limits. 

In  the  first  place  the  provision  does  not 
reach  the  case  of  a  combination  of  two  of  the 
departments  against  the  third.  If  the  legislative 
authority,  which  possesses  so  many  means  of 
operating  on  the  motives  of  the  other  depart¬ 
ments,  should  be  able  to  gain  to  its  interest 
either  of  the  others,  or  even  one  third  of  its 
members,  the  remaining  department  could 
derive  no  advantage  from  its  remedial  pro¬ 
vision.  I  do  not  dwell,  however,  on  this  objec¬ 
tion,  because  it  may  be  thought  to  be  rather 
against  the  modification  of  the  principle,  than 
against  the  principle  itself. 

In  the  next  place,  it  may  be  considered  as 
an  objection  inherent  in  the  principle,  that 
as  every  appeal  to  the  people  would  carry  an 


THE  FEDERALIST 


160 

implication  of  some  defect  in  the  government, 
frequent  appeals  would,  in  a  great  measure, 
deprive  the  government  of  that  veneration 
which  time  bestows  on  everything,  and  with¬ 
out  which  perhaps  the  wisest  and  freest  gov¬ 
ernments  would  not  possess  the  requisite  sta¬ 
bility.  If  it  be  true  that  all  governments  rest 
on  opinion,  it  is  no  less  true  that  the  strength 
of  opinion  in  each  individual,  and  its  practical 
influence  on  his  conduct,  depend  much  on  the 
number  which  he  supposes  to  have  enter¬ 
tained  the  same  opinion.  The  reason  of  man, 
like  man  himself,  is  timid  and  cautious  when 
left  alone,  and  acquires  firmness  and  confi¬ 
dence  in  proportion  to  the  number  with  which 
it  is  associated.  When  the  examples  which 
fortify  opinion  are  ancient  as  well  as  numer¬ 
ous,  they  are  known  to  have  a  double  effect. 
In  a  nation  of  philosophers,  this  consideration 
ought  to  be  disregarded.  A  reverence  for  the 
laws  would  be  sufficiently  inculcated  by  the 
voice  of  an  enlightened  reason.  But  a  nation 
of  philosophers  is  as  little  to  be  expected  as 
the  philosophical  race  of  kings  wished  for  by 
Plato.  And  in  every  other  nation,  the  most 
rational  government  will  not  find  it  a  super¬ 
fluous  advantage  to  have  the  prejudices  of  the 
community  on  its  side. 

The  danger  of  disturbing  the  public  tran¬ 
quillity  by  interesting  too  strongly  the  pub¬ 
lic  passions,  is  a  still  more  serious  objection 
against  a  frequent  reference  of  constitutional 
questions  to  the  decision  of  the  whole  society. 
Notwithstanding  the  success  which  has  at¬ 
tended  the  revisions  of  our  established  forms 
of  government,  and  which  does  so  much  hon¬ 
our  to  the  virtue  and  intelligence  of  the  people 
of  America,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  ex¬ 
periments  are  of  too  ticklish  a  nature  to  be 
unnecessarily  multiplied.  We  are  to  recollect 
that  all  the  existing  constitutions  were  formed 
in  the  midst  of  a  danger  which  repressed  the 
passions  most  unfriendly  to  order  and  con¬ 
cord;  of  an  enthusiastic  confidence  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  in  their  patriotic  leaders,  which  stifled  the 
ordinary  diversity  of  opinions  on  great  na¬ 
tional  questions;  of  a  universal  ardour  for 
new  and  opposite  forms,  produced  by  a  univer¬ 
sal  resentment  and  indignation  against  the 
ancient  government;  and  whilst  no  spirit  of 
party  connected  with  the  changes  to  be  made, 
or  the  abuses  to  be  reformed,  could  mingle  its 
leaven  in  the  operation.  The  future  situations 
in  which  we  must  expect  to  be  usually  placed, 
do  not  present  any  equivalent  security  against 
the  danger  which  is  apprehended. 


But  the  greatest  objection  of  all  is,  that  the 
decisions  which  would  probably  result  from 
such  appeals  would  not  answer  the  purpose 
of  maintaining  the  constitutional  equilibrium 
of  the  government.  We  have  seen  that  the 
tendency  of  republican  governments  is  to  an 
aggrandisement  of  the  legislative  at  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  the  other  departments.  The  appeals 
to  the  people,  therefore,  would  usually  be 
made  by  the  executive  and  judiciary  depart¬ 
ments.  But  whether  made  by  one  side  or  the 
other,  would  each  side  enjoy  equal  advantages 
on  the  trial?  Let  us  view  their  different  situa¬ 
tions.  The  members  of  the  executive  and  judi¬ 
ciary  departments  are  few  in  number,  and  can 
be  personally  known  to  a  small  part  only  of 
the  people.  The  latter,  by  the  mode  of  their 
appointment,  as  well  as  by  the  nature  and 
permanency  of  it,  are  too  far  removed  from  the 
people  to  share  much  in  their  prepossessions. 
The  former  are  generally  the  objects  of  jeal¬ 
ousy,  and  their  administration  is  always  liable 
to  be  discoloured  and  rendered  unpopular. 
The  members  of  the  legislative  department, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  numerous.  They  are 
distributed  and  dwell  among  the  people  at 
large.  Their  connections  of  blood,  of  friend¬ 
ship,  and  of  acquaintance  embrace  a  great  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  most  influential  part  of  the 
society.  The  nature  of  their  public  trust  im¬ 
plies  a  personal  influence  among  the  people, 
and  that  they  are  more  immediately  the  con¬ 
fidential  guardians  of  the  rights  and  liberties 
of  the  people.  With  these  advantages,  it  can 
hardly  be  supposed  that  the  adverse  party 
would  have  an  equal  chance  for  a  favourable 
issue. 

But  the  legislative  party  would  not  only  be 
able  to  plead  their  cause  most  successfully  with 
the  people.  They  would  probably  be  consti¬ 
tuted  themselves  the  judges.  The  same  influ¬ 
ence  which  had  gained  them  an  election  into 
the  legislature  would  gain  them  a  seat  in  the 
convention.  If  this  should  not  be  the  case  with 
all,  it  would  probably  be  the  case  with  many, 
and  pretty  certainly  with  those  leading  char¬ 
acters  on  whom  everything  depends  in  such 
bodies.  The  convention,  in  short,  would  be 
composed  chiefly  of  men  who  had  been,  who 
actually  were,  or  who  expected  to  be,  members 
of  the  department  whose  conduct  was  ar¬ 
raigned.  They  would  consequently  be  parties 
to  the  very  question  to  be  decided  by  them. 

It  might,  however,  sometimes  happen  that 
appeals  would  be  made  under  circumstances 
less  adverse  to  the  executive  and  judiciary  de- 


NUMBER  50  161 


partments.  The  usurpations  of  the  legislature 
might  be  so  flagrant  and  so  sudden  as  to  admit 
of  no  specious  colouring.  A  strong  party  among 
themselves  might  take  side  with  the  other 
branches.  The  executive  power  might  be  in 
the  hands  of  a  peculiar  favourite  of  the  people. 
In  such  a  posture  of  things,  the  public  decision 
might  be  less  swayed  by  prepossessions  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  the  legislative  party.  But  still  it  could 
never  be  expected  to  turn  on  the  true  merits 
of  the  question.  It  would  inevitably  be  con¬ 
nected  with  the  spirit  of  pre-existing  parties, 
or  of  parties  springing  out  of  the  question 
itself.  It  would  be  connected  with  persons  of 
distinguished  character  and  extensive  influ¬ 
ence  in  the  community.  It  would  be  pro¬ 
nounced  by  the  very  men  who  had  been  agents 
in,  or  opponents  of,  the  measures  to  which  the 
decision  would  relate.  The  passions ,  therefore, 
not  the  reason ,  of  the  public  would  sit  in 
judgment.  But  it  is  the  reason,  alone,  of  the 
public  that  ought  to  control  and  regulate  the 
government.  The  passions  ought  to  be  con¬ 
trolled  and  regulated  by  the  government. 

We  found  in  the  last  paper,  that  mere 
declarations  in  the  written  constitution  are 
not  sufficient  to  restrain  the  several  depart¬ 
ments  within  their  legal  rights.  It  appears  in 
this,  that  occasional  appeals  to  the  people 
would  be  neither  a  proper  nor  an  effectual 
provision  for  that  purpose.  How  far  the  pro¬ 
visions  of  a  different  nature  contained  in  the 
plan  above  quoted  might  be  adequate,  I  do  not 
examine.  Some  of  them  are  unquestionably 
founded  on  sound  political  principles,  and 
all  of  them  are  framed  with  singular  ingenuity 
and  precision.  Publius 

Number  jo 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

It  may  be  contended,  perhaps,  that  instead  of 
occasional  appeals  to  the  people,  which  are 
liable  to  the  objections  urged  against  them, 
periodical  appeals  are  the  proper  and  adequate 
means  of  preventing  and  correcting  infrac¬ 
tions  of  the  Constitution. 

It  will  be  attended  to,  that  in  the  examina¬ 
tion  of  these  expedients,  I  confine  myself  to 
their  aptitude  for  enforcing  the  Constitution, 
by  keeping  the  several  departments  of  power 
within  their  due  bounds,  without  particularly 
considering  them  as  provisions  for  altering  the 
Constitution  itself.  In  the  first  view,  appeals 
to  the  people  at  fixed  periods  appear  to  be 
nearly  as  ineligible  as  appeals  on  particular 


occasions  as  they  emerge.  If  the  periods  be 
separated  by  short  intervals,  the  measures  to 
be  reviewed  and  rectified  will  have  been  of 
recent  date,  and  will  be  connected  with  all  the 
circumstances  which  tend  to  vitiate  and  per¬ 
vert  the  result  of  occasional  revisions.  If  the 
periods  be  distant  from  each  other,  the  same 
remark  will  be  applicable  to  all  recent  meas¬ 
ures;  and  in  proportion  as  the  remoteness  of 
the  others  may  favour  a  dispassionate  review 
of  them,  this  advantage  is  inseparable  from  in¬ 
conveniences  which  seem  to  counterbalance 
it.  In  the  first  place,  a  distant  prospect  of  pub¬ 
lic  censure  would  be  a  very  feeble  restraint 
on  power  from  those  excesses  to  which  it  might 
be  urged  by  the  force  of  present  motives.  Is 
it  to  be  imagined  that  a  legislative  assembly, 
consisting  of  a  hundred  or  two  hundred  mem¬ 
bers,  eagerly  bent  on  some  favourite  object, 
and  breaking  through  the  restraints  of  the 
Constitution  in  pursuit  of  it,  would  be  arrested 
in  their  career,  by  considerations  drawn  from 
a  censorial  revision  of  their  conduct  at  the 
future  distance  of  ten,  fifteen,  or  twenty  years? 
In  the  next  place,  the  abuses  would  often  have 
completed  their  mischievous  effects  before  the 
remedial  provision  would  be  applied.  And  in 
the  last  place,  where  this  might  not  be  the  case, 
they  would  be  of  long  standing,  would  have 
taken  deep  root,  and  would  not  easily  be  ex¬ 
tirpated. 

The  scheme  of  revising  the  constitution,  in 
order  to  correct  recent  breaches  of  it,  as  well 
as  for  other  purposes,  has  been  actually  tried 
in  one  of  the  States.  One  of  the  objects  of  the 
Council  of  Censors  which  met  in  Pennsylvania 
in  1783  and  1784,  was,  as  we  have  seen,  to  in¬ 
quire,  “whether  the  constitution  had  been  vio¬ 
lated,  and  whether  the  legislative  and  execu¬ 
tive  departments  had  encroached  on  each  oth¬ 
er.”  This  important  and  novel  experiment  in 
politics  merits,  in  several  points  of  view,  very 
particular  attention.  In  some  of  them  it  may, 
perhaps,  as  a  single  experiment,  made  under 
circumstances  somewhat  peculiar,  be  thought 
to  be  not  absolutely  conclusive.  But  as  applied 
to  the  case  under  consideration,  it  involves 
some  facts  which  I  venture  to  remark  as  a  com¬ 
plete  and  satisfactory  illustration  of  the  reason¬ 
ing  which  I  have  employed. 

First.  It  appears,  from  the  names  of  the 
gentlemen  who  composed  the  council,  that 
some,  at  least,  of  its  most  active  and  leading 
members  had  also  been  active  and  leading 
characters  in  the  parties  which  pre-existed  in 
the  State. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


162 

Secondly.  It  appears  that  the  same  active 
and  leading  members  of  the  council  had  been 
active  and  influential  members  of  the  legisla¬ 
tive  and  executive  branches  within  the  period 
to  be  reviewed;  and  even  patrons  or  opponents 
of  the  very  measures  to  be  thus  brought  to  the 
test  of  the  constitution.  Two  of  the  members 
had  been  vice-presidents  of  the  State,  and 
several  other  members  of  the  executive  coun¬ 
cil,  within  the  seven  preceding  years.  One  of 
them  had  been  speaker,  and  a  number  of  others 
distinguished  members,  of  the  legislative  as¬ 
sembly  within  the  same  period. 

Thirdly.  Every  page  of  their  proceedings 
witnesses  the  effect  of  all  these  circumstances 
on  the  temper  of  their  deliberations.  Through¬ 
out  the  continuance  of  the  council,  it  was  split 
into  two  fixed  and  violent  parties.  The  fact  is 
acknowledged  and  lamented  by  themselves. 
Had  this  not  been  the  case,  the  face  of  their 
proceedings  exhibits  a  proof  equally  satis¬ 
factory.  In  all  questions,  however  unimportant 
in  themselves,  or  unconnected  with  each  other, 
the  same  names  stand  invariably  contrasted 
on  the  opposite  columns.  Every  unbiased  ob¬ 
server  may  infer,  without  danger  of  mistake, 
and  at  the  same  time  without  meaning  to  re¬ 
flect  on  either  party,  or  any  individuals  of 
either  party,  that,  unfortunately,  passion ,  not 
reason ,  must  have  presided  over  their  deci¬ 
sions.  When  men  exercise  their  reason  coolly 
and  freely  on  a  variety  of  distinct  questions, 
they  inevitably  fall  into  different  opinions  on 
some  of  them.  When  they  are  governed  by  a 
common  passion,  their  opinions,  if  they  are 
so  to  be  called,  will  be  the  same. 

Fourthly.  It  is  at  least  problematical,  whether 
the  decisions  of  this  body  do  not,  in  several 
instances,  misconstrue  the  limits  prescribed  for 
the  legislative  and  executive  departments,  in¬ 
stead  of  reducing  and  limiting  them  within 
their  constitutional  places. 

Fifthly.  I  have  never  understood  that  the 
decisions  of  the  council  on  constitutional  ques¬ 
tions,  whether  rightly  or  erroneously  formed, 
have  had  any  effect  in  varying  the  practice 
founded  on  legislative  constructions.  It  even 
appears,  if  I  mistake  not,  that  in  one  instance 
the  contemporary  legislature  denied  the  con¬ 
structions  of  the  council,  and  actually  prevail 
ed  in  the  contest. 

This  censorial  body,  therefore,  proves  at 
the  same  time,  by  its  researches,  the  existence 
of  the  disease,  and  by  its  example,  the  inelfi- 
cacy  of  the  remedy. 

Ibis  conclusion  cannot  be  invalidated  by 


alleging  that  the  State  in  which  the  experi¬ 
ment  was  made  was  at  that  crisis,  and  had  been 
for  a  long  time  before,  violently  heated  and 
distracted  by  the  rage  of  party.  Is  it  to  be  pre¬ 
sumed  that  at  any  future  septennial  epoch  the 
same  State  will  be  free  from  parties?  Is  it  to 
be  presumed  that  any  other  State,  at  the  same 
or  any  other  given  period,  will  be  exempt  from 
them?  Such  an  event  ought  to  be  neither  pre¬ 
sumed  nor  desired;  because  an  extinction  of 
parties  necessarily  implies  either  a  universal 
alarm  for  the  public  safety,  or  an  absolute  ex¬ 
tinction  of  liberty. 

Were  the  precaution  taken  of  excluding 
from  the  assemblies  elected  by  the  people,  to 
revise  the  preceding  administration  of  the 
government,  all  persons  who  should  have  been 
concerned  with  the  government  within  the 
given  period,  the  difficulties  would  not  be 
obviated.  The  important  task  would  probably 
devolve  on  men,  who,  with  inferior  capacities, 
would  in  other  respects  be  little  better  quali¬ 
fied.  Although  they  might  not  have  been  per¬ 
sonally  concerned  in  the  administration,  and 
therefore  not  immediately  agents  in  the  meas¬ 
ures  to  be  examined,  they  would  probably 
have  been  involved  in  the  parties  connected 
with  these  measures,  and  have  been  elected 
under  their  auspices.  Publius 

Number  5/ 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

To  what  expedient,  then,  shall  we  finally  re¬ 
sort,  for  maintaining  in  practice  the  necessary 
partition  of  power  among  the  several  depart¬ 
ments,  as  laid  down  in  the  Constitution?  The 
only  answer  that  can  be  given  is,  that  as  all 
these  exterior  provisions  are  found  to  be  in¬ 
adequate,  the  defect  must  be  supplied,  by  so 
contriving  the  interior  structure  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  as  that  its  several  constituent  parts  may, 
by  their  mutual  relations,  be  the  means  of 
keeping  each  other  in  their  proper  places. 
Without  presuming  to  undertake  a  full  de¬ 
velopment  of  this  important  idea,  I  will  hazard 
a  few  general  observations,  which  may  perhaps 
place  it  in  a  clearer  light,  and  enable  us  to 
form  a  more  correct  judgment  of  the  princi¬ 
ples  and  structure  of  the  government  planned 
by  the  convention. 

In  order  to  lay  a  due  foundation  for  that 
separate  and  distinct  exercise  of  the  different 
powers  of  government,  which  to  a  certain  ex¬ 
tent  is  admitted  on  all  bands  to  be  essential  to 
the  preservation  of  liberty,  it  is  evident  that 


NUMBER  si  163 


each  department  should  have  a  will  of  its  own; 
and  consequently  should  be  so  constituted 
that  the  members  of  each  should  have  as  little 
agency  as  possible  in  the  appointment  of  the 
members  of  the  others.  Were  this  principle 
rigorously  adhered  to,  it  would  require  that 
all  the  appointments  for  the  supreme  execu¬ 
tive,  legislative,  and  judiciary  magistracies 
should  be  drawn  from  the  same  fountain  of 
authority,  the  people,  through  channels  hav¬ 
ing  no  communication  whatever  with  one 
another.  Perhaps  such  a  plan  of  constructing 
the  several  departments  would  be  less  difficult 
in  practice  than  it  may  in  contemplation 
appear.  Some  difficulties,  however,  and  some 
additional  expense  would  attend  the  execu¬ 
tion  of  it.  Some  deviations,  therefore,  from 
the  principle  must  be  admitted.  In  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  judiciary  department  in  par¬ 
ticular,  it  might  be  inexpedient  to  insist  rigor¬ 
ously  on  the  principle:  first,  because  peculiar 
qualifications  being  essential  in  the  members, 
the  primary  consideration  ought  to  be  to  select 
that  mode  of  choice  which  best  secures  these 
qualifications;  secondly,  because  the  perma¬ 
nent  tenure  by  which  the  appointments  are 
held  in  that  department  must  soon  destroy  all 
sense  of  dependence  on  the  authority  confer¬ 
ring  them. 

It  is  equally  evident,  that  the  members  of 
each  department  should  be  as  little  dependent 
as  possible  on  those  of  the  others,  for  the  emol¬ 
uments  annexed  to  their  offices.  Were  the  ex¬ 
ecutive  magistrate,  or  the  judges,  not  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  legislature  in  this  particular, 
their  independence  in  every  other  would  be 
merely  nominal. 

But  the  great  security  against  a  gradual  con¬ 
centration  of  the  several  powers  in  the  same 
department,  consists  in  giving  to  those  who 
administer  each  department  the  necessary  con¬ 
stitutional  means  and  personal  motives  to  re¬ 
sist  encroachments  of  the  others.  The  pro¬ 
vision  for  defence  must  in  this,  as  in  all  other 
cases,  be  made  commensurate  to  the  danger  of 
attack.  Ambition  must  be  made  to  counteract 
ambition.  The  interest  of  the  man  must  be 
connected  with  the  constitutional  rights  of  the 
place.  It  may  be  a  reflection  on  human  nature 
that  such  devices  should  be  necessary  to  con¬ 
trol  the  abuses  of  government.  But  what  is 
government  itself  but  the  greatest  of  all  reflec¬ 
tions  on  human  nature?  If  men  were  angels, 
no  government  would  be  necessary.  If  angels 
were  to  govern  men,  neither  external  nor  in¬ 
ternal  controls  on  government  would  be  neces¬ 


sary.  In  framing  a  government  which  is  to  be 
administered  by  men  over  men,  the  great  dif¬ 
ficulty  lies  in  this:  you  must  first  enable  the 
government  to  control  the  governed;  and  in 
the  next  place  oblige  it  to  control  itself.  A  de¬ 
pendence  on  the  people  is,  no  doubt,  the  pri¬ 
mary  control  on  the  government;  but  experi¬ 
ence  has  taught  mankind  the  necessity  of  aux¬ 
iliary  precautions. 

This  policy  of  supplying,  by  opposite  and 
rival  interests,  the  defect  of  better  motives, 
might  be  traced  through  the  whole  system  of 
human  affairs,  private  as  well  as  public.  We 
see  it  particularly  displayed  in  all  the  sub¬ 
ordinate  distributions  of  power,  where  the 
constant  aim  is  to  divide  and  arrange  the  sev¬ 
eral  offices  in  such  a  manner  as  that  each  may 
be  a  check  on  the  other— that  the  private  in¬ 
terest  of  every  individual  may  be  a  sentinel 
over  the  public  rights.  These  inventions  of 
prudence  cannot  be  less  requisite  in  the  dis¬ 
tribution  of  the  supreme  powers  of  the  State. 

But  it  is  not  possible  to  give  to  each  depart¬ 
ment  an  equal  power  of  self-defence.  In  re¬ 
publican  government,  the  legislative  authority 
necessarily  predominates.  The  remedy  for  this 
inconveniency  is  to  divide  the  legislature  into 
different  branches;  and  to  render  them,  by  dif¬ 
ferent  modes  of  election  and  different  princi¬ 
ples  of  action,  as  little  connected  with  each 
other  as  the  nature  of  their  common  functions 
and  their  common  dependence  on  the  society 
will  admit.  It  may  even  be  necessary  to  guard 
against  dangerous  encroachments  by  still  fur¬ 
ther  precautions.  As  the  weight  of  the  legisla¬ 
tive  authority  requires  that  it  should  be  thus 
divided,  the  weakness  of  the  executive  may  re¬ 
quire,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  should  be 
fortified.  An  absolute  negative  on  the  legisla¬ 
ture  appears,  at  first  view,  to  be  the  natural 
defence  with  which  the  executive  magistrate 
should  be  armed.  But  perhaps  it  would  be 
neither  altogether  safe  nor  alone  sufficient. 
On  ordinary  occasions  it  might  not  be  exerted 
with  the  requisite  firmness,  and  on  extraordi¬ 
nary  occasions  it  might  be  perfidiously  abused. 
May  not  this  defect  of  an  absolute  negative  be 
supplied  by  some  qualified  connection  be¬ 
tween  this  weaker  department  and  the  weaker 
branch  of  the  stronger  department,  by  which 
the  latter  may  be  led  to  support  the  constitu¬ 
tional  rights  of  the  former,  without  being  too 
much  detached  from  the  rights  of  its  own  de¬ 
partment? 

If  the  principles  on  which  these  observations 
are  founded  be  just,  as  I  persuade  myself  they 


THE  FEDERALIST 


164 

are,  and  they  be  applied  as  a  criterion  to  the 
several  State  constitutions,  and  to  the  federal 
Constitution,  it  will  be  found  that  if  the  latter 
does  not  perfectly  correspond  with  them,  the 
former  are  infinitely  less  able  to  bear  such  a 
test. 

There  are,  moreover,  two  considerations  par¬ 
ticularly  applicable  to  the  federal  system  of 
America,  which  place  that  system  in  a  very 
interesting  point  of  view. 

First.  In  a  single  republic  all  the  power  sur¬ 
rendered  by  the  people  is  submitted  to  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  a  single  government;  and  the 
usurpations  are  guarded  against  by  a  division 
of  the  government  into  distinct  and  separate 
departments.  In  the  compound  republic  of 
America,  the  power  surrendered  by  the  people 
is  first  divided  between  two  distinct  govern¬ 
ments,  and  then  the  portion  allotted  to  each 
subdivided  among  distinct  and  separate  de¬ 
partments.  Hence  a  double  security  arises  to 
the  rights  of  the  people.  The  different  govern¬ 
ments  will  control  each  other,  at  the  same  time 
that  each  will  be  controlled  by  itself. 

Second.  It  is  of  great  importance  in  a  re¬ 
public  not  only  to  guard  the  society  against 
the  oppression  of  its  rulers,  but  to  guard  one 
part  of  the  society  against  the  injustice  of  the 
other  part.  Different  interests  necessarily  exist 
in  different  classes  of  citizens.  If  a  majority  be 
united  by  a  common  interest,  the  rights  of  the 
minority  will  be  insecure.  There  are  but  two 
methods  of  providing  against  this  evil:  the  one 
by  creating  a  will  in  the  community  independ¬ 
ent  of  the  majority— that  is,  of  the  society  it¬ 
self;  the  other,  by  comprehending  in  the  so¬ 
ciety  so  many  separate  descriptions  of  citizens 
as  will  render  an  unjust  combination  of  a  ma¬ 
jority  of  the  whole  very  improbable,  if  not  im¬ 
practicable.  The  first  method  prevails  in  all 
governments  possessing  an  hereditary  or  self- 
appointed  authority.  This,  at  best,  is  but  a 
precarious  security;  because  a  power  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  society  may  as  well  espouse  the 
unjust  views  of  the  major,  as  the  rightful  inter¬ 
ests  of  the  minor  party,  and  may  possibly  be 
turned  against  both  parties.  The  second  meth¬ 
od  will  be  exemplified  in  the  federal  republic 
of  the  United  States.  Whilst  all  authority  in  it 
will  be  derived  from  and  dependent  on  the 
society,  the  society  itself  will  be  broken  into  so 
many  parts,  interests,  and  classes  of  citizens, 
that  the  rights  of  individuals,  or  of  the  minor¬ 
ity,  will  be  in  little  danger  from  interested 
combinations  of  the  majority.  In  a  freegovern- 
inent  the  security  for  civil  rights  must  be  the 


same  as  that  for  religious  rights.  It  consists  in 
the  one  case  in  the  multiplicity  of  interests, 
and  in  the  other  in  the  multiplicity  of  sects. 
The  degree  of  security  in  both  cases  will  de¬ 
pend  on  the  number  of  interests  and  sects;  and 
this  may  be  presumed  to  depend  on  the  extent 
of  country  and  number  of  people  compre¬ 
hended  under  the  same  government.  This  view 
of  the  subject  must  particularly  recommend  a 
proper  federal  system  to  all  the  sincere  and 
considerate  friends  of  republican  government, 
since  it  show’s  that  in  exact  proportion  as  the 
territory  of  the  Union  may  be  formed  into 
more  circumscribed  Confederacies,  or  States, 
oppressive  combination  of  a  majority  will  be 
facilitated;  the  best  security,  under  the  repub¬ 
lican  forms,  for  the  rights  of  every  class  of 
citizens  will  be  diminished;  and  consequently 
the  stability  and  independence  of  some  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  government,  the  only  other  security, 
must  be  proportionally  increased.  Justice  is 
the  end  of  government.  It  is  the  end  of  civil 
society.  It  ever  has  been  and  ever  will  be  pur¬ 
sued  until  it  be  obtained,  or  until  liberty  be 
lost  in  the  pursuit.  In  a  society  under  the  forms 
of  which  the  stronger  faction  can  readily  unite 
and  oppress  the  weaker,  anarchy  may  as  truly 
be  said  to  reign  as  in  a  state  of  nature,  where 
the  weaker  individual  is  not  secured  against 
the  violence  of  the  stronger;  and  as,  in  the 
latter  state,  even  the  stronger  individuals  are 
prompted,  by  the  uncertainty  of  their  condi¬ 
tion,  to  submit  to  a  government  which  may 
protect  the  weak  as  well  as  themselves;  so,  in 
the  former  state,  will  the  more  powerful  fac¬ 
tions  or  parties  be  gradually  induced,  by  a  like 
motive,  to  wish  for  a  government  which  will 
protect  all  parties,  the  weaker  as  well  as  the 
more  powerful.  It  can  be  little  doubted  that  if 
the  State  of  Rhode  Island  wras  separated  from 
the  Confederacy  and  left  to  itself,  the  insecu¬ 
rity  of  rights  under  the  popular  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  within  such  narrow  limits  would  be  dis¬ 
played  by  such  reiterated  oppressions  of  fac¬ 
tious  majorities  that  some  power  altogether  in¬ 
dependent  of  the  people  would  soon  be  called 
for  by  the  voice  of  the  very  factions  whose  mis¬ 
rule  had  proved  the  necessity  of  it.  In  the  ex¬ 
tended  republic  ol  the  United  Stales,  and 
among  the  great  variety  ol  interests,  parties, 
and  sects  which  it  embraces,  a  coalition  of  .1 
majority  of  the  whole  society  could  seldom 
take  place  on  any  other  principles  than  those 
of  justice  and  the  general  good;  whilst  there 
being  thus  less  danger  to  a  minor  from  the 
will  of  a  major  party,  there  must  be  less  pre- 


NUMBER  5 2  165 


text,  also,  to  provide  for  the  security  of  the 
former,  by  introducing  into  the  government  a 
will  not  dependent  on  the  latter,  or,  in  other 
words,  a  will  independent  of  the  society  itself. 

It  is  no  less  certain  than  it  is  important,  not¬ 
withstanding  the  contrary  opinions  which 
have  been  entertained,  that  the  larger  the  so¬ 
ciety,  provided  it  lie  within  a  practical  sphere, 
the  more  duly  capable  it  will  be  of  self-govern¬ 
ment.  And  happily  for  the  republican  cause, 
the  practicable  sphere  may  be  carried  to  a  very 
«reat  extent  by  a  judicious  modification  and 
mixture  of  the  federal  principle .  Publius 

Number  32 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

From  the  more  general  inquiries  pursued  in 
the  four  last  papers,  I  pass  on  to  a  more  par¬ 
ticular  examination  of  the  several  parts  of  the 
government.  I  shall  begin  with  the  House  of 
Representatives. 

The  first  view  to  be  taken  of  this  part  of  the 
government  relates  to  the  qualifications  of  the 
electors  and  the  elected. 

Those  of  the  former  are  to  be  the  same  with 
those  of  the  electors  of  the  most  numerous 
branch  of  the  State  legislatures.  The  definition 
of  the  right  of  suffrage  is  very  justly  regarded 
as  a  fundamental  article  of  republican  govern¬ 
ment.  It  was  incumbent  on  the  convention, 
therefore,  to  define  and  establish  this  right  in 
the  Constitution.  To  have  left  it  open  for  the 
occasional  regulation  of  the  Congress  would 
have  been  improper  for  the  reason  just  men¬ 
tioned.  To  have  submitted  it  to  the  legislative 
discretion  of  the  States  would  have  been  im¬ 
proper  for  the  same  reason;  and  for  the  addi¬ 
tional  reason  that  it  would  have  rendered  too 
dependent  on  the  State  governments  that 
branch  of  the  federal  government  which  ought 
to  be  dependent  on  the  people  alone.  To 
have  reduced  the  different  qualifications  in 
the  different  States  to  one  uniform  rule  would 
probably  have  been  as  dissatisfactory  to  some 
of  the  States  as  it  would  have  been  difficult  to 
the  convention.  The  provision  made  by  the 
convention  appears,  therefore,  to  be  the  best 
that  lay  within  their  option.  It  must  be  satis¬ 
factory  to  every  State,  because  it  is  conform¬ 
able  to  the  standard  already  established,  or 
which  may  be  established,  by  the  State  itself. 
It  will  be  safe  to  the  United  States,  because, 
being  fixed  by  the  State  constitutions,  it  is  not 
alterable  by  the  State  governments,  and  it  can¬ 
not  be  feared  that  the  people  of  the  States  will 


alter  this  part  of  their  constitutions  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  abridge  the  rights  secured  to 
them  by  the  federal  Constitution. 

The  qualifications  of  the  elected,  being  less 
carefully  and  properly  defined  by  the  State 
constitutions,  and  being  at  the  same  time  more 
susceptible  of  uniformity,  have  been  very  prop¬ 
erly  considered  and  regulated  by  the  conven¬ 
tion.  A  representative  of  the  United  States 
must  be  of  the  age  of  twenty-five  years;  must 
have  been  seven  years  a  citizen  of  the  United 
States;  must,  at  the  time  of  his  election,  be  an 
inhabitant  of  the  State  he  is  to  represent;  and, 
during  the  time  of  his  service,  must  be  in  no 
office  under  the  United  States.  Under  these 
reasonable  limitations,  the  door  of  this  part  of 
the  federal  government  is  open  to  merit  of 
every  description,  whether  native  or  adoptive, 
wrhether  young  or  old,  and  without  regard  to 
poverty  or  wealth,  or  to  any  particular  pro¬ 
fession  of  religious  faith. 

The  term  for  which  the  representatives  are 
to  be  elected  falls  under  a  second  view  which 
may  be  taken  of  this  branch.  In  order  to  decide 
on  the  propriety  of  this  article,  two  questions 
must  be  considered:  first,  whether  biennial 
elections  will,  in  this  case,  be  safe;  secondly, 
whether  they  be  necessary  or  useful. 

As  it  is  essential  to  liberty  that  the  govern¬ 
ment  in  general  should  have  a  common  inter¬ 
est  with  the  people,  so  it  is  particularly  essen¬ 
tial  that  the  branch  of  it  under  consideration 
should  have  an  immediate  dependence  on,  and 
an  intimate  sympathy  with,  the  people.  Fre¬ 
quent  elections  are  unquestionably  the  only 
policy  by  which  this  dependence  and  sympathy 
can  be  effectually  secured.  But  what  particular 
degree  of  frequency  may  be  absolutely  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  purpose  does  not  appear  to  be  sus¬ 
ceptible  of  any  precise  calculation,  and  must 
depend  on  a  variety  of  circumstances  with 
which  it  may  be  connected.  Let  us  consult  ex¬ 
perience,  the  guide  that  ought  always  to  be 
followed  whenever  it  can  be  found. 

The  scheme  of  representation,  as  a  substi¬ 
tute  for  a  meeting  of  the  citizens  in  person,  be¬ 
ing  at  most  but  very  imperfectly  known  to 
ancient  polity,  it  is  in  more  modern  times  only 
that  we  are  to  expect  instructive  examples. 
And  even  here,  in  order  to  avoid  a  research 
too  vague  and  diffusive,  it  will  be  proper  to 
confine  ourselves  to  the  fewr  examples  which 
are  best  known,  and  which  bear  the  greatest 
analogy  to  our  particular  case.  The  first  to 
which  this  character  ought  to  be  applied  is 
the  House  of  Commons  in  Great  Britain.  The 


1 66 


THE  FEDERALIST 


history  of  this  branch  of  the  English  Consti¬ 
tution,  anterior  to  the  date  of  Magna  Charta, 
is  too  obscure  to  yield  instruction.  The  very 
existence  of  it  has  been  made  a  question  among 
political  antiquaries.  The  earliest  records  of 
subsequent  date  prove  that  parliaments  were 
to  sit  only  every  year;  not  that  they  were  to  be 
elected  every  year.  And  even  these  annual  ses¬ 
sions  were  left  so  much  at  the  discretion  of  the 
monarch,  that,  under  various  pretexts,  very 
long  and  dangerous  intermissions  were  often 
contrived  by  royal  ambition.  To  remedy  this 
grievance,  it  was  provided  by  a  statute  in  the 
reign  of  Charles  II.  that  the  intermissions 
should  not  be  protracted  beyond  a  period  of 
three  years.  On  the  accession  of  William  III., 
when  a  revolution  took  place  in  the  govern¬ 
ment,  the  subject  was  still  more  seriously  re¬ 
sumed,  and  it  was  declared  to  be  among  the 
fundamental  rights  of  the  people,  that  parlia¬ 
ments  ought  to  be  held  frequently.  By  another 
statute,  which  passed  a  few  years  later  in  the 
same  reign,  the  term  “frequently,”  which  had 
alluded  to  the  triennial  period  settled  in  the 
time  of  Charles  II.,  is  reduced  to  a  precise 
meaning,  it  being  expressly  enacted  that  a  new 
parliament  shall  be  called  within  three  years 
after  the  termination  of  the  former.  The  last 
change,  from  three  to  seven  years,  is  well 
known  to  have  been  introduced  pretty  early  in 
the  present  century,  under  an  alarm  for  the 
Hanoverian  succession.  From  these  facts  it  ap¬ 
pears  that  the  greatest  frequency  of  elections 
which  has  been  deemed  necessary  in  that  king¬ 
dom,  for  binding  the  representatives  to  their 
constituents,  does  not  exceed  a  triennial  re¬ 
turn  of  them.  And  if  we  may  argue  from  the 
degree  of  liberty  retained  even  under  septen¬ 
nial  elections,  and  all  the  other  vicious  ingre¬ 
dients  in  the  parliamentary  constitution,  we 
cannot  doubt  that  a  reduction  of  the  period 
from  seven  to  three  years,  with  the  other  neces¬ 
sary  reforms,  would  so  far  extend  the  influence 
of  the  people  over  their  representatives  as  to 
satisfy  us  that  biennial  elections,  under  the 
federal  system,  cannot  possibly  be  dangerous 
to  the  requisite  dependence  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  on  their  constituents. 

Elections  in  Ireland,  till  of  late,  were  regu¬ 
lated  entirely  by  the  discretion  of  the  crown, 
and  were  seldom  repeated,  except  on  the  ac¬ 
cession  of  a  new  prime,  or  some  other  contin¬ 
gent  event.  The  parliament  whit  h  commenced 
with  George  II.  was  continued  throughout 
his  whole  reign,  a  period  of  about  thirty-five 
years.  The  only  dependence  of  the  representa¬ 


tives  on  the  people  consisted  in  the  right  of 
the  latter  to  supply  occasional  vacancies,  by 
the  election  of  new  members,  and  in  the 
chance  of  some  event  which  might  produce  a 
general  new  election.  The  ability  also  of  the 
Irish  parliament  to  maintain  the  rights  of  their 
constituents,  so  far  as  the  disposition  might 
exist,  was  extremely  shackled  by  the  control 
of  the  crown  over  the  subjects  of  their  delib¬ 
eration.  Of  late,  these  shackles,  if  I  mistake 
not,  have  been  broken;  and  octennial  parlia¬ 
ments  have  besides  been  established.  What 
effect  may  be  produced  by  this  partial  reform 
must  be  left  to  further  experience.  The  ex¬ 
ample  of  Ireland,  from  this  view  of  it,  can 
throw  but  little  light  on  the  subject.  As  far  as 
we  can  draw  any  conclusion  from  it,  it  must 
be  that  if  the  people  of  that  country  have  been 
able  under  all  these  disadvantages  to  retain 
any  liberty  whatever,  the  advantage  of  bien¬ 
nial  elections  would  secure  to  them  every  de¬ 
gree  of  liberty,  which  might  depend  on  a  due 
connection  between  their  representatives  and 
themselves. 

Let  us  bring  our  inquiries  nearer  home.  The 
example  of  these  States,  when  British  colonies, 
claims  particular  attention,  at  the  same  time 
that  it  is  so  well  known  as  to  require  little  to 
be  said  on  it.  The  principle  of  representation, 
in  one  branch  of  the  legislature  at  least,  was 
established  in  all  of  them.  But  the  periods  of 
election  were  different.  They  varied  from  one 
to  seven  years.  Have  we  any  reason  to  infer, 
from  the  spirit  and  conduct  of  the  representa¬ 
tives  of  the  people,  prior  to  the  Revolution, 
that  biennial  elections  would  have  been  dan¬ 
gerous  to  the  public  liberties?  The  spirit  which 
everywhere  displayed  itself  at  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  the  struggle,  and  which  vanquished 
the  obstacles  to  independence,  is  the  best  of 
proofs  that  a  sufficient  portion  of  liberty  had 
been  everywhere  enjoyed  to  inspire  both  a 
sense  of  its  worth  and  a  zeal  for  its  proper  en¬ 
largement.  This  remark  holds  good,  as  well 
with  regard  to  the  then  colonies  whose  elec¬ 
tions  were  least  frequent,  as  to  those  whose 
elections  were  most  frequent.  Virginia  was  the 
colony  which  stood  first  in  resisting  the  par¬ 
liamentary  usurpations  of  Great  Britain;  it 
was  the  first  also  in  espousing,  by  public  act, 
the  resolution  of  independence.  In  Virginia, 
nevertheless,  if  I  have  not  been  misinformed, 
elections  under  the  former  government  were 
septennial.  This  particular  example  is  brought 
into  view,  not  as  a  proof  of  any  peculiar  merit, 
for  the  priority  in  those  instances  was  prob- 


NUMBER  53  167 


ably  accidental;  and  still  less  of  any  advantage 
in  septennial  elections,  for  when  compared 
with  a  greater  frequency  they  are  inadmissi¬ 
ble:  but  merely  as  a  proof,  and  I  conceive  it  to 
be  a  very  substantial  proof,  that  the  liberties 
of  the  people  can  be  in  no  danger  from  bien¬ 
nial  elections. 

The  conclusion  resulting  from  these  exam¬ 
ples  will  be  not  a  little  strengthened  by  recol¬ 
lecting  three  circumstances.  The  first  is,  that 
the  federal  legislature  will  possess  a  part  only 
of  that  supreme  legislative  authority  which  is 
vested  completely  in  the  British  Parliament; 
and  which,  with  a  few  exceptions,  was  exer¬ 
cised  by  the  colonial  assemblies  and  the  Irish 
legislature.  It  is  a  received  and  well-founded 
maxim,  that  where  no  other  circumstances  af¬ 
fect  the  case,  the  greater  the  power  is,  the 
shorter  ought  to  be  its  duration;  and.  con¬ 
versely,  the  smaller  the  power,  the  more  safely 
may  its  duration  be  protracted.  In  the  second 
place,  it  has,  on  another  occasion,  been  shown 
that  the  federal  legislature  will  not  only  be  re¬ 
strained  by  its  dependence  on  the  people,  as 
other  legislative  bodies  are,  but  that  it  will  be, 
moreover,  watched  and  controlled  by  the  sev¬ 
eral  collateral  legislatures,  which  other  legisla¬ 
tive  bodies  are  not.  And  in  the  third  place,  no 
comparison  can  be  made  between  the  means 
that  will  be  possessed  by  the  more  permanent 
branches  of  the  federal  government  for  seduc¬ 
ing,  if  they  should  be  disposed  to  seduce,  the 
House  of  Representatives  from  their  duty  to 
the  people,  and  the  means  of  influence  over 
the  popular  branch  possessed  by  the  other 
branches  of  the  government  above  cited.  With 
less  power,  therefore,  to  abuse,  the  federal 
representatives  can  be  less  tempted  on  one 
side,  and  will  be  doubly  watched  on  the  other. 

Publius 

Number 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

I  shall  here,  perhaps,  be  reminded  of  a  cur¬ 
rent  observation,  “that  where  annual  elections 
end,  tyranny  begins.”  If  it  be  true,  as  has  often 
been  remarked,  that  sayings  which  become 
proverbial  are  generally  founded  in  reason,  it 
is  not  less  true  that  when  once  established  they 
are  often  applied  to  cases  to  which  the  reason 
of  them  does  not  extend.  I  need  not  look  for  a 
proof  beyond  the  case  before  us.  What  is  the 
reason  on  which  this  proverbial  observation  is 
founded?  No  man  will  subject  himself  to  the 
ridicule  of  pretending  that  any  natural  con¬ 


nection  subsists  between  the  sun  or  the  sea¬ 
sons,  and  the  period  within  which  human  vir¬ 
tue  can  bear  the  temptations  of  power.  Hap¬ 
pily  for  mankind,  liberty  is  not,  in  this  respect, 
confined  to  any  single  point  of  time;  but  lies 
within  extremes,  which  afford  sufficient  lati¬ 
tude  for  all  the  variations  which  may  be  re¬ 
quired  by  the  various  situations  and  circum¬ 
stances  of  civil  society.  The  election  of  magis¬ 
trates  might  be,  if  it  were  found  expedient, 
as  in  some  instances  it  actually  has  been,  daily, 
weekly,  or  monthly,  as  well  as  annual;  and  if 
circumstances  may  require  a  deviation  from 
the  rule  on  one  side,  why  not  also  on  the  other 
side?  Turning  our  attention  to  the  periods  es¬ 
tablished  among  ourselves,  for  the  election  of 
the  most  numerous  branches  of  the  State  legis¬ 
latures,  we  find  them  by  no  means  coinciding 
any  more  in  this  instance  than  in  the  elections 
of  other  civil  magistrates.  In  Connecticut  and 
Rhode  Island  the  periods  are  half-yearly.  In 
the  other  States,  South  Carolina  excepted, 
they  are  annual.  In  South  Carolina  they  are 
biennial— as  is  proposed  in  the  federal  govern¬ 
ment.  Here  is  a  difference,  as  four  to  one,  be¬ 
tween  the  longest  and  shortest  periods;  and  yet 
it  would  not  be  easy  to  show  that  Connecticut 
or  Rhode  Island  is  better  governed,  or  enjoys 
a  greater  share  of  rational  liberty,  than  South 
Carolina;  or  that  either  the  one  or  the  other 
of  these  States  is  distinguished  in  these  re¬ 
spects,  and  by  these  causes,  from  the  States 
whose  elections  are  different  from  both. 

In  searching  for  the  grounds  of  this  doc¬ 
trine,  I  can  discover  but  one,  and  that  is  wholly 
inapplicable  to  our  case.  The  important  dis¬ 
tinction  so  well  understood  in  America,  be¬ 
tween  a  Constitution  established  by  the  peo¬ 
ple  and  unalterable  by  the  government,  and  a 
law  established  by  the  government  and  alter¬ 
able  by  the  government,  seems  to  have  been 
little  understood  and  less  observed  in  any 
other  country.  Wherever  the  supreme  power 
of  legislation  has  resided,  has  been  supposed 
to  reside  also  a  full  power  to  change  the  form 
of  the  government.  Even  in  Great  Britain, 
where  the  principles  of  political  and  civil  lib¬ 
erty  have  been  most  discussed,  and  where  we 
hear  most  of  the  rights  of  the  Constitution,  it 
is  maintained  that  the  authority  of  the  Parlia¬ 
ment  is  transcendent  and  uncontrollable,  as 
well  with  regard  to  the  Constitution  as  the  or¬ 
dinary  objects  of  legislative  provision.  They 
have  accordingly,  in  several  instances,  actually 
changed,  by  legislative  acts  some  of  the  most 
fundamental  articles  of  the  government.  They 


THE  FEDERALIST 


168 

have  in  particular,  on  several  occasions,  chang¬ 
ed  the  period  of  election;  and,  on  the  last  oc¬ 
casion,  not  only  introduced  septennial  in  place 
of  triennial  elections,  but  by  the  same  act  con¬ 
tinued  themselves  in  place  four  years  beyond 
the  term  for  which  they  were  elected  by  the 
people.  An  attention  to  these  dangerous  prac¬ 
tices  has  produced  a  very  natural  alarm  in  the 
votaries  of  free  government,  of  which  fre¬ 
quency  of  elections  is  the  corner-stone;  and 
has  led  them  to  seek  for  some  security  to  lib¬ 
erty,  against  the  danger  to  which  it  is  exposed. 
Where  no  Constitution,  paramount  to  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  either  existed  or  could  be  obtained, 
no  constitutional  security,  similar  to  that  es¬ 
tablished  in  the  United  States,  was  to  be  at¬ 
tempted.  Some  other  security,  therefore,  was 
to  be  sought  for;  and  what  better  security 
would  the  case  admit  than  that  of  selecting 
and  appealing  to  some  simple  and  familiar 
portion  of  time,  as  a  standard  for  measuring 
the  danger  of  innovations,  for  fixing  the  na¬ 
tional  sentiment,  and  for  uniting  the  patri¬ 
otic  exertions?  The  most  simple  and  familiar 
portion  of  time,  applicable  to  the  subject,  was 
that  of  a  year;  and  hence  the  doctrine  has  been 
inculcated  by  a  laudable  zeal,  to  erect  some 
barrier  against  the  gradual  innovations  of  an 
unlimited  government,  that  the  advance  to¬ 
wards  tyranny  wTas  to  be  calculated  by  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  departure  from  the  fixed  point  of 
annual  elections.  But  what  necessity  can  there 
be  of  applying  this  expedient  to  a  government 
limited,  as  the  federal  government  will  be,  by 
the  authority  of  a  paramount  Constitution? 
Or  who  will  pretend  that  the  liberties  of  the 
people  of  America  will  not  be  more  secure  un¬ 
der  biennial  elections,  unalterably  fixed  by 
such  a  Constitution,  than  those  of  any  other 
nation  would  be  where  elections  were  annual, 
or  even  more  frecpient,  but  subject  to  altera¬ 
tions  by  the  ordinary  power  of  the  govern¬ 
ment? 

The  second  question  stated  is,  whether  bien¬ 
nial  elections  be  necessary  or  useful.  The  pro¬ 
priety  of  answering  this  question  in  the  affirm¬ 
ative  will  appear  from  several  very  obvious 
considerations. 

No  man  can  be  a  competent  legislator  who 
does  not  add  to  an  upright  intention  and  a 
sound  judgment  a  certain  degree  of  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  subjects  on  which  he  is  to  legislate. 
A  part  of  this  knowledge  may  be  acquired  by 
means  of  information  which  lie  within  the 
compass  of  men  in  private  as  well  as  public 
stations.  Another  part  can  only  be  attained, 


or  at  least  thoroughly  attained,  by  actual  ex¬ 
perience  in  the  station  wrhich  requires  the  use 
of  it.  The  period  of  service  ought,  therefore, 
in  all  such  cases,  to  bear  some  proportion  to 
the  extent  of  practical  knowledge  requisite  to 
the  due  performance  of  the  service.  The  period 
of  legislative  serv  ice  established  in  most  of  the 
States  for  the  more  numerous  branch  is,  as  we 
have  seen,  one  year.  The  question  then  may  be 
put  into  this  simple  form:  does  the  period  of 
two  years  bear  no  greater  proportion  to  the 
knowledge  requisite  for  federal  legislation 
than  one  year  does  to  the  knowledge  requisite 
for  State  legislation?  The  very  statement  of 
the  question,  in  this  form,  suggests  the  answer 
that  ought  to  be  given  to  it. 

In  a  single  State,  the  requisite  knowiedge 
relates  to  the  existing  laws,  which  are  uniform 
throughout  the  State,  and  with  wThich  all  the 
citizens  are  more  or  less  conversant;  and  to  the 
general  affairs  of  the  State,  which  lie  within 
a  small  compass,  are  not  very  diversified,  and 
occupy  much  of  the  attention  and  conversa¬ 
tion  of  every  class  of  people.  The  great  theatre 
of  the  United  States  presents  a  very  different 
scene.  The  laws  are  so  far  from  being  uniform 
that  they  vary  in  every  State;  whilst  the  public 
affairs  of  the  Union  are  spread  throughout  a 
very  extensive  region,  and  are  extremely  diver¬ 
sified  by  the  local  affairs  connected  with  them, 
and  can  with  difficulty  be  correctly  learnt  in 
any  other  place  than  in  the  central  councils, 
to  w'hich  a  knowiedge  of  them  will  be  brought 
by  the  representatives  of  every  part  of  the  em¬ 
pire.  Yet  some  knowiedge  of  the  affairs,  and 
even  of  the  lawTs,  of  all  the  States  ought  to  be 
possessed  by  the  members  from  each  of  the 
States.  How  can  foreign  trade  be  properly  reg¬ 
ulated  by  uniform  laws  without  some  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  the  commerce,  the  ports,  the 
usages,  and  the  regulations  of  the  different 
States?  How  can  the  trade  between  the  differ¬ 
ent  States  be  duly  regulated  without  some 
knowiedge  of  their  relative  situations  in  these 
and  other  respects?  How  can  taxes  be  judi¬ 
ciously  imposed  and  effectually  collected  if 
they  be  not  accommodated  to  the  different  laws 
and  local  circumstances  relating  to  these  ob¬ 
jects  in  the  different  States?  How  can  uniform 
regulations  for  the  militia  be  duly  provided 
without  a  similar  knowiedge  of  many  internal 
circumstances  by  which  the  States  are  distin¬ 
guished  from  each  other?  These  are  the  prin¬ 
cipal  objects  of  federal  legislation,  and  sug¬ 
gest  most  forcibly  the  extensive  information 
which  the  representatives  ought  to  acquire. 


NUMBER  53  169 


The  other  interior  objects  will  require  a  pro¬ 
portional  degree  of  information  with  regard 
to  them. 

It  is  true  that  all  these  difficulties  will,  by 
degrees,  be  very  much  diminished.  The  most 
laborious  task  will  be  the  proper  inauguration 
of  the  government  and  the  primeval  formation 
of  a  federal  code.  Improvements  on  the  first 
draughts  will  every  year  become  both  easier 
and  fewer.  Past  transactions  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  will  be  a  ready  and  accurate  source  of 
information  to  new  members.  The  affairs  of 
the  Union  will  become  more  and  more  ob¬ 
jects  of  curiosity  and  conversation  among  the 
citizens  at  large.  And  the  increased  inter¬ 
course  among  those  of  different  States  will 
contribute  not  a  little  to  diffuse  a  mutual 
knowledge  of  their  affairs,  as  this  again  will 
contribute  to  a  general  assimilation  of  their 
manners  and  laws.  But  with  all  these  abate¬ 
ments,  the  business  of  federal  legislation  must 
continue  so  far  to  exceed,  both  in  novelty  and 
difficulty,  the  legislative  business  of  a  single 
State,  as  to  justify  the  longer  period  of  service 
assigned  to  those  who  are  to  transact  it. 

A  branch  of  knowledge  which  belongs  to 
the  acquirements  of  a  federal  representative, 
and  which  has  not  been  mentioned,  is  that  of 
foreign  affairs.  In  regulating  our  own  com¬ 
merce,  he  ought  to  be  not  only  acquainted 
with  the  treaties  between  the  United  States 
and  other  nations,  but  also  with  the  commer¬ 
cial  policy  and  laws  of  other  nations.  He 
ought  not  to  be  altogether  ignorant  of  the  law 
of  nations;  for  that,  as  far  as  it  is  a  proper 
object  of  municipal  legislation,  is  submitted 
to  the  federal  government.  And  although  the 
House  of  Representatives  is  not  immediately 
to  participate  in  foreign  negotiations  and  ar¬ 
rangements,  yet  from  the  necessary  connection 
between  the  several  branches  of  public  affairs, 
those  particular  branches  will  frequently  de¬ 
serve  attention  in  the  ordinary  course  of  legis¬ 
lation,  and  will  sometimes  demand  particular 
legislative  sanction  and  co-operation.  Some 
portion  of  this  knowledge  may,  no  doubt,  be 
acquired  in  a  man’s  closet;  but  some  of  it  also 
can  only  be  derived  from  the  public  sources  of 
information;  and  all  of  it  will  be  acquired  to 
best  effect  by  a  practical  attention  to  the  sub¬ 
ject  during  the  period  of  actual  service  in  the 
legislature. 

There  are  other  considerations  of  less  im¬ 
portance,  perhaps,  but  which  are  not  un¬ 
worthy  of  notice.  The  distance  which  many 
of  the  representatives  will  be  obliged  to  travel. 


and  the  arrangements  rendered  necessary  by 
that  circumstance,  might  be  much  more  seri¬ 
ous  objections  with  fit  men  to  this  "service,  if 
limited  to  a  single  year,  than  if  extended  to 
two  years.  No  argument  can  be  drawn  on  this 
subject  from  the  case  of  the  delegates  to  the 
existing  Congress.  They  are  elected  annually, 
it  is  true;  but  their  re-election  is  considered  by 
the  legislative  assemblies  almost  as  a  matter 
of  course.  The  election  of  the  representatives 
by  the  people  would  not  be  governed  by  the 
same  principle. 

A  few  of  the  members,  as  happens  in  all 
such  assemblies,  will  possess  superior  talents; 
will,  by  frequent  re-elections,  become  mem¬ 
bers  of  long  standing;  will  be  thoroughly  mas¬ 
ters  of  the  public  business,  and  perhaps  not 
unwilling  to  avail  themselves  of  those  advan¬ 
tages.  The  greater  the  proportion  of  new  mem¬ 
bers,  and  the  less  the  information  of  the  bulk 
of  the  members,  the  more  apt  will  they  be  to 
fall  into  the  snares  that  may  be  laid  for  them. 
This  remark  is  no  less  applicable  to  the  rela¬ 
tion  which  will  subsist  between  the  House  of 
Representatives  and  the  Senate. 

It  is  an  inconvenience  mingled  with  the  ad¬ 
vantages  of  our  frequent  elections,  even  in 
single  States,  where  they  are  large,  and  hold 
but  one  legislative  session  in  a  year,  that  spuri¬ 
ous  elections  cannot  be  investigated  and  an¬ 
nulled  in  time  for  the  decision  to  have  its  due 
effect.  If  a  return  can  be  obtained,  no  matter 
by  what  unlawful  means,  the  irregular  mem¬ 
ber,  who  takes  his  seat  of  course,  is  sure  of 
holding  it  a  sufficient  time  to  answer  his  pur¬ 
poses.  Hence  a  very  pernicious  encouragement 
is  given  to  the  use  of  unlawful  means  for  ob¬ 
taining  irregular  returns.  Were  elections  for 
the  federal  legislature  to  be  annual,  this  prac¬ 
tice  might  become  a  very  serious  abuse,  par¬ 
ticularly  in  the  more  distant  States.  Each  house 
is,  as  it  necessarily  must  be,  the  judge  of  the 
elections,  qualifications,  and  returns  of  its 
members;  and  whatever  improvements  may 
be  suggested  by  experience,  for  simplifying 
and  accelerating  the  process  in  disputed  cases, 
so  great  a  portion  of  a  year  would  unavoid¬ 
ably  elapse  before  an  illegitimate  member 
could  be  dispossessed  of  his  seat,  that  the  pros¬ 
pect  of  such  an  event  would  be  little  check  to 
unfair  and  illicit  means  of  obtaining  a  seat. 

All  these  considerations  taken  together  war¬ 
rant  us  in  affirming  that  biennial  elections  will 
be  as  useful  to  the  affairs  of  the  public  as  we 
have  seen  that  they  will  be  safe  to  the  liberty 
of  the  people.  Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


Number 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

The  next  view  which  I  shall  take  of  the  House 
of  Representatives  relates  to  the  appointment 
of  its  members  to  the  several  States,  which  is  to 
be  determined  by  the  same  rule  with  that  of 
direct  taxes. 

It  is  not  contended  that  the  number  of  peo¬ 
ple  in  each  State  ought  not  to  be  the  standard 
for  regulating  the  proportion  of  those  who 
are  to  represent  the  people  of  each  State. 
The  establishment  of  the  same  rule  for  the  ap¬ 
pointment  of  taxes  will  probably  be  as  little 
contested;  though  the  rule  itself,  in  this  case, 
is  by  no  means  founded  on  the  same  principle. 
In  the  former  case,  the  rule  is  understood  to 
refer  to  the  personal  rights  of  the  people,  with 
which  it  has  a  natural  and  universal  connec¬ 
tion.  In  the  latter,  it  has  reference  to  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  wealth,  of  which  it  is  in  no  case  a 
precise  measure,  and  in  ordinary  cases  a  very 
unfit  one.  But  notwithstanding  the  imperfec¬ 
tion  of  the  rule  as  applied  to  the  relative 
wealth  and  contributions  of  the  States,  it  is 
evidently  the  least  objectionable  among  the 
practicable  rules,  and  had  too  recently  ob¬ 
tained  the  general  sanction  of  America,  not  to 
have  found  a  ready  preference  with  the  con¬ 
vention. 

All  this  is  admitted,  it  will  perhaps  be  said; 
but  does  it  follow,  from  an  admission  of  num¬ 
bers  for  the  measure  of  representation,  or  of 
slaves  combined  with  free  citizens  as  a  ratio 
of  taxation,  that  slaves  ought  to  be  included 
in  the  numerical  rule  of  representation?  Slaves 
are  considered  as  property,  not  as  persons. 
They  ought  therefore  to  be  comprehended  in 
estimates  of  taxation  which  are  founded  on 
property,  and  to  be  excluded  from  representa¬ 
tion  which  is  regulated  by  a  census  of  persons. 
This  is  the  objection,  as  I  understand  it,  stated 
in  its  full  force.  I  shall  be  equally  candid  in 
stating  the  reasoning  which  may  be  offered  on 
the  opposite  side. 

"We  subscribe  to  the  doctrine,"  might  one 
of  our  Southern  brethren  observe,  "that  repre¬ 
sentation  relates  more  immediately  to  persons, 
and  taxation  more  immediately  to  property, 
and  we  join  in  the  application  of  this  distinc¬ 
tion  to  the  case  of  our  slaves.  But  we  must 
deny  the  fact  that  slaves  are  considered  merely 
as  property,  and  in  no  respect  whatever  as 
persons.  The  true  state  of  the  case  is,  that  they 
partake  of  both  these  qualities:  being  con¬ 
sidered  by  our  laws,  in  some  respects,  as  per¬ 


sons,  and  in  other  respects  as  property.  In 
being  compelled  to  labour,  not  for  himself,  but 
for  a  master;  in  being  vendible  by  one  master 
to  another  master;  and  in  being  subject  at  all 
times  to  be  restrained  in  his  liberty  and  chas¬ 
tised  in  his  body,  by  the  capricious  will  of 
another,— the  slave  may  appear  to  be  degraded 
from  the  human  rank,  and  classed  with  those 
irrational  animals  which  fall  under  the  legal 
denomination  of  property.  In  being  protected, 
on  the  other  hand,  in  his  life  and  in  his  limbs, 
against  the  violence  of  all  others,  even  the 
master  of  his  labour  and  his  liberty;  and  in 
being  punishable  himself  for  all  violence  com¬ 
mitted  against  others,— the  slave  is  no  less  evi¬ 
dently  regarded  by  the  lawT  as  a  member  of  the 
society,  not  as  a  part  of  the  irrational  creation; 
as  a  moral  person,  not  as  a  mere  article  of 
property.  The  federal  Constitution,  therefore, 
decides  with  great  propriety  on  the  case  of 
our  slaves,  when  it  view’s  them  in  the  mixed 
character  of  persons  and  of  property.  This  is 
in  fact  their  true  character.  It  is  the  character 
bestowed  on  them  by  the  laws  under  which 
they  live;  and  it  will  not  be  denied  that  these 
are  the  proper  criterion;  because  it  is  only 
under  the  pretext  that  the  laws  have  trans¬ 
formed  the  negroes  into  subjects  of  property 
that  a  place  is  disputed  them  in  the  computa¬ 
tion  of  numbers;  and  it  is  admitted,  that  if  the 
laws  w  ere  to  restore  the  rights  which  have  been 
taken  away,  the  negroes  could  no  longer  be 
refused  an  equal  share  of  representation  with 
the  other  inhabitants. 

"This  question  may  be  placed  in  another 
light.  It  is  agreed  on  all  sides,  that  numbers 
are  the  best  scale  of  wealth  and  taxation,  as 
they  are  the  only  proper  scale  of  representa¬ 
tion.  Would  the  convention  have  been  im¬ 
partial  or  consistent,  if  they  had  rejected  the 
slaves  from  the  list  of  inhabitants  when  the 
shares  of  representation  were  to  be  calculated, 
and  inserted  them  on  the  lists  when  the  tariff 
of  contributions  was  to  be  adjusted?  Could 
it  be  reasonably  expected  that  the  Southern 
States  would  concur  in  a  system  which  con¬ 
sidered  their  slaves  in  some  degree  as  men 
when  burdens  were  to  be  imposed,  but  refused 
to  consider  them  in  the  same  light  when  ad¬ 
vantages  were  to  be  conferred?  Might  not  some 
surprise  also  be  expressed,  that  those  who  re¬ 
proach  the  Southern  States  with  the  barbarous 
policy  of  considering  as  property  a  part  of 
their  human  brethren,  should  themselves  con¬ 
tend  that  the  government  to  which  all  the 
States  are  to  be  parties,  ought  to  consider  this 


NUMBER  54  171 


unfortunate  race  more  completely  in  the  un¬ 
natural  light  of  property  than  the  very  laws  of 
which  they  complain? 

“It  may  be  replied,  perhaps,  that  slaves  are 
not  included  in  the  estimate  of  representatives 
in  any  of  the  States  possessing  them.  They 
neither  vote  themselves  nor  increase  the  votes 
of  their  masters.  Upon  what  principle,  then, 
ought  they  to  be  taken  into  the  federal  esti¬ 
mate  of  representation?  In  rejecting  them  al¬ 
together,  the  Constitution  would,  in  this  re¬ 
spect,  have  followed  the  very  laws  which  have 
been  appealed  to  as  the  proper  guide. 

“This  objection  is  repelled  by  a  single  ob¬ 
servation.  It  is  a  fundamental  principle  of 
the  proposed  Constitution,  that  as  the  aggre¬ 
gate  number  of  representatives  allotted  to  the 
several  States  is  to  be  determined  by  a  federal 
rule,  founded  on  the  aggregate  number  of 
inhabitants,  so  the  right  of  choosing  this  al¬ 
lotted  number  in  each  .State  is  to  be  exercised 
by  such  part  of  the  inhabitants  as  the  State 
itself  may  designate.  The  qualifications  on 
which  the  right  of  suffrage  depend  are  not, 
perhaps,  the  same  in  any  two  States.  In  some 
of  the  States  the  difference  is  very  material.  In 
every  State,  a  certain  proportion  of  inhabi¬ 
tants  are  deprived  of  this  right  by  the  consti¬ 
tution  of  the  State,  who  will  be  included  in 
the  census  by  which  the  federal  Constitution 
apportions  the  representatives.  In  this  point 
of  view  the  Southern  States  might  retort  the 
complaint,  by  insisting  that  the  principle  laid 
down  by  the  convention  required  that  no  re¬ 
gard  should  be  had  to  the  policy  of  particular 
States  towards  their  own  inhabitants;  and 
consequently,  that  the  slaves,  as  inhabitants, 
should  have  been  admitted  into  the  census 
according  to  their  full  number,  in  like  manner 
with  other  inhabitants,  who,  by  the  policy  of 
other  States,  are  not  admitted  to  all  the  rights 
of  citizens.  A  rigorous  adherence,  however,  to 
this  principle,  is  waived  by  those  who  would 
be  gainers  by  it.  All  that  they  ask  is  that  equal 
moderation  be  shown  on  the  other  side.  Let 
the  case  of  the  slaves  be  considered,  as  it  is  in 
truth,  a  peculiar  one.  Let  the  compromising 
expedient  of  the  Constitution  be  mutually 
adopted,  which  regards  them  as  inhabitants, 
but  as  debased  by  servitude  below  the  equal 
level  of  free  inhabitants;  which  regards  the 
slave  as  divested  of  two-fifths  of  the  man. 

“After  all,  may  not  another  ground  be  taken 
on  which  this  article  of  the  Constitution  will 
admit  of  a  still  more  ready  defence?  We  have 
hitherto  proceeded  on  the  idea  that  represen¬ 


tation  related  to  persons  only,  and  not  at  all 
to  property.  But  is  it  a  just  idea?  Government 
is  instituted  no  less  for  protection  of  the  prop¬ 
erty,  than  of  the  persons,  of  individuals.  The 
one  as  well  as  the  other,  therefore,  may  be 
considered  as  represented  by  those  who  are 
charged  with  the  government.  Upon  this  prin¬ 
ciple  it  is  that  in  several  of  the  States,  and 
particularly  in  the  State  of  New  York,  one 
branch  of  the  government  is  intended  more 
especially  to  be  the  guardian  of  property, 
and  is  accordingly  elected  by  that  part  of  the 
society  which  is  most  interested  in  this  object 
of  government.  In  the  federal  Constitution 
this  policy  does  not  prevail.  The  rights  of 
property  are  committed  into  the  same  hands 
with  the  personal  rights.  Some  attention  ought, 
therefore,  to  be  paid  to  property  in  the  choice 
of  those  hands. 

“For  another  reason,  the  votes  allowed  in 
the  federal  legislature  to  the  people  of  each 
State  ought  to  bear  some  proportion  to  the 
comparative  wealth  of  the  States.  States  have 
not,  like  individuals,  an  influence  over  each 
other,  arising  from  superior  advantages  of 
fortune.  If  the  law  allows  an  opulent  citizen 
but  a  single  vote  in  the  choice  of  his  represen¬ 
tative,  the  respect  and  consequence  which  he 
derives  from  his  fortunate  situation  very  fre¬ 
quently  guide  the  votes  of  others  to  the  objects 
of  his  choice;  and  through  this  imperceptible 
channel  the  rights  of  property  are  conveyed 
into  the  public  representation.  A  State  pos¬ 
sesses  no  such  influence  over  other  States.  It  is 
not  probable  that  the  richest  State  in  the  Con¬ 
federacy  will  ever  influence  the  choice  of  a 
single  representative  in  any  other  State.  Nor 
will  the  representatives  of  the  larger  and  richer 
States  possess  any  other  advantage  in  the  fed¬ 
eral  legislature,  over  the  representatives  of 
other  States,  than  what  may  result  from  their 
superior  number  alone.  As  far,  therefore,  as 
their  superior  wealth  and  weight  may  justly 
entitle  them  to  any  advantage,  it  ought  to  be 
secured  to  them  by  a  superior  share  of  repre¬ 
sentation.  The  new  Constitution  is,  in  this 
respect,  materially  different  from  the  existing 
Confederation,  as  well  as  from  that  of  the 
United  Netherlands,  and  other  similar  con¬ 
federacies.  In  each  of  the  latter,  the  efficacy  of 
the  federal  resolutions  depends  on  the  sub¬ 
sequent  and  voluntary  resolutions  of  the  states 
composing  the  union.  Hence  the  states,  though 
possessing  an  equal  vote  in  the  public  coun¬ 
cils,  have  an  unequal  influence,  corresponding 
with  the  unequal  importance  of  these  subse- 


172  THE  FEDERALIST 


quent  and  voluntary  resolutions.  Under  the 
proposed  Constitution,  the  federal  acts  will 
take  effect  without  the  necessary  intervention 
of  the  individual  States.  They  will  depend 
merely  on  the  majority  of  votes  in  the  fed¬ 
eral  legislature,  and  consequently  each  vote, 
whether  proceeding  from  a  larger  or  smaller 
State,  or  a  State  more  or  less  wealthy  or  power¬ 
ful,  will  have  an  equal  weight  and  efficacy:  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  votes  individually 
given  in  a  State  legislature,  by  the  representa¬ 
tives  of  unequal  counties  or  other  districts, 
have  each  a  precise  equality  of  value  and 
effect;  or  if  there  be  any  difference  in  the  case, 
it  proceeds  from  the  difference  in  the  personal 
character  of  the  individual  representative, 
rather  than  from  any  regard  to  the  extent  of 
the  district  from  which  he  comes.” 

Such  is  the  reasoning  which  an  advocate  for 
the  Southern  interests  might  employ  on  this 
subject;  and  although  it  may  appear  to  be  a 
little  strained  in  some  points,  yet,  on  the 
whole,  I  must  confess  that  it  fully  reconciles 
me  to  the  scale  of  representation  which  the 
convention  have  established. 

In  one  respect,  the  establishment  of  a  com¬ 
mon  measure  for  representation  and  taxation 
will  have  a  very  salutary  effect.  As  the  accu¬ 
racy  of  the  census  to  be  obtained  by  the  Con¬ 
gress  will  necessarily  depend,  in  a  considerable 
degree,  on  the  disposition,  if  not  on  the  co¬ 
operation,  of  the  States,  it  is  of  great  impor¬ 
tance  that  the  States  should  feel  as  little  bias 
as  possible  to  swell  or  to  reduce  the  amount 
of  their  numbers.  Were  their  share  of  repre¬ 
sentation  alone  to  be  governed  by  this  rule, 
they  would  have  an  interest  in  exaggerating 
their  inhabitants.  Were  the  rule  to  decide 
their  share  of  taxation  alone,  a  contrary  temp¬ 
tation  would  prevail.  By  extending  the  rule  to 
both  objects,  the  States  will  have  opposite 
interests,  which  will  control  and  balance  each 
other,  and  produce  the  requisite  impartiality. 

Publius 

Number  jj 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON’] 

The  number  of  which  the  House  of  Repre¬ 
sentatives  is  to  consist  forms  another  and  a 
very  interesting  point  of  view  under  which 
this  branch  of  the  federal  legislature  may  be 
contemplated.  Scarce  any  article,  indeed,  in 
the  whole  Constitution  seems  to  be  rendered 
more  worthy  of  attention,  by  the  weight  of 
character  and  the  apparent  force  of  argument 


with  which  it  has  been  assailed.  The  charges 
exhibited  against  it  are,  first,  that  so  small  a 
number  of  representatives  will  be  an  unsafe 
depositary  of  the  public  interests;  secondly, 
that  they  will  not  possess  a  proper  knowledge 
of  the  local  circumstances  of  their  numerous 
constituents;  thirdly,  that  they  will  be  taken 
from  that  class  of  citizens  which  will  sympa¬ 
thise  least  with  the  feelings  of  the  mass  of  the 
people,  and  be  most  likely  to  aim  at  a  per¬ 
manent  elevation  of  the  few  on  the  depression 
of  the  many;  fourthly,  that  defective  as  the 
number  will  be  in  the  first  instance,  it  will  be 
more  and  more  disproportionate,  by  the  in¬ 
crease  of  the  people,  and  the  obstacles  which 
will  prevent  a  correspondent  increase  of  the 
representatives. 

In  general  it  may  be  remarked  on  this  sub¬ 
ject,  that  no  political  problem  is  less  suscep¬ 
tible  of  a  precise  solution  than  that  which  re¬ 
lates  to  the  number  most  convenient  for  a 
representative  legislature;  nor  is  there  any 
point  on  which  the  policy  of  the  several  States 
is  more  at  variance,  whether  we  compare  their 
legislative  assemblies  directly  with  each  other, 
or  consider  the  proportions  which  they  respec¬ 
tively  bear  to  the  number  of  their  constituents. 
Passing  over  the  difference  between  the  small¬ 
est  and  largest  States,  as  Delaware,  whose 
most  numerous  branch  consists  of  twenty-one 
representatives,  and  Massachusetts,  where  it 
amounts  to  between  three  and  four  hundred, 
a  very  considerable  difference  is  observable 
among  States  nearly  equal  in  population.  The 
number  of  representatives  in  Pennsylvania  is 
not  more  than  one-fifth  of  that  in  the  State 
last  mentioned.  New  York,  whose  population 
is  to  that  of  South  Carolina  as  six  to  five,  has 
little  more  than  one-third  of  the  number  of 
representatives.  As  great  a  disparity  prevails 
between  the  States  of  Georgia  and  Delaware 
or  Rhode  island.  In  Pennsylvania  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  do  not  bear  a  greater  proportion  to 
their  constituents  than  of  one  for  every  four 
or  five  thousand.  In  Rhode  Island  they  bear 
a  proportion  of  at  least  one  for  every  thou¬ 
sand.  And  according  to  the  constitution  of 
Georgia,  the  proportion  may  be  carried  to  one 
to  every  ten  electors;  and  must  unavoidably 
far  exceed  the  proportion  in  any  of  the  other 
States. 

Another  general  remark  to  be  made  is,  that 
the  ratio  between  the  representatives  and  the 
people  ought  not  to  be  the  same  where  the 
latter  are  very  numerous  as  where  they  arc 
very  few.  Were  the  representatives  in  Virginia 


NUMBER  55  173 


to  be  regulated  by  the  standard  in  Rhode 
Island,  they  would,  at  this  time,  amount  to 
between  four  and  five  hundred;  and  twenty 
or  thirty  years  hence,  to  a  thousand.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  ratio  of  Pennsylvania,  if  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  State  of  Delaware,  would  reduce 
the  representative  assembly  of  the  latter  to 
seven  or  eight  members.  Nothing  can  be  more 
fallacious  than  to  found  our  political  calcu¬ 
lations  on  arithmetical  principles.  Sixty  or 
seventy  men  may  be  more  properly  trusted 
with  a  given  degree  of  power  than  six  or  seven. 
But  it  does  not  follow  that  six  or  seven  hun¬ 
dred  would  be  proportionably  a  better  deposi¬ 
tary.  And  if  we  carry  on  the  supposition  to 
six  or  seven  thousand,  the  whole  reasoning 
ought  to  be  reversed.  The  truth  is,  that  in  all 
cases  a  certain  number  at  least  seems  to  be 
necessary  to  secure  the  benefits  of  free  consul¬ 
tation  and  discussion,  and  to  guard  against 
too  easy  a  combination  for  improper  purposes; 
as,  on  the  other  hand,  the  number  ought  at 
most  to  be  kept  within  a  certain  limit,  in  order 
to  avoid  the  confusion  and  intemperance  of  a 
multitude.  In  all  very  numerous  assemblies, 
of  whatever  character  composed,  passion  never 
fails  to  wrest  the  sceptre  from  reason.  Had 
every  Athenian  citizen  been  a  Socrates,  every 
Athenian  assembly  would  still  have  been  a 
mob. 

It  is  necessary  also  to  recollect  here  the  ob¬ 
servations  which  were  applied  to  the  case  of 
biennial  elections.  For  the  same  reason  that 
the  limited  powers  of  the  Congress,  and  the 
control  of  the  State  legislatures,  justify  less 
frequent  elections  than  the  public  safety  might 
otherwise  require,  the  members  of  the  Con¬ 
gress  need  be  less  numerous  than  if  they  pos¬ 
sessed  the  whole  power  of  legislation,  and  were 
under  no  other  than  the  ordinary  restraints 
of  other  legislative  bodies. 

With  these  general  ideas  in  our  minds,  let 
us  weigh  the  objections  which  have  been  stated 
against  the  number  of  members  proposed  for 
the  House  of  Representatives.  It  is  said,  in  the 
first  place,  that  so  small  a  number  cannot  be 
safely  trusted  with  so  much  power. 

The  number  of  which  this  branch  of  the 
legislature  is  to  consist,  at  the  outset  of  the 
government,  will  be  sixty-five.  Within  three 
years  a  census  is  to  be  taken,  when  the  number 
may  be  augmented  to  one  for  every  thirty 
thousand  inhabitants;  and  within  every  suc¬ 
cessive  period  of  ten  years  the  census  is  to  be 
renewed,  and  augmentations  may  continue  to 
be  made  under  the  above  limitation.  It  will 


not  be  thought  an  extravagant  conjecture  that 
the  first  census  will,  at  the  rate  of  one  for  every 
thirty  thousand,  raise  the  number  of  repre¬ 
sentatives  to  at  least  one  hundred.  Estimating 
the  negroes  in  the  proportion  of  three-fifths, 
it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the  population 
of  the  United  States  will  by  that  time,  if  it 
does  not  already,  amount  to  three  millions. 
At  the  expiration  of  twenty-five  years,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  computed  rate  of  increase,  the  num¬ 
ber  of  representatives  will  amount  to  two  hun¬ 
dred;  and  of  fifty  years,  to  four  hundred.  This 
is  a  number  which,  I  presume,  will  put  an 
end  to  all  fears  arising  from  the  smallness  of 
the  body.  I  take  for  granted  here  what  I  shall, 
in  answering  the  fourth  objection,  hereafter 
show,  that  the  number  of  representatives  will 
be  augmented  from  time  to  time  in  the  man¬ 
ner  provided  by  the  Constitution.  On  a  con¬ 
trary  supposition,  I  should  admit  the  objec¬ 
tion  to  have  very  great  weight  indeed. 

The  true  question  to  be  decided  then  is, 
whether  the  smallness  of  the  number,  as  a 
temporary  regulation,  be  dangerous  to  the 
public  liberty?  Whether  sixty-five  members  for 
a  few  years,  and  a  hundred  or  two  hundred 
for  a  few  more,  be  a  safe  depositary  for  a 
limited  and  well-guarded  power  of  legislating 
for  the  United  States?  I  must  own  that  I  could 
not  give  a  negative  answer  to  this  question 
without  first  obliterating  every  impression 
which  I  have  received  with  regard  to  the  present 
genius  of  the  people  of  America,  the  spirit 
which  actuates  the  State  legislatures,  and  the 
principles  which  are  incorporated  with  the 
political  character  of  every  class  of  citizens.  I 
am  unable  to  conceive  that  the  people  of 
America,  in  their  present  temper,  or  under 
any  circumstances  which  can  speedily  happen, 
will  choose,  and  every  second  year  repeat  the 
choice  of,  sixty-five  or  a  hundred  men  who 
would  be  disposed  to  form  and  pursue  a 
scheme  of  tyranny  or  treachery.  I  am  unable 
to  conceive  that  the  State  legislatures,  which 
must  feel  so  many  motives  to  watch,  and 
which  possess  so  many  means  of  counteract¬ 
ing,  the  federal  legislature,  would  fail  either 
to  detect  or  to  defeat  a  conspiracy  of  the  latter 
against  the  liberties  of  their  common  constitu¬ 
ents.  I  am  equally  unable  to  conceive  that 
there  are  at  this  time,  or  can  be  in  any  short 
time,  in  the  United  States,  any  sixty-five  or  a 
hundred  men  capable  of  recommending  them¬ 
selves  to  the  choice  of  the  people  at  large,  who 
would  either  desire  or  dare,  within  the  short 
space  of  two  years,  to  betray  the  solemn  trust 


THE  FEDERALIST 


committed  to  them.  What  change  of  circum¬ 
stances,  time,  and  a  fuller  population  of  our 
country  may  produce,  requires  a  prophetic 
spirit  to  declare,  which  makes  no  part  of  my 
pretensions.  But  judging  from  the  circum¬ 
stances  now  before  us,  and  from  the  probable 
state  of  them  within  a  moderate  period  of 
time.  I  must  pronounce  that  the  liberties  of 
America  cannot  be  unsafe  in  the  number  of 
hands  proposed  by  the  federal  Constitution. 

From  what  quarter  can  the  danger  proceed? 
Are  we  afraid  of  foreign  gold?  If  foreign  gold 
could  so  easily  corrupt  our  federal  rulers  and 
enable  them  to  ensnare  and  betray  their  con¬ 
stituents,  how  has  it  happened  that  we  are  at 
this  time  a  free  and  independent  nation?  The 
congress  which  conducted  us  through  the  Rev¬ 
olution  was  a  less  numerous  body  than  their 
successors  will  be;  they  were  not  chosen  by, 
nor  responsible  to,  their  fellow-citizens  at 
large;  though  appointed  from  year  to  year, 
and  recallable  at  pleasure,  they  were  gener¬ 
ally  continued  for  three  years,  and,  prior  to 
the  ratification  of  the  federal  articles,  for  a 
still  longer  term.  They  held  their  consultations 
always  under  the  veil  of  secrecy;  they  had  the 
sole  transaction  of  our  affairs  with  foreign 
nations;  through  the  whole  course  of  the  war 
they  had  the  fate  of  their  country  more  in 
their  hands  than  it  is  to  be  hoped  will  ever 
be  the  case  with  our  future  representatives; 
and  from  the  greatness  of  the  prize  at  stake, 
and  the  eagerness  of  the  party  which  lost  it, 
it  may  well  be  supposed  that  the  use  of  other 
means  than  force  would  not  have  been  scru¬ 
pled.  Yet  we  know  by  happy  experience  that 
the  public  trust  was  not  betrayed;  nor  has  the 
purity  of  our  public  councils  in  this  partic¬ 
ular  ever  suffered,  even  from  the  whispers  of 
calumny. 

Is  the  danger  apprehended  from  the  other 
branches  of  the  federal  government?  But  where 
are  the  means  to  be  found  by  the  President, 
or  the  Senate,  or  both?  Their  emoluments  of 
office,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  will  not,  and  with¬ 
out  a  previous  corruption  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  cannot,  more  than  suffice  for 
very  different  purposes;  their  private  fortunes, 
as  they  must  all  be  American  citizens,  cannot 
possibly  be  sources  of  danger.  The  only  means, 
then,  which  they  can  possess  will  be  in  the 
dispensation  of  appointments.  Is  it  here  that 
suspicion  rests  her  charge?  Sometimes  we  are 
told  that  this  fund  of  corruption  is  to  be  ex¬ 
hausted  by  the  President  in  subduing  the  \ir- 
tue  of  the  Senate.  Now,  the  fidelity  of  the  other 


House  is  to  be  the  victim.  The  improbability 
of  such  a  mercenary  and  perfidious  combina¬ 
tion  of  the  several  members  of  government, 
standing  on  as  different  foundations  as  repub¬ 
lican  principles  will  well  admit,  and  at  the 
same  time  accountable  to  the  society  over 
which  they  are  placed,  ought  alone  to  quiet 
this  apprehension.  But,  fortunately,  the  Con¬ 
stitution  has  provided  a  still  further  safeguard. 
The  members  of  the  Congress  are  rendered 
ineligible  to  any  civil  offices  that  may  be 
created,  or  of  which  the  emoluments  may  be 
increased,  during  the  term  of  their  election. 
No  offices  therefore  can  be  dealt  out  to  the 
existing  members  but  such  as  may  become 
vacant  by  ordinary  casualties:  and  to  suppose 
that  these  would  be  sufficient  to  purchase  the 
guardians  of  the  people,  selected  by  the  people 
themselves,  is  to  renounce  every  rule  by  which 
events  ought  to  be  calculated,  and  to  substi¬ 
tute  an  indiscriminate  and  unbounded  jeal¬ 
ousy,  with  which  all  reasoning  must  be  vain. 
The  sincere  friends  of  liberty,  who  give  them¬ 
selves  up  to  the  extravagancies  of  this  passion, 
are  not  aware  of  the  injury  they  do  their  own 
cause.  As  there  is  a  degree  of  depravity  in  man¬ 
kind  which  requires  a  certain  degree  of  cir¬ 
cumspection  and  distrust,  so  there  are  other 
qualities  in  human  nature  which  justify  a 
certain  portion  of  esteem  and  confidence. 
Republican  government  presupposes  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  these  qualities  in  a  higher  degree 
than  any  other  form.  Were  the  pictures  which 
have  been  drawn  by  the  political  jealousy  of 
some  among  us  faithful  likenesses  of  the 
human  character,  the  inference  would  be  that 
there  is  not  sufficient  virtue  among  men  for 
self-government;  and  that  nothing  less  than 
the  chains  of  despotism  can  restrain  them 
from  destroying  and  devouring  one  another. 

Publius 

Number  56 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

The  second  charge  against  the  House  of  Repre¬ 
sentatives  is,  that  it  will  be  too  small  to  possess 
a  due  knowledge  of  the  interests  of  its  constitu¬ 
ents. 

As  this  objection  evidently  proceeds  from  a 
comparison  of  the  proposed  number  of  repre¬ 
sentatives  with  the  great  extent  of  the  United 
States,  the  number  of  their  inhabitants,  and 
the  diversity  of  their  interests,  without  taking 
into  view  at  the  same  time  the  circumstances 
which  will  distinguish  the  Congress  from  other 


NUMBER  56 


legislative  bodies,  the  best  answer  that  can  be 
given  to  it  will  be  a  brief  explanation  of  these 
peculiarities. 

It  is  a  sound  and  important  principle  that 
the  representative  ought  to  be  acquainted 
with  the  interests  and  circumstances  of  his 
constituents.  But  this  principle  can  extend  no 
further  than  to  those  circumstances  and  inter¬ 
ests  to  which  the  authority  and  care  of  the 
representative  relate.  An  ignorance  of  a  variety 
of  minute  and  particular  objects,  which  do 
not  lie  within  the  compass  of  legislation,  is 
consistent  with  every  attribute  necessary  to  a 
due  performance  of  the  legislative  trust.  In 
determining  the  extent  of  information  re¬ 
quired  in  the  exercise  of  a  particular  authority, 
recourse  then  must  be  had  to  the  objects  within 
the  purview  of  that  authority. 

What  are  to  be  the  objects  of  federal  legisla¬ 
tion?  Those  which  are  of  most  importance, 
and  which  seem  most  to  require  local  knowl¬ 
edge,  are  commerce,  taxation,  and  the  militia. 

A  proper  regulation  of  commerce  requires 
much  information,  as  has  been  elsewhere  re¬ 
marked;  but  as  far  as  this  information  relates 
to  the  laws  and  local  situation  of  each  indi¬ 
vidual  State,  a  very  few  representatives  would 
be  very  sufficient  vehicles  of  it  to  the  federal 
councils. 

Taxation  will  consist,  in  a  great  measure, 
of  duties  which  will  be  involved  in  the  regula¬ 
tion  of  commerce.  So  far  the  preceding  remark 
is  applicable  to  this  object.  As  far  as  it  may 
consist  of  internal  collections,  a  more  diffusive 
knowledge  of  the  circumstances  of  the  State 
may  be  necessary.  But  will  not  this  also  be 
possessed  in  sufficient  degree  by  a  very  few 
intelligent  men,  diffusively  elected  within  the 
State?  Divide  the  largest  State  into  ten  or 
twelve  districts,  and  it  will  be  found  that  there 
will  be  no  peculiar  local  interests  in  either 
which  will  not  be  within  the  knowledge  of 
the  representative  of  the  district.  Besides  this 
source  of  information,  the  laws  of  the  State, 
framed  by  representatives  from  every  part  of 
it,  will  be  almost  of  themselves  a  sufficient 
guide.  In  every  State  there  have  been  made, 
and  must  continue  to  be  made,  regulations  on 
this  subject  which  will,  in  many  cases,  leave 
little  more  to  be  done  by  the  federal  legisla¬ 
ture  than  to  review  the  different  laws,  and 
reduce  them  in  one  general  act.  A  skilful  indi¬ 
vidual  in  his  closet,  with  all  the  local  codes 
before  him,  might  compile  a  law  on  some 
subjects  of  taxation  for  the  whole  Union  with¬ 
out  any  aid  from  oral  information,  and  it  may 


be  expected  that  whenever  internal  taxes  may 
be  necessary,  and  particularly  in  cases  requir¬ 
ing  uniformity  throughout  the  States,  the  more 
simple  objects  will  be  preferred.  To  be  fully 
sensible  of  the  facility  which  will  be  given  to 
this  branch  of  federal  legislation  by  the  assist¬ 
ance  of  the  State  codes,  we  need  only  suppose 
for  a  moment  that  this  or  any  other  State  were 
divided  into  a  number  of  parts,  each  having 
and  exercising  within  itself  a  power  of  local 
legislation.  Is  it  not  evident  that  a  degree 
of  local  information  and  preparatory  labour 
would  be  found  in  the  several  volumes  of 
their  proceedings  which  would  very  much 
shorten  the  labours  of  the  general  legislature, 
and  render  a  much  smaller  number  of  mem¬ 
bers  sufficient  for  it? 

The  federal  councils  will  derive  great  ad¬ 
vantage  from  another  circumstance.  The  rep¬ 
resentatives  of  each  State  will  not  only  bring 
with  them  a  considerable  knowledge  of  its 
laws,  and  a  local  knowledge  of  their  respective 
districts,  but  will  probably  in  all  cases  have 
been  members,  and  may  even  at  the  very  time 
be  members,  of  the  State  legislature,  where 
all  the  local  information  and  interests  of  the 
State  are  assembled,  and  from  whence  they 
may  easily  be  conveyed  by  a  very  few  hands 
into  the  legislature  of  the  United  States. 

The  observations  made  on  the  subject  of 
taxation  apply  with  greater  force  to  the  case 
of  the  militia.  For  however  different  the  rules 
of  discipline  may  be  in  different  States,  they 
are  the  same  throughout  each  particular  State; 
and  depend  on  circumstances  which  can  differ 
but  little  in  different  parts  of  the  same  State. 

The  attentive  reader  will  discern  that  the 
reasoning  here  used,  to  prove  the  sufficiency 
of  a  moderate  number  of  representatives,  does 
not  in  any  respect  contradict  what  was  urged 
on  another  occasion  with  regard  to  the  exten¬ 
sive  information  which  the  representatives 
ought  to  possess,  and  the  time  that  might  be 
necessary  for  acquiring  it.  This  information, 
so  far  as  it  may  relate  to  local  objects,  is  ren¬ 
dered  necessary  and  difficult,  not  by  a  differ¬ 
ence  of  laws  and  local  circumstances  within 
a  single  State,  but  of  those  among  different 
States.  Taking  each  State  by  itself,  its  laws  are 
the  same,  and  its  interests  but  little  diversi¬ 
fied.  A  few  men,  therefore,  will  possess  all  the 
knowledge  requisite  for  a  proper  representa¬ 
tion  of  them.  Were  the  interests  and  affairs  of 
each  individual  State  perfectly  simple  and  uni¬ 
form,  a  knowledge  of  them  in  one  part  would 
involve  a  knowledge  of  them  in  every  other. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


and  the  whole  State  might  be  competently 
represented  by  a  single  member  taken  from 
any  part  of  it.  On  a  comparison  of  the  different 
States  together,  we  find  a  great  dissimilarity 
in  their  laws,  and  in  many  other  circumstances 
connected  with  the  objects  of  federal  legisla¬ 
tion,  with  all  of  which  the  federal  representa¬ 
tives  ought  to  have  some  acquaintance.  Whilst 
a  few’  representatives,  therefore,  from  each 
State  may  bring  with  them  a  due  knowledge 
of  their  own  State,  every  representative  will 
have  much  information  to  acquire  concerning 
all  the  other  States.  The  changes  of  time,  as 
w’as  formerly  remarked,  on  the  comparative 
situation  of  the  different  States,  will  have  an 
assimilating  effect.  The  effect  of  time  on  the 
internal  affairs  of  the  States,  taken  singly,  will 
be  just  the  contrary.  At  present  some  of  the 
States  are  little  more  than  a  society  of  hus¬ 
bandmen.  Few’  of  them  have  made  much  prog¬ 
ress  in  those  branches  of  industry  which  give 
a  variety  and  complexity  to  the  affairs  of  a 
nation.  These,  how’ever,  will  in  all  of  them  be 
the  fruits  of  a  more  advanced  population;  and 
will  require,  on  the  part  of  each  State,  a  fuller 
representation.  The  foresight  of  the  conven¬ 
tion  has  accordingly  taken  care  that  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  population  may  be  accompanied  with  a 
proper  increase  of  the  representative  branch  of 
the  government. 

The  experience  of  Great  Britain,  which  pre¬ 
sents  to  mankind  so  many  political  lessons, 
both  of  the  monitory  and  exemplary  kind,  and 
which  has  been  frequently  consulted  in  the 
course  of  these  inquiries,  corroborates  the  re¬ 
sult  of  the  reflections  which  we  have  just  made. 
The  number  of  inhabitants  in  the  two  king¬ 
doms  of  England  and  Scotland  cannot  be 
stated  at  less  than  eight  millions.  The  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  these  eight  millions  in  the  House 
of  Commons  amount  to  five  hundred  and  fifty- 
eight.  Of  this  number,  one  ninth  are  elected 
by  three  hundred  and  sixty-four  persons,  and 
one  half  by  five  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
twenty-three  persons.1  It  cannot  be  supposed 
that  the  half  thus  elected,  and  who  do  not 
even  reside  among  the  people  at  large,  can  add 
anything  either  to  the  security  of  the  people 
against  the  government,  or  to  the  knowledge 
of  their  circumstances  and  interests  in  the 
legislative  councils.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  no¬ 
torious  that  they  arc  more  frequently  the  rep¬ 
resentatives  and  instruments  of  the  executive 
magistrate  than  the  guardians  and  advocates 

1  Burgh’s  I*olilical  Disquisitions.— Publius 


of  the  popular  rights.  They  might,  therefore, 
with  great  propriety,  be  considered  as  some¬ 
thing  more  than  a  mere  deduction  from  the 
real  representatives  of  the  nation.  We  will, 
however,  consider  them  in  this  light  alone,  and 
will  not  extend  the  deduction  to  a  consider¬ 
able  number  of  others,  who  do  not  reside 
among  their  constituents,  are  very  faintly  con¬ 
nected  with  them,  and  have  very  little  partic¬ 
ular  knowledge  of  their  affairs.  With  all  these 
concessions  two  hundred  and  seventy-nine  per¬ 
sons  only  will  be  the  depositary  of  the  safety, 
interest,  and  happiness  of  eight  millions— that 
is  to  say,  there  will  be  one  representative  only 
to  maintain  the  rights  and  explain  the  situa¬ 
tion  of  tioenty-eight  thousand  six  hundred  and 
seventy  constituents,  in  an  assembly  exposed 
to  the  whole  force  of  executive  influence,  and 
extending  its  authority  to  every  other  object 
of  legislation  within  a  nation  whose  affairs 
are  in  the  highest  degree  diversified  and  com¬ 
plicated.  Yet  it  is  very  certain,  not  only  that  a 
valuable  portion  of  freedom  has  been  pre¬ 
served  under  all  these  circumstances,  but  that 
the  defects  in  the  British  code  are  chargeable, 
in  a  very  small  proportion,  on  the  ignorance 
of  the  legislature  concerning  the  circumstances 
of  the  people.  Allowing  to  this  case  the  weight 
which  is  due  to  it,  and  comparing  it  with  that 
of  the  House  of  Representatives  as  above  ex¬ 
plained,  it  seems  to  give  the  fullest  assurance 
that  a  representative  for  every  thirty  thousand 
inhabitants  will  render  the  latter  both  a  safe 
and  competent  guardian  of  the  interests  which 
will  be  confided  to  it.  Publius 

Number 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

The  third  charge  against  the  House  of  Repre¬ 
sentatives  is,  that  it  will  be  taken  from  that 
class  of  citizens  which  will  have  least  sympathy 
w  ith  the  mass  of  the  people,  and  be  most  likely 
to  aim  at  an  ambitious  sacrifice  of  the  many  to 
the  aggrandisement  of  the  few. 

Of  all  the  objections  which  have  been 
framed  against  the  federal  Constitution,  this 
is  perhaps  the  most  extraordinary.  Whilst  the 
objection  itself  is  levelled  against  a  pretended 
oligarchy,  the  principle  of  it  strikes  at  the  very 
root  of  republican  government. 

The  aim  of  every  political  constitution  is, 
or  ought  to  be,  first  to  obtain  for  rulers  men 
who  possess  most  wisdom  to  discern,  and  most 
virtue  to  pursue,  the  common  good  of  the  so- 


NUMBER  57 


ciety;  and  in  the  next  place,  to  take  the  most 
effectual  precautions  for  keeping  them  virtu¬ 
ous  whilst  they  continue  to  hold  their  public 
trust.  The  elective  mode  of  obtaining  rulers 
is  the  characteristic  policy  of  republican  gov¬ 
ernment.  The  means  relied  on  in  this  form  of 
government  for  preventing  their  degeneracy 
are  numerous  and  various.  The  most  effectual 
one  is  such  a  limitation  of  the  term  of  appoint¬ 
ments  as  will  maintain  a  proper  responsibility 
to  the  people. 

Let  me  now  ask  what  circumstance  there  is 
in  the  constitution  of  the  House  of  Representa¬ 
tives  that  violates  the  principles  of  republi¬ 
can  government,  or  favours  the  elevation  of 
the  few  on  the  ruins  of  the  many?  Let  me  ask 
whether  every  circumstance  is  not,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  strictly  conformable  to  these  principles, 
and  scrupulously  impartial  to  the  rights  and 
pretensions  of  every  class  and  description  of 
citizens? 

Who  are  to  be  the  electors  of  the  federal 
representatives?  Not  the  rich,  more  than  the 
poor;  not  the  learned,  more  than  the  ignorant; 
not  the  haughty  heirs  of  distinguished  names, 
more  than  the  humble  sons  of  obscurity  and 
unpropitious  fortune.  The  electors  are  to  be 
the  great  body  of  the  people  of  the  United 
States.  They  are  to  be  the  same  who  exercise 
the  right  in  every  State  of  electing  the  corre¬ 
sponding  branch  of  the  legislature  of  the  State. 

Who  are  to  be  the  objects  of  popular  choice? 
Every  citizen  whose  merit  may  recommend 
him  to  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  his  coun¬ 
try.  No  qualification  of  wealth,  of  birth,  of  reli¬ 
gious  faith,  or  of  civil  profession  is  permitted 
to  fetter  the  judgment  or  disappoint  the  in¬ 
clination  of  the  people. 

If  we  consider  the  situation  of  the  men  on 
whom  the  free  suffrages  of  their  fellow-citizens 
may  confer  the  representative  trust,  we  shall 
find  it  involving  every  security  which  can  be 
devised  or  desired  for  their  fidelity  to  their  con¬ 
stituents. 

In  the  first  place,  as  they  will  have  been 
distinguished  by  the  preference  of  their  fel¬ 
low-citizens,  we  are  to  presume  that  in  general 
they  will  be  somewhat  distinguished  also  by 
those  qualities  which  entitle  them  to  it,  and 
which  promise  a  sincere  and  scrupulous  regard 
to  the  nature  of  their  engagements. 

In  the  second  place,  they  will  enter  into  the 
public  service  under  circumstances  which  can¬ 
not  fail  to  produce  a  temporary  affection  at 
least  to  their  constituents.  There  is  in  every 


breast  a  sensibility  to  marks  of  honour,  of 
favour,  of  esteem,  and  of  confidence,  which, 
apart  from  all  considerations  of  interest,  is 
some  pledge  for  grateful  and  benevolent  re¬ 
turns.  Ingratitude  is  a  common  topic  of  dec¬ 
lamation  against  human  nature;  and  it  must 
be  confessed  that  instances  of  it  are  but  too 
frequent  and  flagrant,  both  in  public  and  in 
private  life.  But  the  universal  and  extreme 
indignation  wrhich  it  inspires  is  itself  a  proof 
of  the  energy  and  prevalence  of  the  contrary 
sentiment. 

In  the  third  place,  those  ties  which  bind  the 
representative  to  his  constituents  are  strength¬ 
ened  by  motives  of  a  more  selfish  nature.  His 
pride  and  vanity  attach  him  to  a  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment  which  favours  his  pretensions  and 
give  him  a  share  in  its  honours  and  distinc¬ 
tions.  Whatever  hopes  or  projects  might  be 
entertained  by  a  few  aspiring  characters,  it 
must  generally  happen  that  a  great  proportion 
of  the  men  deriving  their  advancement  from 
their  influence  with  the  people,  would  have 
more  to  hope  from  a  preservation  of  the  fa¬ 
vour,  than  from  innovations  in  the  govern¬ 
ment  subversive  of  the  authority  of  the  people. 

AH  these  securities,  however,  would  be  found 
very  insufficient  without  the  restraint  of  fre¬ 
quent  elections.  Hence,  in  the  fourth  place, 
the  House  of  Representatives  is  so  constituted 
as  to  support  in  the  members  an  habitual 
recollection  to  their  dependence  on  the  people. 
Before  the  sentiments  impressed  on  their 
minds  by  the  mode  of  their  elevation  can  be 
effaced  by  the  exercise  of  power,  they  wdll  be 
compelled  to  anticipate  the  moment  when 
their  power  is  to  cease,  wdien  their  exercise  of 
it  is  to  be  reviewed,  and  when  they  must  de¬ 
scend  to  the  level  from  wdiich  they  were  raised: 
there  for  ever  to  remain  unless  a  faithful  dis¬ 
charge  of  their  trust  shall  have  established 
their  true  title  to  a  renewal  of  it. 

I  will  add,  as  a  fifth  circumstance  in  the 
situation  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  re¬ 
straining  them  from  oppressive  measures,  that 
they  can  make  no  law  which  will  not  have  its 
full  operation  on  themselves  and  their  friends, 
as  well  as  on  the  great  mass  of  the  society. 
This  has  always  been  deemed  one  of  the  strong¬ 
est  bonds  by  which  human  policy  can  connect 
the  rulers  and  the  people  together.  It  creates 
between  them  that  communion  of  interests 
and  sympathy  of  sentiments  of  which  few  gov¬ 
ernments  have  furnished  examples;  but  with¬ 
out  which  every  government  degenerates  into 


THE  FEDERALIST 


178 

tyranny.  If  it  be  asked  what  is  to  restrain  the 
House  of  Representatives  from  making  legal 
discriminations  in  favour  of  themselves  and  a 
particular  class  of  the  society?  I  answer:  the 
genius  of  the  whole  system;  the  nature  of  just 
and  constitutional  laws;  and  above  all.  the 
vigilant,  and  manly  spirit  which  actuates  the 
people  of  America— a  spirit  which  nourishes 
freedom,  and  in  return  is  nourished  by  it. 

If  this  spirit  shall  ever  be  so  far  debased  as 
to  tolerate  a  law  not  obligatory  on  the  legisla¬ 
ture,  as  well  as  on  the  people,  the  people  will 
be  prepared  to  tolerate  anything  but  liberty. 

Such  will  be  the  relation  between  the  House 
of  Representatives  and  their  constituents. 
Duty,  gratitude,  interest,  ambition  itself,  are 
the  chords  by  which  they  will  be  bound  to 
fidelity  and  sympathy  with  the  great  mass  of 
the  people.  It  is  possible  that  these  may  all  be 
insufficient  to  control  the  caprice  and  wicked¬ 
ness  of  man.  But  are  they  not  all  that  govern¬ 
ment  will  admit,  and  that  human  prudence 
can  devise?  Are  they  not  the  genuine  and  the 
characteristic  means  by  which  republican  gov¬ 
ernment  provides  for  the  liberty  and  happi¬ 
ness  of  the  people?  Are  they  not  the  identical 
means  on  which  every  State  government  in  the 
Union  relies  for  the  attainment  of  these  im¬ 
portant  ends?  What  then  are  we  to  understand 
by  the  objection  which  this  paper  has  com¬ 
bated?  What  are  we  to  say  to  the  men  who 
profess  the  most  flaming  zeal  for  republican 
government,  yet  boldly  impeach  the  funda¬ 
mental  principle  of  it;  who  pretend  to  be 
champions  for  the  right  and  the  capacity  of 
the  people  to  choose  their  own  rulers,  yet 
maintain  that  they  will  prefer  those  only  who 
will  immediately  and  infallibly  betray  the 
trust  committed  to  them? 

Were  the  objection  to  be  read  by  one  who 
had  not  seen  the  mode  prescribed  by  the  Con¬ 
stitution  for  the  choice  of  representatives,  he 
could  suppose  nothing  less  than  that  some  un¬ 
reasonable  qualification  of  property  was  an¬ 
nexed  to  the  right  of  suffrage;  or  that  the  right 
of  eligibility  was  limited  to  persons  of  partic¬ 
ular  families  or  fortunes;  or  at  least  that  the 
mode  prescribed  by  the  State  constitutions 
was,  in  some  respect  or  other,  very  grossly  de¬ 
parted  from.  We  have  seen  how  far  such  a  sup¬ 
position  would  err,  as  to  the  two  first  points. 
Nor  would  it,  in  fact,  be  less  erroneous  as  to 
the  last.  The  only  difference  discoverable  be¬ 
tween  the  two  cases  is,  that  each  representa¬ 
tive  of  the  United  States  will  be  elected  by 
five  or  six  thousand  citizens;  whilst  in  the  indi¬ 


vidual  States,  the  election  of  a  representative 
is  left  to  about  as  many  hundreds.  Will  it  be 
pretended  that  this  difference  is  sufficient  to 
justify  an  attachment  to  the  State  govern¬ 
ments,  and  an  abhorrence  to  the  federal  gov¬ 
ernment?  If  this  be  the  point  on  which  the  ob¬ 
jection  turns,  it  deserves  to  be  examined. 

Is  it  supported  by  reason?  This  cannot  be 
said,  without  maintaining  that  five  or  six  thou¬ 
sand  citizens  are  less  capable  of  choosing  a 
fit  representative,  or  more  liable  to  be  cor¬ 
rupted  by  an  unfit  one,  than  five  or  six  hun¬ 
dred.  Reason,  on  the  contrary,  assures  us,  that 
as  in  so  great  a  number  a  fit  representative 
would  be  most  likely  to  be  found,  so  the  choice 
would  be  less  likely  to  be  diverted  from  him 
by  the  intrigues  of  the  ambitious  or  the  bribes 
of  the  rich. 

Is  the  consequence  from  this  doctrine  ad¬ 
missible?  If  we  say  that  five  or  six  hundred  citi¬ 
zens  are  as  many  as  can  jointly  exercise  their 
right  of  suffrage,  must  we  not  deprive  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  the  immediate  choice  of  their  public  serv¬ 
ants,  in  every  instance  where  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  the  government  does  not  require  as 
many  of  them  as  will  amount  to  one  for  that 
number  of  citizens? 

Is  the  doctrine  warranted  by  facts?  It  was 
shown  in  the  last  paper  that  the  real  represen¬ 
tation  in  the  British  House  of  Commons  very 
little  exceeds  the  proportion  of  one  for  every 
thirty  thousand  inhabitants.  Besides  a  variety 
of  powerful  causes  not  existing  here,  and  which 
favour  in  that  country  the  pretensions  of  rank 
and  wealth,  no  person  is  eligible  as  a  repre¬ 
sentative  of  a  county,  unless  he  possess  real 
estate  of  the  clear  value  of  six  hundred  pounds 
sterling  per  year;  nor  of  a  city  or  borough,  un¬ 
less  he  possess  a  like  estate  of  half  that  annual 
value.  To  this  qualification  on  the  part  of  the 
county  representatives  is  added  another  on 
the  part  of  the  county  electors,  which  restrains 
the  right  of  suffrage  to  persons  having  a  free¬ 
hold  estate  of  the  annual  value  of  more  than 
twenty  pounds  sterling,  according  to  the  pres¬ 
ent  rate  of  money.  Notwithstanding  these  un¬ 
favourable  circumstances,  and  notwithstand¬ 
ing  some  very  unequal  laws  in  the  British 
code,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  representatives 
of  the  nation  have  elevated  the  few  on  the 
ruins  of  the  many. 

But  we  need  not  resort  to  foreign  experience 
on  this  subject.  Our  own  is  explicit  and  deci¬ 
sive.  1'he  districts  in  New  Hampshire  in  which 
the  senators  are  chosen  immediately  by  the 
people  are  nearly  as  large  as  will  be  necessary 


NUMBER  58 


for  her  representatives  in  the  Congress.  Those 
of  Massachusetts  are  larger  than  will  be  neces¬ 
sary  for  that  purpose;  and  those  of  New  York 
still  more  so.  In  the  last  State  the  members  of 
Assembly  for  the  cities  and  counties  of  New 
York  and  Albany  are  elected  by  very  nearly 
as  many  voters  as  will  be  entitled  to  a  repre¬ 
sentative  in  the  Congress,  calculating  on  the 
number  of  sixty-five  representatives  only.  It 
makes  no  difference  that  in  these  senatorial  dis¬ 
tricts  and  counties  a  number  of  representa¬ 
tives  are  voted  for  by  each  elector  at  the  same 
time.  If  the  same  electors  at  the  same  time  are 
capable  of  choosing  four  or  five  representa¬ 
tives,  they  cannot  be  incapable  of  choosing 
one.  Pennsylvania  is  an  additional  example. 
Some  of  her  counties,  which  elect  her  State 
representatives,  are  almost  as  large  as  her  dis¬ 
tricts  will  be  by  which  her  federal  representa¬ 
tives  will  be  elected.  The  city  of  Philadelphia 
is  supposed  to  contain  between  fifty  and  sixty 
thousand  souls.  It  will  therefore  form  nearly 
two  districts  for  the  choice  of  federal  represent¬ 
atives.  It  forms,  however,  but  one  county,  in 
which  every  elector  votes  for  each  of  its  repre¬ 
sentatives  in  the  State  legislature.  And  what 
may  appear  to  be  still  more  directly  to  our 
purpose,  the  whole  city  actually  elects  a  single 
member  for  the  executive  council.  This  is  the 
case  in  all  the  other  counties  of  the  State. 

Are  not  these  facts  the  most  satisfactory 
proofs  of  the  fallacy  which  has  been  employed 
against  the  branch  of  the  federal  government 
under  consideration?  Has  it  appeared  on  trial 
that  the  senators  of  New  Hampshire,  Massa¬ 
chusetts,  and  New  York,  or  the  executive  coun¬ 
cil  of  Pennsylvania,  or  the  members  of  the 
Assembly  in  the  two  last  States,  have  betrayed 
any  peculiar  disposition  to  sacrifice  the  many 
to  the  few,  or  are  in  any  respect  less  worthy  of 
their  places  than  the  representatives  and  mag¬ 
istrates  appointed  in  other  States  by  very 
small  divisions  of  the  people? 

But  there  are  cases  of  a  stronger  complexion 
than  any  which  I  have  yet  quoted.  One  branch 
of  the  legislature  of  Connecticut  is  so  consti¬ 
tuted  that  each  member  of  it  is  elected  by  the 
whole  State.  So  is  the  governor  of  that  State, 
of  Massachusetts,  and  of  this  State,  and  the 
president  of  New  Hampshire.  1  leave  every 
man  to  decide  whether  the  result  of  any  one  of 
these  experiments  can  be  said  to  countenance 
a  suspicion,  that  a  diffusive  mode  of  choosing 
representatives  of  the  people  tends  to  elevate 
traitors  and  to  undermine  the  public  liberty. 

Publius 


Number  58 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

The  remaining  charge  against  the  House  of 
Representatives,  which  I  am  to  examine,  is 
grounded  on  a  supposition  that  the  number 
of  members  will  not  be  augmented  from  time 
to  time,  as  the  progress  of  population  may  de¬ 
mand. 

It  has  been  admitted  that  this  objection,  if 
well  supported,  would  have  great  weight.  The 
following  observations  will  show  that,  like 
most  other  objections  against  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  it  can  only  proceed  from  a  partial  view 
of  the  subject,  or  from  a  jealousy  which  dis¬ 
colours  and  disfigures  every  object  which  is 
beheld. 

1.  Those  who  urge  the  objection  seem  not 
to  have  recollected  that  the  federal  Constitu¬ 
tion  will  not  suffer  by  a  comparison  with  the 
State  constitutions,  in  the  security  provided 
for  a  gradual  augmentation  of  the  number  of 
representatives.  The  number  which  is  to  pre¬ 
vail  in  the  first  instance  is  declared  to  be  tem¬ 
porary.  Its  duration  is  limited  to  the  short 
term  of  three  years.  Within  every  successive 
term  of  ten  years  a  census  of  inhabitants  is  to 
be  repeated.  The  unequivocal  objects  of  these 
regulations  are,  first,  to  readjust,  from  time  to 
time,  the  apportionment  of  representatives  to 
the  number  of  inhabitants,  under  the  single 
exception  that  each  State  shall  have  one  repre¬ 
sentative  at  least;  secondly,  to  augment  the 
number  of  representatives  at  the  same  periods, 
under  the  sole  limitation  that  the  whole  num¬ 
ber  shall  not  exceed  one  for  every  thirty  thou¬ 
sand  inhabitants.  If  we  review  the  constitu¬ 
tions  of  the  several  States,  we  shall  find  that 
some  of  them  contain  no  determinate  regula¬ 
tions  on  this  subject,  that  others  correspond 
pretty  much  on  this  point  with  the  federal 
Constitution,  and  that  the  most  effectual  se¬ 
curity  in  any  of  them  is  resolvable  into  a  mere 
directory  provision. 

2.  As  far  as  experience  has  taken  place  on 
this  subject,  a  gradual  increase  of  representa¬ 
tives  under  the  State  constitutions,  has  at  least 
kept  pace  with  that  of  the  constituents,  and  it 
appears  that  the  former  have  been  as  ready  to 
concur  in  such  measures  as  the  latter  have 
been  to  call  for  them. 

3.  There  is  a  peculiarity  in  the  federal  Con¬ 
stitution  which  insures  a  watchful  attention  in 
a  majority  both  of  the  people  and  of  their 
representatives  to  a  constitutional  augmenta¬ 
tion  of  the  latter.  The  peculiarity  lies  in  this. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


that  one  branch  of  the  legislature  is  a  repre¬ 
sentation  of  citizens,  the  other  of  the  States: 
in  the  former,  consequently,  the  larger  States 
will  have  most  weight;  in  the  latter,  the  ad¬ 
vantage  will  be  in  favour  of  the  smaller  States. 
From  this  circumstance  it  may  with  certainty 
be  inferred  that  the  larger  States  will  be  stren¬ 
uous  advocates  for  increasing  the  number  and 
weight  of  that  part  of  the  legislature  in  which 
their  influence  predominates.  And  it  so  hap¬ 
pens  that  four  only  of  the  largest  will  have  a 
majority  of  the  whole  votes  in  the  House  of 
Representatives.  Should  the  representatives 
or  people,  therefore,  of  the  smaller  States  op¬ 
pose  at  any  time  a  reasonable  addition  of  mem¬ 
bers,  a  coalition  of  a  very  few  States  will  be 
sufficient  to  overrule  the  opposition;  a  coali¬ 
tion  which,  notwithstanding  the  rivalship  and 
local  prejudices  which  might  prevent  it  on 
ordinary  occasions,  would  not  fail  to  take 
place,  when  not  merely  prompted  by  common 
interest,  but  justified  by  equity  and  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  the  Constitution. 

It  may  be  alleged,  perhaps,  that  the  Senate 
would  be  prompted  by  like  motives  to  an  ad¬ 
verse  coalition;  and  as  their  concurrence  would 
be  indispensable,  the  just  and  constitutional 
views  of  the  other  branch  might  be  defeated. 
This  is  the  difficulty  which  has  probably  cre¬ 
ated  the  most  serious  apprehensions  in  the 
jealous  friends  of  a  numerous  representation. 
Fortunately  it  is  among  the  difficulties  which, 
existing  only  in  appearance,  vanish  on  a  close 
and  accurate  inspection.  The  following  reflec¬ 
tions  will,  if  I  mistake  not,  be  admitted  to  be 
conclusive  and  satisfactory  on  this  point. 

Notwithstanding  the  equal  authority  which 
will  subsist  between  the  two  houses  on  all  legis¬ 
lative  subjects,  except  the  originating  of  mon¬ 
ey  bills,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  House, 
composed  of  the  greater  number  of  members, 
when  supported  by  the  more  powerful  States, 
and  speaking  the  known  and  determined  sense 
of  a  majority  of  the  people,  will  have  no  small 
advantage  in  a  question  depending  on  the 
comparative  firmness  of  the  two  houses. 

This  advantage  must  be  increased  by  the 
consciousness,  felt  by  the  same  side,  of  being 
supported  in  its  demands  by  right,  by  reason, 
and  by  the  Constitution;  and  the  conscious¬ 
ness,  on  the  opposite  side,  of  contending 
against  the  force  of  all  these  solemn  considera¬ 
tions. 

It  is  farther  to  be  considered,  that  in  the 
gradation  between  the  smallest  and  largest 
States,  there  are  several  which,  though  most 


likely  in  general  to  arrange  themselves  among 
the  former,  are  too  little  removed  in  extent 
and  population  from  the  latter,  to  second  an 
opposition  to  their  just  and  legitimate  preten¬ 
sions.  Hence  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  a 
majority  of  votes,  even  in  the  Senate,  would  be 
unfriendly  to  proper  augmentations  in  the 
number  of  representatives. 

It  will  not  be  looking  too  far  to  add,  that 
the  senators  from  all  the  new  States  may  be 
gained  over  to  the  just  views  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  by  an  expedient  too  obvious 
to  be  overlooked.  As  these  States  will,  for  a 
great  length  of  time,  advance  in  population 
with  peculiar  rapidity,  they  will  be  interested 
in  frequent  reapportionments  of  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  to  the  number  of  inhabitants.  The 
large  States,  therefore,  who  will  prevail  in  the 
House  of  Representatives,  will  have  nothing 
to  do  but  to  make  reapportionments  and  aug¬ 
mentations  mutually  conditions  of  each  other; 
and  the  senators  from  all  the  most  growing 
States  will  be  bound  to  contend  for  the  latter, 
by  the  interest  which  their  States  will  feel  in 
the  former. 

These  considerations  seem  to  afford  ample 
security  on  this  subject,  and  ought  alone  to 
satisfy  all  the  doubts  and  fears  which  have 
been  indulged  with  regard  to  it.  Admitting, 
however,  that  they  should  all  be  insufficient  to 
subdue  the  unjust  policy  of  the  smaller  States, 
or  their  predominant  influence  in  the  councils 
of  the  Senate,  a  constitutional  and  infallible 
resource  still  remains  with  die  larger  States,  by 
which  they  will  be  able  at  all  times  to  accom¬ 
plish  their  just  purposes.  The  House  of  Repre¬ 
sentatives  cannot  only  refuse,  but  they  alone 
can  propose,  the  supplies  requisite  for  the  sup¬ 
port  of  government.  They,  in  a  word,  hold 
the  purse— that  powerful  instrument  by  which 
we  behold,  in  the  history  of  the  British  Con¬ 
stitution,  an  infant  and  humble  representative 
of  the  people  gradually  enlarging  the  sphere 
of  its  activity  and  importance,  and  finally 
reducing,  as  far  as  it  seems  to  have  wished, 
all  the  overgrown  prerogatives  of  the  other 
branches  of  the  government.  1  his  power  oNcr 
the  purse  may,  in  fact,  be  regarded  as  the  most 
complete  and  effectual  weapon  with  which  any 
constitution  can  arm  the  immediate  represent¬ 
atives  of  the  people,  for  obtaining  a  redress  ol 
every  grievance,  and  for  carrying  into  effect 
every  just  and  salutary  measure. 

Hut  will  not  the  House  of  Representatives 
be  as  much  interested  as  the  Senate  in  main¬ 
taining  the  government  in  its  proper  tunc- 


NUMBER  38  181 


tions,  and  will  they  not  therefore  be  unwilling 
to  stake  its  existence  or  its  reputation  on  the 
pliancy  of  the  Senate?  Or,  if  such  a  trial  of 
firmness  between  the  two  branches  were  haz¬ 
arded,  would  not  the  one  be  as  likely  first  to 
yield  as  the  other?  These  questions  will  create 
no  difficulty  with  those  who  reflect  that  in  all 
cases  the  smaller  the  number,  and  the  more 
permanent  and  conspicuous  the  station,  of 
men  in  powder,  the  stronger  must  be  the  inter¬ 
est  which  they  will  individually  feel  in  what¬ 
ever  concerns  the  government.  Those  who  rep¬ 
resent  the  dignity  of  their  country  in  the  eyes 
of  other  nations  will  be  particularly  sensible 
to  every  prospect  of  public  danger,  or  of  dis¬ 
honourable  stagnation  in  public  affairs.  To 
those  causes  we  are  to  ascribe  the  continual 
triumph  of  the  British  House  of  Commons 
over  the  other  branches  of  the  government, 
whenever  the  engine  of  a  money  bill  has  been 
employed.  An  absolute  inflexibility  on  the  side 
of  the  latter,  although  it  could  not  have  failed 
to  involve  every  department  of  the  state  in  the 
general  confusion,  has  neither  been  appre¬ 
hended  nor  experienced.  The  utmost  degree  of 
firmness  that  can  be  displayed  by  the  federal 
Senate  or  President,  will  not  be  more  than 
equal  to  a  resistance  in  which  they  will  be  sup¬ 
ported  by  constitutional  and  patriotic  prin¬ 
ciples. 

In  this  review  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
House  of  Representatives,  I  have  passed  over 
the  circumstances  of  economy  wrhich,  in  the 
present  state  of  affairs,  might  have  had  some 
effect  in  lessening  the  temporary  number  of  rep¬ 
resentatives,  and  a  disregard  of  wrhich  wrould 
probably  have  been  as  rich  a  theme  of  decla¬ 
mation  against  the  Constitution  as  has  been 
shown  by  the  smallness  of  the  number  pro¬ 
posed.  I  omit  also  any  remarks  on  the  difficulty 
w'hich  might  be  found,  under  present  circum¬ 
stances,  in  engaging  in  the  federal  service  a 
large  number  of  such  characters  as  the  people 
w?ill  probably  elect.  One  observation,  however, 
I  must  be  permitted  to  add  on  this  subject  as 
claiming,  in  my  judgment,  a  very  serious  at¬ 
tention.  It  is,  that  in  all  legislative  assemblies 
the  greater  the  number  composing  them  may 
be,  the  few7er  will  be  the  men  w7ho  will  in  fact 
direct  their  proceedings.  In  the  first  place,  the 
more  numerous  an  assembly  may  be,  of  what¬ 
ever  characters  composed,  the  greater  is  known 
to  be  the  ascendancy  of  passion  over  reason.  In 
the  next  place,  the  larger  the  number,  the 
greater  will  be  the  proportion  of  members  of 
limited  information  and  of  wTeak  capacities. 


Now%  it  is  precisely  on  characters  of  this  de¬ 
scription  that  the  eloquence  and  address  of  the 
few7  are  known  to  act  with  all  their  force.  In 
the  ancient  republics,  w7here  the  whole  body  of 
the  people  assembled  in  person,  a  single  ora¬ 
tor,  or  an  artful  statesman,  was  generally  seen 
to  rule  with  as  complete  a  sw7ay  as  if  a  sceptre 
had  been  placed  in  his  single  hand.  On  the 
same  principle,  the  more  multitudinous  a 
representative  assembly  may  be  rendered,  the 
more  it  wTill  partake  of  the  infirmities  incident 
to  collective  meetings  of  the  people.  Ignorance 
will  be  the  dupe  of  cunning,  and  passion  the 
slave  of  sophistry  and  declamation.  The  peo¬ 
ple  can  never  err  more  than  in  supposing  that 
by  multiplying  their  representatives  beyond 
a  certain  limit,  they  strengthen  the  barrier 
against  the  government  of  a  few.  Experience 
will  for  ever  admonish  them  that,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  after  securing  a  sufficient  number  for  the 
purposes  of  safety ,  of  local  information,  and  of 
diffusive  sympathy  with  the  whole  society,  they 
will  counteract  their  own  views  by  every  addi¬ 
tion  to  their  representatives.  The  countenance 
of  the  government  may  become  more  demo¬ 
cratic,  but  the  soul  that  animates  it  will  be 
more  oligaichic.  The  machine  will  be  enlarg¬ 
ed,  but  the  fewer,  and  often  the  more  secret, 
'will  be  the  springs  by  which  its  motions  are 
directed. 

As  connected  writh  the  objection  against  the 
number  of  representatives,  may  properly  be 
here  noticed,  that  which  has  been  suggested 
against  the  number  made  competent  for  legis¬ 
lative  business.  It  has  been  said  that  more  than 
a  majority  ought  to  have  been  required  for  a 
quorum;  and  in  particular  cases,  if  not  in  all, 
more  than  a  majority  of  a  quorum  for  a  deci¬ 
sion.  That  some  advantages  might  have  result¬ 
ed  from  such  a  precaution  cannot  be  denied. 
It  might  have  been  an  additional  shield  to 
some  particular  interests,  and  another  ob¬ 
stacle  generally  to  hasty  and  partial  measures. 
But  these  considerations  are  outweighed  by  the 
inconveniences  in  the  opposite  scale.  In  all 
cases  where  justice  or  the  general  good  might 
require  new7  laws  to  be  passed,  or  active  meas¬ 
ures  to  be  pursued,  the  fundamental  principle 
of  free  government  w  ould  be  reversed.  It  would 
be  no  longer  the  majority  that  would  rule:  the 
power  would  be  transferred  to  the  minority. 
Were  the  defensive  privilege  limited  to  partic¬ 
ular  cases,  an  interested  minority  might  take 
advantage  of  it  to  screen  themselves  from 
equitable  sacrifices  to  the  general  weal,  or,  in 
particular  emergencies,  to  extort  unreasonable 


THE  FEDERALIST 


indulgences.  Lastly  it  would  facilitate  and 
foster  the  baneful  practice  of  secessions;  a 
practice  which  has  shown  itself  even  in  States 
where  a  majority  only  is  required:  a  practice 
subversive  of  all  the  principles  of  order  and 
regular  government;  a  practice  which  leads 
more  directlv  to  public  convulsions,  and  the 
ruin  of  popular  governments  than  any  other 
which  has  yet  been  displayed  among  us. 

Publius 

Number  59 

[HAMILTON] 

The  natural  order  of  the  subject  leads  us  to 
consider,  in  this  place,  that  provision  of  the 
Constitution  which  authorises  the  national  leg¬ 
islature  to  regulate,  in  the  last  resort,  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  its  own  members. 

It  is  in  these  words:  “The  times,  places,  and 
manner  of  holding  elections  for  senators  and 
representatives  shall  be  prescribed  in  each 
State  by  the  legislature  thereof;  but  the  Con¬ 
gress  may,  at  any  time,  by  law,  make  or  alter 
such  regulations,  except  as  to  the  places  of 
choosing  senators.”  1  This  provision  has  not 
only  been  declaimed  against  by  those  who 
condemn  the  Constitution  in  the  gross:  but  it 
has  been  censured  by  those  who  have  objected 
with  less  latitude  and  greater  moderation:  and, 
in  one  instance,  it  has  been  thought  exception¬ 
able  by  a  gentleman  who  has  declared  himself 
the  advocate  of  every  other  part  of  the  system. 

I  am  greatly  mistaken,  notwithstanding,  if 
there  be  any  article  in  the  whole  plan  more 
completely  defensible  than  this.  Its  propriety 
rests  upon  the  evidence  of  this  plain  proposi¬ 
tion,  that  every  government  ought  to  contain 
in  itself  the  means  of  its  own  preservation . 
Every  just  reasoner  will,  at  first  sight,  approve 
an  adherence  to  this  rule,  in  the  work  of  the 
convention;  and  will  disapprove  every  devia¬ 
tion  from  it  whit  h  may  not  appear  to  have  been 
dictated  by  the  necessity  of  incorporating  into 
the  work  some  particular  ingredient,  which 
with  a  rigid  conformity  to  the  rule  was  incom¬ 
patible.  Even  in  this  case,  though  he  may  ac¬ 
quiesce  in  the  necessity,  )et  he  will  not  cease 
to  regard  and  to  regret  a  departure  from  so 
fundamental  a  principle  as  a  portion  of  imper¬ 
fection  in  the  system  which  may  prove  the  seed 
of  future  weakness,  and  perhaps  anarchy. 

It  will  not  be  alleged  that  an  election  law 
could  have  been  framed  and  inserted  in  the 

5  ist  clause,  ph  section,  of  the  ist  article.— 
Punt  n  s 


Constitution  which  would  have  been  always 
applicable  to  every  probable  change  in  the 
situation  of  the  country;  and  it  will  therefore 
not  be  denied,  that  a  discretionary  power  over 
elections  ought  to  exist  somewhere.  It  will,  I 
presume,  be  as  readily  conceded  that  there 
were  only  three  ways  in  which  this  power 
could  have  been  reasonably  modified  and  dis¬ 
posed:  that  it  must  either  have  been  lodged 
wholl)  in  the  national  legislature,  or  wholly  in 
the  State  legislatures,  or  primarily  in  the  latter 
and  ultimately  in  the  former.  The  last  mode 
has,  with  reason,  been  preferred  by  the  con¬ 
vention.  They  have  submitted  the  regulation 
of  elections  for  the  federal  government,  in  the 
first  instance,  to  the  local  administrations; 
which,  in  ordinary  cases,  and  when  no  im¬ 
proper  views  prevail,  may  be  both  more  con¬ 
venient  and  more  satisfactory;  but  they  have 
reserved  to  the  national  authority  a  right  to  in¬ 
terpose, whenever  extraordinary  circumstances 
might  render  that  interposition  necessary  to 
its  safety. 

Nothing  can  be  more  evident  than  that  an 
exclusive  power  of  regulating  elections  for  the 
national  go\  eminent,  in  the  hands  of  the  State 
legislatures,  would  leave  the  existence  of  the 
Union  entirely  at  tfteir  mercy.  They  could  at 
any  moment  annihilate  it,  by  neglecting  to 
provide  for  the  choice  of  persons  to  adminis¬ 
ter  its  affairs.  It  is  to  little  purpose  to  say  that 
a  neglect  or  omission  of  this  kind  would  not 
be  likely  to  take  place.  The  constitutional 
possibility  of  the  thing,  without  an  equivalent 
for  the  risk,  is  an  unanswerable  objection.  Nor 
has  any  satisfactory  reason  been  yet  assigned 
for  incurring  that  risk.  The  extravagant  sur¬ 
mises  of  a  distempered  jealousy  can  never  be 
dignified  with  that  character.  If  we  are  in  a 
humour  to  presume  abuses  of  power,  it  is  as 
fair  to  presume  them  on  the  part  of  the  State 
governments  as  on  the  part  of  the  general  gov¬ 
ernment.  And  as  it  is  more  consonant  to  the 
rules  of  a  just  theory,  to  trust  the  Union  with 
the  care  of  its  own  existence,  than  to  transfer 
that  care  to  any  other  hands,  if  abuses  of  pow¬ 
er  are  to  be  hazarded  on  the  one  side  or  on  the 
other,  it  is  more  rational  to  hazard  them  where 
the  power  would  naturally  be  placed,  than 
where  it  would  unnaturall)  be  placed. 

Suppose  an  article  had  been  introduced  in¬ 
to  the  Constitution,  empowering  the  United 
States  to  regulate  the  elections  lor  the  particu¬ 
lar  States,  would  any  man  have  hesitated  to 
condemn  it,  both  as  an  unwarrantable  trans¬ 
position  of  power,  and  as  a  premeditated  en- 


NUMBER  59  183 


gine  for  the  destruction  of  the  State  govern¬ 
ments?  The  violation  of  principle,  in  this  case, 
would  have  required  no  comment:  and,  to  an 
unbiased  observer,  it  will  not  be  less  apparent 
in  the  project  of  subjecting  the  existence  of 
the  national  government,  in  a  similar  respect, 
to  the  pleasure  of  the  State  governments.  An 
impartial  view  of  the  matter  cannot  fail  to  re¬ 
sult  in  a  conviction,  that  each,  as  far  as  pos¬ 
sible,  ought  to  depend  on  itself  for  its  own 
preservation. 

As  an  objection  to  this  position,  it  may  be 
remarked  that  the  constitution  of  the  national 
Senate  would  involve,  in  its  full  extent,  the 
danger  which  it  is  suggested  might  flow  from 
an  exclusive  power  in  the  State  legislatures  to 
regulate  the  federal  elections.  It  may  be  al¬ 
leged  that,  by  declining  the  appointment  of 
senators,  they  might  at  any  time  give  a  fatal 
blow  to  the  Union;  and  from  this  it  may  be 
inferred  that  as  its  existence  would  be  thus 
rendered  dependent  upon  them  in  so  essential 
a  point,  there  can  be  no  objection  to  intrusting 
them  with  it  in  the  particular  case  under  con¬ 
sideration.  The  interest  of  each  State,  it  may 
be  added,  to  maintain  its  representation  in  the 
national  councils,  would  be  a  complete  secu¬ 
rity  against  an  abuse  of  the  trust. 

This  argument,  though  specious,  will  not, 
upon  examination,  be  found  solid.  It  is  cer¬ 
tainly  true  that  the  State  legislatures,  by  for¬ 
bearing  the  appointment  of  senators,  may  de¬ 
stroy  the  national  government.  But  it  will  not 
follow  that,  because  they  have  the  power  to  do 
this  in  one  instance,  they  ought  to  have  it  in 
every  other.  There  are  cases  in  which  the  per¬ 
nicious  tendency  of  such  a  power  may  be  far 
more  decisive,  without  any  motive  equally  co¬ 
gent  with  that  which  must  have  regulated  the 
conduct  of  the  convention  in  respect  to  the 
formation  of  the  Senate,  to  recommend  their 
admission  into  the  system.  So  far  as  that  con¬ 
struction  may  expose  the  Union  to  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  injury  from  the  State  legislatures,  it  is 
an  evil;  but  it  is  an  evil  which  could  not  have 
been  avoided  without  excluding  the  States, 
in  their  political  capacities,  wdiolly  from  a 
place  in  the  organisation  of  the  national  gov¬ 
ernment.  If  this  had  been  done,  it  would 
doubtless  have  been  interpreted  into  an  entire 
dereliction  of  the  federal  principle;  and  would 
certainly  have  deprived  the  State  governments 
of  that  absolute  safeguard  which  they  will  en¬ 
joy  under  this  provision.  But  however  wise  it 
may  have  been  to  have  submitted  in  this  in¬ 
stance  to  an  inconvenience,  for  the  attainment 


of  a  necessary  advantage  or  a  greater  good,  no 
inference  can  be  drawn  from  [hence  to  favour 
an  accumulation  of  the  evil,  where  no  neces¬ 
sity  urges,  nor  any  greater  good  invites. 

It  may  be  easily  discerned  also  that  the  na¬ 
tional  government  would  run  a  much  greater 
risk  from  a  power  in  the  State  legislatures  over 
the  elections  of  its  House  of  Representatives, 
than  from  their  power  of  appointing  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  its  Senate.  The  senators  are  to  be  cho¬ 
sen  for  the  period  of  six  years;  there  is  to  be  a 
rotation,  by  which  the  seats  of  a  third  part  of 
them  are  to  be  vacated  and  replenished  every 
two  years;  and  no  State  is  to  be  entitled  to 
more  than  two  senators;  a  quorum  of  the  body 
is  to  consist  of  sixteen  members.  The  joint  re¬ 
sult  of  these  circumstances  would  be,  that  a 
temporary  combination  of  a  few  States  to  in¬ 
termit  the  appointment  of  senators,  could 
neither  annul  the  existence  nor  impair  the  ac¬ 
tivity  of  the  body;  and  it  is  not  from  a  general 
and  permanent  combination  of  the  States  that 
we  can  have  anything  to  fear.  The  first  might 
proceed  from  sinister  designs  in  the  leading 
members  of  a  few  of  the  State  legislatures:  the 
last  would  suppose  a  fixed  and  rooted  disaffec- 
tation  in  the  great  body  of  the  people,  which 
will  either  never  exist  at  all,  or  will,  in  all 
probability,  proceed  from  an  experience  of 
the  inaptitude  of  the  general  government  to 
the  advancement  of  their  happiness— in  which 
event  no  good  citizen  could  desire  its  continu¬ 
ance. 

But  with  regard  to  the  federal  House  of 
Representatives,  there  is  intended  to  be  a 
general  election  of  members  once  in  two  years. 
If  the  State  legislatures  were  to  be  invested 
with  an  exclusive  power  of  regulating  these 
elections,  every  period  of  making  them  would 
be  a  delicate  crisis  in  the  national  situation, 
which  might  issue  in  a  dissolution  of  the 
Union,  if  the  leaders  of  a  few  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  States  should  have  entered  into  a  pre¬ 
vious  conspiracy  to  prevent  an  election. 

I  shall  not  deny  that  there  is  a  degree  of 
weight  in  the  observation,  that  the  interests 
of  each  State,  to  be  represented  in  the  federal 
councils,  will  be  a  security  against  the  abuse 
of  a  power  over  its  elections  in  the  hands  of  the 
State  legislatures.  But  the  security  will  not  be 
considered  as  complete  by  those  who  attend  to 
the  force  of  an  obvious  distinction  between 
the  interest  of  the  people  in  the  public  felicity 
and  the  interest  of  their  local  rulers  in  the 
power  and  consequence  of  their  offices.  The 
people  of  America  may  be  w’armly  attached 


THE  FEDERALIST 


to  the  government  of  the  Union,  at  times  when 
the  particular  rulers  of  particular  States,  stim¬ 
ulated  by  the  natural  rivalship  of  power,  and 
by  the  hopes  of  personal  aggrandisement,  and 
supported  by  a  strong  faction  in  each  of  those 
States,  may  be  in  a  very  opposite  temper.  This 
diversity  of  sentiment  between  a  majority  of 
the  people  and  the  individuals  who  have  the 
greatest  credit  in  their  councils  is  exemplified 
in  some  of  the  States  at  the  present  moment, 
on  the  present  question.  The  scheme  of  sepa¬ 
rate  confederacies,  which  will  always  multiply 
the  chances  of  ambition,  will  be  a  never  fail¬ 
ing  bait  to  all  such  influential  characters  in  the 
State  administrations  as  are  capable  of  prefer¬ 
ring  their  own  emolument  and  advancement 
to  the  public  weal.  With  so  effectual  a  weapon 
in  their  hands  as  the  exclusive  power  of  regu¬ 
lating  elections  for  the  national  government, 
a  combination  of  a  few  such  men,  in  a  few  of 
the  most  considerable  States,  where  the  temp¬ 
tation  will  always  be  the  strongest,  might  ac¬ 
complish  the  destruction  of  the  Union,  by 
seizing  the  opportunity  of  some  casual  dissatis¬ 
faction  among  the  people  (and  which  perhaps 
they  may  themselves  have  excited),  to  discon¬ 
tinue  the  choice  of  members  for  the  federal 
House  of  Representatives.  It  ought  never  to 
be  forgotten  that  a  firm  union  of  this  country, 
under  an  efficient  government,  will  probably 
be  an  increasing  object  of  jealousy  to  more 
than  one  nation  of  Europe:  and  that  enter¬ 
prises  to  subvert  it  will  sometimes  originate 
in  the  intrigues  of  foreign  powers,  and  will 
seldom  fail  to  be  patronised  and  abetted  by 
some  of  them.  Its  preservation  therefore  ought, 
in  no  case  that  can  be  avoided,  to  be  committed 
to  the  guardianship  of  any  but  those  whose 
situation  will  uniformly  beget  an  immediate 
interest  in  the  faithful  and  vigilant  perform¬ 
ance  of  the  trust.  Publius 

Number  60 

[HAM  I  LI  ON] 

Wk  havk  seen  that  an  uncontrollable  power 
over  the  elections  to  the  federal  government 
could  not.  without  hazard,  be  committed  to 
the  State  legislatures.  Let  11s  now  see  what 
would  be  the  danger  on  the  other  side;  that  is. 
from  confiding  the  ultimate  right  of  regulat¬ 
ing  its  own  elections  to  the  Union  itself.  It  is 
not  pretended  that  this  right  would  ever  be 
used  for  the  exclusion  of  any  State  from  its 
share  in  the  representation.  I  he  interest  ol  all 
would,  in  this  respect  at  least,  be  the  security 


of  all.  But  it  is  alleged  that  it  might  be  employ¬ 
ed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  promote  the  election 
of  some  favourite  class  of  men  in  exclusion  of 
others,  by  confining  the  places  of  election  to 
particular  districts,  and  rendering  it  impracti¬ 
cable  to  the  citizens  at  large  to  partake  in  the 
choice.  Of  all  chimerical  suppositions,  this 
seems  to  be  the  most  chimerical.  On  the  one 
hand,  no  rational  calculation  of  probabilities 
would  lead  us  to  imagine  that  the  disposition 
which  a  conduct  so  violent  and  extraordinary 
would  imply,  could  ever  find  its  way  into  the 
national  councils;  and  on  the  other,  it  may  be 
concluded  with  certainty,  that  if  so  improper 
a  spirit  should  ever  gain  admittance  into  them, 
it  would  display  itself  in  a  form  altogether  dif¬ 
ferent  and  far  more  decisive. 

The  improbability  of  the  attempt  may  be 
satisfactorily  inferred  from  this  single  reflec¬ 
tion,  that  it  could  never  be  made  without  caus¬ 
ing  an  immediate  revolt  of  the  great  body  of 
the  people,  headed  and  directed  by  the  State 
governments.  It  is  not  difficult  to  conceive 
that  this  characteristic  right  of  freedom  may, 
in  certain  turbulent  and  factious  seasons,  be 
violated,  in  respect  to  a  particular  class  of 
citizens,  by  a  victorious  and  overbearing  ma¬ 
jority;  but  that  so  fundamental  a  privilege,  in 
a  country  so  situated  and  enlightened,  should 
be  invaded  to  the  prejudice  of  the  great  mass 
of  the  people,  by  the  deliberate  policy  of  the 
government,  without  occasioning  a  popular 
revolution,  is  altogether  inconceivable  and  in¬ 
credible. 

In  addition  to  this  general  reflection,  there 
are  considerations  of  a  more  precise  nature, 
which  forbid  all  apprehension  on  the  subject. 
The  dissimilarity  in  the  ingredients  which  will 
compose  the  national  government,  and  still 
more  in  the  manner  in  which  they  will  be 
brought  into  action  in  its  various  branches, 
must  form  a  powerlul  obstacle  to  a  concert  of 
views  in  any  partial  scheme  ol  elections.  I  here 
is  sulficient  diversity  in  the  state  of  property, 
in  the  genius,  manners,  and  habits  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  the  dillerent  parts  of  the  Union,  to 
occasion  a  material  diversity  of  disposition 
in  their  representatives  towards  the  dillerent 
ranks  and  conditions  in  society.  And  though 
an  intimate  intercourse  under  the  same  gov¬ 
ernment  will  promote  a  gradual  assimilation 
in  some  of  these  respects,  yet  there  are  causes, 
as  well  physical  as  moral,  which  may,  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree,  permanently  nourish 
different  propensities  and  inclinations  in  this 
respect.  But  the  circumstance  which  will  be 


NUMBER  60  185 


likely  to  have  the  greatest  influence  in  the  mat¬ 
ter  will  be  the  dissimilar  modes  of  constituting 
the  several  component  parts  of  the  govern¬ 
ment.  The  House  of  Representatives  being  to 
be  elected  immediately  by  the  people,  the  Sen¬ 
ate  by  the  State  legislatures,  the  President  by 
electors  chosen  for  that  purpose  by  the  people, 
there  would  be  little  probability  of  a  common 
interest  to  cement  these  different  branches  in 
a  predilection  for  any  particular  class  ol  elec¬ 
tors. 

As  to  the  Senate,  it  is  impossible  that  any 
regulation  of  “time  and  manner,”  which  is  all 
that  is  proposed  to  be  submitted  to  the  nation¬ 
al  government  in  respect  to  that  body,  can  af¬ 
fect  the  spirit  which  will  direct  the  choice  of 
its  members.  The  collective  sense  of  the  State 
legislatures  can  never  be  influenced  by  extrane¬ 
ous  circumstances  of  that  sort;  a  consideration 
which  alone  ought  to  satisfy  us  that  the  dis¬ 
crimination  apprehended  would  never  be  at¬ 
tempted.  For  what  inducement  could  the  Sen¬ 
ate  have  to  concur  in  a  preference  in  which 
itself  would  not  be  included?  Or  to  what  pur¬ 
pose  would  it  be  established,  in  reference  to 
one  branch  of  the  legislature,  if  it  could  not 
be  extended  to  the  other.  The  composition  of 
the  one  would  in  this  case  counteract  that  of 
the  other.  And  we  can  never  suppose  that  it 
would  embrace  the  appointments  to  the  Sen¬ 
ate,  unless  we  can  at  the  same  time  suppose  the 
voluntary  co-operation  of  the  State  legisla¬ 
tures.  If  we  make  the  latter  supposition,  it  then 
becomes  immaterial  where  the  power  in  ques¬ 
tion  is  placed— whether  in  their  hands  or  in 
those  of  the  Union. 

But  what  is  to  be  the  object  of  this  capri¬ 
cious  partiality  in  the  national  councils?  Is  it 
to  be  exercised  in  a  discrimination  between 
the  different  departments  of  industry,  or  be¬ 
tween  the  different  kinds  of  property,  or  be¬ 
tween  the  different  degrees  of  property?  Will 
it  lean  in  favour  of  the  landed  interest,  or  the 
moneyed  interest,  or  the  mercantile  interest, 
or  the  manufacturing  interest?  Or,  to  speak  in 
the  fashionable  language  of  the  adversaries  to 
the  Constitution,  will  it  court  the  elevation  of 
“the  wealthy  and  the  well-born,”  to  the  exclu¬ 
sion  and  debasement  of  all  the  rest  of  the 
society? 

If  this  partiality  is  to  be  exerted  in  favour 
of  those  wrho  are  concerned  in  any  particular 
description  of  industry  or  property,  I  presume 
it  will  readily  be  admitted  that  the  competi¬ 
tion  for  it  will  lie  between  landed  men  and 
merchants.  And  I  scruple  not  to  affirm  that  it 


is  infinitely  less  likely  that  either  of  them 
should  gain  an  ascendant  in  the  national  coun¬ 
cils,  than  that  the  one  or  the  other  of  them 
should  predominate  in  all  the  local  councils. 
The  inference  will  be,  that  a  conduct  tending 
to  give  an  undue  preference  to  either  is  much 
less  to  be  dreaded  from  the  former  than  from 
the  latter. 

The  sev  eral  States  are  in  various  degrees  ad¬ 
dicted  to  agriculture  and  commerce.  In  most, 
if  not  ail  of  them,  agriculture  is  predominant. 
In  a  few'  of  them,  however,  commerce  nearly 
divides  its  empire,  and  in  most  of  them  has  a 
considerable  share  of  influence.  I11  proportion 
as  either  prevails,  it  will  be  conveyed  into  the 
national  representation;  and  for  the  very  rea¬ 
son  that  this  will  be  an  emanation  from  a 
greater  variety  of  interests,  and  in  much  more 
various  proportions  than  are  to  be  found  in 
any  single  State,  it  wTill  be  much  less  apt  to 
espouse  either  of  them  with  a  decided  partial¬ 
ity  than  the  representation  of  any  single  State. 

In  a  country  consisting  chiefly  of  the  culti¬ 
vators  of  land,  where  the  rules  of  an  equal  rep¬ 
resentation  obtain,  the  landed  interest  must, 
upon  the  whole,  preponderate  in  the  govern¬ 
ment.  As  long  as  this  interest  prevails  in  most 
of  the  State  legislatures,  so  long  it  must  main¬ 
tain  a  correspondent  superiority  in  the  na¬ 
tional  Senate  which  will  generally  be  a  faith¬ 
ful  copy  of  the  majorities  of  those  assemblies. 
It  cannot  therefore  be  presumed  that  a  sacri¬ 
fice  of  the  landed  to  the  mercantile  class  will 
ever  be  a  favourite  object  of  this  branch  of  the 
federal  legislature.  In  applying  thus  particu¬ 
larly  to  the  Senate  a  general  observation  sug¬ 
gested  by  the  situation  of  the  country,  I  am 
governed  by  the  consideration  that  the  credu¬ 
lous  votaries  of  State  power  cannot,  upon  their 
own  principles,  suspect  that  the  State  legisla¬ 
tures  would  be  warped  from  their  duty  by  any 
external  influence.  But  in  reality  the  same  sit¬ 
uation  must  hav  e  the  same  effect,  in  the  primi¬ 
tive  composition  at  least  of  the  federal  House 
of  Representatives:  an  improper  bias  towards 
the  mercantile  class  is  as  little  to  be  expected 
from  this  quarter  as  from  the  other. 

In  order,  perhaps,  to  give  countenance  to 
the  objection  at  any  rate,  it  may  be  asked,  is 
there  not  danger  of  an  opposite  bias  in  the 
national  government  which  may  dispose  it  to 
endeavour  to  secure  a  monopoly  of  the  federal 
administration  to  the  landed  class?  As  there  is 
little  likelihood  that  the  supposition  of  such 
a  bias  will  have  any  terrors  for  those  who 
would  be  immediately  injured  by  it,  a  laboured 


1 86 


THE  FEDERALIST 


answer  to  this  question  will  be  dispensed 
with.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  remark,  first,  that 
for  the  reasons  elsewhere  assigned,  it  is  less 
likely  that  any  decided  partiality  should  pre¬ 
vail  in  the  councils  of  the  Union  than  in  those 
of  any  of  its  members.  Secondly,  that  there 
would  be  no  temptation  to  violate  the  Con¬ 
stitution  in  favour  of  the  landed  class,  because 
that  class  would,  in  the  natural  course  of 
things,  enjoy  as  great  a  preponderancy  as  it¬ 
self  could  desire.  And  thirdly,  that  men  ac¬ 
customed  to  investigate  the  sources  of  public 
prosperity  upon  a  large  scale  must  be  too  well 
convinced  of  the  utility  of  commerce  to  be  in¬ 
clined  to  inflict  upon  it  so  deep  a  wound  as 
would  result  from  the  entire  exclusion  of  those 
who  would  best  understand  its  interest  from  a 
share  in  the  management  of  them.  The  impor¬ 
tance  of  commerce,  in  the  view  of  revenue 
alone,  must  effectually  guard  it  against  the 
enmity  of  a  body  which  would  be  continually 
importuned  in  its  favour  by  the  urgent  calls 
of  public  necessity. 

I  the  rather  consult  brevity  in  discussing 
the  probability  of  a  preference  founded  upon 
a  discrimination  between  the  diffeient  kinds 
of  industry  and  property,  because,  as  far  as  I 
understand  the  meaning  of  the  objectors,  they 
contemplate  a  discrimination  of  another  kind. 
They  appear  to  have  in  view,  as  the  objects  of 
the  preference  with  which  they  endeavour  to 
alarm  ns.  those  whom  they  designate  by  the 
description  of  “the  wealthy  and  the  well-born/ 
These,  it  seems,  are  to  be  exalted  to  an  odious 
pre-eminence  over  the  rest  of  their  felIowr- 
citi/ens.  At  one  time,  however,  their  elevation 
is  to  be  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  small¬ 
ness  of  the  representative  body;  at  another 
time  it  is  to  be  effected  by  depriving  the  peo¬ 
ple  at  large  of  the  opportunity  of  exercising 
their  right  of  suffrage  in  the  choice  of  that 
body. 

Hut  upon  what  principle  is  the  discrimina¬ 
tion  of  the  places  of  election  to  be  made,  in 
order  to  answer  the  purpose  of  the  meditated 
preference?  Are  “the  wealthy  and  the  well¬ 
born,”  as  they  arc  called,  confined  to  particu¬ 
lar  spots  in  the  several  States?  Have  they,  by 
some  miraculous  instinct  or  foresight,  set  apart 
in  each  of  (hem  a  common  plate  of  residence? 
Are  they  only  to  be  met  with  in  the  towns  or 
cities?  Or  are  they,  on  the  contrary,  scattered 
over  the  face  of  the  country  as  avarice  or 
chance  may  have  happened  to  cast  their  own 
lot  or  that  of  their  predecessors?  If  the  latter 
is  the  case  (as  every  intelligent  man  knows  it 


to  be,1)  is  it  not  evident  that  the  policy  of  con¬ 
fining  the  places  of  election  to  particular  dis¬ 
tricts  would  be  as  subversive  of  its  own  aim 
as  it  would  be  exceptionable  on  every  other 
account?  The  truth  is,  that  there  is  no  method 
of  securing  to  the  rich  the  preference  appre¬ 
hended,  but  by  prescribing  qualifications  of 
property  either  for  those  who  may  elect  or 
be  elected.  But  this  forms  no  part  of  the  power 
to  be  conferred  upon  the  national  govern¬ 
ment.  Its  authority  would  be  expressly  re¬ 
stricted  to  the  regulation  of  the  times ,  the 
places ,  the  manner  of  elections.  The  qualifica¬ 
tions  of  the  persons  who  may  choose  or  be 
chosen,  as  has  been  remarked  upon  other  oc¬ 
casions,  are  defined  and  fixed  in  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  and  are  unalterable  by  the  legislature. 

Let  it,  however,  be  admitted,  for  argument 
sake,  that  the  expedient  suggested  might  be 
successful:  and  let  it  at  the  same  time  be 
equally  taken  for  granted  that  all  the  scruples 
which  a  sense  of  duty  or  an  apprehension  of 
the  danger  of  the  experiment  might  inspire, 
were  overcome  in  the  breasts  of  the  national 
rulers,  still  I  imagine  it  will  hardly  be  pretend¬ 
ed  that  they  could  ever  hope  to  carry  such  an 
enterprise  into  execution  without  the  aid  of  a 
military  force  sufficient  to  subdue  the  resist¬ 
ance  of  the  great  body  of  the  people.  The  im¬ 
probability  of  the  existence  of  a  force  equal  to 
that  object  has  been  discussed  and  demon¬ 
strated  in  different  parts  of  these  papers;  but 
that  the  futility  of  the  objection  under  con¬ 
sideration  may  appear  in  the  strongest  light, 
it  shall  be  conceded  for  a  moment  that  such 
a  force  might  exist,  and  the  national  govern¬ 
ment  shall  be  supposed  to  be  in  the  actual 
possession  of  it.  What  wall  be  the  conclusion? 
With  a  disposition  to  invade  the  essential  rights 
of  the  community,  and  with  the  meansof  grati¬ 
fying  that  disposition,  is  it  presumable  that 
the  persons  who  were  actuated  by  it  would 
amuse  themselves  in  the  ridiculous  task  of 
fabricating  election  laws  for  securing  a  prefer¬ 
ence  to  a  favourite  class  of  men?  Would  they 
not  be  likely  to  prefer  a  conduct  better  adapt¬ 
ed  to  their  own  immediate  aggrandisement? 
Would  they  not  rather  boldly  resolve  to  per¬ 
petuate  themselves  in  office  by  one  decisive  act 
of  usurpation,  than  to  trust  to  precarious  ex¬ 
pedients  which,  in  spile  of  all  the  precautions 
that  might  accompany  them,  might  terminate 
in  the  dismission,  disgrace,  and  ruin  of  their 
authors?  Would  they  not  fear  that  citizens, 

1  Particularly  in  the  Southern  States  and  in  this 
state.— Publius 


NUMBER  6 1 


not  less  tenacious  than  conscious  of  their 
rights,  would  flock  from  the  remote  extremes 
of  their  respective  States  to  the  places  of  elec¬ 
tion,  to  overthrow  their  tyrants,  and  to  sub¬ 
stitute  men  who  would  be  disposed  to  avenge 
the  violated  majesty  of  the  people?  Publius 

Number  61 

[HAMILTON] 

The  more  candid  opposers  of  the  provision 
respecting  elections,  contained  in  the  plan  of 
the  convention,  when  pressed  in  argument, 
will  sometimes  concede  the  propriety  of  that 
provision;  with  this  qualification,  however, 
that  it  ought  to  have  been  accompanied  with  a 
declaration  that  all  elections  should  be  had 
in  the  counties  where  the  electors  resided. 
This,  say  they,  was  a  necessary  precaution 
against  an  abuse  of  the  power.  A  declaration 
of  this  nature  would  certainly  have  been  harm¬ 
less;  so  far  as  it  would  have  had  the  effect  of 
quieting  apprehensions,  it  might  not  have 
been  undesirable.  But  it  would,  in  fact,  have 
afforded  little  or  no  additional  security  against 
the  danger  apprehended;  and  the  want  of  it 
will  never  be  considered,  by  an  impartial  and 
judicious  examiner,  as  a  serious,  still  less  as  an 
insuperable,  objection  to  the  plan.  The  differ¬ 
ent  views  taken  of  the  subject  in  the  two  pre¬ 
ceding  papers  must  be  sufficient  to  satisfy  all 
dispassionate  and  discerning  men  that  if  the 
public  liberty  should  ever  be  the  victim  of  the 
ambition  of  the  national  rulers,  the  power 
under  examination,  at  least,  will  be  guiltless 
of  the  sacrifice. 

If  those  who  are  inclined  to  consult  their 
jealousy  only  would  exercise  it  in  a  careful 
inspection  of  the  several  State  constitutions, 
they  would  find  little  less  room  for  disquietude 
and  alarm  from  the  latitude  which  most  of 
them  allow  in  respect  to  elections  than  from 
the  latitude  which  is  proposed  to  be  allowed 
to  the  national  government  in  the  same  re¬ 
spect.  A  review  of  their  situation,  in  this  par¬ 
ticular,  would  tend  greatly  to  remove  any  ill 
impressions  w'hich  may  remain  in  regard  to 
this  matter.  But  as  that  viewr  w7ould  lead  into 
long  and  tedious  details,  I  shall  content  my¬ 
self  with  the  single  example  of  the  State  in 
which  I  write.  The  constitution  of  New  York 
makes  no  other  provision  for  locality  of  elec¬ 
tions  than  that  the  members  of  the  Assembly 
shall  be  elected  in  the  counties;  those  of  the 
Senate,  in  the  great  districts  into  which  the 
State  is  or  may  be  divided;  these  at  present  are 


187 

four  in  number,  and  comprehend  each  from 
two  to  six  counties.  It  may  readily  be  perceived 
that  it  w7ould  not  be  more  difficult  to  the  legis¬ 
lature  of  Newr  York  to  defeat  the  suffrages  of 
the  citizens  of  New  York,  by  confining  elections 
to  particular  places,  than  for  the  legislature  of 
the  United  States  to  defeat  the  suffrages  of  the 
citizens  of  the  Union,  by  the  like  expedient. 
Suppose,  for  instance,  the  city  of  Albany  wTas 
to  be  appointed  the  sole  place  of  election  for 
the  county  and  district  of  which  it  is  a  part, 
wTould  not  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  speedily 
become  the  only  electors  of  the  members  both 
of  the  Senate  and  Assembly  for  that  county 
and  district?  Can  w7e  imagine  that  the  electors 
wTho  reside  in  the  remote  subdivisions  of  the 
counties  of  Albany,  Saratoga.  Cambridge,  etc., 
or  in  any  part  of  the  county  of  Montgomery, 
would  take  the  trouble  to  come  to  the  city  of 
Albany,  to  give  their  votes  for  members  of  the 
Assembly  or  Senate,  sooner  than  they  would 
repair  to  the  city  of  New  York,  to  participate 
in  the  choice  of  the  members  of  the  federal 
House  of  Representatives?  The  alarming  in¬ 
difference  discoverable  in  the  exercise  of  so 
invaluable  a  privilege  under  the  existing  laws, 
which  afford  every  facility  to  it,  furnishes  a 
ready  answer  to  this  question.  And,  abstracted 
from  any  experience  on  the  subject,  we  can  be 
at  no  loss  to  determine  that  when  the  place  of 
election  is  at  an  inconvenient  distance  from 
the  elector,  the  effect  upon  his  conduct  will  be 
the  same  w  hether  that  distance  be  twenty  miles 
or  twenty  thousand  miles.  Hence  it  must  ap¬ 
pear  that  objections  to  the  particular  modifi¬ 
cation  of  the  federal  power  of  regulating  elec¬ 
tions  will,  in  substance,  apply  wdth  equal  force 
to  the  modification  of  the  like  powder  in  the 
constitution  of  this  State;  and  for  this  reason 
it  will  be  impossible  to  acquit  the  one  and 
to  condemn  the  other.  A  similar  comparison 
would  lead  to  the  same  conclusion  in  respect 
to  the  constitutions  of  most  of  the  other  States. 

If  it  should  be  said  that  defects  in  the  State 
constitutions  furnish  no  apology  for  those 
wThich  are  to  be  found  in  the  plan  proposed, 
I  answer,  that  as  the  former  have  never  been 
thought  chargeable  with  inattention  to  the 
security  of  liberty,  where  the  imputations 
throwm  on  the  latter  can  be  shown  to  be  appli* 
cable  to  them  also,  the  presumption  is  that 
they  are  rather  the  cavilling  refinements  of 
a  predetermined  opposition  than  the  w7ell- 
founded  inferences  of  a  candid  research  after 
truth.  To  those  who  are  disposed  to  consider 
as  innocent  omissions  in  the  State  constitu- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


cions  what  they  regard  as  unpardonable  blem¬ 
ishes  in  the  plan  of  the  convention,  nothing 
can  be  said;  or  at  most,  they  can  only  be  asked 
to  assign  some  substantial  reason  why  the 
representatives  of  the  people  in  a  single  State 
should  be  more  impregnable  to  the  lust  of 
power,  or  other  sinister  motives,  than  the  rep¬ 
resentatives  of  the  people  of  the  UnuedStates? 

If  they  cannot  do  this,  they  ought  at  least  to 
prove  to  us  that  it  is  easier  to  subvert  the  liber¬ 
ties  of  three  millions  of  people,  with  the  advan¬ 
tage  of  local  governments  to  head  their  oppo¬ 
sition,  than  of  two  hundred  thousand  people 
who  are  destitute  of  that  advantage.  And  in 
relation  to  the  point  immediately  under  con¬ 
sideration,  they  ought  to  convince  us  that  it 
is  less  probable  that  a  predominant  faction  in 
a  single  State  should,  in  order  to  maintain  its 
superiority,  incline  to  a  preference  of  a  partic¬ 
ular  class  of  electors,  than  that  a  similar  spirit 
should  take  possession  of  the  representatives 
of  thirteen  States,  spread  over  a  vast  region, 
and  in  several  respects  distinguishable  from 
each  other  by  a  diversity  of  local  circumstances, 
prejudices,  and  interests. 

Hitherto  my  observations  have  only  aimed 
at  a  vindication  of  the  provision  in  question, 
on  the  ground  of  theoretic  propriety,  on  that 
of  the  danger  of  placing  the  power  elsewhere, 
and  on  that  of  the  safety  of  placing  it  in  the 
manner  proposed,  but  there  remains  to  be 
mentioned  a  positive  advantage  which  will 
result  from  this  disposition,  and  which  could 
not  as  well  have  been  obtained  from  any 
other:  I  allude  to  the  circumstance  of  uniform¬ 
ity  in  the  time  of  elections  for  the  federal 
1  louse  of  Representatives.  It  is  more  than  pos¬ 
sible  that  this  uniformity  may  be  found  by 
experience  to  be  of  great  importance  to  the 
public  welfare,  both  as  a  security  against  the 
perpetuation  of  the  same  spirit  in  the  body, 
and  as  a  cure  for  the  diseases  of  faction.  1  f  each 
State  mav  choose  its  own  time  of  election,  it 
is  possible  there  may  be  at  least  as  many  differ¬ 
ent  periods  as  there  are  months  in  the  year. 
The  times  of  election  in  tne  several  States,  as 
they  are  now  established  for  local  purposes, 
vary  between  extremes  as  wide  as  Match  and 
November.  The  consequent e  of  this  diversity 
would  be  that  there  could  never  happen  a 
total  dissolution  or  renovation  of  the  body  at 
one  time.  11  an  improper  spirit  of  any  kind 
should  happen  to  pic  vail  in  it,  that  spirit 
would  be  apt  to  infuse  itself  into  the  new  mem¬ 
bers,  as  they  conic  forward  in  succession.  The 
mass  would  be  likely  to  remain  nearly  the 


same,  assimilating  constantly  to  itself  its  grad¬ 
ual  accretions.  There  is  a  contagion  in  example 
which  few  men  have  sufficient  force  of  mind  to 
resist.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  treble  the 
duration  in  office,  with  the  condition  of  a 
total  dissolution  of  the  body  at  the  same  time, 
might  be  less  formidable  to  liberty  than  one 
third  of  that  duration  subject  to  gradual  and 
successive  alterations. 

Uniformity  in  the  time  of  elections  seems 
not  less  requisite  for  executing  the  idea  of 
a  regular  rotation  in  the  Senate,  and  for  con¬ 
veniently  assembling  the  legislature  at  a  stated 
period  in  each  year. 

It  may  be  asked.  Why,  then,  could  not  a 
time  have  been  fixed  in  the  Constitution?  As 
the  most  zealous  adversaries  of  the  plan  of  the 
convention  in  this  State  are,  in  general,  not 
less  zealous  admirers  of  the  constitution  of  the 
State,  the  question  may  be  retorted,  and  it  may 
be  asked.  Why  was  not  a  time  for  the  like 
purpose  fixed  in  the  constitution  of  this  State? 
No  better  answer  can  be  given  than  that  it 
was  a  matter  which  might  safely  be  entrusted 
to  legislative  discretion:  and  that  if  a  time  had 
been  appointed,  it  might,  upon  experiment, 
have  been  found  less  convenient  than  some 
other  time.  The  same  answer  may  be  given  to 
the  question  put  on  the  other  side.  And  it 
may  be  added  that  the  supposed  danger  of  a 
gradual  change  being  merely  speculative,  it 
would  have  been  hardly  advisable  upon  that 
speculation  to  establish,  as  a  fundamental 
point,  what  would  deprive  several  States  of  the 
convenience  of  having  the  elections  for  their 
own  government  and  for  the  national  govern¬ 
ment  at  the  same  epochs.  Publius 

Number  62 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

Having  examined  the  constitution  of  the 
House  of  Representatives,  and  answered  such 
of  the  objections  against  it  as  seemed  to  merit 
notice,  1  enter  next  on  the  examination  of  the 
Senate. 

The  heads  into  which  this  member  of  the 
government  may  he  considered  arc:  1.  The 
qualification  oi  senators;  11.  The  appointment 
of  them  by  the  State  legislatures;  III.  The 
equality  of  representation  in  the  Senate;  IV. 
"I  lie  number  of  senators,  and  the  term  lot 
which  they  are  to  be  elected;  V.  The  powers 
vested  in  the  Senate. 

j.  The  qualifications  proposed  for  senators, 
as  distinguished  from  those  of  representatives. 


NUMBER  62  189 


consist  in  a  more  advanced  age  and  a  longer 
period  of  citizenship.  A  senator  must  be  thirty 
years  of  age  at  least;  as  a  representative  must 
be  twenty-five.  And  the  former  must  have  been 
a  citizen  nine  years;  as  seven  years  are  required 
for  the  latter.  The  propriety  of  these  distinc¬ 
tions  is  explained  by  the  nature  of  the  sena¬ 
torial  trust,  which,  requiring  greater  extent 
of  information  and  stability  of  character,  re¬ 
quires  at  the  same  time  that  the  senator  should 
have  reached  a  period  of  life  most  likely  to 
supply  these  advantages;  and  which,  partici¬ 
pating  immediately  in  transactions  with  for¬ 
eign  nations,  ought  to  be  exercised  by  none 
who  are  not  thoroughly  weaned  from  the  pre¬ 
possessions  and  habits  incident  to  foreign 
birth  and  education.  The  term  of  nine  years 
appears  to  be  a  prudent  mediocrity  between 
a  total  exclusion  of  adopted  citizens,  whose 
merits  and  talents  may  claim  a  share  in  the 
public  confidence,  and  an  indiscriminate  and 
hasty  admission  of  them,  which  might  create  a 
channel  for  foreign  influence  on  the  national 
councils. 

II.  It  is  equally  unnecessary  to  dilate  on  the 
appointment  of  senators  by  the  State  legisla¬ 
tures.  Among  the  various  modes  which  might 
have  been  devised  for  constituting  this  branch 
of  the  government,  that  which  has  been  pro¬ 
posed  by  the  convention  is  probably  the  most 
congenial  with  the  public  opinion.  It  is  recom¬ 
mended  by  the  double  advantage  of  favouring 
a  select  appointment,  and  of  giving  to  the  State 
governments  such  an  agency  in  the  formation 
of  the  federal  government  as  must  secure  the 
authority  of  the  former,  and  may  form  a  con¬ 
venient  link  between  the  two  systems. 

III.  The  equality  of  representation  in  the 
Senate  is  another  point,  which,  being  evi¬ 
dently  the  result  of  compromise  between  the 
opposite  pretensions  of  the  large  and  the  small 
States,  does  not  call  for  much  discussion.  If 
indeed  it  be  right,  that  among  a  people  thor¬ 
oughly  incorporated  into  one  nation,  every  dis¬ 
trict  ought  to  have  a  proportional  share  in  the 
government,  and  that  among  independent  and 
sovereign  States,  bound  together  by  a  simple 
league,  the  parties,  however  unequal  in  size, 
ought  to  have  an  equal  share  in  the  common 
councils,  it  does  not  appear  to  be  without  some 
reason  that  in  a  compound  republic,  partak¬ 
ing  both  of  the  national  and  federal  character, 
the  government  ought  to  be  founded  on  a 
mixture  of  the  principles  of  proportional  and 
equal  representation.  But  it  is  superfluous  to 
try,  by  the  standard  of  theory,  a  part  of  the 


Constitution  which  is  allowed  on  all  hands  to 
be  the  result,  not  of  theory,  but  “of  a  spirit 
of  amity,  and  that  mutual  deference  and  con¬ 
cession  which  the  peculiarity  of  our  political 
situation  rendered  indispensable/'  A  common 
government,  with  powers  equal  to  its  objects, 
is  called  for  by  the  voice,  and  still  more  loudly 
by  the  political  situation,  of  America.  A  gov¬ 
ernment  founded  on  principles  more  conso¬ 
nant  to  the  wishes  of  the  larger  States  is  not 
likely  to  be  obtained  from  the  smaller  States. 
The  only  option,  then,  for  the  former,  lies 
between  the  proposed  government  and  a  gov¬ 
ernment  still  more  objectionable.  Under  this 
alternative,  the  advice  of  prudence  must  be  to 
embrace  the  lesser  evil;  and,  instead  of  indulg¬ 
ing  a  fruitless  anticipation  of  the  possible  mis¬ 
chiefs  which  may  ensue,  to  contemplate  rather 
the  advantageous  consequences  which  may 
qualify  the  sacrifice. 

In  this  spirit  it  may  be  remarked,  that  the 
equal  vote  allowed  to  each  State  is  at  once  a 
constitutional  recognition  of  the  portion  of 
sovereignty  remaining  in  the  individual  States, 
and  an  instrument  for  preserving  that  residu¬ 
ary  sovereignty.  So  far  the  equality  ought  to  be 
no  less  acceptable  to  the  large  than  to  the 
small  States;  since  they  are  not  less  solicitous 
to  guard,  by  every  possible  expedient,  against 
an  improper  consolidation  of  the  States  into 
one  simple  republic. 

Another  advantage  accruing  from  this  in¬ 
gredient  in  the  constitution  of  the  Senate 
is  the  additional  impediment  it  must  prove 
against  improper  acts  of  legislation.  No  law 
or  resolution  can  now  be  passed  without  the 
concurrence,  first,  of  a  majority  of  the  people, 
and  then,  of  a  majority  of  the  States.  It  must 
be  acknowledged  that  this  complicated  check 
on  legislation  may  in  some  instances  be  injuri¬ 
ous  as  well  as  beneficial;  and  that  the  peculiar 
defence  which  it  involves  in  favour  of  the 
smaller  States  would  be  more  rational,  if  any 
interests  common  to  them,  and  distinct  from 
those  of  the  other  States,  would  otherwise  be 
exposed  to  peculiar  danger.  But  as  the  larger 
States  will  always  be  able,  by  their  power  over 
the  supplies,  to  defeat  unreasonable  exertions 
of  this  prerogative  of  the  lesser  States,  and  as 
the  facility  and  excess  of  law-making  seem  to 
be  the  diseases  to  which  our  governments  are 
most  liable,  it  is  not  impossible  that  this  part 
of  the  Constitution  may  be  more  convenient 
in  practice  than  it  appears  to  many  in  con¬ 
templation. 

IV.  The  number  of  senators,  and  the  dura- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


tion  of  their  appointment,  come  next  to  be 
considered.  In  order  to  form  an  accurate  judg¬ 
ment  on  both  these  points,  it  will  be  proper  to 
inquire  into  the  purposes  which  are  to  be 
answered  by  a  senate;  and  in  order  to  ascertain 
these,  it  will  be  necessary  to  review  the  incon¬ 
veniences  which  a  republic  must  suffer  from 
the  want  of  such  an  institution. 

First.  It  is  a  misfortune  incident  to  republi¬ 
can  government,  though  in  a  less  degree  than 
to  other  governments,  that  those  who  admin¬ 
ister  it  may  forget  their  obligations  to  their 
constituents,  and  prove  unfaithful  to  their  im¬ 
portant  trust.  In  this  point  of  view,  a  senate, 
as  a  second  branch  of  the  legislative  assembly, 
distinct  from,  and  dividing  the  power  with, 
a  first,  must  be  in  all  cases  a  salutary  check  on 
the  government.  It  doubles  the  security  to  the 
people,  by  requiring  the  concurrence  of  two 
distinct  bodies  in  schemes  of  usurpation  or 
perfidy,  where  the  ambition  or  corruption  of 
one  would  otherwise  be  sufficient.  I  bis  is  a 
precaution  founded  on  such  clear  principles, 
and  now  so  well  understood  in  the  United 
States,  that  it  would  be  more  than  superfluous 
to  enlarge  on  it.  1  will  barely  remark,  that  as 
the  improbability  of  sinister  combinations  will 
be  in  proportion  to  the  dissimilarity  in  the 
genius  of  the  two  bodies,  it  must  be  politic  to 
distinguish  them  from  each  other  by  every  cir¬ 
cumstance  which  will  consist  with  a  due  har¬ 
mony  in  all  proper  measures,  and  with  the 
genuine  principles  of  republican  government. 

Secondly.  The  necessity  of  a  senate  is  not 
less  indicated  by  the  propensity  of  all  single 
and  numerous  assemblies  to  yield  to  the  im¬ 
pulse  of  sudden  and  violent  passions,  and  to 
be  seduced  by  factious  leaders  into  intemper¬ 
ate  and  pernicious  resolutions.  Examples  on 
this  subject  might  be  cited  without  number; 
and  from  proceedings  within  the  UnitedStates, 
as  well  as  from  the  history  of  other  nations. 
But  a  position  that  will  not  be  contradicted 
need  not  be  proved.  All  that  need  be  remarked 
is,  that  a  body  which  is  to  correct  this  infirmity 
ought  itself  to  be  free  from  it,  and  consequently 
ought  to  be  less  numerous.  It  ought,  moreover, 
to  possess  great  firmness,  and  consequently 
ought  to  hold  its  authority  by  a  tenure  of  con¬ 
siderable  duration. 

Thirdly.  Another  defect  to  be  supplied  by 
a  senate  lies  in  a  want  of  due  acquaintance 
with  the  objects  and  principles  of  legislation. 
It  is  not  possible  that  an  assembly  of  men 
called  for  the  most  part  from  pursuits  of  a 
private  nature,  continued  in  appointment  for 


a  short  time,  and  led  by  no  permanent  motive 
to  devote  the  intervals  of  public  occupation 
to  a  study  of  the  laws,  the  affairs,  and  the  com¬ 
prehensive  interests  of  their  country,  should, 
if  left  wholly  to  themselves,  escape  a  variety  of 
important  errors  in  the  exercise  of  their  legis¬ 
lative  trust.  It  may  be  affirmed,  on  the  best 
grounds,  that  no  small  share  of  the  present 
embarrassments  of  America  is  to  be  charged  on 
the  blunders  of  our  governments;  and  that 
these  have  proceeded  from  the  heads  rather 
than  the  hearts  of  most  of  the  authors  of  them. 
What  indeed  are  all  the  repealing,  explaining, 
and  amending  laws,  which  fill  and  disgrace  our 
voluminous  codes,  but  so  many  monuments  of 
deficient  wisdom;  so  many  impeachments  ex¬ 
hibited  by  each  succeedingagainst  each  preced¬ 
ing  session;  so  many  admonitions  to  the  people 
of  the  value  of  those  aids  which  may  be  ex¬ 
pected  from  a  well-constituted  senate? 

A  good  government  implies  two  things:  first, 
fidelity  to  the  object  of  government,  which  is 
the  happiness  of  the  people;  secondly,  a  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  means  by  which  that  object  can  be 
best  attained.  Some  governments  are  deficient 
in  both  these  qualities;  most  governments  are 
deficient  in  the  first.  1  scruple  not  to  assert  that 
in  American  governments  too  little  attention 
has  been  paid  to  the  last.  I  he  federal  Con¬ 
stitution  avoids  this  error;  and  what  merits 
particular  notice,  it  provides  for  the  last  in  a 
mode  which  increases  the  security  for  the  first. 

Fourthly.  The  mutability  in  the  public  coun¬ 
cils  arising  from  a  rapid  succession  of  new 
members,  however  qualified  they  may  be, 
f  points  out,  in  the  strongest  manner,  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  some  stable  institution  in  the  govern¬ 
ment.  Every  new  election  in  the  States  is  found 
to  change  one  half  of  the  representatives.  From 
this  change  of  men  must  proceed  a  change  of 
opinions;  and  from  a  change  of  opinions,  a 
change  of  measures.  But  a  continual  change 
even  of  good  measures  is  inconsistent  with 
every  rule  of  prudence  and  every  prospect  of 
success.  The  remark  is  verified  in  private  life, 
and  becomes  more  just,  as  well  as  more  impor¬ 
tant,  in  national  transactions. 

To  trace  the  mischievous  cflectsof  a  mutable 
government  would  fill  a  volume.  1  will  hint  a 
few  only,  each  of  which  will  be  perceived  to 
be  a  source  of  innumerable  others. 

In  the  first  place,  it  forleits  the  respect  and 
confidence  of  other  nations,  and  all  the  advan¬ 
tages  connected  with  national  character.  An 
individual  who  is  observed  to  be  inconstant 
to  his  plans,  or  perhaps  to  carry  on  his  affairs 


NUMBER  63  191 


without  any  plan  at  all,  is  marked  at  once,  by 
all  prudent  people,  as  a  speedy  victim  to  his 
own  unsteadiness  and  folly.  His  more  friendly 
neighbours  may  pity  him,  but  all  will  decline 
to  connect  their  fortunes  with  his;  and  not 
a  few  will  seize  the  opportunity  of  making 
their  fortunes  out  of  his.  One  nation  is  to 
another  what  one  individual  is  to  another; 
with  this  melancholy  distinction  perhaps,  that 
the  former,  with  fewer  of  the  benevolent  emo¬ 
tions  than  the  latter,  are  under  fewer  restraints 
also  from  taking  undue  advantage  from  the 
indiscretions  of  each  other.  Every  nation,  con¬ 
sequently,  whose  affairs  betray  a  want  of  wis¬ 
dom  and  stability,  may  calculate  on  every  loss 
which  can  be  sustained  from  the  more  system¬ 
atic  policy  of  their  wiser  neighbours.  But  the 
best  instruction  on  this  subject  is  unhappily 
conveyed  to  America  by  the  example  of  her 
own  situation.  She  finds  that  she  is  held  in  no 
respect  by  her  friends;  that  she  is  the  derision 
of  her  enemies;  and  that  she  is  a  prey  to  every 
nation  which  has  an  interest  in  speculating  on 
her  fluctuating  councils  and  embarrassed  af¬ 
fairs. 

The  internal  effects  of  a  mutable  policy  are 
still  more  calamitous.  It  poisons  the  blessing 
of  liberty  itself.  It  will  be  of  little  avail  to  the 
people  that  the  laws  are  made  by  men  of  their 
own  choice,  if  the  laws  be  so  voluminous  that 
they  cannot  be  read,  or  so  incoherent  that  they 
cannot  be  understood;  if  they  be  repealed  or 
revised  before  they  are  promulgated,  or  under¬ 
go  such  incessant  changes  that  no  man,  who 
knows  what  the  law  is  to-day,  can  guess  what 
it  will  be  to-morrow.  Law  is  defined  to  be  a 
rule  of  action;  but  how  can  that  be  a  rule 
which  is  little  known  and  less  fixed? 

Another  effect  of  public  instability  is  the 
unreasonable  advantage  it  gives  to  the  saga¬ 
cious,  the  enterprising,  and  the  moneyed  few 
over  the  industrious  and  uninformed  mass  of 
the  people.  Every  new  regulation  concerning 
commerce  or  revenue,  or  in  any  manner  affect¬ 
ing  the  value  of  the  different  species  of  prop¬ 
erty,  presents  a  new  harvest  to  those  who  watch 
the  change  and  can  trace  its  consequences; 
a  harvest,  reared  not  by  themselves,  but  by  the 
toils  and  cares  of  the  great  body  of  their  fel¬ 
low-citizens.  This  is  a  state  of  things  in  which 
it  may  be  said  with  some  truth  that  laws  are 
made  for  the  few,  not  for  the  many. 

In  another  point  of  view,  great  injury  results 
from  an  unstable  government.  The  want  of 
confidence  in  the  public  councils  damps  every 
useful  undertaking,  the  success  and  profit  of 


which  may  depend  on  a  continuance  of  exist¬ 
ing  arrangements.  What  prudent  merchant 
will  hazard  his  fortunes  in  any  new  branch  of 
commerce  when  he  knows  not  but  that  his 
plans  may  be  rendered  unlawful  before  they 
can  be  executed?  What  farmer  or  manufac¬ 
turer  will  lay  himself  out  for  the  encourage¬ 
ment  given  to  any  particular  cultivation  or 
establishment  when  he  can  have  no  assurance 
that  his  preparatory  labours  and  advances  will 
not  render  him  a  victim  to  an  inconstant  gov¬ 
ernment?  In  a  word,  no  great  improvement  or 
laudable  enterprise  can  go  forward  which  re¬ 
quires  the  auspices  of  a  steady  system  of  na¬ 
tional  policy. 

But  the  most  deplorable  effect  of  all  is  that 
diminution  of  attachment  and  reverence  which 
steals  into  the  hearts  of  the  people  towards  a 
political  system  which  betrays  so  many  marks 
of  infirmity,  and  disappoints  so  many  of  their 
flattering  hopes.  No  government,  any  more 
than  an  individual,  will  long  be  respected 
without  being  truly  respectable;  nor  be  truly 
respectable  without  possessing  a  certain  por¬ 
tion  of  order  and  stability.  Publius 

Number  63 

[HAMILTON  OR  MADISON] 

A  fifth  desideratum,  illustrating  the  utility  of 
a  senate,  is  the  want  of  a  due  sense  of  national 
character.  Without  a  select  and  stable  member 
of  the  government,  the  esteem  of  foreign  pow¬ 
ers  will  not  only  be  forfeited  by  an  unenlight¬ 
ened  and  variable  policy,  proceeding  from  the 
causes  already  mentioned,  but  the  national 
councils  will  not  possess  that  sensibility  to  the 
opinion  of  the  world  which  is  perhaps  not 
less  necessary  in  order  to  merit,  than  it  is  to 
obtain,  its  respect  and  confidence. 

An  attention  to  the  judgment  of  other  na¬ 
tions  is  important  to  every  government  for 
two  reasons:  the  one  is,  that,  independently 
of  the  merits  of  any  particular  plan  or  meas¬ 
ure,  it  is  desirable,  on  various  accounts,  that  it 
should  appear  to  other  nations  as  the  offspring 
of  a  wise  and  honourable  policy:  the  second  is, 
that  in  doubtful  cases,  particularly  where  the 
national  councils  may  be  warped  by  some 
strong  passion  or  momentary  interest,  the  pre¬ 
sumed  or  known  opinion  of  the  impartial 
world  may  be  the  best  guide  that  can  be  fol¬ 
lowed.  What  has  not  America  lost  by  her  want 
of  character  with  foreign  nations;  and  how 
many  errors  and  follies  would  she  not  have 
avoided,  if  the  justice  and  propriety  of  her 


THE  FEDERALIST 


measures  had,  in  every  instance,  been  pre¬ 
viously  tried  by  the  light  in  which  the)  would 
probably  appear  to  the  unbiased  part  of  man¬ 
kind? 

Yet  however  requisite  a  sense  of  national 
character  may  be,  it  is  evident  that  it  can  never 
be  sufficiently  possessed  by  a  numerous  and 
changeable  body.  It  can  only  be  found  in  a 
number  so  small  that  a  sensible  degree  of  the 
praise  and  blame  of  public  measures  may  be 
the  portion  of  each  individual;  or  in  an  as¬ 
sembly  so  durably  invested  with  public  trust, 
that  the  pride  and  consequence  of  its  members 
mav  be  sensibly  incorporated  with  the  repu¬ 
tation  and  prosperity  of  the  community.  The 
half-yearly  representatives  of  Rhode  Island 
would  probably  have  been  little  affected  in 
their  deliberations  on  the  iniquitous  measures 
of  that  State  by  arguments  drawn  from  the 
light  in  which  such  measures  would  be  viewed 
by  foreign  nations,  or  even  by  the  sister  States; 
whilst  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  if  the 
concurrence  of  a  select  and  stable  body  had 
been  necessary,  a  regard  to  national  character 
alone  would  have  prevented  the  calamities  un¬ 
der  which  that  misguided  people  is  now  la¬ 
bouring. 

1  add,  as  a  sixth  defect,  the  want,  in  some 
important  cases,  of  a  due  responsibility  in  the 
government  to  the  people,  arising  from  that 
frequency  of  elections  which  in  other  cases 
produces  this  responsibility.  This  remark  will, 
perhaps,  appear  not  only  new.  but  paradox¬ 
ical.  It  must  nevertheless  be  acknowledged, 
when  explained,  to  be  as  undeniable  as  it  is 
important. 

Responsibility,  in  order  to  be  reasonable, 
must  be  limited  to  objects  within  the  power 
of  (he  responsible  party,  and  in  order  to  be 
effectual,  must  relate  to  operations  of  that 
power,  of  which  a  ready  and  proper  judgment 
can  be  formed  by  the  constituents.  The  objects 
of  government  may  be  divided  into  two  gen¬ 
eral  classes:  the  one  depending  on  measures 
which  have  singly  an  immediate  and  sensible 
operation:  the  other  depending  on  a  succes¬ 
sion  of  well-chosen  and  well-connected  meas¬ 
ures.  whic  h  have  a  gradual  and  perhaps  unob¬ 
served  operation.  The  importance  of  the  latter 
description  to  the  collective  and  permanent 
welfare  of  every  country  needs  no  explanation. 
\nd  yet  it  is  evident  that  an  assembly  elected 
for  so  short  a  term  as  to  be  unable  to  provide 
more  than  one  or  two  links  in  a  chain  of  meas¬ 
ures,  on  which  the  general  welfare  may  essen¬ 
tially  depend,  ought  not  to  be  answerable  for 


the  final  result,  any  more  than  a  steward  or 
tenant,  engaged  for  one  year,  could  be  justly 
made  to  answer  for  places  or  improvements 
which  could  not  be  accomplished  in  less  than 
half  a  dozen  years.  Nor  is  it  possible  for  the 
people  to  estimate  the  share  of  influence  which 
their  annual  assemblies  may  respectively  have 
on  events  resulting  from  the  mixed  transac¬ 
tions  of  several  years.  It  is  sufficiently  difficult 
to  preserve  a  personal  responsibility  in  the 
members  of  a  numerous  body  for  such  acts  of 
the  body  as  have  an  immediate,  detached,  and 
palpable  operation  on  its  constituents. 

The  proper  remedy  for  this  defect  must  be 
an  additional  body  in  the  legislative  depart¬ 
ment.  which,  having  sufficient  permanency  to 
provide  for  such  objects  as  require  a  continued 
attention  and  a  train  of  measures,  may  be 
justly  and  effectuallyanswerable  for  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  those  objects. 

Thus  far  I  have  considered  the  circumstances 
which  point  out  the  necessity  of  a  well-con¬ 
structed  Senate  only  as  they  relate  to  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  the  people.  To  a  people  as  little 
blinded  by  prejudice  or  corrupted  by  flattery 
as  those  whom  I  address,  I  shall  not  scruple 
to  add  that  such  an  institution  may  be  some¬ 
times  necessary  as  a  defence  to  the  people 
against  their  own  temporary  errors  and  delu¬ 
sions.  As  the  cool  and  deliberate  sense  of  the 
community  ought,  in  all  governments,  and 
actually  will,  in  all  free  governments,  ulti¬ 
mately  prevail  over  the  views  of  its  rulers;  so 
there  are  particular  moments  in  public  affairs 
when  the  people,  stimulated  by  some  irregular 
passion,  or  some  illicit  advantage,  or  misled 
by  the  artful  misrepresentations  of  interested 
men,  may  call  for  measures  which  they  them¬ 
selves  will  afterwards  be  the  most  ready  to 
lament  and  condemn.  In  these  critical  mo¬ 
ments,  how  salutary  will  be  the  interference 
of  some  temperate  and  respectable  body  of 
citizens  in  order  to  check  the  misguided  career, 
and  to  suspend  the  blow  meditated  by  the 
people  against  themselves,  until  reason,  jus¬ 
tice,  and  truth  can  regain  their  authority  over 
the  public  mind?  What  bitter  anguish  would 
not  the  people  of  Athens  have  often  escaped 
if  their  government  had  contained  so  provi¬ 
dent  a  safeguard  against  the  tyranny  of  their 
own  passions?  Popular  liberty  might  then  have 
escaped  the  indelible  reproach  of  decreeing 
to  the  same  citizens  the  hemlock  on  one  day 
and  statues  on  the  next. 

It  may  be  suggested  that  a  people  spread 
over  an  extensive  region  cannot,  like  the 


NUMBER  63  193 


crowded  inhabitants  of  a  small  district,  be  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  infection  of  violent  passions,  or  to 
the  danger  of  combining  in  pursuit  of  unjust 
measures.  I  am  far  from  denying  that  this  is 
a  distinction  of  peculiar  importance.  I  have,  on 
the  contrary,  endeavoured  in  a  former  paper 
to  show  that  it  is  one  of  the  principal  recom¬ 
mendations  of  a  confederated  republic.  At  the 
same  time,  this  advantage  ought  not  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  superseding  the  use  of  auxiliary  pre¬ 
cautions.  It  may  even  be  remarked  that  the 
same  extended  situation,  which  will  exempt 
the  people  of  America  from  some  of  the  dan¬ 
gers  incident  to  lesser  republics,  will  expose 
them  to  the  inconveniency  of  remaining  for 
a  longer  time  under  the  influence  of  those  mis¬ 
representations  which  the  combined  industry 
of  interested  men  may  succeed  in  distributing 
among  them. 

It  adds  no  small  weight  to  all  these  con¬ 
siderations  to  recollect  that  history  informs 
us  of  no  long-lived  republic  which  had  not  a 
senate.  Sparta,  Rome,  and  Carthage  are,  in 
fact,  the  only  states  to  whom  that  character 
can  be  applied.  In  each  of  the  two  first  there 
was  a  senate  for  life.  The  constitution  of  the 
senate  in  the  last  is  less  known.  Circumstan¬ 
tial  evidence  makes  it  probable  that  it  was  not 
different  in  this  particular  from  the  two  others. 
It  is  at  least  certain  that  it  had  some  quality 
or  other  which  rendered  it  an  anchor  against 
popular  fluctuations;  and  that  a  smaller  coun¬ 
cil,  drawn  out  of  the  senate,  was  appointed 
not  only  for  life,  but  filled  up  vacancies  itself. 
These  examples,  though  as  unfit  for  the  imita¬ 
tion,  as  they  are  repugnant  to  the  genius,  of 
America,  are,  notwithstanding,  when  compared 
with  the  fugitive  and  turbulent  existence  of 
other  ancient  republics,  very  instructive  proofs 
of  the  necessity  of  some  institution  that  will 
blend  stability  with  liberty.  I  am  not  unaware 
of  the  circumstances  which  distinguish  the 
American  from  other  popular  governments, 
as  well  ancient  as  modern;  and  which  render 
extreme  circumspection  necessary  in  reason¬ 
ing  from  the  one  case  to  the  other.  But  after 
allowing  due  weight  to  this  consideration,  it 
may  stiil  be  maintained  that  there  are  many 
points  of  similitude  which  render  these  ex¬ 
amples  not  unworthy  of  our  attention.  Many 
of  the  defects,  as  we  have  seen,  which  can  only 
be  supplied  by  a  senatorial  institution,  are 
common  to  a  numerous  assembly  frequently 
elected  by  the  people,  and  to  the  people  them¬ 
selves.  There  are  others  peculiar  to  the  former, 
which  require  the  control  of  such  an  institu¬ 


tion.  The  people  can  never  wilfully  betray 
their  own  interests;  but  they  may  possibly  be 
betrayed  by  the  representatives  of  the  people; 
and  the  danger  will  be  evidently  greater  where 
the  whole  legislative  trust  is  lodged  in  the 
hands  of  one  body  of  men,  than  where  the  con¬ 
currence  of  separate  and  dissimilar  bodies  is 
required  in  every  public  act. 

The  difference  most  relied  on  between  the 
American  and  other  republics  consists  in  the 
principle  of  representation;  which  is  the  pivot 
on  which  the  former  move,  and  which  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  been  unknown  to  the  latter,  or 
at  least  to  the  ancient  part  of  them.  The  use 
which  has  been  made  of  this  difference,  in 
reasonings  contained  in  former  papers,  will 
have  shown  that  I  am  disposed  neither  to  deny 
its  existence  nor  to  undervalue  its  importance. 

I  feel  the  less  restraint,  therefore,  in  observing 
that  the  position  concerning  the  ignorance  of 
the  ancient  governments  on  the  subject  of  rep¬ 
resentation  is  by  no  means  precisely  true  in 
the  latitude  commonly  given  to  it.  Without 
entering  into  a  disquisition  which  here  would 
be  misplaced,  I  will  refer  to  a  few  known  facts 
in  support  of  what  I  advance. 

In  the  most  pure  democracies  of  Greece 
many  of  the  executive  functions  were  per¬ 
formed,  not  by  the  people  themselves,  but 
by  officers  elected  by  the  people,  and  repre¬ 
senting  the  people  in  their  executive  capacity. 

Prior  to  the  reform  of  Solon,  Athens  was 
governed  by  nine  Archons,  annually  elected 
by  the  people  at  large .  The  degree  of  power 
delegated  to  them  seems  to  be  left  in  great 
obscurity.  Subsequent  to  that  period,  we  find 
an  assembly,  first  of  four,  and  afterwards  of 
six  hundred  members,  annually  elected  by  the 
people ;  and  partially  representing  them  in 
their  legislative  capacity,  since  they  were  not 
only  associated  with  the  people  in  the  function 
of  making  laws,  but  had  the  exclusive  right 
of  originating  legislative  propositions  to  the 
people.  The  senate  of  Carthage,  also,  what¬ 
ever  might  be  its  power  or  the  duration  of  its 
appointment,  appears  to  have  been  elective 
by  the  suffrages  of  the  people.  Similar  in¬ 
stances  might  be  traced  in  most,  if  not  all,  the 
popular  governments  of  antiquity. 

Lastly,  in  Sparta  we  meet  with  the  Ephori, 
and  in  Rome  with  the  Tribunes;  two  bodies, 
small  indeed  in  numbers,  but  annually  elected 
by  the  whole  body  of  the  people ,  and  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  representatives  of  the  people, 
almost  in  their  plenipotentiary  capacity.  The 
Cosmi  of  Crete  were  also  annually  elected  by 


THE  FEDERALIST 


the  people,  and  have  been  considered  by  some 
authors  as  an  institution  analogous  to  those  of 
Sparta  and  Rome,  with  this  difference  only, 
that  in  the  election  of  that  representative  body 
the  right  of  suffrage  was  communicated  to  a 
part  only  of  the  people. 

From  these  facts,  to  which  many  others 
might  be  added,  it  is  clear  that  the  principle 
of  representation  was  neither  unknown  to  the 
ancients  nor  wholly  overlooked  in  their  politi¬ 
cal  constitutions.  The  true  distinction  between 
these  and  the  American  governments  lies  in 
the  total  exclusion  of  the  people,  in  their  col¬ 
lective  capacity,  from  any  share  in  the  latter, 
and  not  in  the  total  exclusion  of  the  represent¬ 
atives  of  the  people  from  the  administration 
of  the  former.  The  distinction,  however,  thus 
qualified,  must  be  admitted  to  leave  a  most 
advantageous  superiority  in  favour  of  the 
United  States.  But  to  insure  to  this  advantage 
its  full  effect,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  sepa¬ 
rate  it  from  the  other  advantage  of  an  exten¬ 
sive  territory.  For  it  cannot  be  believed  that 
any  form  of  representative  government  could 
have  succeeded  within  the  narrow  limits  occu¬ 
pied  by  the  democracies  of  Greece. 

In  answer  to  all  these  arguments,  suggested 
by  reason,  illustrated  by  examples,  and  en¬ 
forced  by  our  own  experience,  the  jealous 
adversary  of  the  Constitution  will  probably 
content  himself  with  repeating  that  a  senate 
appointed  not  immediately  by  the  people,  and 
for  the  term  of  six  years,  must  gradually  ac¬ 
quire  a  dangerous  pre-eminence  in  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  and  finally  transform  it  into  a  ty¬ 
rannical  aristocracy. 

To  this  general  answer,  the  general  reply 
ought  to  be  sufficient,  that  liberty  may  be  en¬ 
dangered  by  the  abuses  of  liberty  as  well  as  by 
the  abuses  of  power;  that  there  are  numerous 
instances  of  the  former  as  well  as  of  the  latter; 
and  that  the  former,  rather  than  the  latter, 
are  apparently  most  to  be  apprehended  by  the 
United  States.  But  a  more  particular  reply  may 
be  given. 

Before  such  a  revolution  can  be  effected, 
tli e  Senate,  it  is  to  be  observed,  must  in  the 
first  plate  corrupt  itself;  must  next  corrupt 
the  State  legislatures;  must  then  corrupt  the 
House  of  Representatives  and  must  finally 
corrupt  the  people  at  large.  It  is  evident  that 
the  Senate  must  be  first  corrupted  before  it 
can  attempt  an  establish  men  (of  tyranny.  With¬ 
out  corrupting  the  State  legislatures  it  cannot 
prosecute  the  attempt,  because  the  periodical 
change  of  members  would  otherwise  regener¬ 


ate  the  whole  body.  Without  exerting  the 
means  of  corruption  with  equal  success  on  the 
House  of  Representatives,  the  opposition  of 
that  coequal  branch  of  the  government  would 
inevitably  defeat  the  attempt;  and  without 
corrupting  the  people  themselves,  a  succes¬ 
sion  of  new  representatives  would  speedily 
restore  all  things  to  their  pristine  order.  Is 
there  any  man  who  can  seriously  persuade  him¬ 
self  that  the  proposed  Senate  can,  by  any  pos¬ 
sible  means  within  the  compass  of  human 
address,  arrive  at  the  object  of  a  lawless  ambi¬ 
tion  through  all  these  obstructions? 

If  reason  condemns  the  suspicion,  the  same 
sentence  is  pronounced  by  experience.  The 
constitution  of  Maryland  furnishes  the  most 
opposite  example.  The  Senate  of  that  State  is 
elected,  as  the  federal  Senate  will  be,  indirectly 
by  the  people  and  for  a  term  less  by  one  year 
only  than  the  federal  Senate.  It  is  distinguished, 
also,  by  the  remarkable  prerogative  of  filling 
up  its  own  vacancies  within  the  term  of  its 
appointment,  and,  at  the  same  time,  is  not 
under  the  control  of  any  such  rotation  as  is 
provided  for  the  federal  Senate.  There  are 
some  other  lesser  distinctions  which  would 
expose  the  former  to  colourable  objections 
that  do  not  lie  against  the  latter.  If  the  federal 
Senate,  therefore,  really  contained  the  danger 
which  has  been  so  loudly  proclaimed,  some 
symptoms  at  least  of  a  like  danger  ought  by 
this  time  to  have  been  betrayed  by  the  Senate 
of  Maryland,  but  no  such  symptoms  have  ap¬ 
peared.  On  the  contrary,  the  jealousies  at  first 
entertained  by  men  of  the  same  description 
with  those  who  view  with  terror  the  corre¬ 
spondent  part  of  the  federal  Constitution,  have 
been  gradually  extinguished  by  the  progress 
of  the  experiment;  and  the  Maryland  consti¬ 
tution  is  daily  deriving,  from  the  salutary 
operation  of  this  part  of  it,  a  reputation  in 
which  it  will  probably  not  be  rivalled  by  that 
of  any  State  in  the  Union. 

But  if  anything  could  silence  the  jealousies 
on  this  subject  it  ought  to  be  the  British  ex¬ 
ample.  I'he  Senate  there,  instead  of  being 
elected  for  a  term  of  six  years  and  of  being 
unconfined  to  particular  families  or  fortunes, 
is  an  hereditary  assembly  of  opulent  nobles. 
File  House  of  Representatives,  instead  of 
being  elected  for  two  years,  and  by  die  whole 
body  of  the  people,  is  elected  for  seven  years 
and,  in  very  great  proportion,  by  a  very  small 
proportion  of  the  people.  Here,  unquestion¬ 
ably,  ought  to  be  seen  in  full  display  the 
aristoc  ratic  usurpations  and  tyranny  which  are 


NUMBER  64 


195 


at  some  future  period  to  be  exemplified  in  the 
United  States.  Unfortunately,  however,  for  the 
anti-federal  argument,  the  British  history  in¬ 
forms  us  that  this  hereditary  assembly  has  not 
been  able  to  defend  itself  against  the  continual 
encroachments  of  the  House  of  Representa¬ 
tives;  and  that  it  no  sooner  lost  the  support  of 
the  monarch  than  it  was  actually  crushed  by 
the  weight  of  the  popular  branch. 

As  far  as  antiquity  can  instruct  us  on  this 
subject,  its  examples  support  the  reasoning 
which  we  have  employed.  In  Sparta,  the  Ephori, 
the  annual  representatives  of  the  people,  were 
found  an  overmatch  for  the  senate  for  life, 
continually  gained  on  its  authority,  and  finally 
drew  all  power  into  their  own  hands.  The  Trib¬ 
unes  of  Rome,  who  were  the  representatives  of 
the  people,  prevailed,  it  is  well  known,  in  al¬ 
most  every  contest  with  the  senate  for  life,  and 
in  the  end  gained  the  most  complete  triumph 
over  it.  The  fact  is  the  more  remarkable  as 
unanimity  was  required  in  every  act  of  the 
Tribunes,  even  after  their  number  was  aug¬ 
mented  to  ten.  It  proves  the  irresistible  force 
possessed  by  that  branch  of  a  free  government 
which  has  the  people  on  its  side.  To  these  ex¬ 
amples  might  be  added  that  of  Carthage,  whose 
senate,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Polybius, 
instead  of  drawing  all  power  into  its  vortex,  had, 
at  the  commencement  of  the  second  Punic  War, 
lost  almost  the  whole  of  its  original  portion. 

Besides  the  conclusive  evidence  resulting 
from  this  assemblage  of  facts,  that  the  federal 
Senate  will  never  be  able  to  transform  itself, 
by  gradual  usurpations,  into  an  independent 
and  aristocratic  body,  we  are  warranted  in  be¬ 
lieving  that  if  such  a  revolution  should  ever 
happen  from  causes  which  the  foresight  of  man 
cannot  guard  against,  the  House  of  Represent¬ 
atives,  with  the  people  on  their  side,  will  at  all 
times  be  able  to  bring  back  the  Constitution 
to  its  primitive  form  and  principles.  Against 
the  force  of  the  immediate  representatives  of 
the  people  nothing  will  be  able  to  maintain 
even  the  constitutional  authority  of  the  Sen¬ 
ate,  but  such  a  display  of  enlightened  policy 
and  attachment  to  the  public  good,  as  will  di¬ 
vide  with  that  branch  of  the  legislature  the  af¬ 
fections  and  support  of  the  entire  body  of  the 
people  themselves.  Publius 


Number  64 


[jay1 


It  is  a  just  and  not  a  new  observation  that 
enemies  to  particular  persons,  and  opponents 


to  particular  measures,  seldom  confine  their 
censures  to  such  things  only  in  either  as  are 
worthy  of  blame.  Unless  on  this  principle,  it  is 
difficult  to  explain  the  motives  of  their  con¬ 
duct  who  condemn  the  proposed  Constitution 
in  the  aggregate,  and  treat  with  severity  some 
of  the  most  unexceptionable  articles  in  it. 

The  second  section  gives  power  to  the  Presi¬ 
dent,  “by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of 
the  Senate,  to  make  treaties ,  provided  two 

THIRDS  OF  THE  SENATORS  PRESENT  CONCUR.” 

The  power  of  making  treaties  is  an  impor¬ 
tant  one,  especially  as  it  relates  to  war,  peace, 
and  commerce;  and  it  should  not  be  delegated 
but  in  such  a  mode,  and  with  such  precautions, 
as  will  afford  the  highest  security  that  it  will 
be  exercised  by  men  the  best  qualified  for  the 
purpose,  and  in  the  manner  most  conducive  to 
the  public  good.  The  convention  appears  to 
have  been  attentive  to  both  these  points:  they 
have  directed  the  President  to  be  chosen  by  se¬ 
lect  bodies  of  electors,  to  be  deputed  by  the 
people  for  that  express  purpose;  and  they  have 
committed  the  appointment  of  senators  to  the 
State  legislatures.  This  mode  has,  in  such  cases, 
vastly  the  advantage  of  elections  by  the  people 
in  their  collective  capacity,  where  the  activity 
of  party  zeal,  taking  advantage  of  the  supine¬ 
ness,  the  ignorance,  and  the  hopes  and  fears  of 
the  unwary  and  uninterested,  often  places 
men  in  office  by  the  votes  of  a  small  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  electors. 

As  the  select  assemblies  for  choosing  the  Pres¬ 
ident,  as  well  as  the  State  legislatures  who  ap¬ 
point  the  senators,  will  in  general  be  compos¬ 
ed  of  the  most  enlightened  and  respectable  citi¬ 
zens,  there  is  reason  to  presume  that  their  at¬ 
tention  and  their  votes  will  be  directed  to 
those  men  only  who  have  become  the  most  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  their  abilities  and  virtue,  and  in 
whom  the  people  perceive  just  grounds  for  con¬ 
fidence.  The  Constitution  manifests  very  par¬ 
ticular  attention  to  this  object.  By  excluding 
men  under  thirty-five  from  the  first  office,  and 
those  under  thirty  from  the  second,  it  confines 
the  electors  to  men  of  whom  the  people  have 
had  time  to  form  a  judgment,  and  with  respect 
to  whom  they  will  not  be  liable  to  be  deceived 
by  those  brilliant  appearances  of  genius  and 
patriotism  which,  like  transient  meteors,  some¬ 
times  mislead  as  well  as  dazzle.  If  the  observa¬ 
tion  be  well  founded,  that  wise  kings  will  al¬ 
ways  be  served  by  able  ministers,  it  is  fair  to 
argue,  that  as  an  assembly  of  select  electors 
possess,  in  a  greater  degree  than  kings,  the 
means  of  extensive  and  accurate  information 


iq6  THE  FEDERALIST 


relative  to  men  and  characters,  so  will  their 
appointments  bear  at  least  equal  marks  of  dis¬ 
cretion  and  discernment.  The  inference  which 
naturally  results  from  these  considerations  is 
this,  that  the  President  and  senators  so  chosen 
will  always  be  of  the  number  of  those  who  best 
understand  our  national  interests,  whether  con¬ 
sidered  in  relation  to  the  several  States  or  to 
foreign  nations,  who  are  best  able  to  promote 
those  interests,  and  whose  reputation  for  in¬ 
tegrity  inspires  and  merits  confidence.  With 
such  men  the  power  of  making  treaties  may  be 
safely  lodged. 

Although  the  absolute  necessity  of  system, 
in  the  conduct  of  any  business,  is  universally 
known  and  acknowledged,  yet  the  high  impor¬ 
tance  of  it  in  national  affairs  has  not  yet  be¬ 
come  sufficiently  impressed  on  the  public  mind. 
They  who  wish  to  commit  the  power  under 
consideration  to  a  popular  assembly,  compos¬ 
ed  of  members  constantly  coming  and  going  in 
quick  succession,  seem  not  to  recollect  that 
such  a  body  must  necessarily  be  inadequate  to 
the  attainment  of  those  objects  which  require 
to  be  steadily  contemplated  in  all  their  rela¬ 
tions  and  circumstances,  and  which  can  only 
be  approached  and  achieved  by  measures  which 
not  only  talents,  but  also  exact  information, 
and  often  much  time,  are  necessary  to  concert 
and  to  execute.  It  was  wise,  therefore,  in  the 
convention  to  provide,  not  only  that  the  pow¬ 
er  of  making  treaties  should  be  committed  to 
able  and  honest  men,  but  also  that  they  should 
continue  in  place  a  sufficient  time  to  become 
perfectly  acquainted  with  our  national  con¬ 
cerns.  and  to  form  and  introduce  a  system  for 
the  management  of  them.  The  duration  pre¬ 
scribed  is  such  as  will  give  them  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  greatly  extending  their  political  infor¬ 
mation,  and  of  rendering  their  accumulating 
experience  more  and  more  beneficial  to  their 
country.  Nor  has  the  convention  discovered 
less  prudence  in  providing  for  the  frequent 
elections  of  senators  in  such  a  way  as  to  obviate 
the  inconvenience  of  periodically  transferring 
those  great  affairs  entirely  to  new  men;  for  by 
leaving  a  considerable  residue  of  the  old  ones 
in  place,  uniformity,  and  order,  as  well  as  a 
constant  succession  of  official  information,  will 
be  preserved. 

There  arc  a  few  who  will  not  admit  that  the 
affairs  of  trade  and  navigation  should  be  regu¬ 
lated  bv  a  system  cautiously  formed  and  stead 
ily  pursued;  and  that  both  our  treaties  and  out¬ 
laws  should  correspond  with  and  be  made  to 
promote  it.  It  is  of  much  consequence  that  this 


correspondence  and  conformity  be  carefully 
maintained;  and  they  who  assent  to  the  truth 
of  this  position  will  see  and  confess  that  it  is 
well  provided  for  by  making  concurrence  of 
the  Senate  necessary  both  to  treaties  and  to 
laws. 

It  seldom  happens  in  the  negotiation  of  trea¬ 
ties,  of  whatever  nature,  but  that  perfect  se¬ 
crecy  and  immediate  despatch  are  sometimes 
requisite.  There  are  cases  where  the  most  use¬ 
ful  intelligence  may  be  obtained  if  the  persons 
possessing  it  can  be  relieved  from  apprehen¬ 
sions  of  discovery.  Those  apprehensions  will 
operate  on  those  persons  whether  they  are  ac¬ 
tuated  by  mercenary  or  friendly  motives;  and 
there  doubtless  are  many  of  both  descriptions 
who  would  rely  on  the  secrecy  of  the  President, 
but  who  would  not  confide  in  that  of  the  Sen¬ 
ate,  and  still  less  in  that  of  a  large  popular  As¬ 
sembly.  The  convention  have  done  well,  there¬ 
fore,  in  so  disposing  of  the  power  of  making 
treaties,  that  although  the  President  must,  in 
forming  them,  act  by  the  advice  and  consent  of 
the  Senate,  yet  he  will  be  able  to  manage  the 
business  of  intelligence  in  such  a  manner  as 
prudence  may  suggest. 

They  who  have  turned  their  attention  to  the 
affairs  of  men  must  have  perceived  that  there 
are  tides  in  them;  tides  very  irregular  in  their 
duration,  strength,  and  direction,  and  seldom 
found  to  run  twice  exactly  in  the  same  manner 
or  measure.  To  discern  and  to  profit  by  these 
tides  in  national  affairs  is  the  business  of  those 
who  preside  over  them;  and  they  who  have  had 
much  experience  on  this  head  inform  us  that 
there  frequently  are  occasions  when  days,  nay, 
even  when  hours,  are  precious.  The  loss  of  a 
battle,  the  death  of  a  prince,  the  removal  of  a 
minister,  or  other  circumstances  intervening 
to  change  the  present  posture  and  aspect  ot  af¬ 
fairs,  may  turn  the  most  favourable  tide  into 
,i  course  opposite  to  our  wishes.  As  in  the  field, 
so  in  the  cabinet,  there  are  moments  to  be  seized 
as  they  pass,  and  they  who  preside  in  either 
should  be  left  in  capacity  to  improve  them.  So 
often  and  so  essentially  have  we  heretofore  suf¬ 
fered  from  (he-  want  of  secrecy  and  despatch, 
that  the  Constitution  would  have  been  incx- 
c  usably  defective  if  no  attention  had  been  paid 
to  those  objects.  Those  matters  which  in  nego¬ 
tiations  usually  require  the  most  secrecy  and 
the  most  despatch  are  those  preparatory  and 
auxiliary  measures  which  are  not  otherwise  im¬ 
portant  in  a  national  view,  than  as  they  tend 
to  facilitate  the  attainment  of  the  objects  of 
the  negotiation.  For  these,  the  President  will 


NUMBER  64  197 


find  no  difficulty  to  provide;  and  should  any 
circumstance  occur  which  requires  the  advice 
and  consent  of  the  Senate,  he  may  at  any  time 
convene  them.  Thus  we  see  that  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  provides  that  our  negotiations  for  treaties 
shall  have  every  advantage  which  can  be  de¬ 
rived  from  talents,  information,  integrity,  and 
deliberate  investigations  on  the  one  hand,  and 
from  secrecy  and  despatch  on  the  other. 

But  to  this  plan,  as  to  most  others  that  have 
ever  appeared,  objections  are  contrived  and 
urged. 

Some  are  displeased  with  it,  not  on  account 
of  any  errors  or  defects  in  it,  but  because,  as  the 
treaties,  when  made,  are  to  have  the  force  of 
laws,  they  should  be  made  only  by  men  in¬ 
vested  with  legislative  authority.  These  gentle¬ 
men  seem  not  to  consider  that  the  judgments 
of  our  courts,  and  the  commissions  constitu¬ 
tionally  given  by  our  governor,  are  as  valid 
and  as  binding  on  all  persons  whom  they  con¬ 
cern  as  the  laws  passed  by  our  legislature.  All 
constitutional  acts  of  power,  whether  in  the 
executive  or  in  the  judicial  department,  have 
as  much  legal  validity  and  obligation  as  if  they 
proceeded  from  the  legislature;  and  therefore, 
whatever  name  be  given  to  the  power  of  mak¬ 
ing  treaties,  or  however  obligatory  they  may 
be  when  made,  certain  it  is  that  the  people 
may,  with  much  propriety,  commit  the  power 
of  a  distinct  body  from  the  legislature,  the  ex¬ 
ecutive,  or  the  judicial.  It  surely  does  not  fol¬ 
low  that  because  they  have  given  the  power 
of  making  laws  to  the  legislature  that  there¬ 
fore  they  should  likewise  give  them  power  to 
do  every  other  act  of  sovereignty  by  which  the 
citizens  are  to  be  bound  and  affected. 

Others,  though  content  that  treaties  should 
be  made  in  the  mode  proposed,  are  averse  to 
their  being  the  supreme  laws  of  the  land.  They 
insist,  and  profess  to  believe,  that  treaties  like 
acts  of  assembly,  should  be  repealable  at  pleas¬ 
ure.  This  idea  seems  to  be  new  and  peculiar  to 
this  country,  but  new  errors,  as  well  as  new 
truths,  often  appear.  These  gentlemen  would 
do  well  to  reflect  that  a  treaty  is  only  another 
name  for  a  bargain,  and  that  it  would  be  im¬ 
possible  to  find  a  nation  who  would  make  any 
bargain  with  us  which  should  be  binding  on 
them  absolutely,  but  on  us  only  so  long  and  so 
far  as  we  may  think  proper  to  be  bound  by  it. 
They  who  make  laws  may,  without  doubt, 
amend  or  repeal  them;  and  it  will  not  be  dis¬ 
puted  that  they  who  make  treaties  may  alter 
or  cancel  them;  but  still  let  us  not  forget  that 
treaties  are  made,  not  by  only  one  of  the  con¬ 


tracting  parties,  but  by  both;  and  consequent¬ 
ly,  that  as  the  consent  of  both  was  essential  to 
their  formation  at  first,  so  must  it  ever  after¬ 
wards  be  to  alter  or  cancel  them.  The  proposed 
Constitution,  therefore,  has  not  in  the  least  ex¬ 
tended  the  obligation  of  treaties.  They  are  just 
as  binding,  and  just  as  far  beyond  the  lawful 
reach  of  legislative  acts  now,  as  they  will  be  at 
any  future  period,  or  under  any  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment. 

However  useful  jealousy  may  be  in  republics, 
yet  when  like  bile  in  the  natural,  it  abounds 
too  much  in  the  body  politic,  the  eyes  of  both 
become  very  liable  to  be  deceived  by  the  de¬ 
lusive  appearances  which  that  malady  casts  on 
surrounding  objects.  From  this  cause,  proba¬ 
bly,  proceed  the  fears  and  apprehensions  of 
some  that  the  President  and  Senate  may  make 
treaties  without  an  equal  eye  to  the  interests  of 
all  the  States.  Others  suspect  that  two  thirds 
will  oppress  the  remaining  third,  and  ask 
whether  those  gentlemen  are  made  sufficiently 
responsible  for  their  conduct;  whether,  if  they 
act  corruptly,  they  can  be  punished;  and  if 
they  make  disadvantageous  treaties,  how  are 
we  to  get  rid  of  those  treaties? 

As  all  the  States  are  equally  represented  in 
the  Senate,  and  by  men  the  most  able  and  the 
most  willing  to  promote  the  interests  of  their 
constituents,  they  will  all  have  an  equal  degree 
of  influence  in  that  body,  especially  while  they 
continue  to  be  careful  in  appointing  proper 
persons,  and  to  insist  on  their  punctual  attend¬ 
ance.  In  proportion  as  the  United  States  as¬ 
sume  a  national  form  and  a  national  character, 
so  will  the  good  of  the  whole  be  more  and  more 
an  object  of  attention,  and  the  government 
must  be  a  weak  one  indeed  if  it  should  forget 
that  the  good  of  the  whole  can  only  be  pro¬ 
moted  by  advancing  the  good  of  each  of  the 
parts  or  members  which  compose  the  whole.  It 
will  not  be  in  the  power  of  the  President  and 
Senate  to  make  any  treaties  by  which  they  and 
their  families  and  estates  will  not  be  equally 
bound  and  affected  with  the  rest  of  the  com¬ 
munity;  and,  having  no  private  interests  dis¬ 
tinct  from  that  of  the  nation,  they  will  be  un¬ 
der  no  temptations  to  neglect  the  latter. 

As  to  corruption,  the  case  is  not  supposable. 
He  must  either  have  been  very  unfortunate  in 
his  intercourse  with  the  world,  or  possess  a 
heart  very  susceptible  of  such  impressions,  who 
can  think  it  probable  that  the  President  and 
two  thirds  of  the  Senate  will  ever  be  capable  of 
such  unworthy  conduct.  The  idea  is  too  gross 
and  too  invidious  to  be  entertained.  But  in 


THE  FEDERALIST 


198 

such  a  case,  if  it  should  ever  happen,  the  treaty 
so  obtained  from  us  would,  like  all  other  fraud¬ 
ulent  contracts,  be  null  and  void  by  the  law  of 
nations. 

With  respect  to  their  responsibility,  it  is  dif¬ 
ficult  to  conceive  how  it  could  be  increased. 
Every  consideration  that  can  influence  the  hu¬ 
man  mind,  such  as  honour,  oaths,  reputations, 
conscience,  the  love  of  country,  and  family  af¬ 
fections  and  attachments,  afford  security  for 
their  fidelity.  In  short,  as  the  Constitution  has 
taken  the  utmost  care  that  they  shall  be  men 
of  talents  and  integrity,  we  have  reason  to  be 
persuaded  that  the  treaties  they  make  will  be 
as  advantageous  as,  all  circumstances  consider¬ 
ed,  could  be  made;  and  so  far  as  the  fear  of 
punishment  and  disgrace  can  operate,  that  mo¬ 
tive  to  good  behaviour  is  amply  afforded  by 
the  article  on  the  subject  of  impeachments. 

Publius 

Number  65 

IhAMILTON] 

The  remaining  powers  which  the  plan  of  the 
convention  allots  to  the  Senate,  in  a  distinct 
capacity,  are  comprised  in  their  participation 
with  the  executive  in  the  appointment  to  of¬ 
fices,  and  in  their  judicial  character  as  a  court 
for  the  trial  of  impeachments.  As  in  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  appointments  the  executive  will  be  the 
principal  agent,  the  provisions  relating  to  it 
will  most  properly  be  discussed  in  the  exam¬ 
ination  of  that  department.  We  will,  therefore, 
conclude  this  head  with  a  view  of  the  judicial 
character  of  the  Senate. 

A  well-constituted  court  for  the  trial  of  im¬ 
peachments  is  an  object  not  more  to  be  de¬ 
sired  than  difficult  to  be  obtained  in  a  govern¬ 
ment  wholly  elective.  The  subjects  of  its  juris¬ 
diction  arc  those  offences  which  proceed  from 
the  misconduct  of  public  men,  or,  in  other 
words,  from  the  abuse  or  violation  of  some  pub¬ 
lic  trust.  '1  hey  are  of  a  nature  which  may  with 
peculiar  propriety  be  denominated  political, 
as  they  relate  chiefly  to  injuries  done  immedi¬ 
ately  to  the  society  itself.  The  prosecution  of 
them, for  this  reason,  will  seldom  fail  to  agitate 
the  passions  of  the  whole  community,  and  to 
divide  it  into  parties  more  or  less  friendly  or 
inimical  to  the  accused.  In  many  cases  it  will 
connect  itself  with  the  pre-existing  factions, 
and  will  enlist  all  their  animosities,  partiali¬ 
ties,  influence,  and  interest  on  one  side  or  on 
the  other;  and  in  such  cases  there  will  always 
be  the  greatest  danger  that  the  decision  will  be 


regulated  more  by  the  comparative  strength  of 
parties,  than  by  the  real  demonstrations  of  in¬ 
nocence  or  guilt. 

The  delicacy  and  magnitude  of  a  trust  which 
so  deeply  concerns  the  political  reputation  and 
existence  of  every  man  engaged  in  the  admin¬ 
istration  of  public  affairs,  speak  for  themselves. 
The  difficulty  of  placing  it  rightly,  in  a  govern¬ 
ment  resting  entirely  on  the  basis  of  periodical 
elections,  will  as  readily  be  perceived,  when  it 
is  considered  that  the  most  conspicuous  char¬ 
acters  in  it  will,  from  that  circumstance,  be  too 
often  the  leaders  or  the  tools  of  the  most  cun¬ 
ning  or  the  most  numerous  faction,  and  on 
this  account  can  hardly  be  expected  to  possess 
the  requisite  neutrality  towards  those  whose 
conduct  may  be  the  subject  of  scrutiny. 

The  convention,  it  appears,  thought  the  Sen¬ 
ate  the  most  fit  depositary  of  this  important 
trust.  Those  who  can  best  discern  the  intrinsic 
difficulty  of  the  thing,  will  be  least  hasty  in 
condemning  that  opinion,  and  will  be  most  in¬ 
clined  to  allow  due  weight  to  the  arguments 
which  may  be  supposed  to  have  produced  it. 

What,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  true  spirit  of 
the  institution  itself?  Is  it  not  designed  as  a 
method  of  national  inquest  into  the  conduct 
of  public  men?  If  this  be  the  design  of  it,  who 
can  so  properly  be  the  inquisitors  for  the  na¬ 
tion  as  the  representatives  of  the  nation  them¬ 
selves?  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  power  of 
originating  the  inquiry,  or,  in  other  words,  of 
preferring  the  impeachment,  ought  to  be 
lodged  in  the  hands  of  one  branch  of  the  legis¬ 
lative  body.  Will  not  the  reasons  which  indi¬ 
cate  the  propriety  of  this  arrangement  strongly 
plead  for  an  admission  of  the  other  branch  of 
that  body  to  a  share  of  the  inquiry? The  model 
from  which  the  idea  of  this  institution  has 
been  borrowed  pointed  out  that  course  to  the 
convention.  In  Great  Rritain  it  is  the  province 
of  the  House  of  Commons  to  prefer  the  im¬ 
peachment,  and  of  the  House  of  Lords  to  de¬ 
cide  upon  it.  Several  of  the  State  constitutions 
have  followed  the  example.  As  well  the  latter, 
as  the  former,  seem  to  have  regarded  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  impeachments  as  a  bridle  in  the  hands 
of  the  legislative  body  upon  the  executive  serv¬ 
ants  of  the  government.  Is  not  this  the  true 
light  in  which  it  ought  to  be  regarded? 

Where  else  than  in  the  Senate  could  have 
been  found  a  tribunal  sufficiently  dignified, 
or  sullicicntly  independent?  What  other  body 
would  be  likely  to  feel  confidence  enough  in 
its  own  situation  to  preserve,  unawed  and  un¬ 
influenced,  the  necessary  impartiality  between 


NUMBER  65  199 


an  individual  accused,  and  the  representatives 
of  the  people,  his  accusers? 

Could  the  Supreme  Court  have  been  relied 
upon  as  answering  this  description?  It  is  much 
to  be  doubted  whether  the  members  of  that 
tribunal  would  at  all  times  be  endowed  with 
so  eminent  a  portion  of  fortitude  as  would  be 
called  for  in  the  execution  of  so  difficult  a  task; 
and  it  is  still  more  to  be  doubted,  whether  they 
would  possess  the  degree  of  credit  and  author¬ 
ity  which  might,  on  certain  occasions,  be  indis¬ 
pensable  towards  reconciling  the  people  to  a 
decision  that  should  happen  to  clash  with  an 
accusation  brought  by  their  immediate  repre¬ 
sentatives.  A  deficiency  in  the  first  would  be 
fatal  to  the  accused;  in  the  last,  dangerous  to 
the  public  tranquillity.  The  hazard,  in  both 
these  respects,  could  only  be  avoided,  if  at  all, 
by  rendering  that  tribunal  more  numerous  than 
would  consist  with  a  reasonable  attention  to 
economy.  The  necessity  of  a  numerous  court 
for  the  trial  of  impeachments  is  equally  dic¬ 
tated  by  the  nature  of  the  proceeding.  This 
can  never  be  tied  down  by  such  strict  rules, 
either  in  the  delineation  of  the  offence  by  the 
prosecutors,  or  in  the  construction  of  it  by  the 
judges,  as  in  common  cases  serve  to  limit  the 
discretion  of  courts  in  favour  of  personal  se¬ 
curity.  There  will  be  no  jury  to  stand  between 
the  judges  who  are  to  pronounce  the  sentence 
of  the  law  and  the  party  who  is  to  receive  or 
suffer  it.  The  awful  discretion  which  a  court  of 
impeachments  must  necessarily  have,  to  doom 
to  honour  or  to  infamy  the  most  confidential 
and  the  most  distinguished  characters  of  the 
community,  forbids  the  commitment  of  the 
trust  to  a  small  number  of  persons. 

These  considerations  seem  alone  sufficient 
to  authorise  a  conclusion,  that  the  Supreme 
Court  would  have  been  an  improper  substi¬ 
tute  for  the  Senate,  as  a  court  of  impeachments. 
There  remains  a  further  consideration,  which 
will  not  a  little  strengthen  this  conclusion.  It 
is  this:  The  punishment  which  may  be  the  con¬ 
sequence  of  conviction  upon  impeachment,  is 
not  to  terminate  the  chastisement  of  the  of¬ 
fender.  After  having  been  sentenced  to  a  per¬ 
petual  ostracism  from  the  esteem  and  confi¬ 
dence,  and  honours  and  emoluments  of  his 
country,  he  will  still  be  liable  to  prosecution 
and  punishment  in  the  ordinary  course  of  law. 
Would  it  be  proper  that  the  persons  who  had 
disposed  of  his  fame,  and  his  most  valuable 
rights  as  a  citizen,  in  one  trial,  should,  in  an¬ 
other  trial  for  the  same  offence,  be  also  the  dis¬ 
posers  of  his  life  and  his  fortune?  Would  there 


not  be  the  greatest  reason  to  apprehend  that 
error,  in  the  first  sentence,  would  be  the  par¬ 
ent  of  error  in  the  second  sentence?  That  the 
strong  bias  of  one  decision  would  be  apt  to 
overrule  the  influence  of  any  new  lights  which 
might  be  brought  to  vary  the  complexion  of 
another  decision?  Those  who  know  anything 
of  human  nature  will  not  hesitate  to  answer 
these  questions  in  the  affirmative;  and  will  be 
at  no  loss  to  perceive  that,  by  making  the  same 
persons  judges  in  both  cases,  those  who  might 
happen  to  be  the  objects  of  prosecution  would, 
in  a  great  measure,  be  deprived  of  the  double 
security  intended  them  by  a  double  trial.  The 
loss  of  life  and  estate  would  often  be  virtually 
included  in  a  sentence  which,  in  its  terms,  im¬ 
ported  nothing  more  than  dismission  from  a 
present,  and  disqualification  for  a  future,  of¬ 
fice.  It  may  be  said  that  the  intervention  of  a 
jury,  in  the  second  instance,  would  obviate  the 
danger.  But  juries  are  frequently  influenced 
by  the  opinions  of  judges.  They  are  sometimes 
induced  to  find  special  verdicts  which  refer 
the  main  question  to  the  decision  of  the  court. 
Who  would  be  willing  to  stake  his  life  and  his 
estate  upon  the  verdict  of  a  jury  acting  under 
the  auspices  of  judges  who  had  predetermined 
his  guilt? 

Would  it  have  been  an  improvement  of  the 
plan  to  have  united  the  Supreme  Court  with 
the  Senate,  in  the  formation  of  the  court  of  im¬ 
peachment?  This  union  would  certainly  have 
been  attended  with  several  advantages;  but 
would  they  not  have  been  overbalanced  by 
the  signal  disadvantage,  already  stated,  arising 
from  the  agency  of  the  same  judges  in  the  dou¬ 
ble  prosecution  to  which  the  offender  would 
be  liable?  To  a  certain  extent,  the  benefits  of 
that  union  will  be  obtained  from  making  the 
chief  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  the  presi¬ 
dent  of  the  court  of  impeachments,  as  is  pro¬ 
posed  to  be  done  in  the  plan  of  the  conven¬ 
tion;  while  the  inconveniences  of  an  entire  in¬ 
corporation  of  the  former  into  the  latter  will 
be  substantially  avoided.  This  was  perhaps  the 
prudent  mean.  I  forbear  to  remark  upon  the 
additional  pretext  for  clamour  against  the  ju¬ 
diciary,  which  so  considerable  an  augmenta¬ 
tion  of  its  authority  would  have  afforded. 

Would  it  have  been  desirable  to  have  com¬ 
posed  the  court  for  the  tfial  of  impeachments  of 
persons  wholly  distinct  from  the  other  depart¬ 
ments  of  the  government?  There  are  weighty 
arguments, as  well  against, as  in  favour  of,  such 
a  plan.  To  some  minds  it  will  not  appear  a 
trivial  objection  that  it  could  tend  to  increase 


THE  FEDERALIST 


the  complexity  of  the  political  machine,  and  to 
add  a  new  spring  to  the  government,  the  util¬ 
ity  of  which  would  at  best  be  questionable.  But 
an  objection  which  will  not  be  thought  by  any 
unworthy  of  attention  is  this:  a  court  formed 
upon  such  a  plan  would  either  be  attended 
with  a  heavy  expense,  or  might  in  practice  be 
subject  to  a  variety  of  casualties  and  incon¬ 
veniences.  It  must  either  consist  of  permanent 
officers,  stationary  at  the  seat  of  government, 
and  of  course  entitled  to  fixed  and  regular  sti¬ 
pends,  or  of  certain  officers  of  the  State  govern¬ 
ments,  to  be  called  upon  whenever  an  im¬ 
peachment  was  actually  depending.  It  will  not 
be  easy  to  imagine  any  third  mode  materially 
different  which  could  rationally  be  proposed. 
As  the  court,  for  reasons  already  given,  ought 
to  be  numerous,  the  first  scheme  will  be  repro¬ 
bated  by  every  man  who  can  compare  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  the  public  wants  with  the  means  of  sup¬ 
plying  them.  The  second  will  be  espoused  with 
caution  by  those  who  will  seriously  consider 
the  difficulty  of  collecting  men  dispersed  over 
the  whole  Union;  the  injury  to  the  innocent, 
from  the  procrastinated  determination  of  the 
charges  which  might  be  brought  against  them; 
the  advantage  to  the  guilty,  from  the  opportu¬ 
nities  which  delay  would  afford  to  intrigue  and 
corruption;  and  in  some  cases  the  detriment 
to  the  State,  from  the  prolonged  inaction  of 
men  whose  firm  and  faithful  execution  of  their 
duty  might  have  exposed  them  to  the  persecu¬ 
tion  of  an  intemperate  or  designing  majority 
in  the  House  of  Representatives.  Though  this 
latter  supposition  may  seem  harsh,  and  might 
not  be  likely  often  to  be  verified,  yet  it  ought 
not  to  be  forgotten  that  the  demon  of  faction 
will,  at  certain  seasons,  extend  his  sceptre  over 
all  numerous  bodies  of  men. 

But  though  one  or  the  other  of  the  substi¬ 
tutes  which  have  been  examined,  or  some 
other  that  might  be  devised,  should  be  thought 
preferable  to  the  plan,  in  this  respect,  reported 
by  the  convention,  it  will  not  follow  that  the 
Constitution  ought  for  this  reason  to  be  re¬ 
jected.  If  mankind  were  to  resolve  to  agree  in 
no  institution  of  government,  until  every  part 
of  it  had  been  adjusted  to  the  most  exact 
standard  of  perfection,  society  would  soon  be¬ 
come  a  general  scene  of  anarchy,  and  the  world 
a  desert.  Where  is  the  standard  of  perfection 
to  be  found?  Who  will  undertake  to  unite  the 
discordant  opinions  of  a  whole  community  in 
the  same  judgment  of  it;  and  to  prevail  upon 
one  conceited  projector  to  renount  e  his  infalli¬ 
ble  criterion  for  the  fallible  criterion  of  his 


more  conceited  neighbour?  To  answer  the 
purpose  of  the  adversaries  of  the  Constitution, 
they  ought  to  prove,  not  merely  that  partic¬ 
ular  provisions  in  it  are  not  the  best  which 
might  have  been  imagined,  but  that  the  plan 
upon  the  whole  is  bad  and  pernicious. 

Publius 

Number  66 

[HAMILTON] 

A  review  of  the  principal  objections  that  have 
appeared  against  the  proposed  court  for  the 
trial  of  impeachments  will  not  improbably 
eradicate  the  remains  of  any  unfavourable  im¬ 
pressions  which  may  still  exist  in  regard  to  this 
matter. 

The  first  of  these  objections  is,  that  the  pro¬ 
vision  in  question  confounds  legislative  and 
judiciary  authorities  in  the  same  body,  in  vio¬ 
lation  of  that  important  and  well-established 
maxim  which  requires  a  separation  between 
the  different  departments  of  power.  The  true 
meaning  of  this  maxim  has  been  discussed  and 
ascertained  in  another  place,  and  has  been 
shown  to  be  entirely  compatible  with  a  partial 
intermixture  of  those  departments  for  special 
purposes,  preserving  them,  in  the  main,  dis¬ 
tinct  and  unconnected.  This  partial  intermix¬ 
ture  is  even,  in  some  cases,  not  only  proper 
but  necessary  to  the  mutual  defence  of  the 
several  members  of  the  government  against 
each  other.  An  absolute  or  qualified  negative 
in  the  executive  upon  the  acts  of  the  legislative 
body  is  admitted,  by  the  ablest  adepts  in  politi¬ 
cal  science,  to  be  an  indispensable  barrier 
against  the  encroachments  of  the  latter  upon 
the  former.  And  it  may,  perhaps,  with  no  less 
reason  be  contented  that  the  powers  relating 
to  impeachments  are,  as  before  intimated,  an 
essential  check  in  the  hands  of  that  body  upon 
the  encroachments  of  the  executive.  The  divi¬ 
sion  of  them  between  the  two  branches  of  the 
legislature,  assigning  to  one  the  right  of  accus¬ 
ing,  to  the  other  the  right  of  judging,  avoids 
the  inconvenience  of  making  the  same  persons 
both  accusers  and  judges;  and  guards  against 
the  danger  of  persecution,  from  the  prevalency 
of  a  factious  spirit  in  cither  of  those  branches. 
As  the  concurrence  of  two  thirds  of  the  Senate 
will  be  requisite  to  a  condemnation,  the  seen 
rity  to  innocence,  from  this  additional  circum¬ 
stance,  will  be  as  complete  as  itself  can  desire. 

It  is  curious  to  observe  with  what  vehemence 
this  part  of  the  plan  is  assailed,  on  the  princi¬ 
ple  here  taken  notice  of,  by  men  who  profess 


201 


NUMBER  66 


to  admire,  without  exception,  the  constitution 
of  this  State;  while  that  constitution  makes 
the  Senate,  together  with  the  chancellor  and 
judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  not  only  a  court 
of  impeachments,  but  the  highest  judicatory  in 
the  State,  in  all  causes,  civil  and  criminal.  The 
proportion,  in  point  of  numbers,  of  the  chan¬ 
cellor  and  judges  to  the  senators  is  so  incon¬ 
siderable  that  the  judiciary  authority  of  New 
York,  in  the  last  resort,  may,  with  truth,  be 
said  to  reside  in  its  Senate.  If  the  plan  of  the 
convention  be,  in  this  respect,  chargeable  with 
a  departure  from  the  celebrated  maxim  which 
has  been  so  often  mentioned,  and  seems  to  be 
so  little  understood,  how  much  more  culpable 
must  be  the  constitution  of  New  York?1 

A  second  objection  to  the  Senate,  as  a  court 
of  impeachments,  is,  that  it  contributes  to  an 
undue  accumulation  of  power  in  that  body, 
tending  to  give  to  the  government  a  counte¬ 
nance  too  aristocratic.  The  Senate,  it  is  ob¬ 
served,  is  to  have  concurrent  authority  with 
the  Executive  in  the  formation  of  treaties  and 
in  the  appointment  to  offices:  if,  say  the  ob¬ 
jectors,  to  these  prerogatives  is  added  that  of 
deciding  in  all  cases  of  impeachment,  it  will 
give  a  decided  predominancy  to  senatorial  in¬ 
fluence.  To  an  objection  so  little  precise  in 
itself,  it  is  not  easy  to  finda  very  precise  answer. 
Where  is  the  measure  or  criterion  to  which 
we  can  appeal  for  determining  what  will  give 
the  Senate  too  much,  too  little,  or  barely  the 
proper  degree  of  influence?  Will  it  not  be  more 
safe,  as  well  as  more  simple,  to  dismiss  such 
vague  and  uncertain  calculations,  to  examine 
each  power  by  itself,  and  to  decide,  on  general 
principles,  where  it  may  be  deposited  with 
most  advantage  and  least  inconvenience? 

If  we  take  this  course,  it  will  lead  to  a  more 
intelligible,  if  not  to  a  more  certain  result.  The 
disposition  of  the  power  of  making  treaties, 
which  has  obtained  in  the  plan  of  the  conven¬ 
tion,  will,  then,  if  I  mistake  not,  appear  to  be 
fully  justified  by  the  considerations  stated  in  a 
former  number,  and  by  others  which  will  occur 
under  the  next  head  of  our  inquiries.  The 
expediency  of  the  junction  of  the  Senate  wTith 
the  Executive,  in  the  power  of  appointing  to 
offices,  wall,  I  trust,  be  placed  in  a  light  not  less 
satisfactory,  in  the  disquisitions  under  the 

Mn  that  of  New'  Jersey,  also,  the  final  judici¬ 
ary  authority  is  in  a  branch  of  the  legislature. 
In  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania, 
and  South  Carolina,  one  branch  of  the  legislature 
is  the  court  for  the  trial  of  inipeachments.- 
Publics 


same  head.  And  I  flatter  myself  the  observa¬ 
tions  in  my  last  paper  must  have  gone  no  in¬ 
considerable  way  towards  proving  that  it  was 
not  easy,  if  practicable,  to  find  a  more  fit  recep¬ 
tacle  for  the  power  of  determining  impeach¬ 
ments,  than  that  which  has  been  chosen.  If 
this  be  truly  the  case,  the  hypothetical  dread 
of  the  too  great  weight  of  the  Senate  ought  to 
be  discarded  from  our  reasonings. 

But  this  hypothesis,  such  as  it  is,  has  already 
been  refuted  in  the  remarks  applied  to  the 
duration  in  office  prescribed  for  the  senators. 
It  was  by  them  shown,  as  well  on  the  credit  of 
historical  examples,  as  from  the  reason  of  the 
thing,  that  the  most  popular  branch  of  every 
government,  partaking  of  the  republican  gen¬ 
ius,  by  being  generally  the  favourite  of  the 
people,  will  be  as  generally  a  full  match,  if  not 
an  overmatch,  for  every  other  member  of  the 
Government. 

But  independent  of  this  most  active  and 
operative  principle,  to  secure  the  equilibrium 
of  the  national  House  of  Representatives,  the 
plan  of  the  convention  has  provided  in  its 
favour  several  important  counterpoises  to  the 
additional  authorities  to  be  conferred  upon 
the  Senate.  The  exclusive  privilege  of  originat¬ 
ing  money  bills  will  belong  to  the  House  of 
Representatives.  The  same  house  wdll  possess 
the  sole  right  of  instituting  impeachments:  is 
not  this  a  complete  counterbalance  to  that  of 
determining  them?  The  same  house  w’ill  be  the 
umpire  in  all  elections  of  the  President,  w'hich 
do  not  unite  the  suffrages  of  a  majority  of  the 
whole  number  of  electors;  a  case  which  it  can¬ 
not  be  doubted  will  sometimes,  if  not  fre¬ 
quently,  happen.  The  constant  possibility  of 
the  thing  must  be  a  fruitful  source  of  influence 
to  that  body.  The  more  it  is  contemplated,  the 
more  important  will  appear  this  ultimate 
though  contingent  powrer,  of  deciding  the  com¬ 
petitions  of  the  most  illustrious  citizens  of  the 
Union,  for  the  first  office  in  it.  It  w'ould  not 
perhaps  be  rash  to  predict  that  as  a  mean  of 
influence  it  will  be  found  to  outweigh  all  the 
peculiar  attributes  of  the  Senate. 

A  third  objection  to  the  Senate  as  a  court 
of  impeachments  is  drawn  from  the  agency 
they  are  to  have  in  the  appointments  to  office. 
It  is  imagined  that  they  would  be  too  indulgent 
judges  of  the  conduct  of  men.  in  whose  official 
creation  they  had  participated.  The  principle 
of  this  objection  would  condemn  a  practice 
wThich  is  to  be  seen  in  all  the  State  govern¬ 
ments,  if  not  in  all  the  governments  with 
which  we  are  acquainted:  I  mean  that  of  ren- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


dering  those  who  hold  offices  during  pleas¬ 
ure  dependent  on  the  pleasure  of  those  who 
appoint  them.  With  equal  plausibility  might 
it  be  alleged  in  this  case  that  the  favouritism  of 
the  latter  would  always  be  an  asylum  for  the 
misbehaviour  of  the  former.  But  that  practice, 
in  contradiction  to  this  principle,  proceeds 
upon  the  presumption  that  the  responsibility 
of  those  who  appoint,  for  the  fitness  and  com¬ 
petency  of  the  persons  on  whom  they  bestow 
their  choice,  and  the  interest  they  will  have  in 
the  respectable  and  prosperous  administration 
of  affairs,  will  inspire  a  sufficient  disposition 
to  dismiss  from  a  share  in  it  all  such  who,  by 
their  conduct,  shall  have  proved  themselves 
unworthy  of  the  confidence  reposed  in  them. 
Though  facts  may  not  always  correspond  with 
this  presumption,  yet  if  it  be,  in  the  main, 
just,  it  must  destroy  the  supposition  that  the 
Senate,  who  will  merely  sanction  the  choice 
of  the  Executive,  should  feel  a  bias  towards 
the  objects  of  that  choice,  strong  enough  to 
blind  them  to  the  evidences  of  guilt  so  extraor¬ 
dinary,  as  to  have  induced  the  representatives 
of  the  nation  to  become  its  accusers. 

If  any  further  arguments  were  necessary  to 
evince  the  improbability  of  such  a  bias,  it 
might  be  found  in  the  nature  of  the  agency  of 
the  Senate  in  the  business  of  appointments. 

It  will  be  the  office  of  the  President  to  nomi¬ 
nate,  and,  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the 
Senate,  to  appoint.  There  will,  of  course,  be 
no  exertion  of  choice  on  the  part  of  the  Senate. 
They  may  defeat  one  choice  of  the  Executive, 
and  oblige  him  to  make  another;  but  they  can¬ 
not  themselves  choose—  they  can  only  ratify  or 
reject  the  choice  of  the  President.  They  might 
even  entertain  a  preference  to  some  other  per¬ 
son,  at  the  very  moment  they  were  assenting  to 
the  one  proposed,  because  there  might  be  no 
positive  ground  of  opposition  to  him;  and 
they  could  not  be  sure,  if  they  withheld  their 
assent,  that  the  subsequent  nomination  would 
fall  upon  their  own  favourite,  or  upon  any 
other  person  in  their  estimation  more  meri¬ 
torious  than  the  one  rejected.  Thus  it  could 
hardly  happen  that  the  majority  of  the  Senate 
would  feel  any  other  complacency  towards  the 
object  of  an  appointment  than  such  as  the 
appearances  of  merit  might  inspire,  and  the 
proofs  of  the  want  of  it  destroy. 

A  fourth  objection  to  the  Senate,  in  the 
capacity  of  a  court  of  impeachments,  is  de¬ 
rived  from  its  union  with  the  Executive  in 
the  power  of  making  treaties.  r\  his,  it  has  been 
said,  would  constitute  the  senators  their  own 


judges,  in  every  case  of  a  corrupt  or  perfidious 
execution  of  that  trust.  After  having  combined 
with  the  Executive  in  betraying  the  interests 
of  the  nation  in  a  ruinous  treaty,  what  pros¬ 
pect,  it  is  asked,  would  there  be  of  their  being 
made  to  suffer  the  punishment  they  would 
deserve,  when  they  were  themselves  to  decide 
upon  the  accusation  brought  against  them  for 
the  treachery  of  which  they  have  been  guilty? 

This  objection  has  been  circulated  with 
more  earnestness  and  with  greater  show  of 
reason  than  any  other  which  has  appeared 
against  this  part  of  the  plan;  and  yet  I  am 
deceived  if  it  does  not  rest  upon  an  erroneous 
foundation. 

The  security  essentially  intended  by  the 
Constitution  against  corruption  and  treachery 
in  the  formation  of  treaties  is  to  be  sought  for 
in  the  numbers  and  characters  of  those  who 
are  to  make  them.  The  joint  agency  of  the 
Chief  Magistrate  of  the  Union,  and  of  two 
thirds  of  the  members  of  a  body  selected  by 
the  collective  wisdom  of  the  legislatures  of  the 
several  States,  is  designed  to  be  the  pledge  for 
the  fidelity  of  the  national  councils  in  this 
particular.  The  convention  might  with  pro¬ 
priety  have  meditated  the  punishment  of  the 
Executive,  for  a  deviation  from  the  instruc¬ 
tions  of  the  Senate,  or  a  want  of  integrity  in 
the  conduct  of  the  negotiations  committed  to 
him;  they  might  also  have  had  in  view  the 
punishment  of  a  few  leading  individuals  in 
the  Senate,  who  should  have  prostituted  their 
influence  in  that  body  as  the  mercenary  in¬ 
struments  of  foreign  corruption:  but  they 
could  not,  with  more  or  with  equal  propriety, 
have  contemplated  the  impeachment  and  pun¬ 
ishment  of  two  thirds  of  the  Senate  consent¬ 
ing  to  an  improper  treaty,  than  of  a  major¬ 
ity  of  that  or  of  the  other  branch  of  the 
national  legislature  consenting  to  a  pernicious 
or  unconstitutional  law— a  principle  which,  1 
believe,  has  never  been  admitted  into  any 
government.  I  low,  in  lact,  could  a  majority 
in  the  l  louse  of  Representatives  impeach  them¬ 
selves?  Not  better,  it  is  evident,  than  two  thirds 
of  the  Senate  might  try  themselves.  And  yet 
what  reason  is  there  that  a  majority  of  the 
1  louse  of  Representatives,  sacrificing  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  the  society  by  an  unjust  and  tyrannical 
act  of  legislation,  should  escape  with  impunity, 
more  than  two  thirds  of  the  Senate,  sacrificing 
the  same  interests  in  an  injurious  treaty  with 
a  foreign  power?  The  truth  is,  that  in  all  such 
cases  it  is  essential  to  the  freedom  and  to  the 
necessary  independence  of  the  deliberations  of 


NUMBER  67  203 


the  body,  that  the  members  of  it  should  be 
exempt  from  punishment  for  acts  done  in  a 
collective  capacity;  and  the  security  to  the 
society  must  depend  on  the  care  which  is  taken 
to  Confide  the  trust  to  proper  hands,  to  make 
it  their  interest  to  execute  it  with  fidelity,  and 
to  make  it  as  difficult  as  possible  for  them  to 
combine  in  any  interest  opposite  to  that  of  the 
public  good. 

So  far  as  might  concern  the  misbehaviour 
of  the  Executive  in  perverting  the  instructions 
or  contravening  the  views  of  the  Senate,  we 
need  not  be  apprehensive  of  the  want  of  a 
disposition  in  that  body  to  punish  the  abuse 
of  their  confidence,  or  to  vindicate  their  own 
authority.  We  may  thus  far  count  upon  their 
pride,  if  not  upon  their  virtue.  And  so  far 
even  as  might  concern  the  corruption  of  lead¬ 
ing  members,  by  whose  arts  and  influence  the 
majority  may  have  been  inveigled  into  meas¬ 
ures  odious  to  the  community,  if  the  proofs 
of  that  corruption  should  be  satisfactory,  the 
usual  propensity  of  human  nature  will  war¬ 
rant  us  in  concluding  that  there  would  be  com¬ 
monly  no  defect  of  inclination  in  the  body  to 
divert  the  public  resentment  from  themselves 
by  a  ready  sacrifice  of  the  authors  of  their 
mismanagement  and  disgrace.  Publius 

Number  67 

[HAMILTON] 

The  constitution  of  the  executive  depart¬ 
ment  of  the  proposed  government  claims  next 
our  attention. 

There  is  hardly  any  part  of  the  system  which 
could  have  been  attended  with  greater  diffi¬ 
culty  in  the  arrangement  of  it  than  this;  and 
there  is,  perhaps,  none  which  has  been  in¬ 
veighed  against  with  less  candour  or  criticised 
with  less  judgment. 

Here  the  writers  against  the  Constitution 
seem  to  have  taken  pains  to  signalise  their  tal¬ 
ent  of  misrepresentation.  Calculating  upon  the 
aversion  of  the  people  to  monarchy,  they  have 
endeavoured  to  enlist  all  their  jealousies  and 
apprehensions  in  opposition  to  the  intended 
President  of  the  United  States;  not  merely  as 
the  embryo,  but  as  ihe  full-grown  progeny, 
of  that  detested  parent.  To  establish  the  pre¬ 
tended  affinity,  they  have  not  scrupled  to  draw 
resources  even  from  the  regions  of  fiction. 
The  authorities  of  a  magistrate,  in  few  in¬ 
stances  greater,  in  some  instances  less,  than 
those  of  a  governor  of  New  York,  have  been 
magnified  into  more  than  royal  prerogatives. 


He  has  been  decorated  with  attributes  superior 
in  dignity  and  splendour  to  those  of  a  king  of 
Great  Britain.  He  has  been  shown  to  us  with 
the  diadem  sparkling  on  his  brow  and  the 
imperial  purple  flowing  in  his  train.  He  has 
been  seated  on  a  throne  surrounded  with  min¬ 
ions  and  mistresses,  giving  audience  to  the 
envoys  of  foreign  potentates,  in  all  the  super¬ 
cilious  pomp  of  majesty.  The  image  of  Asiatic 
despotism  and  voluptuousness  have  scarcely 
been  wanting  to  crown  the  exaggerated  scene. 
We  have  been  taught  to  tremble  at  the  terrific 
visages  of  murdering  janizaries,  and  to  blush 
at  the  unveiled  mysteries  of  a  future  seraglio. 

Attempts  so  extravagant  as  these  to  disfigure 
or,  it  might  rather  be  said,  to  metamorphose 
the  object,  render  it  necessary  to  take  an  accu¬ 
rate  view  of  its  real  nature  and  form:  in  order 
as  well  to  ascertain  its  true  aspect  and  genuine 
appearance,  as  to  unmask  the  disingenuity  and 
expose  the  fallacy  of  the  counterfeit  resem¬ 
blances  which  have  been  so  insidiously,  as  well 
as  industriously,  propagated. 

In  the  execution  of  this  task  there  is  no  man 
who  would  not  find  it  an  arduous  effort  either 
to  behold  with  moderation,  or  to  treat  with  se¬ 
riousness,  the  devices,  not  less  weak  than  wick¬ 
ed,  which  have  been  contrived  to  pervert  the 
public  opinion  in  relation  to  the  subject.  They 
so  far  exceed  the  usual  though  unjustifiable 
licences  of  party  artifice,  that  even  in  a  dis¬ 
position  the  most  candid  and  tolerant,  they 
must  force  the  sentiments  which  favour  an 
indulgent  construction  of  the  conduct  of  polit¬ 
ical  adversaries  to  give  place  to  a  voluntary 
and  unreserved  indignation.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  bestow  the  imputation  of  deliberate 
imposture  and  deception  upon  the  gross  pre¬ 
tence  of  a  similitude  between  a  king  of  Great 
Britain  and  a  magistrate  of  the  character  mark¬ 
ed  out  for  that  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States.  It  is  still  more  impossible  to  withhold 
that  imputation  from  the  rash  and  barefaced 
expedients  which  have  been  employed  to  give 
success  to  the  attempted  imposition. 

In  one  instance,  which  I  cite  as  a  sample  of 
the  general  spirit,  the  temerity  has  proceeded 
so  far  as  to  ascribe  to  the  President  of  the 
United  States  a  power  which  by  the  instru¬ 
ment  reported  is  expressly  allotted  to  the  Exec¬ 
utives  of  the  individual  States.  1  mean  the 
power  of  filling  casual  vacancies  in  the  Senate. 

This  bold  experiment  upon  the  discernment 
of  his  countrymen  has  been  hazarded  by  a 
writer  who  (whatever  may  be  his  real  merit) 
has  had  no  inconsiderable  share  in  the  ap- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


plauses  of  his  partv1;  and  who,  upon  this  false 
and  unfounded  suggestion,  has  built  a  series 
of  observations  equally  false  and  unfounded. 
Let  him  now  be  confronted  with  the  evidence 
of  the  fact,  and  let  him,  if  he  be  able,  justify 
or  extenuate  the  shameful  outrage  he  has  of¬ 
fered  to  the  dictates  of  truth  and  to  the  rules  of 
fair  dealing. 

The  second  clause  of  the  second  section  of 
the  second  article  empowers  the  President  of 
the  United  States  “to  nominate,  and  by  and 
with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  to 
appoint  ambassadors,  other  public  ministers 
and  consuls,  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  and 
all  other  officers  of  United  States  whose  ap¬ 
pointments  are  not  in  the  Constitution  other¬ 
wise  provided  for,  and  which  shall  he  estab¬ 
lished  by  law”  Immediately  after  this  clause 
follows  another  in  these  words:  “The  Presi¬ 
dent  shall  have  power  to  fill  up  all  vacancies 
that  may  happen  during  the  recess  of  the  Seri¬ 
ate,  by  granting  commissions  which  shall  ex¬ 
pire  at  the  end  of  their  next  session.”  It  is  from 
this  last  provision  that  the  pretended  power  of 
the  President  to  fill  vacancies  in  the  Senate 
has  been  deduced.  A  slight  attention  to  the 
connection  of  the  clauses,  and  to  the  obvious 
meaning  of  the  terms,  will  satisfy  us  that  the 
deduction  is  not  even  colourable. 

The  first  of  these  two  clauses,  it  is  clear,  only 
provides  a  mode  for  appointing  such  officers, 
“whose  appointments  are  not  otherwise  pro¬ 
vided  for  in  the  Constitution,  and  which  shall 
be  established  by  law”;  of  course  it  cannot 
extend  to  the  appointments  of  senators,  whose 
appointments  are  otherwise  provided  for  in 
the  Constitution.2  and  who  are  established  by 
the  Constitution,  and  will  not  require  a  future 
establishment  by  law.  This  position  will  hardly 
be  contested. 

The  last  of  these  two  clauses,  it  is  equally 
clear,  cannot  be  understood  to  comprehend 
the  power  of  filling  vacancies  in  the  Senate, 
for  the  following  reasons:—  First,  The  relation 
in  which  that  clause  stands  to  the  other,  which 
declares  the  general  mode  of  appointing  offi¬ 
cers  of  the  United  States,  denotes  it  to  be 
nothing  more  than  a  supplement  to  the  other, 
for  the  purpose  of  establishing  an  auxiliary 
method  of  appointment,  in  cases  to  which 
the  general  method  was  inadequate.  The  or¬ 
dinary  power  of  appointment  is  confined  to 
the  President  and  Senate  jointly,  and  can 
therefore  only  be  exercised  during  the  session 

1  See  Cam,  No.  V.— Pima  us 

3  Article  1,  section  3,  clause  1.— Puiilius 


of  the  Senate:  but  as  it  would  have  been  im¬ 
proper  to  oblige  this  body  to  be  continually  in 
session  for  the  appointment  of  officers,  and  as 
vacancies  might  happen  in  their  recess ,  which 
it  might  be  necessary  for  the  public  service  to 
fill  without  delay,  the  succeeding  clause  is  evi¬ 
dently  intended  to  authorise  the  President, 
singly,  to  make  temporary  appointments  “dur¬ 
ing  the  recess  of  the  Senate,  bv  granting  com¬ 
missions  which  shall  expire  at  the  end  of  their 
next  session.”  Secondly.  If  this  clause  is  to  be 
considered  as  supplementary  to  the  one  which 
precedes,  the  vacancies  of  wffiich  it  speaks  must 
be  construed  to  relate  to  the  “officers”  de¬ 
scribed  in  the  preceding  one:  and  this,  we  have 
seen,  excludes  from  its  description  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  Senate.  Thirdly.  The  time  within 
which  the  power  is  to  operate,  “during  the 
recess  of  the  Senate,”  and  the  duration  of  the 
appointments,  “to  the  end  of  the  next  session” 
of  that  body,  conspire  to  elucidate  the  sense  of 
the  provision,  which,  if  it  had  been  intended 
to  comprehend  senators,  would  naturally  have 
referred  the  temporary  power  of  filling  vacan¬ 
cies  to  the  recess  of  the  State  legislatures,  who 
are  to  make  the  permanent  appointments,  and 
not  to  the  recess  of  the  national  Senate,  who 
are  to  have  no  concern  in  those  appointments; 
and  would  have  extended  the  duration  in 
office  of  the  temporary  senators  to  the  next 
session  of  the  legislature  of  the  State,  in  whose 
representation  the  vacancies  had  happened, 
instead  of  making  it  to  expire  at  the  end  of  the 
ensuing  session  of  the  national  Senate.  The 
circumstances  of  the  body  authorised  to  make 
the  permanent  appointments  would,  of  course, 
have  governed  the  modification  of  a  power 
which  related  to  the  temporary  appointments; 
and  as  the  national  Senate  is  the  body  whose 
situation  is  alone  contemplated  in  the  clause 
upon  which  the  suggestion  under  examination 
has  been  founded,  the  vacancies  to  which  it 
alludes  can  only  be  deemed  to  respect  those 
officers  in  whose  appointment  that  body  has 
a  concurrent  agency  with  the  President.  Blit 
lastly,  the  first  and  second  clauses  of  the  third 
section  of  the  first  article,  not  only  obviate  all 
possibility  of  doubt  but  destroy  the  pretext  of 
misconception.  The  former  provides  that  “the 
Senate  of  the  United  States  shall  be  composed 
of  two  Senators  from  each  State,  chosen  by  the 
legislature  thereof  for  six  years”;  and  the  latter 
directs  that,  “if  vacancies  in  that  body  should 
happen  by  resignation  or  otherwise,  during 
the  recess  of  the  legislature  of  any  State, 
the  Executive  thereof  mav  make  temporary 


NUMBER  68  205 


appointments  until  the  next  meeting  of  the 
legislature,  which  shall  then  fill  such  vacan¬ 
cies.”  Here  is  an  express  power  given,  in  clear 
and  unambiguous  terms,  to  the  State  Execu¬ 
tives,  to  fill  casual  vacancies  in  the  Senate,  by 
temporary  appointments;  which  not  only  in¬ 
validates  the  supposition,  that  the  clause  be¬ 
fore  considered  could  have  been  intended  to 
confer  that  power  upon  the  President  of  the 
United  States,  but  proves  that  this  supposi¬ 
tion,  destitute  as  it  is  even  of  the  merit  of 
plausibility,  must  have  originated  in  an  inten¬ 
tion  to  deceive  the  people,  too  palpable  to  be 
obscured  by  sophistry,  too  atrocious  to  be  pal¬ 
liated  by  hypocrisy. 

I  have  taken  the  pains  to  select  this  instance 
of  misrepresentation,  and  to  place  it  in  a  clear 
and  strong  light,  as  an  unequivocal  proof  of 
the  unwarrantable  arts  which  are  practised  to 
prevent  a  fair  and  impartial  judgment  of  the 
real  merits  of  the  Constitution  submitted  to 
the  consideration  of  the  people.  Nor  have  I 
scrupled,  in  so  flagrant  a  case,  to  allow  myself 
a  severity  of  animadversion  little  congenial 
with  the  general  spirit  of  these  papers.  I  hesi¬ 
tate  not  to  submit  it  to  the  decision  of  any 
candid  and  honest  adversary  of  the  proposed 
government,  whether  language  can  furnish 
epithets  of  too  much  asperity,  for  so  shameless 
and  so  prostitute  an  attempt  to  impose  on  the 
citizens  of  America.  Publius 

Number  68 

[HAMILTON] 

The  mode  of  appointment  of  the  Chief  Magis¬ 
trate  of  the  United  States  is  almost  the  only 
part  of  the  system,  of  any  consequence,  which 
has  escaped  without  severe  censure,  or  which 
has  received  the  slightest  mark  of  approbation 
from  its  opponents.  The  most  plausible  of 
these,  who  has  appeared  in  print,  has  even 
deigned  to  admit  that  the  election  of  the  Presi¬ 
dent  is  pretty  well  guarded.1  I  venture  some¬ 
what  further,  and  hesitate  not  to  affirm,  that 
if  the  manner  of  it  be  not  perfect,  it  is  at  least 
excellent.  It  unites  in  an  eminent  degree  all 
the  advantages,  the  union  of  which  was  to  be 
wished  for. 

It  was  desirable  that  the  sense  of  the  people 
should  operate  in  the  choice  of  the  person  to 
whom  so  important  a  trust  was  to  be  confided. 
This  end  will  be  answered  by  committing  the 
right  of  making  it.  not  to  any  pre-established 
body,  but  to  men  chosen  by  the  people  tor  the 

1  Vide  Federal  Farmer.— Publius 


special  purpose,  and  at  the  particular  conjunc¬ 
ture. 

It  was  equally  desirable  that  the  immediate 
election  should  be  made  by  men  most  capable 
of  analysing  the  qualities  adapted  to  the  sta¬ 
tion,  and  acting  under  circumstances  favour¬ 
able  to  deliberation,  and  to  a  judicious  com¬ 
bination  of  all  the  reasons  and  inducements 
which  were  proper  to  govern  their  choice.  A 
small  number  of  persons,  selected  by  their  fel¬ 
low-citizens  from  the  general  mass,  will  be 
most  likely  to  possess  the  information  and  dis¬ 
cernment  requisite  to  such  complicated  inves¬ 
tigations. 

It  was  also  peculiarly  desirable  to  afford  as 
little  opportunity  as  possible  to  tumult  and 
disorder.  This  evil  was  not  least  to  be  dreaded 
in  the  election  of  a  magistrate,  who  was  to  have 
so  important  an  agency  in  the  administration 
of  the  government  as  the  President  of  the 
United  States.  But  the  precautions  which  have 
been  so  happily  concerted  in  the  system  under 
consideration,  promise  an  effectual  security 
against  this  mischief.  The  choice  of  several , 
to  form  an  intermediate  body  of  electors,  will 
be  much  less  apt  to  convulse  the  community 
with  any  extraordinary  or  violent  movements 
than  the  choice  of  one  who  was  himself  to  be 
the  final  object  of  the  public  wishes.  And  as 
the  electors  chosen  in  each  State  are  to  as¬ 
semble  and  vote  in  the  State  in  which  they  are 
chosen,  this  detached  and  divided  situation 
will  expose  them  much  less  to  heats  and  fer¬ 
ments,  which  might  be  communicated  from 
them  to  the  people,  than  if  they  were  all  to  be 
convened  at  one  time  in  one  place. 

Nothing  was  more  to  be  desired  than  that 
every  practicable  obstacle  should  be  opposed 
to  cabal,  intrigue,  and  corruption.  These  most 
deadly  aversaries  of  republican  government 
might  naturally  have  been  expected  to  make 
their  approaches  from  more  than  one  quarter, 
but  chiefly  from  the  desire  in  foreign  powers 
to  gain  an  improper  ascendant  in  our  councils. 
How  could  they  better  gratify  this  than  by 
raising  a  creature  of  their  own  to  the  chief 
magistracy  of  the  Union?  But  the  convention 
have  guarded  against  all  danger  of  this  sort 
with  the  most  provident  and  judicious  atten¬ 
tion.  They  have  not  made  the  appointment  of 
the  President  to  depend  on  any  pre-existing 
bodies  of  men,  who  might  be  tampered  with 
beforehand  to  prostitute  their  votes;  but  they 
have  referred  it  in  the  first  instance  to  an  im¬ 
mediate  act  of  the  people  of  America,  to  be 
exerted  in  the  choice  of  persons  for  the  tempo- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


rarv  and  sole  purpose  of  making  the  appoint¬ 
ment.  And  they  have  excluded  from  eligibility 
to  this  trust  all  those  who  from  situation  might 
be  suspected  of  too  great  devotion  to  the  Presi¬ 
dent  in  office.  No  senator,  representative,  or 
other  person  holding  a  place  of  trust  or  profit 
under  the  United  States  can  be  of  the  numbers 
of  the  electors.  Thus  without  corrupting  the 
bodv  of  the  people,  the  immediate  agents  in 
the  election  will  at  least  enter  upon  the  task 
free  from  any  sinister  bias.  Their  transient  ex¬ 
istence,  and  their  detached  situation,  already 
taken  notice  of,  afford  a  satisfactory  prospect 
of  their  continuing  so  to  the  conclusion  of  it. 
The  business  of  corruption,  when  it  is  to  em¬ 
brace  so  considerable  a  number  of  men,  re¬ 
quires  time  as  well  as  means.  Nor  would  it  be 
found  easy  suddenly  to  embark  them,  dispers¬ 
ed  as  they  would  be  over  thirteen  States,  in  any 
combinations  founded  upon  motives  which, 
though  they  could  not  properly  be  denominat¬ 
ed  corrupt,'  might  yet  be  of  a  nature  to  mislead 
them  from  their  duty. 

Another  and  no  less  important  desideratum 
was  that  the  Executive  should  be  independent 
for  his  continuance  in  office  on  all  but  the 
people  themselves.  He  might  otherwise  be 
tempted  to  sacrifice  his  duty  to  hjs  complai¬ 
sance  for  those  whose  favour  was  necessary  to 
the  duration  of  his  official  consequence.  This 
advantage  will  also  be  secured  by  making  his 
re-election  to  depend  on  a  special  body  of 
representatives,  deputed  by  the  society  for  the 
single  purpose  of  making  the  important  choice. 

All  these  advantages  will  happily  combine 
in  the  plan  devised  by  the  convention;  which 
is,  that  the  people  of  each  State  shall  choose 
a  number  of  persons  as  electors,  equal  to  the 
number  of  senators  and  representatives  of  such 
State  in  the  national  government,  who  shall 
assemble  within  the  State  and  vote  for  some 
fit  person  as  President.  Their  votes,  thus  given, 
are  to  be  transmitted  to  the  scat  of  the  national 
government,  and  the  person  who  may  happen 
to  have  a  majority  of  the  whole  number  of 
votes  will  be  the  President.  But  as  a  majority 
of  the  votes  might  not  always  happen  to  centre 
in  one  mail,  and  as  it  might  be  unsafe  to  per¬ 
mit  less  than  a  majority  to  be  conclusive,  it 
is  provided  that,  in  such  a  contingency,  the 
House  of  Representatives  shall  select  out  of 
the  candidates  who  shall  have  the  five  highest 
number  of  votes,  the  man  who  in  their  opinion 
may  be  best  qualified  for  the  office. 

The  process  of  election  affords  a  moral  cer¬ 
tainty  that  the  office  of  President  will  never 


fall  to  the  lot  of  any  man  who  is  not  in  an 
eminent  degree  endowed  with  the  requisite 
qualifications.  Talents  for  low  intrigue  and  the 
little  arts  of  popularity  may  alone  suffice  to 
elevate  a  man  to  the  first  honours  in  a  single 
State;  but  it  will  require  other  talents,  and  a 
different  kind  of  merit,  to  establish  him  in  the 
esteem  and  confidence  of  the  whole  Union,  or 
of  so  considerable  a  portion  of  it  as  would  be 
necessary  to  make  him  a  successful  candidate 
for  the  distinguished  office  of  President  of  the 
United  States.  It  will  not  be  too  strong  to  say 
that  there  will  be  a  constant  probability  of 
seeing  the  station  filled  by  characters  pre-emi¬ 
nent  for  ability  and  virtue.  And  this  will  be 
thought  no  inconsiderable  recommendation  of 
the  Constitution  by  those  who  are  able  to  esti¬ 
mate  the  share  which  the  executive  in  every 
government  must  necessarily  have  in  its  good 
or  ill  administration.  Though  we  cannot  ac¬ 
quiesce  in  the  political  heresy  of  the  poet  who 
says— 

For  forms  of  government  let  fools  contest— 

That  which  is  best  administered  is  best  — 

yet  we  may  safely  pronounce  that  the  true 
test  of  a  good  government  is  its  aptitude  and 
tendency  to  produce  a  good  administration. 

The  Vice-President  is  to  be  chosen  in  the 
same  manner  with  the  President;  with  this 
difference,  that  the  Senate  is  to  do,  in  respect 
to  the  former,  what  is  to  be  done  by  the  House 
of  Representatives,  in  respect  to  the  latter. 

The  appointment  of  an  extraordinary  per¬ 
son,  as  Vice-President,  has  been  objected  to  as 
superfluous,  if  not  mischievous.  It  has  been 
alleged,  that  it  would  have  been  preferable  to 
have  authorised  the  Senate  to  elect  out  of  their 
own  body  an  officer  answering  that  description. 
But  two  considerations  seem  to  justify  the  ideas 
of  the  convention  in  this  respect.  One  is,  that 
to  secure  at  all  times  the  possibility  of  a  defi¬ 
nite  resolution  of  the  body,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  President  should  have  only  a  casting  vote. 
And  to  take  the  senator  of  any  State  from 
his  scat  as  senator,  to  place  him  in  that  of 
President  of  the  Senate,  would  be  to  exchange, 
in  regard  to  the  State  from  which  he  came,  a 
constant  for  a  contingent  vote.  I  he  other  con¬ 
sideration  is.  that  as  the  Vice-President  may 
occasionally  become  a  substitute  for  the  Presi¬ 
dent,  in  the  supreme  executive  magistracy,  all 
the  reasons  which  recommend  the  mode  of 
election  prescribed  for  t lie  one  apply  with 
great  if  not  with  equal  force  to  the  manner  of 
appointing  the  other.  It  is  remarkable  that  in 


NUMBER  6p  207 


this,  as  in  most  other  instances,  the  objection 
which  is  made  would  lie  against  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  this  State.  We  have  a  Lieutenant-Gov¬ 
ernor,  chosen  by  the  people  at  large,  who  pre¬ 
sides  in  the  Senate,  and  is  the  constitutional 
substitute  for  the  Governor  in  casualties  simi¬ 
lar  to  those  which  would  authorise  the  Vice- 
President  to  exercise  the  authorities  and  dis¬ 
charge  the  duties  of  the  President.  Publius 

Number  6g 

[HAMILTON] 

I  proceed  now  to  trace  the  real  characters  of 
the  proposed  Executive,  as  they  are  marked 
out  in  the  plan  of  the  convention.  This  will 
serve  to  place  in  a  strong  light  the  unfairness 
of  the  representations  which  have  been  made 
in  regard  to  it. 

The  first  thing  which  strikes  our  attention 
is  that  the  executive  authority,  with  few  excep¬ 
tions,  is  to  be  vested  in  a  single  magistrate. 
This  will  scarcely,  however,  be  considered  as 
a  point  upon  which  any  comparison  can  be 
grounded;  for  if,  in  this  particular,  there  be  a 
resemblance  to  the  king  of  Great  Britain,  there 
is  not  less  a  resemblance  to  the  Grand  Seignior, 
to  the  khan  of  Tartary,  to  the  Man  of  the 
Seven  Mountains,  or  to  the  governor  of  New 
York. 

That  magistrate  is  to  be  elected  for  four 
years;  and  is  to  be  re-eligible  as  often  as  the 
people  of  the  United  States  shall  think  him 
worthy  of  their  confidence.  In  these  circum¬ 
stances  there  is  a  total  dissimilitude  between 
him  and  a  king  of  Great  Britain,  who  is  an  he¬ 
reditary  monarch,  possessing  the  crown  as  a 
patrimony  descendible  to  his  heirs  for  ever; 
but  there  is  a  close  analogy  between  him  and  a 
governor  of  New  York,  who  is  elected  for  three 
years,  and  is  re-eligible  without  limitation  or 
intermission.  If  we  consider  howmuch  less  time 
would  be  requisite  for  establishing  a  danger¬ 
ous  influence  in  a  single  State  than  for  estab¬ 
lishing  a  like  influence  throughout  the  United 
States  we  must  conclude  that  a  duration  of 
four  years  for  the  Chief  Magistrate  of  the  Un¬ 
ion  is  a  degree  of  permanency  far  less  to  be 
dreaded  in  that  office  than  a  duration  of  three 
years  for  a  corresponding  office  in  a  single 
State. 

The  President  of  the  United  States  would  he 
liable  to  be  impeached,  tried,  and,  upon  con¬ 
viction  of  treason,  bribery,  or  other  high  crimes 
or  misdemeanours,  removed  from  office;  and 
would  afterwards  be  liable  to  prosecution  and 


punishment  in  the  ordinary  course  of  law.  The 
person  of  the  king  of  Great  Britain  is  sacred 
and  inviolable;  there  is  no  constitutional  tri¬ 
bunal  to  which  he  is  amenable;  no  punishment 
to  which  he  can  be  subjected  without  involv¬ 
ing  the  crisis  of  a  national  revolution.  In  this 
delicate  and  important  circumstance  of  per¬ 
sonal  responsibility,  the  President  of  Confed¬ 
erated  America  would  stand  upon  no  better 
ground  than  a  governor  of  New  York,  and  up¬ 
on  worse  ground  than  the  governors  of  Mary 
land  and  Delaware. 

The  President  of  the  United  States  is  to  have 
power  to  return  a  bill  which  shall  have  passed 
the  two  branches  of  the  legislature  for  recon¬ 
sideration;  and  the  bill  so  returned  is  to  be¬ 
come  a  law  if.  upon  that  reconsideration,  it  be 
approved  by  two  thirds  of  both  houses.  The 
king  of  Great  Britain,  on  his  part,  has  an  abso¬ 
lute  negative  upon  the  acts  of  the  two  houses 
of  Parliament.  The  disuse  of  that  power  for  a 
considerable  time  past  does  not  affect  the  re¬ 
ality  of  its  existence;  and  is  to  be  ascribed 
wholly  to  the  crown’s  having  found  the  means 
of  substituting  influence  to  authority,  or  the 
art  of  gaining  a  majority  in  one  or  the  other  of 
the  two  houses,  to  the  necessity  of  exerting  a 
prerogative  which  could  seldom  be  exerted 
without  hazarding  some  degree  of  national 
agitation.  The  qualified  negative  of  the  Presi¬ 
dent  differs  widely  from  this  absolute  negative 
of  the  British  sovereign;  and  tallies  exactly 
with  the  revisionary  authority  of  the  council 
of  revision  of  this  State,  of  which  the  governor 
is  a  constituent  part.  In  this  respect  the  power 
of  the  President  would  exceed  that  of  the  gov¬ 
ernor  of  New  York,  because  the  former  would 
possess,  singly,  what  the  latter  shares  with  the 
chancellor  and  judges;  but  it  would  be  pre¬ 
cisely  the  same  with  that  of  the  governor  of 
Massachusetts,  whose  constitution,  as  to  this 
article,  seems  to  have  been  the  original  from 
which  the  convention  have  copied. 

The  President  is  to  be  the  “commander-in¬ 
chief  of  the  army  and  navyof  the  United  States, 
and  of  the  militia  of  the  several  States,  wflien 
called  into  the  actual  service  of  the  United 
States.  He  is  to  have  power  to  grant  reprieves 
and  pardons  for  offences  against  the  United 
States,  except  in  cases  of  impeachment;  to  rec¬ 
ommend  to  the  consideration  of  Congress  such 
measures  as  he  shall  judge  necessary  and  ex¬ 
pedient;  to  convene,  on  extraordinary  occa¬ 
sions,  both  houses  of  the  legislature,  or  either 
of  them,  and,  in  case  of  disagreement  between 
them  with  respect  to  the  time  of  adjournment. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


208 

to  adjourn  them  to  such  time  as  he  shall  think 
proper;  to  take  care  that  the  laws  be  faithfully 
executed;  and  to  commission  all  officers  of  the 
United  States/’  In  most  of  these  particulars  the 
power  of  the  President  will  resemble  equally 
that  of  the  king  of  Great  Britain  and  of  the 
governor  of  New  York.  The  most  material 
points  of  difference  are  these;—  First.  The  Pres¬ 
ident  will  have  only  the  occasional  command 
of  such  part  of  the  militia  of  the  nation  as  by 
legislative  provision  may  be  called  into  the  ac¬ 
tual  service  of  the  Union.  The  king  of  Great 
Britain  and  the  governor  of  New  York  have  at 
all  times  the  entire  command  of  all  the  militia 
within  their  several  jurisdictions.  In  this  ar¬ 
ticle,  therefore,  the  power  of  the  President 
would  be  inferior  to  that  of  either  the  mon¬ 
arch  or  the  governor.  Secondly .  The  President 
is  to  be  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  and 
navv  of  the  United  States.  In  this  respect  his 
authority  would  be  nominally  the  same  with 
that  of  the  king  of  Great  Britain,  but  in  sub¬ 
stance  much  inferior  to  it.  It  would  amount  to 
nothing  more  than  the  supreme  command  and 
direction  of  the  military  and  naval  forces,  as 
first  general  and  admiral  of  the  Confederacy; 
while  that  of  the  British  king  extends  to  the 
declaring  of  war  and  to  the  raising  and  regu¬ 
lating  of  fleets  and  armies— all  which,  by  the 
Constitution  under  consideration,  would  ap¬ 
pertain  to  the  legislature/  The  governor  of 
New  York,  on  the  other  hand,  is  by  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  State  vested  only  with  the  com¬ 
mand  of  its  militia  anti  navy.  But  the  consti¬ 
tutions  of  several  of  the  States  expressly  de¬ 
clare  their  governors  to  he  commanders-in- 
chief,  as  well  of  the  army  as  navy;  and  it  may 
well  he  a  question  whether  those  of  New  Hamp¬ 
shire  and  Massachusetts,  in  particular,  do  not, 
in  this  instance,  confer  larger  powers  upon 

writer  in  a  Pennsylvania  paper,  under  the 
signature  of  Tamony,  lias  asserted  that  the  king 
of  Great  Hriiain  owes  Ids  prerogative  as  com¬ 
mander-in-chief  to  an  annual  mutiny  hill.  1  he 
truth  is,  on  the  contrary,  that  his  prerogative,  in 
this  respect,  is  immemorial,  and  was  only  dis¬ 
puted,  “contrary  10  all  icason  and  precedent,” 
as  Blackslone,  vol.  i.  page  262,  expresses  it,  by  the 
Long  Parliament  of  Chillies  L;  hut  b\  the  statute 
die  13th  of  Charles  II.  chap,  vi.,  ii  was  declared  to 
he  in  the  king  alone,  for  that  the  sole  supreme 
government  and  command  of  the  militia  within 
his  M  a  jests’*  icalms  and  dominions,  and  of  all 
force's  by  sea  and  land,  and  of  all  forts  and  places 
of  strength,  1  vi  r  was  ami  is  the  undoubted  right 
of  his  Majesty  and  his  royal  predecessors,  kings 
and  queens  of  Kngkmd,  and  that  both  or  either 
house  of  Parliament  cannot  not  ought  to  pretend 
to  the  same.— Pf at. 1  us 


their  respective  governors  than  could  be  claim¬ 
ed  by  a  President  of  the  United  States.  Thirdly. 
The  power  of  the  President,  in  respect  to  par¬ 
dons,  would  extend  to  all  cases,  except  those 
of  impeachment .  The  governor  of  New  \ork 
may  pardon  in  all  cases,  even  in  those  of  im¬ 
peachment,  except  for  treason  and  murder.  Is 
not  the  power  of  the  governor,  in  this  article, 
on  a  calculation  of  political  consequences, 
greater  than  that  of  the  President?  All  con¬ 
spiracies  and  plots  against  the  government 
which  have  not  been  matured  into  actual  trea¬ 
son  may  be  screened  front  punishment  of  every 
kind  by  the  interposition  of  the  prerogative 
of  pardoning.  If  a  governor  of  New  York, 
therefore,  should  be  at  the  head  of  any  such 
conspiracy,  until  the  design  had  been  ripened 
into  actual  hostility  he  could  insure  his  accom¬ 
plices  and  adherents  an  entire  impunity.  A 
President  of  the  Union,  on  the  other  hand, 
though  he  may  even  pardon  treason  when  pros¬ 
ecuted  in  the  ordinary  course  of  law,  could 
shelter  no  offender,  in  any  degree,  from  the  ef¬ 
fects  of  impeachment  and  conviction.  Would 
not  the  prospect  of  a  total  indemnity  for  all 
the  preliminary  steps  be  a  greater  temptation 
to  undertake  and  persevere  in  an  enterprise 
against  the  public  liberty  than  the  mere  pros¬ 
pect  of  an  exemption  from  death  and  confisca¬ 
tion  if  the  final  execution  ol  the  design,  upon 
an  actual  appeal  to  arms,  should  miscarry? 
Would  this  last  expectation  have  any  influ¬ 
ence  at  all  when  the  probability  was  computed 
that  the  person  who  was  to  afford  that  exemp¬ 
tion  might  himself  be  involved  in  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  the  measure,  and  might  be  inca¬ 
pacitated  by  his  agency  in  it  from  affording 
the  desired  impunity?  The  better  to  judge  of 
this  matter,  it  will  be  necessary  to  recollect 
that, by  the  proposed  Constitution, the  offence 
of  treason  is  limited  “to  levying  war  upon  the 
United  States,  and  adhering  to  their  enemies, 
giving  them  aid  and  comfort”;  and  that  by  the 
laws  of  New  York  it  is  confined  within  similar 
bounds.  Fourthly.  The  President  can  only  ad¬ 
journ  the  national  legislature  in  the  single 
case  of  disagreement  about  the  time  of  ad¬ 
journment.  f'he  British  monarch  may  pro¬ 
rogue  or  even  dissolve  the  Parliament.  1  lie 
governor  of  New  York  may  also  prorogue  the 
legislature  ol  this  State  for  a  limited  time;  a 
power  whit h,  in  certain  situations,  may  be 
employed  to  very  important  purposes. 

1  he  President  is  to  have  power,  with  t lie  ad 
\ ice  and  consent  ol  the  Senate,  to  make  trea¬ 
ties,  provided  two  thirds  of  the  senators  pres- 


NUMBER  69  209 


ent  concur.  The  king  of  Great  Britain  is  the 
sole  and  absolute  representative  of  the  nation 
in  all  foreign  transactions.  He  can  of  his  own 
accord  make  treaties  of  peace,  commerce,  alli¬ 
ance,  and  of  every  other  description.  It  has 
been  insinuated  that  his  authority  in  this  re¬ 
spect  is  not  conclusive,  and  that  his  conven¬ 
tions  with  foreign  powers  are  subject  to  the 
revision,  and  stand  in  need  of  the  ratification, 
of  Parliament.  But  I  believe  this  doctrine  was 
never  heard  of  until  it  was  broached  upon  the 
present  occasion.  Every  jurist 1  of  that  king¬ 
dom,  and  every  other  man  acquainted  with  its 
Constitution,  knows,  as  an  established  fact, 
that  the  prerogative  of  making  treaties  exists 
in  the  crown  in  its  utmost  plenitude;  and  that 
the  compacts  entered  into  by  the  royal  author¬ 
ity  have  the  most  complete  legal  validity  and 
perfection,  independent  of  any  other  sanction. 
The  Parliament,  it  is  true,  is  sometimes  seen 
employing  itself  in  altering  the  existing  laws 
to  conform  them  to  the  stipulations  in  a  new 
treaty;  and  this  may  have  possibly  given  birth 
to  the  imagination  that  its  co-operation  was 
necessary  to  the  obligatory  efficacy  of  the  trea¬ 
ty.  But  this  parliamentary  interposition  pro¬ 
ceeds  from  a  different  cause:  from  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  adjusting  a  most  artificial  and  intricate 
system  of  revenue  and  commercial  laws  to  the 
changes  made  in  them  by  the  operation  of  the 
treaty;  and  of  adapting  new  provisions  and 
precautions  to  the  new  state  of  things  to  keep 
the  machine  from  running  into  disorder.  In 
this  respect,  therefore,  there  is  no  comparison 
between  the  intended  power  of  the  President 
and  the  actual  power  of  the  British  sovereign. 
The  one  can  perform  alone  what  the  other  can 
do  only  with  the  concurrence  of  a  branch  of 
the  legislature.  It  must  be  admitted  that,  in 
this  instance,  the  power  of  the  federal  Execu¬ 
tive  would  exceed  that  of  any  State  Executive. 
But  this  arises  naturally  from  the  sovereign 
power  which  relates  to  treaties.  If  the  Confed¬ 
eracy  were  to  be  dissolved  it  would  become  a 
question  whether  the  Executives  of  the  several 
States  were  not  solely  invested  with  that  deli¬ 
cate  and  important  prerogative. 

The  President  is  also  to  be  authorised  to  re¬ 
ceive  ambassadors  and  other  public  ministers. 
This,  though  it  has  been  a  rich  theme  of  decla¬ 
mation,  is  more  a  matter  of  dignity  than  of  au¬ 
thority.  It  is  a  circumstance  which  will  be  with¬ 
out  consequence  in  the  administration  of  the 
government;  and  it  was  far  more  convenient 

1  Vide  Blackstone’s  Commentaries,  vol.  i.  p.  257. 
—Publius 


that  it  should  be  arranged  in  this  manner  than 
that  there  should  be  a  necessity  of  convening 
the  legislature,  or  one  of  its  branches,  upon 
every  arrival  of  a  foreign  minister,  though  it 
were  merely  to  take  the  place  of  a  departed 
predecessor. 

The  President  is  to  nominate  and,  with  the 
advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate ,  to  appoint 
ambassadors  and  other  public  ministers,  judges 
of  the  Supreme  Court,  and  in  general  all  offi¬ 
cers  of  the  United  States  established  by  law, 
and  whose  appointments  are  not  otherwise 
provided  for  bv  the  Constitution.  The  king  of 
Great  Britain  is  emphatically  and  truly  styled 
the  fountain  of  honour.  He  not  only  appoints 
to  all  offices,  but  can  create  offices.  He  can  con¬ 
fer  titles  of  nobility  at  pleasure;  and  has  the 
disposal  of  an  immense  number  of  church  pre¬ 
ferments.  There  is  evidently  a  great  inferiority 
in  the  power  of  the  President,  in  this  particu¬ 
lar,  to  that  of  the  British  king;  nor  is  it  equal 
to  that  of  the  governor  of  New  York,  if  we  are 
to  interpret  the  meaning  of  the  constitution 
of  the  State  by  the  practice  which  has  obtained 
under  it.  The  power  of  appointment  is  with 
us  lodged  in  a  council  composed  of  the  gover¬ 
nor  and  four  members  of  the  Senate  chosen  by 
the  Assembly.  The  governor  claims,  and  has 
frequently  exercised,  the  right  of  nomination, 
and  is  entitled  to  a  casting  vote  in  the  appoint¬ 
ment.  If  he  really  has  the  right  of  nominating, 
his  authority  is  in  this  respect  equal  to  that  of 
the  President  and  exceeds  it  in  the  article  of 
the  casting  vote.  In  the  national  government, 
if  the  Senate  should  be  divided,  no  appoint¬ 
ment  could  be  made;  in  the  government  of 
New  York,  if  the  council  should  be  divided, 
the  governor  can  turn  the  scale  and  confirm 
his  own  nomination.2  If  we  compare  the  pub¬ 
licity  which  must  necessarily  attend  the  mode 
of  appointment  by  the  President  and  an  en¬ 
tire  branch  of  the  national  legislature  with  the 
privacy  in  the  mode  of  appointment  by  the  gov¬ 
ernor  of  New  York,  closeted  in  a  secret  apart¬ 
ment  with  at  most  four,  and  frequently  with 
only  two  persons;  and  if  we  at  the  same  time 
consider  how  much  more  easy  it  must  be  to  in- 

2  Candour,  however,  demands  an  acknowledg¬ 
ment  that  I  do  not  think  the  claim  of  the  gover¬ 
nor  to  a  right  of  nomination  well  founded.  Yet  it 
is  always  justifiable  to  reason  from  the  practice 
of  a  government,  till  its  propriety  has  been  con¬ 
stitutionally  questioned.  And  independent  of  this 
claim,  when  we  take  into  view  the  other  consid¬ 
erations,  and  pursue  them  through  all  their  con¬ 
sequences.  we  shall  be  inclined  to  draw  much  the 
same  conclusion.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


iJuence  the  small  number  of  which  a  council  of 
appointment  consists  than  the  considerable 
number  of  which  the  national  Senate  would 
consist,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  pronounce  that 
the  power  of  the  chief  magistrate  of  this  State, 
in  the  disposition  of  offices,  must,  in  practice, 
be  greatly  superior  to  that  of  the  Chief  Magis¬ 
trate  of  the  Union. 

Hence  it  appears  that,  except  as  to  the  con¬ 
current  authority  of  the  President  in  the  ar¬ 
ticle  of  treaties,  it  would  be  difficult  to  deter¬ 
mine  whether  that  magistrate  would,  in  the 
aggregate,  possess  more  or  less  power  than  the 
Governor  of  New  York.  And  it  appears  yet 
more  unequivocally  that  there  is  no  pretence 
for  the  parallel  which  has  been  attempted  be¬ 
tween  him  and  the  king  of  Great  Britain.  But 
to  render  the  contrast  in  this  respect  still  more 
striking,  it  may  be  of  use  to  throw  the  princi¬ 
pal  circumstances  of  dissimilitude  into  a  clos¬ 
er  group. 

The  President  of  the  United  States  w’ould 
be  an  officer  elected  by  the  people  for  jour 
years;  the  king  of  Great  Britain  is  a  perpetual 
and  hereditary  prince.  The  one  would  be  ame¬ 
nable  to  personal  punishment  and  disgrace; 
the  person  of  the  other  is  sacred  and  invio¬ 
lable.  The  one  would  have  a  qualified  nega¬ 
tive  upon  the  acts  of  the  legislative  body;  the 
other  has  an  absolute  negative.'!  he  one  would 
have  a  right  to  command  the  military  and  na¬ 
val  forces  of  the  nation;  the  other,  in  addition 
to  this  right,  possesses  that  of  declaring  war, 
and  of  raising  and  regulating  fleets  and  armies 
by  his  own  authority.  The  one  would  have  a 
concurrent  power  with  a  branch  of  the  legis¬ 
lature  in  the  formation  of  treaties;  the  other 
is  the  sole  possessor  of  the  power  of  making 
treaties.  The  one  would  have  a  like  concur¬ 
rent  authority  in  appointing  to  offices;  the  oth¬ 
er  is  the  sole  author  of  all  appointments.  The 
one  can  confer  no  privileges  whatever:  the  oth¬ 
er  can  make  denizens  of  aliens,  noblemen  of 
commoners;  can  erect  corporations  with  all  the 
rights  incident  to  corporate  bodies.  I  he  one 
can  prescribe  no  rules  concerning  the  com¬ 
merce  or  currency  of  the  nation;  the  other  is 
in  several  respects  the  arbiter  of  commerce, 
and  in  this  capac it y  can  establish  markets  and 
fairs,  can  regulate  weights  and  measures,  can 
lay  embargoes  for  a  1  imi ted  t i me, can  coin  mon¬ 
ey,  can  authorise  or  prohibit  the  circ  ulation  of 
foreign  coin.  The  one  has  no  partjele  of  spirit 
ual  jurisdiction;  the  other  is  the  supreme  head 
and  governor  of  the  national  church!  What 
answer  shall  we  give  to  those  who  would  per¬ 


suade  us  that  things  so  unlike  resemble  each 
other?  The  same  that  ought  to  be  given  to 
those  who  tell  us  that  a  government,  the  whole 
power  of  which  would  be  in  the  hands  of  the 
elective  and  periodical  servants  of  the  people, 
is  an  aristocracy,  a  monarchy,  and  a  despotism. 

Publius 

Number  70 

[HAMILTON] 

There  is  an  idea,  which  is  not  without  its 
advocates,  that  a  vigorous  Executive  is  incon¬ 
sistent  with  the  genius  of  republican  govern¬ 
ment.  The  enlightened  welMvishers  to  this  spe¬ 
cies  of  government  must  at  least  hope  that  the 
supposition  is  destitute  of  foundation,  since 
they  can  never  admit  its  truth  without  at  the 
same  time  admitting  the  condemnation  of  their 
own  principles.  Energy  in  the  Executive  is  a 
leading  character  in  the  definition  of  good 
government.  It  is  essential  to  the  protection  of 
thecommunitv against  foreign  attacks;  it  is  not 
less  essential  to  the  steady  administration  of 
the  laws:  to  the  protection  of  property  against 
those  irregular  and  high-handed  combinations 
which  sometimes  interrupt  the  ordinary  course 
of  justice;  to  the  security  of  liberty  against  the 
enterprises  and  assaults  of  ambition,  of  fac¬ 
tion,  and  of  anarchy.  Every  man  the  least  con¬ 
versant  in  Roman  story  know^s  how'  often  that 
republic  was  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  the  ab¬ 
solute  power  of  a  single  man,  under  the  for¬ 
midable  title  of  Dictator,  as  well  against  the  in¬ 
trigues  of  ambitious  individuals  w’ho  aspired 
to  the  tyranny  and  the  seditions  of  wrhole  class¬ 
es  of  the  community  whose  conduct  threaten¬ 
ed  the  existence  of  all  government,  as  against 
the  invasions  of  external  enemies  who  men¬ 
aced  the  conquest  and  destruction  of  Rome. 

There  can  be  no  need,  however,  to  multiply 
arguments  or  examples  on  this  head.  A  feeble 
Executive  implies  a  feeble  execution  of  the 
government.  A  feeble  execution  is  but  another 
phrase  for  a  bad  execution;  and  a  government 
ill  executed,  whatever  it  may  be  in  theory,  must 
be,  in  practice,  a  bad  government. 

Taking  it  for  granted,  therefore,  that  all 
men  of  sense  will  agree  in  the  necessity  of  an 
energetic  Executive,  it  will  only  remain  to  in¬ 
quire  what  are  the  ingredients  which  consti¬ 
tute  this  energy?  How  far  can  they  be  com¬ 
bined  with  those  other  ingredients  which  con¬ 
stitute  safety  in  the  republican  sense?  And  how 
far  does  this  combination  characterise  the  plan 
which  has  been  reported  by  the  convention? 


211 


NUMBER  70 


The  ingredients  which  constitute  energy  in 
the  Executive  are.  first,  unity:  secondly,  dura¬ 
tion:  thirdly,  an  adequate  provision  for  its 
support:  fourthly,  competent  powers. 

The  ingredients  which  constitute  safety  in 
the  republican  sense  are,  first,  a  due  depend¬ 
ence  on  the  people;  secondly,  a  due  responsi¬ 
bility. 

Those  politicians  and  statesmen  who  have 
been  the  most  celebrated  for  the  soundness  of 
their  principles  and  for  the  justice  of  their 
views  have  declared  in  favour  of  a  single  Exec¬ 
utive  and  a  numerous  legislature.  They  have, 
with  great  propriety,  considered  energy  as  the 
most  necessary  qualification  of  the  former,  and 
have  regarded  this  as  most  applicable  to  power 
in  a  single  hand;  while  they  have,  with  equal 
propriety,  considered  the  latter  as  best  adapt¬ 
ed  to  deliberation  and  wisdom,  and  best  calcu¬ 
lated  to  conciliate  the  confidence  of  the  people 
and  to  secure  their  privileges  and  interests. 

That  unity  is  conducive  to  energy  will  not 
be  disputed.  Decision,  activity,  secrecy,  and 
despatch  will  generally  characterise  the  pro¬ 
ceedings  of  one  man  in  a  much  more  eminent 
degree  than  the  proceedings  of  any  greater 
number;  and  in  proportion  as  the  number  is 
increased,  these  qualities  will  be  diminished. 

This  unity  may  be  destroyed  in  two  ways: 
either  by  vesting  the  power  in  two  or  more 
magistrates  of  equal  dignity  and  authority;  or 
by  vesting  it  ostensibly  in  one  man,  subject,  in 
whole  or  in  part,  to  the  control  and  co-opera¬ 
tion  of  others  in  the  capacity  of  counsellors  to 
him.  Of  the  first,  the  two  Consuls  of  Rome 
may  serve  as  an  example;  of  the  last,  we  shall 
find  examples  in  the  constitutions  of  several  of 
the  States.  New  York  and  New  Jersey,  if  I  rec¬ 
ollect  right,  are  the  only  States  which  have 
intrusted  the  executive  authority  wholly  to 
single  men.1  Both  these  methods  of  destroying 
the  unity  of  the  Executive  have  their  parti¬ 
sans;  but  the  votaries  of  an  executive  council 
are  the  most  numerous.  They  are  both  liable, 
if  not  to  equal,  to  similar  objections,  and  may 
in  most  lights  be  examined  in  conjunction. 

The  experience  of  other  nations  will  afford 
little  instruction  on  this  head.  As  far,  however, 
as  it  teaches  anything,  it  teaches  11s  not  to  be 
enamoured  of  plurality  in  the  Executive.  We 
have  seen  that  the  Achueans,  on  an  experiment 

JNew  York  has  no  council  except  for  the  single 
purpose  of  appointing  to  offices;  New  Jersey  has 
a  council  whom  the  governor  may  consult.  But 
l  think,  from  the  terms  of  the  constitution,  their 
resolutions  do  not  hind  him.— Publius 


of  two  Praetors,  were  induced  to  abolish  one. 
The  Roman  history  records  many  instances  of 
mischiefs  to  the  republic  from  the  dissensions 
between  the  Consuls,  and  between  the  mili¬ 
tary  Tribunes,  who  were  at  times  substituted 
for  the  Consuls.  But  it  gives  us  no  specimens 
of  any  peculiar  advantages  derived  to  the  state 
from  the  circumstance  of  the  plurality  of  those 
magistrates.  That  the  dissensions  between  them 
were  not  more  frequent  or  more  fatal  is  matter 
of  astonishment,  until  we  advert  to  the  singu¬ 
lar  position  in  which  the  republic  was  almost 
continually  placed,  and  to  the  prudent  policy 
pointed  out  by  the  circumstances  of  the  state, 
and  pursued  by  the  Consuls,  of  making  a  di¬ 
vision  of  the  government  between  them.  The 
patricians  engaged  in  a  perpetual  struggle  with 
the  plebeians  for  the  preservation  of  their  an¬ 
cient  authorities  and  dignities;  the  Consuls, 
who  were  generally  chosen  out  of  the  former 
body,  were  commonly  united  by  the  personal 
interest  they  had  in  the  defence  of  the  privi¬ 
leges  of  their  order.  In  addition  to  this  motive 
of  union,  after  the  arms  of  the  republic  had 
considerably  expanded  the  bounds  of  its  em¬ 
pire,  it  became  an  established  custom  with  the 
Consuls  to  divide  the  administration  between 
themselves  by  lot— one  of  them  remaining  at 
Rome  to  govern  the  city  and  its  environs,  the 
other  taking  the  command  in  the  more  dis¬ 
tant  provinces.  This  expedient  must,  no  doubt, 
have  had  great  influence  in  preventing  those 
collisions  and  rivalships  which  might  other¬ 
wise  have  embroiled  the  peace  of  the  republic. 

But  quitting  the  dim  light  of  historical  re¬ 
search,  attaching  ourselves  purely  to  the  dic¬ 
tates  of  reason  and  good  sense,  we  shall  discov¬ 
er  much  greater  cause  to  reject  than  to  approve 
the  idea  of  plurality  in  the  Executive,  under 
any  modification  whatever. 

Wherever  two  or  more  persons  are  engaged 
in  any  common  enterprise  or  pursuit  there  is 
always  danger  of  difference  of  opinion.  If  it 
be  a  public  trust  or  office,  in  which  they  are 
clothed  with  equal  dignity  and  authority,  there 
is  peculiar  danger  of  personal  emulation  and 
even  animosity.  From  either,  and  especially 
from  all  these  causes,  the  most  bitter  dissen¬ 
sions  are  apt  to  spring.  Whenever  these  hap¬ 
pen,  they  lessen  the  respectability,  weaken  the 
authority,  and  distract  the  plans  and  opera¬ 
tions  of  those  whom  they  divide.  If  they  should 
unfortunately  assail  the  supreme  executive 
magistracy  of  a  country,  consisting  of  a  plural¬ 
ity  of  persons,  they  might  impede  or  frustrate 
the  most  important  measures  of  the  govern- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


212 

ment  in  the  most  critical  emergencies  of  the 
state.  And  what  is  still  worse,  they  might  split 
die  community  into  the  most  violent  and  ir¬ 
reconcilable  factions,  adhering  differently  to 
the  different  individuals  who  composed  the 
magistracy. 

Men  often  oppose  a  thing,  merely  because 
they  have  had  no  agency  in  planning  it,  or  be¬ 
cause  it  may  have  been  planned  by  those  whom 
they  dislike.  But  if  they  have  been  consulted, 
and  have  happened  to  disapprove,  opposition 
then  becomes,  in  then  estimation,  an  indis¬ 
pensable  duty  of  self-love.  They  seem  to  think 
themselves  bound  in  honour,  and  by  all  the 
motives  of  personal  infallibility,  to  defeat  the 
success  of  what  has  been  resolved  upon  con¬ 
trail  to  their  sentiments.  Men  of  upright,  be¬ 
nevolent  tempers  have  too  many  opportunities 
of  remarking,  with  horror,  to  what  desperate 
lengths  this  disposition  is  sometimes  carried, 
and  how  often  the  great  interests  of  society  are 
sacrificed  to  the  vanity,  to  the  conceit,  and  to 
the  obstinacy  of  individuals  who  have  credit 
enough  to  make  their  passions  and  their  ca¬ 
prices  interesting  to  mankind.  Perhaps  the 
question  now  before  the  public  may,  in  its 
consequences,  afford  melancholy  proofs  of  the 
effects  of  this  despicable  frailty,  or  rather  de¬ 
testable  vice,  in  the  human  character. 

Upon  the  principles  of  a  free  government 
inconveniences  from  the  source  just  mention¬ 
ed  must  necessarily  be  submitted  to  in  the  for¬ 
mation  of  the  legislature:  but  it  is  unnecessary, 
and  therefore  unwise,  to  introduce  them  into 
the  constitution  of  the  Executive.  It  is  here, 
too,  that  they  may  be  most  pernicious.  In  the 
legislature,  promptitude  of  decision  is  oftener 
an  evil  than  a  benefit.  The  differences  of  opin¬ 
ion,  and  the  jarrings  of  parties  in  that  depart¬ 
ment  of  the  government,  though  they  may 
sometimes  obstruct  salutary  plans,  yet  often 
promote  deliberation  and  <  ircumspcction,  and 
serve  to  check  excesses  in  the  majority.  When 
a  resolution,  too,  is  once  taken,  the  opposition 
must  be  at  an  end.  That  resolution  is  a  law, 
and  resistance  to  it  punishable.  But  no  lavour- 
able  circumstances  palliate  or  atone  lor  the 
disadvantages  of  dissension  in  the  executive 
department.  I  lere  they  arc  pure  and  unmixed. 

I  here  is  no  point  at  which  they  cease  to  oper- 
,iic\  1  hey  serve  to  embarrass  and  weaken  the 
execution  of  the  plan  or  measure  to  which 
they  relate,  from  the  first  step  to  the  final  con¬ 
clusion  of  it.  They  constantly  countcrat  t  those 
qualities  iu  the  Executive  which  are  the  most 
necessary  ingredients  in  its  composition-vig¬ 


our  and  expedition,  and  this  without  any 
counterbalancing  good.  In  the  conduct  of  war, 
in  which  the  energy  of  the  Executive  is  the  bul¬ 
wark  of  the  national  security,  everything  would 
be  to  be  apprehended  from  its  plurality. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  these  observations 
apply  with  principal  weight  to  the  first  case 
supposed— that  is,  to  a  plurality  of  magistrates 
of  equal  dignity  and  authority,  a  scheme  the 
advocates  for  which  are  not  likely  to  form  a 
numerous  sect;  but  they  apply,  though  not 
with  equal,  yet  with  considerable  weight  to 
the  project  of  a  council,  whose  concurrence  is 
made  constitutionally  necessary  to  the  opera¬ 
tions  of  the  ostensible  Executive.  An  artful  ca¬ 
bal  in  that  council  would  be  able  to  distract 
and  to  enervate  the  whole  system  of  adminis¬ 
tration.  If  no  such  cabal  should  exist,  the  mere 
diversity  of  views  and  opinions  would  alone  be 
sufficient  to  tincture  the  exercise  of  the  execu¬ 
tive  authority  with  a  spirit  of  habitual  feeble¬ 
ness  and  dilatoriness. 

But  one  of  the  weightiest  objections  to  a 
plurality  in  the  Executive,  and  which  lies  as 
much  against  the  last  as  the  first  plan,  is  that 
it  tends  to  conceal  faults  and  destroy  responsi¬ 
bility .  Responsibility  is  of  two  kinds— to  cen¬ 
sure  and  to  punishment.  The  first  is  the  more 
important  of  the  two,  especially  in  an  elective 
office.  Man,  in  public  trust,  will  much  oftener 
act  in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  him  un¬ 
worthy  of  being  any  longer  trusted  than  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  make  him  obnoxious  to 
legal  punishment.  But  the  multiplication  of 
the  Executive  adds  to  the  difficulty  of  detection 
in  either  case.  It  often  becomes  impossible, 
amidst  mutual  accusations,  to  deteimine  on 
whom  the  blame  or  the  punishment  of  a  per¬ 
nicious  measure,  or  series  of  pernicious  meas¬ 
ures,  ought  really  to  fall.  It  is  shifted  from  one 
to  another  with  so  much  dexterity,  and  under 
such  plausible  appearances,  that  the  public 
opinion  is  leit  in  suspense  about  the  real  au¬ 
thor.  The  circumstances  which  may  have  led  to 
;m\  national  miscarriage  or  misfortune  arc 
sometimes  so  complicated  that,  wit  etc  there  ate 
a  number  ol  actors  who  may  have  had  differ¬ 
ent  degrees  and  kinds  of  agency,  though  we 
may  clearly  see  upon  the  whole  that  there  has 
been  mismanagement,  yet  it  may  be  imprac¬ 
ticable  to  pronounce  to  whose  account  the  evil 
which  may  have  been  incurred  is  truly  charge¬ 
able. 

“1  was  overruled  by  my  council.  I  be  coun¬ 
cil  were  so  divided  in  theii  opinions  that  it  was 
impossible  to  obtain  any  better  resolution  on 


NUMBER  jo  213 


the  point.” These  and  similar  pretexts  are  con¬ 
stantly  at  hand,  whether  true  or  false.  And 
who  is  there  that  will  either  take  the  trouble 
or  incur  the  odium  of  a  strict  scrutiny  into  the 
secret  springs  of  the  transaction?  Should  there 
be  found  a  citizen  zealous  enough  to  under¬ 
take  the  unpromising  task,  if  there  happen  to 
be  collusion  between  the  parties  concerned, 
how  easy  it  is  to  clothe  the  circumstances  with 
so  much  ambiguity  as  to  render  it  uncertain 
what  was  the  precise  conduct  of  any  of  those 
parties? 

In  the  single  instance  in  which  the  governor 
of  this  State  is  coupled  with  a  council— that  is, 
in  the  appointment  to  offices,  we  have  seen  the 
mischiefs  of  it  in  the  view  now  under  consid¬ 
eration.  Scandalous  appointments  to  impor¬ 
tant  offices  have  been  made.  Some  cases,  in¬ 
deed,  have  been  so  flagrant  that  all  parties 
have  agreed  in  the  impropriety  of  the  thing. 
When  inquiry  has  been  made,  the  blame  has 
been  laid  by  the  governor  on  the  members  of 
the  council,  who,  on  their  part,  have  charged 
it  upon  his  nomination;  while  the  people  re¬ 
main  altogether  at  a  loss  to  determine  by  whose 
influence  their  interests  have  been  committed 
to  hands  so  unqualified  and  so  manifestly  im¬ 
proper.  In  tenderness  to  individuals,  I  forbear 
to  descend  to  particulars. 

It  is  evident  from  these  considerations  that 
the  plurality  of  the  Executive  tends  to  deprive 
the  people  of  the  two  greatest  securities  they 
can  have  for  the  faithful  exercise  of  any  dele¬ 
gated  power:  first ,  the  restraints  of  public 
opinion,  which  lose  their  efficacy,  as  well  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  division  of  the  censure  attendant 
on  bad  measures  among  a  number  as  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  uncertainty  on  whom  it  ought  to 
fall;  and,  secondly,  the  opportunity  of  discov¬ 
ering  with  facility  and  clearness  the  miscon¬ 
duct  of  the  persons  they  trust,  in  order  either 
to  [effect]  their  removal  from  office  or  their 
actual  punishment  in  cases  which  admit  of  it. 

In  England,  the  king  is  a  perpetual  magis¬ 
trate;  and  it  is  a  maxim  which  has  obtained 
for  the  sake  of  the  public  peace,  that  he  is  un¬ 
accountable  forhisadministration,and  hisper- 
son  sacred.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  wiser  in 
that  kingdom,  than  to  annex  to  the  king  a  con¬ 
stitutional  council,  who  may  be  responsible  to 
the  nation  for  the  advice  they  give.  Without 
this,  there  would  be  no  responsibility  what¬ 
ever  in  the  executive  department— an  idea  in¬ 
admissible  in  a  free  government.  But  even 
there  the  king  is  not  bound  by  the  resolutions 
of  his  council,  though  they  are  answerable  for 


the  advice  they  give.  He  is  the  absolute  master 
of  his  own  conduct  in  the  exercise  of  his  office, 
and  may  observe  or  disregard  the  counsel  giv¬ 
en  to  him  at  his  sole  discretion. 

But  in  a  republic,  where  every  magistrate 
ought  to  be  personally  responsible  for  his  be¬ 
haviour  in  office,  the  leason  which  in  the  Brit¬ 
ish  Constitution  dictates  the  propriety  of  a 
council,  not  only  ceases  to  apply,  but  turns 
against  the  institution.  In  the  monarchy  of 
Great  Britain,  it  furnishes  a  substitute  for  the 
prohibited  responsibility  of  the  chief  magis¬ 
trate,  which  serves  in  some  degree  as  a  hostage 
to  the  national  justice  for  his  good  behaviour. 
In  the  American  republic  it  would  serve  to  de¬ 
stroy,  or  would  greatly  diminish,  the  intended 
and  necessary  responsibility  of  the  Chief  Mag¬ 
istrate  himself. 

The  idea  of  a  council  to  the  Executive, 
which  has  so  generally  obtained  in  the  State 
constitutions,  has  been  derived  from  that 
maxim  of  republican  jealousy  which  considers 
power  as  safer  in  the  hands  of  a  number  of 
men  than  of  a  single  man.  If  the  maxim  should 
be  admitted  to  be  applicable  to  the  case,  I 
should  contend  that  the  advantage  on  that  side 
would  not  counterbalance  the  numerous  dis¬ 
advantages  on  the  opposite  side.  But  I  do  not 
think  the  rule  at  all  applicable  to  the  execu¬ 
tive  power.  I  clearly  concur  in  opinion,  in  this 
particular,  with  a  writer  whom  the  celebrated 
Junius  pronounces  to  be  “deep,  solid,  and  in¬ 
genious,”  that  “the  executive  power  is  more 
easily  confined  when  it  is  one”;1  that  it  is  far 
more  safe  there  should  be  a  single  object  for 
the  jealousy  and  watchfulness  of  the  people; 
and,  in  a  word,  that  all  multiplication  of  the 
Executive  is  rather  dangerous  than  friendly  to 
liberty. 

A  little  consideration  will  satisfy  us  that  the 
species  of  security  sought  for  in  the  multiplica¬ 
tion  of  the  Executive  is  unattainable.  Num¬ 
bers  must  be  so  great  as  to  render  combination 
difficult,  or  they  are  rather  a  source  of  danger 
than  of  security.  The  united  credit  and  influ¬ 
ence  of  several  individuals  must  be  more  for¬ 
midable  to  liberty  than  the  credit  and  influ¬ 
ence  of  either  of  them  separately.  When  pow¬ 
er,  therefore,  is  placed  in  the  hands  of  so  small 
a  number  of  men  as  to  admit  of  their  interests 
and  views  being  easily  combined  in  a  common 
enterprise,  by  an  artful  leader  it  becomes  more 
liable  to  abuse,  and  more  dangerous  when 
abused,  than  if  it  be  lodged  in  the  hands  of  one 
man;  who,  from  the  very  circumstance  of  his 

1  De  Lolme— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


214 

being  alone,  will  be  more  narrowly  watched 
and  more  readily  suspected,  and  who  cannot 
unite  so  great  a  mass  of  influence  as  when  he  is 

associated  with  others.  The  Decern  virsof  Rome, 

whose  name  denotes  their  number,1  were  more 
to  be  dreaded,  in  their  usurpation  than  any 
one  of  them  would  have  been.  No  person 
would  think  of  proposing  an  Executive  much 
more  numerous  than  that  body;  from  six  to  a 
dozen  have  been  suggested  for  the  number  of 
the  council.  The  extreme  of  these  numbers  is 
not  too  great  for  an  easy  combination;  and 
from  such  a  combination  America  would  have 
more  to  fear  than  from  the  ambition  of  any 
single  individual.  A  council  to  a  magistrate, 
who  is  himself  responsible  for  what  he  does, 
are  generally  nothing  better  than  a  clog  upon 
his  good  intentions,  are  often  the  instruments 
and  accomplices  of  his  bad,  and  are  almost  al¬ 
ways  a  cloak  to  his  faults. 

1  forbear  to  dwell  upon  the  subject  of  ex¬ 
pense;  though  it  be  evident  that  if  the  council 
should  be  numerous  enough  to  answer  the 
principal  end  aimed  at  by  the  institution,  the 
salaries  of  the  members,  who  must  be  drawn 
from  their  homes  to  reside  at  the  seat  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  would  form  an  item  in  the  catalogue 
of  public  expenditures  too  serious  to  be  incur¬ 
red  for  an  object  of  equivocal  utility.  1  will 
only  add  that,  prior  to  the  appearance  of  the 
Constitution,  I  rarely  met  with  an  intelligent 
man  from  any  of  the  States,  who  did  not  admit, 
as  the  result  of  experience,  that  the  UNITY  of 
the  executive  of  this  State  was  one  of  the  best 
of  the  distinguishing  features  of  our  constitu¬ 
tion.  Publius 

Number  7/ 

[HAMILTON] 

Duration  in  office  has  been  mentioned  as 
the  second  requisite  to  the  energy  of  the  Exec¬ 
utive  authority.  This  has  relation  to  two  ob¬ 
jects:  to  the  personal  firmness  of  the  executive 
magistrate  in  the  employment  of  his  constitu¬ 
tional  powers;  and  to  the  stability  of  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  administration  which  may  have  been 
adopted  under  his  auspices.  With  regard  to 
the  first,  it  must  be  evident  that  the  longer  the 
duration  in  ollice,  the  greater  will  be  the  piob- 
ability  of  obtaining  so  important  an  advan¬ 
tage.  It  is  a  general  principle  of  human  nature 
that  a  man  will  be  interested  in  whatever  he 
possesses,  in  proportion  to  the  firmness  or  pre¬ 
cariousness  of  the  tenure  by  which  he  holds  it; 

1  Ten.— Publius 


will  be  less  attached  to  what  he  holds  by  a  mo¬ 
mentary  or  uncertain  title  than  to  what  he 
enjoys  by  a  durable  or  certain  title;  and,  of 
course,  will  be  willing  to  risk  more  for  the  sake 
of  the  one  than  for  the  sake  of  the  other.  This 
remark  is  not  less  applicable  to  a  political  priv¬ 
ilege,  or  honour,  or  trust,  than  to  any  article 
of  ordinary  property.  The  inference  from  it  is 
that  a  man  acting  in  the  capacity  of  chief  mag¬ 
istrate,  under  a  consciousness  that  in  a  very 
short  time  he  must  lay  down  his  office,  will  be 
apt  to  feel  himself  too  little  interested  in  it  to 
hazard  any  material  censure  or  perplexity,  from 
the  independent  exertion  of  his  powers,  or 
from  encountering  the  ill-humours,  however 
transient,  which  may  happen  to  prevail,  either 
in  a  considerable  part  of  the  society  itself,  or 
even  in  a  predominant  faction  in  the  legisla¬ 
tive  body.  If  the  case  should  only  be  that  he 
might  lay  it  down,  unless  continued  by  a  new 
choice,  and  if  he  should  be  desirous  of  being 
continued,  his  wishes,  conspiring  with  his  fears, 
would  tend  still  more  powerfully  to  corrupt 
his  integrity,  or  debase  his  fortitude.  In  either 
case,  feebleness  and  irresolution  must  be  the 
characteristics  of  the  station. 

There  are  some  who  would  be  inclined  to 
regard  the  servile  pliancy  of  the  Executive  to  a 
prevailing  current,  either  in  the  community  or 
in  the  legislature,  as  its  best  recommendation. 
But  such  men  entertain  very  crude  notions,  as 
well  of  the  purposes  for  which  government 
was  instituted  as  of  the  true  means  by  which 
the  public  happiness  may  be  promoted.  The 
republican  principle  demands  that  the  delib¬ 
erate  sense  of  the  community  should  govern 
the  conduct  of  those  to  whom  they  intrust  the 
management  of  their  affairs;  but  it  does  not 
require  an  unqualified  complaisance  to  every 
sudden  breeze  of  passion,  or  to  every  transient 
impulse  which  the  people  may  receive  from 
the  arts  of  men,  who  flatter  their  prejudices 
to  betray  their  interests.  It  is  a  just  observa¬ 
tion  that  the  people  commonly  intend  the 
public  good.  This  often  applies  to  their  very 
errors.  But  their  good  sense  would  despise 
the  adulator  who  should  pretend  that  they  al¬ 
ways  reason  right  about  the  means  of  promot¬ 
ing  it.  I  hey  know  from  experience  that  they 
sometimes  err;  and  the  wonder  is  that  they  so 
seldom  err  as  they  do,  beset,  as  they  continu¬ 
ally  arc,  by  the  wiles  of  parasites  and  syco¬ 
phants,  by  the  snares  of  the  ambitious,  the 
avaricious,  the  desperate,  by  the  artifices  of 
men  who  possess  their  confidence  more  than 
they  deserve  it,  and  of  those  who  seek  to  pos- 


NUMBER  7/  215 


sess  rather  than  to  deserve  it.  When  occasions 
present  themselves,  in  which  the  interests  of 
the  people  are  at  variance  with  their  inclina¬ 
tions,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  persons  whom  they 
have  appointed  to  be  the  guardians  of  those 
interests,  to  withstand  the  temporary  delusion, 
in  order  to  give  them  time  and  opportunity 
for  more  cool  and  sedate  reflection.  Instances 
might  be  cited  in  which  a  conduct  of  this  kind 
has  saved  the  people  from  very  fatal  conse¬ 
quences  of  their  own  mistakes,  and  has  pro¬ 
cured  lasting  monuments  of  their  gratitude  to 
the  men  who  had  courage  and  magnanimity 
enough  to  serve  them  at  the  peril  of  their  dis¬ 
pleasure. 

But  however  inclined  we  might  be  to  insist 
upon  an  unbounded  complaisance  in  the  Ex¬ 
ecutive  to  the  inclinations  of  the  people,  we 
can  with  no  propriety  contend  for  a  like  com¬ 
plaisance  to  the  humour  of  the  legislature. 
The  latter  may  sometimes  stand  in  opposition 
to  the  former,  and  at  other  times  the  people 
may  be  entirely  neutral.  In  either  supposition, 
it  is  certainly  desirable  that  the  Executive 
should  be  in  a  situation  to  dare  to  act  his  own 
opinion  with  vigour  and  decision. 

The  same  rule  which  teaches  the  propriety 
of  a  partition  between  the  various  branches  of 
power,  teaches  us  likewise  that  this  partition 
ought  to  be  so  contrived  as  to  render  the  one 
independent  of  the  other.  To  what  purpose 
separate  the  executive  or  the  judiciary  from 
the  legislative,  if  both  the  executive  and  the 
judiciary  are  so  constituted  as  to  be  at  the  ab¬ 
solute  devotion  of  the  legislative?  Such  a  sepa¬ 
ration  must  be  merely  nominal,  and  incapable 
of  producing  the  ends  for  which  it  was  estab¬ 
lished.  It  is  one  thing  to  be  subordinate  to  the 
laws,  and  another  to  be  dependent  on  the  leg¬ 
islative  body.  The  first  comports  with,  the  last 
\iolates,  the  fundamental  principles  of  good 
government;  and,  whatever  may  be  the  forms 
of  the  Constitution,  unites  all  power  in  the 
same  hands.  The  tendency  of  the  legislative 
authority  to  absorb  every  other,  has  been  fully 
displayed  and  illustrated  by  examples  in  some 
preceding  numbers.  In  governments  purely  re¬ 
publican,  this  tendency  is  almost  irresistible. 
The  representatives  of  the  people,  in  a  popu¬ 
lar  assembly,  seem  sometimes  to  fancy  that 
they  are  the  people  themselves,  and  betray 
strong  symptoms  of  impatience  and  disgust  at 
the  least  sign  of  opposition  from  any  other 
quarter;  as  if  the  exercise  of  its  rights,  by  either 
the  executive  or  judiciary,  were  a  breach  of 
their  privilege  and  an  outrage  to  their  dignity. 


They  often  appear  disposed  to  exert  an  im¬ 
perious  control  over  the  other  departments; 
and  as  they  commonly  have  the  people  on 
their  side,  they  always  act  with  such  momen¬ 
tum  as  to  make  it  very  difficult  for  the  other 
members  of  the  government  to  maintain  the 
balance  of  the  Constitution. 

It  may  perhaps  be  asked,  how  the  shortness 
of  the  duration  in  office  can  affect  the  inde¬ 
pendence  of  the  Executive  on  the  legislature, 
unless  the  one  were  possessed  of  the  power  of 
appointing  or  displacing  the  other.  One  an¬ 
swer  to  this  inquiry  may  be  drawn  from  the 
principle  already  remarked— that  is,  from  the 
slender  interest  a  man  is  apt  to  take  in  a  short¬ 
lived  advantage,  and  the  little  inducement  it 
affords  him  to  expose  himself,  on  account  of 
it,  to  any  considerable  inconvenience  or  haz¬ 
ard.  Another  answer,  perhaps  more  obvious, 
though  not  more  conclusive,  will  result  from 
the  consideration  of  the  influence  of  the  legis¬ 
lative  body  over  the  people;  which  might  be 
employed  to  prevent  the  re-election  of  a  man 
who,  by  an  upright  resistance  to  any  sinister 
project  of  that  body,  should  have  made  him¬ 
self  obnoxious  to  its  resentment. 

It  may  be  asked  also,  whether  a  duration  of 
four  years  would  answer  the  end  proposed; 
and  if  it  would  not,  whether  a  less  period, 
which  would  at  least  be  recommended  by  great¬ 
er  security  against  ambitious  designs,  would 
not,  for  that  reason,  be  preferable  to  a  longer 
period,  which  was,  at  the  same  time,  too  short 
for  the  purpose  of  inspiring  the  desired  firm¬ 
ness  and  independence  of  the  magistrate. 

It  cannot  be  affirmed  that  a  duration  of  four 
years,  or  any  other  limited  duration,  would 
completely  answer  the  end  proposed;  but  it 
would  contribute  towards  it  in  a  degree  which 
would  have  a  material  influence  upon  the  spir¬ 
it  and  character  of  the  government.  Between 
the  commencement  and  termination  of  such 
a  period  there  would  always  be  a  considerable 
interval  in  which  the  prospect  of  annihilation 
would  be  sufficiently  remote  not  to  have  an 
improper  effect  upon  the  conduct  of  a  man  in¬ 
dued  with  a  tolerable  portion  of  fortitude; 
and  in  which  he  might  reasonably  promise 
himself  that  there  would  be  time  enough  be¬ 
fore  it  arrived  to  make  the  community  sen¬ 
sible  of  the  propriety  of  the  measures  he  might 
incline  to  pursue.  Though  it  be  probable  that, 
as  he  approached  the  moment  when  the  pub¬ 
lic  were,  by  a  new  election,  to  signify  their 
sense  of  his  conduct,  his  confidence,  and  with 
it  his  firmness,  would  decline;  yet  both  the 


THE  FEDERALIST 


216 

one  and  the  other  would  derive  support  from 
the  opportunities  which  his  previous  continu¬ 
ance  in  the  station  had  afforded  him,  of  estab¬ 
lishing  himself  in  the  esteem  and  good-will  of 
his  constituents.  He  might,  then,  hazard  with 
safety,  in  proportion  to  the  proofs  he  had  giv¬ 
en  to  his  wisdom  and  integrity,  and  to  the  title 
he  had  acquired  to  the  respect  and  attachment 
of  his  fellow-citizens.  As,  on  the  one  hand,  a 
duration  of  four  years  will  contribute  to  the 
firmness  of  the  Executive  in  a  sufficient  degree 
to  render  it  a  very  valuable  ingredient  in  the 
composition;  so,  on  the  other,  it  is  not  enough 
to  justify  any  alarm  for  the  public  liberty.  If  a 
British  House  of  Commons,  from  the  most 
feeble  beginnings,  from  the  mere  power  of 
assenting  or  disagreeing  to  the  imposition  of  a 
new  tax ,  have,  by  rapid  strides,  reduced  the 
prerogatives  of  the  crown  and  the  privileges  of 
the  nobility  within  the  limits  they  conceived 
to  be  compatible  with  the  principles  of  a  free 
government,  while  they  raised  themselves  to 
the  rank  and  consequence  of  a  co-equal  branch 
of  the  legislature;  if  they  have  been  able,  in 
one  instance,  to  abolish  both  the  royalty  and 
the  aristocracy,  and  to  overturn  all  the  ancient 
establishments,  as  well  in  the  Church  as  State; 
if  they  have  been  able,  on  a  recent  occasion,  to 
make  the  monarch  tremble  at  the  prospect 
of  an  innovation1  attempted  by  them,  what 
would  be  to  be  feared  from  an  elective  magis¬ 
trate  of  four  years’  duration,  with  the  confined 
authorities  of  a  President  of  the  United  States,*' 
What,  but  that  he  might  be  unequal  to  the 
task  which  the  Constitutions  assign  him?  1 
shall  only  add,  that  if  his  duration  be  such  as 
to  leave  a  doubt  of  his  firmness,  that  doubt  is 
inconsistent  with  a  jealousy  of  his  encroach¬ 
ments.  Publius 

Number  72 

[HAMILTON] 

Till-  ADMINISTRATION  of  government,  in  its 
largest  sense,  comprehends  all  the  operations 
of  die  body  politic,  whether  legislative,  or  ju¬ 
diciary;  but  in  its  most  usual  and  perhaps  in 
its  most  precise  signification,  it  is  limited  to 
executive  details,  and  falls  peculiarly  within 
the  provinc  e  of  the  executive  department.  I  he 
actual  conduct  of  foreign  negotiations,  the 

1  This  was  the  case  with  respect  to  Mr.  Iox's 
India  bill,  which  was  carried  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  and  rejected  in  the  House  of  Lords,  to 
the  entire  satisfaction,  as  it  is  said,  of  the  people. 
—  Pubuus 


preparatory  plans  of  finance,  the  application 
and  disbursement  of  the  public  money  in  con¬ 
formity  to  the  general  appropriations  of  the 
legislature,  the  arrangement  of  the  army  and 
navy,  the  direction  of  the  operations  of  war,— 
these,  and  other  matters  of  a  like  nature,  con¬ 
stitute  what  seems  to  be  most  properly  under¬ 
stood  by  the  administration  of  government. 
The  persons,  therefore,  to  whose  immediate 
management  these  different  matters  are  com¬ 
mitted,  ought  to  be  considered  as  the  assistants 
or  deputies  of  the  chief  magistrate,  and  on  this 
account  they  ought  to  derive  their  offices  from 
his  appointment,  at  least  from  his  nomination, 
and  ought  to  be  subject  to  his  superintendence. 
This  view  of  the  subject  will  at  once  suggest 
to  us  the  intimate  connection  between  the 
duration  of  the  executive  magistrate  in  office 
and  the  stability  of  the  system  of  administra¬ 
tion.  To  reverse  and  undo  what  has  been 
done  by  a  predecessor  is  very  often  considered 
by  a  successor  as  the  best  proof  he  can  give  of 
his  own  capacity  and  desert;  and  in  addition 
to  this  propensity,  where  the  alteration  has 
been  the  result  of  public  choice,  the  person 
substituted  is  warranted  in  supposing  that  the 
dismission  of  his  predecessor  has  proceeded 
from  a  dislike  to  his  measures;  and  that  the  less 
he  resembles  him  the  more  he  will  recom¬ 
mend  himself  to  the  favour  of  his  constituents. 
These  considerations,  and  the  influence  of 
personal  confidences  and  attachments,  would 
be  likely  to  induce  every  new  President  to  pro¬ 
mote  a  change  of  men  to  fill  the  subordinate 
stations;  and  these  causes  together  could  not 
fail  to  occasion  a  disgraceful  and  ruinous  muta¬ 
bility  in  the  administration  of  the  government. 

With  a  positive  duration  of  considerable 
extent,  I  connect  the  circumstance  of  re-eligi¬ 
bility.  The  first  is  necessary  to  give  to  the  officer 
himself  the  inclination  and  the  resolution  to 
act  his  part  well,  and  to  the  community  time 
and  leisure  to  observe  the  tendency  of  his 
measures,  and  thence  to  form  an  expei  imental 
estimate  of  their  merits.  I  he  last  is  necessary 
to  enable  the  people,  when  they  see  reason 
to  approve  oi  his  conduct,  to  continue  him  in 
his  station,  in  order  to  prolong  the  utility  ol  his 
talents  and  virtues,  and  to  secure  to  the  gov¬ 
ernment  the  advantage  of  permanency  in  a 
w  ise  system  of  administration. 

Nothing  appears  more  plausible  at  fiist 
sight,  nor  more  ill-founded  upon  dose  inspec¬ 
tion,  than  a  scheme  which  in  relation  to  the 
present  point  has  had  some  respectable  advo¬ 
cates,-!  mean  that  of  continuing  the  chief 


NUMBER  72  217 


magistrate  in  office  for  a  certain  time,  and 
then  excludinghim  from  it, either  fora  limited 
period  or  for  ever  after.  This  exclusion,  whether 
temporary  or  perpetual,  would  have  nearly 
the  same  effects,  and  these  effects  would  be  for 
the  most  part  rather  pernicious  than  salutary. 

One  ill  effect  of  the  exclusion  would  be  a 
diminution  of  the  inducements  to  good  be¬ 
haviour.  There  are  few  men  who  would  not 
feel  much  less  zeal  in  the  discharge  of  a  duty, 
when  they  were  conscious  that  the  advantages 
of  the  station  with  which  it  was  connected  must 
be  relinquished  at  a  detenninate  period,  than 
when  they  were  permitted  to  entertain  a  hope 
of  obtaining,  by  meriting,  a  continuance  of 
them.  This  position  will  not  be  disputed  so 
long  as  it  is  admitted  that  the  desire  of  reward 
is  one  of  the  strongest  incentives  of  human 
conduct;  or  that  the  best  security  for  the  fidel¬ 
ity  of  mankind  is  to  make  their  interest  coin¬ 
cide  with  their  duty.  Even  the  love  of  fame, 
the  ruling  passion  of  the  noblest  minds,  which 
would  prompt  a  man  to  plan  and  undertake 
extensive  and  arduous  enterprises  for  the  pub¬ 
lic  benefit,  requiring  considerable  time  to 
mature  and  perfect  them,  if  he  could  flatter 
himself  with  the  prospect  of  being  allowed  to 
finish  what  he  had  begun,  would,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  deter  him  from  the  undertaking,  when 
he  foresaw  that  he  must  quit  the  scene  before 
he  could  accomplish  the  work,  and  must  com¬ 
mit  that,  together  with  his  own  reputation,  to 
hands  which  might  be  unequal  or  unfriendly 
to  the  task.  The  most  to  be  expected  from  the 
generality  of  men,  in  such  a  situation,  is  the 
negative  merit  of  not  doing  harm,  instead  of 
the  positive  merit  of  doing  good. 

Another  ill  effect  of  the  exclusion  would  be 
the  temptation  to  sordid  views,  to  peculation, 
and,  in  some  instances,  to  usurpation.  An 
avaricious  man,  who  might  happen  to  fill  the 
office,  looking  forward  to  a  time  when  he  must 
at  all  events  yield  up  the  emoluments  he  en¬ 
joyed,  would  feel  a  propensity,  not  easy  to  be 
resisted  by  such  a  man,  to  make  the  best  use  of 
the  opportunity  he  enjoyed  while  it  lasted,  and 
might  not  scruple  to  have  recourse  to  the  most 
corrupt  expedients  to  make  the  harvest  as 
abundant  as  it  was  transitory;  though  the  same 
man,  probably,  with  a  different  prospect  before 
him,  might  content  himself  with  the  regular 
perquisites  of  his  situation,  and  might  even 
be  unwilling  to  risk  the  consequences  of  an 
abuse  of  his  opportunities.  His  avarice  might 
be  a  guard  upon  his  avarice.  Add  to  this  that  the 
same  man  might  be  vain  or  ambitious,  as  well 


as  avaricious.  And  if  he  could  expect  to  pro¬ 
long  his  honours  by  his  good  conduct,  he 
might  hesitate  to  sacrifice  his  appetite  for 
them  to  his  appetite  for  gain.  But  with  the 
prospect  before  him  of  approaching  an  inevi¬ 
table  annihilation,  his  avarice  would  be  likely 
to  get  the  victory  over  his  caution,  his  vanity, 
or  his  ambition. 

An  ambitious  man,  too,  when  he  found  him¬ 
self  seated  on  the  summit  of  his  country’s 
honours,  when  he  looked  forward  to  the  time 
at  which  he  must  descend  from  the  exalted 
eminence  for  ever,  and  reflected  that  no  exer¬ 
tion  of  merit  on  his  part  could  save  him  from 
the  unwelcome  reverse;  such  a  man,  in  such 
a  situation,  would  be  much  more  violently 
tempted  to  embrace  a  favourable  conjuncture 
for  attempting  the  prolongation  of  his  power, 
at  every  personal  hazard,  than  if  he  had  the 
probability  of  answering  the  same  end  by  do¬ 
ing  his  duty. 

Would  it  promote  the  peace  of  the  com¬ 
munity  or  the  stability  of  the  government  to 
have  half  a  dozen  men  who  had  had  credit 
enough  to  be  raised  to  the  seat  of  the  supreme 
magistracy,  wandering  among  the  people  like 
discontented  ghosts,  and  sighing  for  a  place 
which  they  were  destined  never  more  to  pos¬ 
sess? 

A  third  ill  effect  of  the  exclusion  would  be 
the  depriving  the  community  of  the  advantage 
of  the  experience  gained  by  the  chief  magis¬ 
trate  in  the  exercise  of  his  office.  That  expe¬ 
rience  is  the  parent  of  wisdom  is  an  adage  the 
truth  of  which  is  recognised  by  the  wisest  as 
well  as  the  simplest  of  mankind.  What  more 
desirable  or  more  essential  than  this  quality 
in  the  governors  of  nations?  Where  more  de¬ 
sirable  or  more  essential  than  in  the  first  magis¬ 
trate  of  a  nation?  Can  it  be  wise  to  put  this  de¬ 
sirable  and  essential  quality  under  the  ban  of 
the  Constitution,  and  to  declare  that  the  mo¬ 
ment  it  is  acquired  its  possessor  shall  be  com¬ 
pelled  to  abandon  the  station  in  which  it  was 
acquired,  and  to  which  it  is  adapted?  This, 
nevertheless,  is  the  precise  import  of  all  those 
regulations  which  exclude  men  from  serving 
their  country,  by  the  choice  of  their  fellow- 
citizens,  after  they  have  by  a  course  of  service 
fitted  themselves  for  doing  it  with  a  greater 
degree  of  utility. 

A  fourth  ill  effect  of  the  exclusion  would 
be  the  banishing  men  from  stations  in  which, 
in  certain  emergencies  of  the  state,  their  pres¬ 
ence  might  be  of  the  greatest  moment  to  the 
public  interest  or  safety.  There  is  no  nation 


THE  FEDERALIST 


which  has  not,  at  one  period  or  another,  expe¬ 
rienced  an  absolute  necessity  of  the  services  of 
particular  men  in  particular  situations:  per¬ 
haps  it  would  not  be  too  strong  to  sav.  to  the 
preservation  of  its  political  existence.  How 
unwise,  therefore,  must  be  every  such  self- 
denying  ordinance  as  serves  to  prohibit  a  na¬ 
tion  from  making  use  of  its  own  citizens  in 
the  manner  best  suited  to  its  exigencies  and 
circumstances!  Without  supposing  the  per¬ 
sonal  essentiality  of  the  man,  it  is  evident  that 
a  change  of  the  chief  magistrate,  at  the  break¬ 
ing  out  of  a  war,  or  at  any  similar  crisis,  for 
another,  even  of  equal  merit,  would  at  all 
times  be  detrimental  to  the  community,  inas¬ 
much  as  it  would  substitute  inexperience  to 
experience,  and  would  tend  to  unhinge  and 
set  afloat  thealready  settled  train  of  the  admin¬ 
istration. 

A  fifth  ill  effect  of  the  exclusion  would  be, 
that  it  would  operate  as  a  constitutional  inter¬ 
diction  of  stability  in  the  administration.  By 
necessitating  a  change  of  men.  in  the  first  office 
of  the  nation,  it  woidd  necessitate  a  muta¬ 
bility  of  measures.  It  is  not  generally  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  that  men  will  vary  and  measures  remain 
uniform.  The  contrary  is  the  usual  course  of 
things.  And  we  need  not  be  apprehensive  that 
there  will  be  too  much  stability  while  there  is 
even  the  option  of  changing;  nor  need  we  de¬ 
sire  to  prohibit  the  people  from  continuing 
their  confidence  where  they  think  it  may  be 
safely  placed,  and  where,  by  constancy  on  their 
part,  they  may  obviate  the  fatal  inconveniences 
of  fluctuating  councils  and  a  variable  policy. 

These  are  some  of  the  disadvantages  which 
would  flow  from  the  principle  of  exclusion. 
They  apply  most  forcibly  to  the  scheme  of  a 
perpetual  exclusion;  but  when  we  consider 
that  even  a  partial  exclusion  would  always 
render  (he  readmission  ol  the  person  a  remote 
and  precarious  object,  the  observations  which 
have  been  made  will  apply  nearly  as  fully  to 
one  case  as  to  the  other. 

What  are  the  advantages  promised  to  coun¬ 
terbalance  these  disadvantages,''  1  hey  are  1  rep¬ 
resented  to  be:  ist,  greater  independence  in 
the  magistrate;  2nd,  greater  security  to  the 
people.  Unless  the  exclusion  be  perpetual, 
there  will  be  no  pretence  to  infer  the  first 
advantage.  But  even  in  that  case,  may  lie  have 
no  objec  t  beyond  his  present  station,  to  which 
he  may  sacrifice  his  independence?  May  he 
have  no  connections,  no  friends,  for  whom  he 
may  .sacrifice  it?  May  he  not  be  less  willing, 
by  a  firm  conduct,  to  make  personal  enemies, 


when  he  acts  under  the  impression  that  a  time 
is  fast  approaching  on  the  arrival  of  which  he 
not  only  may,  but  must,  be  exposed  to  their 
resentments,  upon  an  equal,  perhaps  upon  an 
inferior,  footing?  It  is  not  an  easy  point  to 
determine  whether  his  independence  would 
be  most  promoted  or  impaired  by  such  an  ar¬ 
rangement. 

As  to  the  second  supposed  advantage,  there 
is  still  greater  reason  to  entertain  doubts  con¬ 
cerning  it.  If  the  exclusion  were  to  be  perpet¬ 
ual.  a  man  of  irregular  ambition,  of  whom 
alone  there  could  be  reason  in  any  case  to 
entertain  apprehension,  would,  with  infinite 
reluctance,  yield  to  the  necessity  of  taking  his 
leave  for  ever  of  a  post  in  which  his  passion 
for  power  and  pre-eminence  had  acquired  the 
force  of  habit.  And  if  he  had  been  fortunate 
or  adroit  enough  to  conciliate  the  good-will  of 
the  people,  he  might  induce  them  to  consider 
as  a  very  odious  and  un justifiable  restraint 
upon  themselves,  a  provision  which  was  cal¬ 
culated  to  debar  them  of  the  right  of  giving 
a  fresh  proof  of  their  attachment  to  a  favour¬ 
ite.  There  may  be  conceived  circumstances  in 
which  this  disgust  of  the  people,  seconding  the 
thwarted  ambition  of  such  a  favourite,  might 
occasion  greater  danger  to  liberty  than  could 
ever  reasonably  be  dreaded  from  the  possibility 
of  a  perpetuation  in  office,  by  the  voluntary 
suffrages  of  the  community,  exercising  a  con¬ 
stitutional  privilege. 

There  is  an  excess  of  refinement  in  the  idea 
of  disabling  the  people  to  continue  in  office 
men  who  had  entitled  themselves,  in  their 
opinion,  to  approbation  and  confidence;  the 
advantages  of  which  are  at  best  speculate  e 
and  equivocal,  and  are  overbalanced  by  dis¬ 
advantages  far  more  certain  and  decisive. 

Publius 

Number  7 ^ 

[HAMILTON] 

Tniv  third  ingredient  towards  constituting 
the  vigour  of  the  exec  utive  authority  is  an  ade¬ 
quate  provision  for  its  support.  It  is  evident 
that,  without  proper  attention  to  this  article, 
the  separation  of  the  executive  from  the  legis¬ 
lative  department  would  be  merely  nominal 
and  nugatory.  The  legislature,  with  a  discre¬ 
tionary  power  o\er  the*  salary  and  emoluments 
of  the  Chief  Magistrate,  could  render  him  as 
obsequious  «t>  their  will  as  they  might  think 
proper  to  make  him.  They  might,  in  most 
cases,  either  reduce  him  by  famine,  or  tempt 


NUMBER  75  219 


him  by  largesses,  to  surrender  at  discretion  his 
judgment  to  their  inclinations.  These  expres¬ 
sions,  taken  in  all  the  latitude  of  the  terms, 
would  no  doubt  convey  more  than  is  intended. 
There  are  men  who  could  neither  be  distressed 
nor  won  into  a  sacrifice  of  their  duty;  but  this 
stern  virtue  is  the  growth  of  few  soils;  and  in 
the  main  it  will  be  found  that  a  power  over  a 
man’s  support  is  a  power  over  his  will.  If  it 
were  necessary  to  confirm  so  plain  a  truth  by 
facts,  examples  would  not  be  wanting,  even  in 
this  country,  of  the  intimidation  or  seduction 
of  the  Executive  by  the  terrors  or  allurements 
of  the  pecuniary  arrangements  of  the  legisla¬ 
tive  body. 

It  is  not  easy,  therefore,  to  commend  too 
highly  the  judicious  attention  which  has  been 
paid  to  this  subject  in  the  proposed  Constitu¬ 
tion.  It  is  there  provided  that  “The  President 
of  the  United  States  shall,  at  stated  times,  re¬ 
ceive  for  his  service  a  compensation  which 
shall  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished  dur¬ 
ing  the  period  for  which  he  shall  have  been 
elected;  and  he  shall  not  receive  within  that 
period  any  other  emolument  from  the  United 
Stales,  or  any  of  them.”  It  is  impossible  to 
imagine  any  provision  which  would  have  been 
more  eligible  than  this.  The  legislature,  on 
the  appointment  of  a  President,  is  once  for  all 
to  declare  what  shall  be  the  compensation  for 
his  services  during  the  time  for  which  he  shall 
have  been  elected.  This  done,  they  will  have 
no  power  to  alter  it,  either  by  increase  or 
diminution,  till  a  new  period  of  service  by  a 
new  election  commences.  They  can  neither 
weaken  his  fortitude  by  operating  on  his  neces¬ 
sities,  nor  corrupt  his  integrity  by  appealing  to 
his  avarice.  Neither  the  Union,  nor  any  of  its 
members,  will  be  at  liberty  to  give,  nor  will  he 
be  at  liberty  to  receive,  any  other  emolument 
than  that  which  may  have  been  determined  by 
the  first  act.  He  can,  of  course,  have  no  pecuni¬ 
ary  inducement  to  renounce  or  desert  the  in¬ 
dependence  intended  for  him  by  the  Consti¬ 
tution. 

The  last  of  the  requisites  to  energy,  which 
have  been  enumerated,  are  competent  powers. 
Let  us  proceed  to  consider  those  which  are  pro¬ 
posed  to  be  vested  in  the  President  of  the 
United  States. 

The  first  thing  that  offers  itself  to  our  obser¬ 
vation  is  the  qualified  negativeof  the  President 
upon  the  acts  or  resolutions  of  the  two  houses 
of  the  legislature;  or,  in  other  words,  his  power 
of  returning  all  bills  with  objections,  to  have 
the  effect  of  preventing  their  becoming  laws, 


unless  they  should  afterwards  be  ratified  by 
two  thirds  of  each  of  the  component  members 
of  the  legislative  body. 

The  propensity  of  the  legislative  department 
to  intrude  upon  the  rights,  and  to  absorb  the 
powers,  of  the  other  departments,  has  been 
already  suggested  and  repeated;  the  insuffi¬ 
ciency  of  a  mere  parchment  delineation  of  the 
boundaries  of  each,  has  also  been  remarked 
upon;  and  the  necessity  of  furnishing  each 
with  constitutional  arms  for  its  own  defence 
has  been  inferred  and  proved.  From  these  clear 
and  indubitable  principles  results  the  proprie¬ 
ty  of  a  negative,  either  absolute  or  qualified,  in 
the  Executive,  upon  the  acts  of  the  legislative 
branches.  Without  the  one  or  the  other,  the 
former  would  be  absolutely  unable  to  defend 
himself  against  the  depredations  of  the  latter. 
He  might  gradually  be  stripped  of  his  author¬ 
ities  by  successive  resolutions,  or  annihilated 
by  a  single  vote.  And  in  the  one  mode  or  the 
other,  the  legislative  and  executive  powers 
might  speedily  come  to  be  blended  in  the  same 
hands.  If  even  no  propensity  had  ever  dis¬ 
covered  itself  in  the  legislative  body  to  invade 
the  rights  of  the  Executive,  the  rules  of  just 
reasoning  and  theoretic  propriety  would  of 
themselves  teach  us  that  the  one  ought  not  to 
be  left  to  the  mercy  of  the  other,  but  ought  to 
possess  a  constitutional  and  effectual  power  of 
self-defence. 

But  the  power  in  question  has  a  further  use. 
It  not  only  serves  as  a  shield  to  the  Executive, 
but  it  furnishes  an  additional  security  against 
the  enaction  of  improper  laws.  It  establishes 
a  salutary  check  upon  the  legislative  body, 
calculated  to  guard  the  community  against  the 
effects  of  faction,  precipitancy,  or  of  any  im¬ 
pulse  unfriendly  to  the  public  good,  which 
may  happen  to  influence  a  majority  of  that 
body. 

The  propriety  of  a  negative  has,  upon  some 
occasions,  been  combated  by  an  observation, 
that  it  was  not  to  be  presumed  a  single  man 
would  possess  more  virtue  and  wisdom  than  a 
number  of  men;  and  that  unless  this  presump¬ 
tion  should  be  entertained,  it  would  be  im¬ 
proper  to  give  the  executive  magistrate  any 
species  of  control  over  the  legislative  body. 

But  this  observation,  when  examined,  will 
appear  rather  specious  than  solid.  The  pro¬ 
priety  of  the  thing  does  not  turn  upon  the 
supposition  of  superior  wisdom  or  virtue  in 
the  Executive,  but  upon  the  supposition  that 
the  legislature  will  not  be  infallible;  that  the 
love  of  power  may  sometimes  betray  it  into 


THE  FEDERALIST 


a  disposition  to  encroach  upon  the  rights  of 
other  members  of  the  government;  that  a  spirit 
of  faction  may  sometimes  pervert  its  delibera¬ 
tions;  that  impressions  of  the  moment  may 
sometimes  hurry  it  into  measures  which  itself, 
on  maturer  reflection,  would  condemn.  I  he 
primary  inducement  to  conferring  the  power 
in  question  upon  the  Executive  is,  to  enable 
him  to  defend  himself:  the  secondary  one 
is  to  increase  the  chances  in  favour  of  the 
community  against  the  passing  of  bad  laws, 
through  haste,  inadvertence,  or  design.  The 
oftener  the  measure  is  brought  under  exam¬ 
ination,  the  greater  the  diversity  in  the  situa¬ 
tions  of  those  who  are  to  examine  it,  the  less 
must  be  the  danger  of  those  errors  which  flow 
from  want  of  due  deliberation,  or  of  those 
missteps  which  proceed  from  the  contagion  of 
some  common  passion  or  interest.  It  is  far  less 
probable  that  culpable  views  of  any  kind 
should  infect  all  the  parts  of  the  government 
at  the  same  moment  and  in  relation  to  the  same 
object,  than  that  they  should  by  turns  govern 
and  mislead  every  one  of  them. 

It  may  perhaps  be  said  that  the  power  of 
preventing  bad  laws  includes  that  of  prevent¬ 
ing  good  ones;  and  may  be  used  to  the  one 
purpose  as  well  as  to  the  other.  But  this  objec¬ 
tion  will  have  little  weight  with  those  who  can 
properly  estimate  the  mischiefs  of  that  incon¬ 
stancy  and  mutability  in  the  laws  which  form 
the  greatest  blemish  in  the  character  and 
genius  of  our  governments.  They  will  con¬ 
sider  every  institution  calculated  to  restrain 
the  excess  of  law-making,  and  to  keep  things 
in  the  same  state  in  which  they  happen  to  be 
at  any  given  period,  as  much  more  likely  to  do 
good  than  harm;  because  it  is  favourable  to 
greater  stability  in  the  system  of  legislation. 
The  injury  which  may  possibly  be  done  by 
defeating  a  few  good  laws  will  be  amply  com¬ 
pensated  by  the  advantage  of  pre\cniing  a 
number  of  bad  ones. 

Nor  is  this  all.  The  superior  weight  and  in¬ 
fluence  of  the  legislative  body  in  a  free  govern¬ 
ment,  and  the  hazard  to  the  Executive  in  a 
trial  of  strength  with  that  body,  afford  a  satis¬ 
factory  security  that  the  negative  would  gen¬ 
erally  be  employed  with  great  caution;  and 
there  would  oftener  be  room  for  a  charge  of 
timidity  than  of  rashness  in  the  exercise  of  it. 
A  king  of  Great  Britain,  with  all  his  train  of 
sovereign  attributes,  and  with  all  the  influence 
he  draws  from  a  thousand  sources,  would,  at 
this  day,  hesitate  to  put  a  negative  upon  the 
joint  resolutions  of  the  two  houses  of  Parlia¬ 


ment.  He  would  not  fail  to  exert  the  utmost 
resources  of  that  influence  to  strangle  a  meas¬ 
ure  disagreeable  to  him,  in  its  progress  to  the 
throne,  to  avoid  being  reduced  to  the  dilemma 
of  permitting  it  to  take  effect,  or  of  risking  the 
displeasure  of  the  nation  by  an  opposition 
to  the  sense  of  the  legislative  body.  Nor  is  it 
probable  that  he  would  ultimately  venture  to 
exert  his  prerogatives,  but  in  a  case  of  mani¬ 
fest  propriety  or  extreme  necessity.  All  well- 
informed  men  in  that  kingdom  will  accede  to 
the  justness  of  this  remark.  A  very  consider¬ 
able  period  has  elapsed  since  the  negative  of 
the  crown  has  been  exercised. 

If  a  magistrate  so  powerful  and  so  well  forti¬ 
fied  as  a  British  monarch  would  have  scruples 
about  the  exercise  of  the  power  under  con¬ 
sideration,  how  much  greater  caution  may  be 
reasonably  expected  in  a  President  of  the 
United  States,  clothed  for  the  short  period  of 
four  years  with  the  executive  authority  of  a 
government  wholly  and  purely  republican? 

It  is  evident  that  there  would  be  greater 
danger  of  his  not  using  his  power  when  neces¬ 
sary  than  of  his  using  it  too  often,  or  too  much. 
An  argument,  indeed,  against  its  expediency 
has  been  drawn  from  this  very  source.  It  has 
been  represented,  on  this  account,  as  a  power 
odious  in  appearance,  useless  in  practice.  But 
it  will  not  follow  that  because  it  might  be 
rarely  exercised  it  would  never  be  exercised. 
In  the  case  for  which  it  is  chiefly  designed,  that 
of  an  immediate  attack  upon  theconstitutional 
rights  of  the  Executive,  or  in  a  case  in  which  the 
public  good  was  evidently  and  palpably  sacri¬ 
ficed,  a  man  of  tolerable  firmness  would  avail 
himself  of  his  constitutional  means  of  defence, 
and  would  listen  to  the  admonitions  of  duty 
and  responsibility.  In  the  former  supposition, 
his  fortitude  would  be  stimulated  by  his  im¬ 
mediate  interest  in  the  power  of  his  office;  in 
the  latter,  by  the  probability  of  the  sanction 
of  his  constituents,  who,  though  they  would 
naturally  incline  to  the  legislative  body  in  a 
doubtful  case,  would  hardly  suffer  their  par¬ 
tiality  to  delude  them  in  a  very  plain  case.  1 
speak  now  with  an  eye  to  a  magistrate  possess¬ 
ing  only  a  common  share  of  firmness.  I  here 
are  men  who,  under  any  circumstances,  will 
have  the  courage  to  do  their  duty  at  every 
hazard. 

But  the  convention  have  pursued  a  mean  in 
this  business  which  will  both  facilitate  the 
exercise  of  the  power  vested  in  this  respect  in 
the  executive  magistrate,  and  make  its  efficacy 
to  depend  on  the  sense  of  a  considerable  part 


221 


NUMBER  74 


of  the  legislative  body.  Instead  of  an  absolute 
negative,  it  is  proposed  to  give  the  Executive 
the  qualified  negative  already  described.  This 
is  a  power  which  would  be  much  more  readily 
exercised  than  the  other.  A  man  who  might  be 
afraid  to  defeat  a  law  by  his  single  veto,  might 
not  scruple  to  return  it  for  reconsideration; 
subject  to  being  finally  rejected  only  in  the 
event  of  more  than  one  third  of  each  house 
concurring  in  the  sufficiency  of  his  objections. 
He  would  be  encouraged  by  the  reflection  that 
if  his  opposition  should  prevail  it  would  em¬ 
bark  in  it  a  very  respectable  proportion  of  the 
legislative  body  whose  influence  would  be 
united  with  his  in  supporting  the  propriety  of 
his  conduct  in  the  public  opinion.  A  direct 
and  categorical  negative  has  something  in  the 
appearance  of  it  more  harsh,  and  more  apt  to 
irritate,  than  the  mere  suggestion  of  argu¬ 
mentative  objections  to  be  approved  or  dis¬ 
approved  by  those  to  whom  they  are  addressed. 
In  proportion  as  it  would  be  less  apt  to  offend, 
it  would  be  more  apt  to  be  exercised;  and  for 
this  very  reason  it  may  in  practice  be  found 
more  effectual.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  it  will  not 
often  happen  that  improper  views  will  gov¬ 
ern  so  large  a  proportion  as  two  thirds  of  both 
branches  of  the  legislature  at  the  same  time; 
and  this,  too,  in  spite  of  the  counterposing 
weight  of  the  Executive.  It  is  at  any  rate  far 
less  probable  that  this  should  be  the  case  than 
that  such  views  should  taint  the  resolutions 
and  conduct  of  a  bare  majority.  A  power  of 
this  nature  in  the  Executive  will  often  have  a 
silent  and  unperceived,  though  forcible,  opera¬ 
tion.  When  men,  engaged  in  unjustifiable  pur¬ 
suits,  are  aware  that  obstructions  may  come 
from  a  quarter  which  they  cannot  control,  they 
will  often  be  restrained  by  the  bare  apprehen¬ 
sion  of  opposition  from  doing  what  they  would 
with  eagerness  rush  into,  if  no  such  external 
impediments  were  to  be  feared. 

This  qualified  negative,  as  has  been  else¬ 
where  remarked,  is  in  this  State  vested  in  a 
council,  consisting  of  the  governor,  with  the 
chancellor  and  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court, 
or  any  two  of  them.  It  has  been  freely  em¬ 
ployed  upon  a  variety  of  occasions,  and  fre¬ 
quently  with  success.  And  its  utility  has  become 
so  apparent  that  persons  who,  in  compiling 
the  Constitution,  were  violent  opposers  of  it, 
have  from  experience  become  its  declared  ad¬ 
mirers.1 

1  Mr.  Abraham  Yates,  a  warm  opponent  of  the 
plan  of  the  convention,  is  of  this  number.— 
Publics 


I  have  in  another  place  remarked  that  the 
convention,  in  the  formation  of  this  part  of 
their  plan,  had  departed  from  the  model 
of  the  constitution  of  this  State  in  favour  of 
that  of  Massachusetts.  Two  strong  reasons 
may  be  imagined  for  this  preference.  One 
is  that  the  judges,  who  are  to  be  the  inter¬ 
preters  of  the  law,  might  receive  an  improper 
bias,  from  having  given  a  previous  opinion  in 
their  revisionary  capacities;  the  other  is,  that 
by  being  often  associated  with  the  Executive, 
they  might  be  induced  to  embark  too  far  in 
the  political  views  of  that  magistrate,  and  thus 
a  dangerous  combination  might  by  degrees  be 
cemented  between  the  executive  and  judiciary 
departments.  It  is  impossible  to  keep  the 
judges  too  distinct  from  every  other  avocation 
than  that  of  expounding  the  laws.  It  is  pecu¬ 
liarly  dangerous  to  place  them  in  a  situation  to 
be  either  corrupted  or  influenced  by  the  Exe¬ 
cutive.  Publius 

Number  74 

[HAMILTON] 

The  President  of  the  United  States  is  to  be 
“commander-in-chief  of  the  army  and  navy  of 
the  United  States,  and  of  the  militia  of  the 
several  States  when  called  into  the  actual  serv¬ 
ice  of  the  United  States.”  The  propriety  of  this 
provision  is  so  evident  in  itself,  and  it  is,  at 
the  same  time,  so  consonant  to  the  precedents 
of  the  State  constitutions  in  general,  that  little 
need  be  said  to  explain  or  enforce  it.  Even 
those  of  them  which  have,  in  other  respects, 
coupled  the  chief  magistrate  with  a  council, 
have  for  the  most  part  concentrated  the  mili¬ 
tary  authority  in  him  alone.  Of  all  the  cares  or 
concerns  of  government,  the  direction  of  war 
most  peculiarly  demands  those  qualities  which 
distinguish  the  exercise  of  power  by  a  single 
hand.  The  direction  of  war  implies  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  common  strength;  and  the  pow¬ 
er  of  directing  and  employing  the  common 
strength  forms  a  usual  and  essential  part  in  the 
definition  of  the  executive  authority. 

“The  President  may  require  the  opinion,  in 
writing,  of  the  principal  officer  in  each  of  the 
executive  departments,  upon  any  subject  re¬ 
lating  to  the  duties  of  their  respective  officers.” 
This  I  consider  as  a  mere  redundancy  in  the 
plan,  as  the  right  for  which  it  provides  would 
result  of  itself  from  the  office. 

He  is  also  to  be  authorised  to  grant  “re¬ 
prieves  and  pardons  for  offences  against  the 
United  States,  except  in  cases  of  impeach- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


ment.”  Humanity  and  good  policy  conspire 
to  dictate  that  the  benign  prerogative  of  par¬ 
doning  should  be  as  little  as  possible  fettered 
or  embarrassed.  The  criminal  code  of  every 
country  partakes  so  much  of  necessary  severity 
that  without  an  easy  access  to  exceptions  in 
favour  of  unfortunate  guilt,  justice  would  wear 
a  countenance  too  sanguinary  and  cruel.  As  the 
sense  of  responsibility  is  always  strongest,  in 
proportion  as  it  is  undivided,  it  may  be  in¬ 
ferred  that  a  single  man  would  be  most  ready 
to  attend  to  the  force  of  those  motives  which 
might  plead  for  a  mitigation  of  the  rigour  of 
the  law,  and  least  apt  to  yield  to  considerations 
which  were  calculated  to  shelter  a  fit  object  of 
its  vengeance.  The  reflection  that  the  fate  of  a 
fellow-creature  depended  on  his  sole  fiat  would 
naturally  inspire  scrupulousness  and  caution: 
the  dread  of  being  accused  of  weakness  or  con¬ 
nivance,  would  beget  equal  circumspection, 
though  of  a  different  kind.  On  the  other  hand, 
as  men  generally  derive  confidence  from  their 
numbers,  they  might  often  encourage  each 
other  in  an  act  of  obduracy,  and  might  be  less 
sensible  to  the  apprehension  of  suspicion  or 
censure  for  an  injudicious  or  affected  clem¬ 
ency.  On  these  accounts,  one  man  appears  to 
be  a  more  eligible  dispenser  of  the  mercy  of 
government  than  a  body  of  men. 

The  expediency  of  vesting  the  power  of  par¬ 
doning  in  the  President  has,  if  I  mistake  not, 
been  only  contested  in  relation  to  the  crime 
of  treason.  This,  it  has  been  urged,  ought  to 
have  depended  upon  the  assent  of  one,  or  both, 
of  the  branches  of  the  legislative  body.  1  shall 
not  deny  that  there  are  strong  reasons  to  be 
assigned  for  recpiiring  in  this  particular  the 
concurrence  of  that  body,  or  of  a  part  of  it.  As 
treason  is  a  crime  levelled  at  the  immediate 
being  of  the  society,  when  the  laws  have  once 
ascertained  the  guilt  of  the  offender,  there 
seems  a  fitness  in  referring  the  expediency  of 
an  act  of  mercy  towards  him  to  the  judgment 
of  the  legislature.  And  this  ought  the  rather 
to  be  the  case,  as  the  supposition  of  the  con¬ 
nivance  of  the  Chief  Magistrate  ought  not  to 
be  entirely  excluded,  lint  there  arc  also  strong 
objections  to  such  a  plan.  It  is  not  to  be 
doubted  that  a  single  man  of  prudence  and 
good  sense  is  better  lilted,  in  delicate  conjunc¬ 
tures,  to  balance  the  motives  which  may  plead 
for  and  against  the  remission  of  the*  punish¬ 
ment,  than  any  numerous  body  whatever.  It 
deserves  particular  attention,  that  treason  will 
often  be  connected  with  seditions  which  em¬ 
brace  a  large  proportion  of  the  community;  as 


lately-happened  in  Massachusetts.  In  every  such 
case,  we  might  expect  to  see  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  the  people  tainted  with  the  same  spirit 
which  had  given  birth  to  the  offence.  And 
when  parties  were  pretty  equally  matched,  the 
secret  sympathy  of  the  friends  and  favourers 
of  the  condemned  person,  availing  itself  of 
the  good  nature  and  weakness  of  others,  might 
frequently  bestow  impunity  where  the  terror 
of  an  example  was  necessary.  On  the  other 
hand,  when  the  sedition  had  proceeded  from 
causes  which  had  inflamed  the  resentments 
of  the  major  party,  they  might  often  be 
found  obstinate  and  inexorable  when  policy 
demanded  a  conduct  of  forbearance  and  clem¬ 
ency.  But  the  principal  argument  for  reposing 
the  power  of  pardoning  in  this  case  to  the 
Chief  Magistrate  is  this:  in  seasons  of  insurrec¬ 
tion  or  rebellion  there  are  often  critical  mo¬ 
ments  when  a  well-timed  offer  of  pardon  to 
the  insurgents  or  rebels  may  restore  the  tran¬ 
quillity  of  the  commonwealth;  and  which,  if 
suffered  to  pass  unimproved,  it  may  never  be 
possible  afterwards  to  recall.  The  dilatory 
process  of  convening  the  legislature,  or  one  of 
its  branches,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  its 
sanction  to  the  measure,  would  frequently  be 
the  occasion  of  letting  slip  the  golden  oppor¬ 
tunity.  The  loss  of  a  week,  a  day,  an  hour,  may 
sometimes  be  fatal.  If  it  should  be  observed 
that  a  discretionary  power,  with  a  view  to  such 
contingencies,  might  be  occasionally  conferred 
upon  the  President,  it  may  be  answered  in  the 
first  place  that  it  is  questionable  whether,  in 
a  limited  Constitution,  that  power  could  be 
delegated  by  law;  and  in  the  second  place, 
that  it  would  generally  be  impolitic  before¬ 
hand  to  take  any  step  which  might  hold  out 
the  prospect  of  impunity.  A  proceeding  of  this 
kind,  out  of  the  usual  course,  would  be  likely 
to  be  construed  into  an  argument  of  timidity 
or  of  weakness,  and  would  have  a  tendency 
to  embolden  guilt.  Puijlius 

Number  75 

[Hamilton] 

Tnr.  Prksidknt  is  to  have  power,  "by  and  with 
the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  to  make 
treaties,  provided  two  thirds  of  the  senators 
present  concur." 

Though  this  provision  has  been  assailed,  on 
different  grounds,  with  no  small  degree  of  vehe¬ 
mence,  l  scruple  not  to  declare  my  firm  per¬ 
suasion  that  it  is  one  of  the  best  digested  and 
most  unexceptionable  parts  of  the  plan.  One 


NUMBER  75  223 


ground  of  ohjection  is  the  trite  topic  of  the 
intermixture  of  powers:  some  contending  that 
the  President  ought  alone  to  possess  the  power 
of  making  treaties;  others,  that  it  ought  to 
have  been  exclusively  deposited  in  the  Senate. 
Another  source  of  objection  is  derived  from 
the  small  number  of  persons  by  whom  a  treaty 
may  be  made.  Of  those  who  espouse  this  objec¬ 
tion,  a  part  are  of  opinion  that  the  House  of 
Representatives  ought  to  have  been  associated 
in  the  business,  while  another  part  seem  to 
think  that  nothing  more  was  necessary  than  to 
have  substituted  two  thirds  of  all  the  members 
of  the  Senate,  to  two  thirds  of  the  members 
present .  As  1  flatter  myself  the  observations 
made  in  a  preceding  number  upon  this  part  of 
the  plan  must  have  sufficed  to  place  it,  to  a 
discerning  eye,  in  a  very  favourable  light,  1 
shall  here  content  myself  with  offering  only 
some  supplementary  remarks,  principally  with 
a  view  to  the  objections  which  have  been  just 
stated. 

With  regard  to  the  intermixture  of  powers, 

1  shall  rely  upon  the  explanations  already 
given  in  other  places,  of  the  true  sense  of  the 
rule  upon  which  that  objection  is  founded; 
and  shall  take  it  for  granted,  as  an  inference 
from  them,  that  the  union  of  the  Executive 
with  the  Senate,  in  the  article  of  treaties,  is 
no  infringement  of  that  rule.  1  venture  to  add, 
that  the  particular  nature  of  the  power  of 
making  treaties  indicates  a  peculiar  propriety 
in  that  union.  Though  several  writers  on  the 
subject  of  government  place  that  power  in  the 
class  of  executive  authorities,  yet  this  is  evi¬ 
dently  an  arbitrary  disposition;  for  if  we  at¬ 
tend  carefully  to  its  operation,  it  will  be  found 
to  partake  more  of  the  legislative  than  of  the 
executive  character,  though  it  does  not  seem 
strictly  to  fall  within  the  definition  of  either  of 
them.  The  essence  of  the  legislative  authority 
is  to  enact  laws,  or,  in  other  words,  to  prescribe 
rules  for  the  regulation  of  the  society;  while 
the  execution  of  the  laws,  and  the  employment 
of  the  common  strength,  either  for  this  pur¬ 
pose  or  for  the  common  defence,  seem  to  com¬ 
prise  all  the  functions  of  the  executive  magis¬ 
trate.  The  power  of  making  treaties  is,  plainly, 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  It  relates  neither 
to  the  execution  of  the  subsisting  laws,  nor  to 
the  enaction  of  new  ones;  and  still  less  to  an 
exertion  of  the  common  strength.  Its  objects 
are  contracts  with  foreign  nations,  which 
have  the  force  of  law,  but  derive  it  from  the 
obligations  of  good  faith.  They  are  not  rules 
prescribed  by  the  sovereign  to  the  subject,  but 


agreements  between  sovereign  and  sovereign. 
The  power  in  question  seems  therefore  to  form 
a  distinct  department,  and  to  belong,  properly, 
neither  to  the  legislative  nor  to  the  executive. 
The  qualities  elsewhere  detailed  as  indispen¬ 
sable  in  the  management  of  foreign  negotia¬ 
tions,  point  out  the  Executive  as  the  most  fit 
agent  in  those  transactions;  while  the  vast 
importance  of  the  trust,  and  the  operation  of 
treaties  as  laws,  plead  strongly  for  the  partici¬ 
pation  of  the  whole  or  a  portion  of  the  legisla¬ 
tive  body  in  the  office  of  making  them. 

However  proper  or  safe  it  may  be  in  govern¬ 
ments  where  the  executive  magistrate  is  an 
hereditary  monarch,  to  commit  to  him  the  en¬ 
tire  power  of  making  treaties,  it  would  be 
utterly  unsafe  and  improper  to  intrust  that 
power  to  an  elective  magistrate  of  four  years’ 
duration.  It  has  been  remarked,  upon  another 
occasion,  and  the  remark  is  unquestionably 
just,  that  an  hereditary  monarch,  though  often 
the  oppressor  of  his  people,  has  personally  too 
much  stake  in  the  government  to  be  in  any 
material  danger  of  being  corrupted  by  foreign 
powers.  But  a  man  raised  from  the  station  of  a 
private  citizen  to  the  rank  of  chief  magistrate, 
possessed  of  a  moderate  or  slender  fortune, 
and  looking  forward  to  a  period  not  very  re¬ 
mote  when  he  may  probably  be  obliged  to 
return  to  the  station  from  which  he  was  taken, 
might  sometimes  be  under  temptations  to 
sacrifice  his  duty  to  his  interest,  which  it  would 
require  superlative  virtue  to  withstand.  An 
avaricious  man  might  be  tempted  to  betray 
the  interests  of  the  state  to  the  acquisition  of 
wealth.  An  ambitious  man  might  make  his 
own  aggrandisement,  by  the  aid  of  a  foreign 
power,  the  price  of  his  treachery  to  his  constit¬ 
uents.  The  history  of  human  conduct  does  not 
warrant  that  exalted  opinion  of  human  vir¬ 
tue  which  could  make  it  wise  in  a  nation  to 
commit  interests  of  so  delicate  and  momen¬ 
tous  a  kind,  as  those  which  concern  its  inter¬ 
course  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  to  the  sole 
disposal  of  a  magistrate  created  and  circum¬ 
stanced  as  would  be  a  President  of  the  United 
States. 

To  have  intrusted  the  power  of  making 
treaties  to  the  Senate  alone,  would  have  been 
to  relinquish  the  benefits  of  the  constitutional 
agency  of  the  President  in  the  conduct  of 
foreign  negotiations.  It  is  true  that  the  Senate 
would,  in  that  case,  have  the  option  of  employ¬ 
ing  in  this  capacity,  but  they  would  also  have 
the  option  of  letting  it  alone,  and  pique  or 
cabal  might  induce  the  latter  rather  than  the 


THE  FEDERALIST 


224 

former.  Besides  this,  the  ministerial  servant  of 
the  Senate  could  not  be  expected  to  enjoy  the 
confidence  and  respect  of  foreign  powers  in  the 
same  degree  with  the  constitutional  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  the  nation,  and,  of  course,  would 
not  be  able  to  act  with  an  equal  degree  of 
weight  or  efficacy.  While  the  Union  would, 
from  this  cause,  lose  a  considerable  advantage 
in  the  management  of  its  external  concerns, 
the  people  would  lose  the  additional  security 
which  would  result  from  the  co-operation  of 
the  Executive.  Though  it  would  be  imprudent 
to  confide  in  him  solely  so  important  a  trust, 
yet  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  his  participation 
would  materially  add  to  the  safety  of  the  so¬ 
ciety.  It  must  indeed  be  clear  to  a  demonstra¬ 
tion  that  the  joint  possession  of  the  power  in 
question,  by  the  President  and  Senate,  would 
afford  a  greater  prospect  of  security  than  the 
separate  possession  of  it  by  either  of  them. 
And  whoever  has  maturely  weighed  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  which  must  concur  in  the  appoint¬ 
ment  of  a  President,  will  be  satisfied  that  the 
office  will  always  bid  fair  to  be  filled  by  men 
of  such  characters  as  to  render  their  concur¬ 
rence  in  the  formation  of  treaties  peculiarly 
desirable,  as  well  on  the  score  of  wisdom,  as 
on  that  of  integrity. 

The  remarks  made  in  a  former  number, 
which  have  been  alluded  to  in  another  part 
of  this  paper,  will  apply  with  conclusive  force 
against  the  admission  of  the  House  of  Repre¬ 
sentatives  to  a  share  in  the  formation  of  trea¬ 
ties.  The  fluctuating  and,  taking  its  future  in¬ 
crease  into  the  account,  the  multitudinous 
composition  of  that  body,  forbid  us  to  expect 
in  it  those  qualities  which  are  essential  to  the 
proper  execution  of  such  a  trust.  Accurate  and 
comprehensive  knowledge  of  foreign  politics; 
a  steady  and  systematic  adherence  to  the  same 
views;  a  nice  and  uniform  sensibility  to  na¬ 
tional  character;  decision,  secrecy,  and  des¬ 
patch,  are  incompatible  with  the  genius  of  a 
body  so  variable  and  so  numerous.  The  very 
complication  of  the  business,  by  introducing 
a  necessity  of  the  concurrenceof  so  many  differ¬ 
ent  bodies,  would  of  itself  afford  a  solid  objec¬ 
tion.  The  greater  frequency  of  the  calls  upon 
the  House  of  Representatives,  and  the  greater 
length  of  time  which  it  would  often  be  neces¬ 
sary  to  keep  them  together  when  convened, 
to  obtain  their  sanction  in  the  progressive 
stages  of  a  treaty,  would  lie  a  source  of  so  great 
inconvenience  and  expense  as  alone  ought  to 
condemn  the  project. 

The  only  objection  which  remains  to  be 


canvassed  is  that  which  would  substitute  the 
proportion  of  two  thirds  of  all  the  members 
composing  the  senatorial  body  to  that  of  two 
thirds  of  the  members  present.  It  has  been 
shown,  under  the  second  head  of  our  inquiries, 
that  all  provisions  which  require  more  than 
the  majority  of  any  body  to  its  resolutions  have 
a  direct  tendency  to  embarrass  the  operations 
of  the  government,  and  an  indirect  one  to 
subject  the  sense  of  the  majority  to  that  of  the 
minority.  This  consideration  seems  sufficient 
to  determine  our  opinion  that  the  convention 
have  gone  as  far  in  the  endeavour  to  secure 
the  advantage  of  numbers  in  the  formation  of 
treaties  as  could  have  been  reconciled  either 
with  the  activity  of  the  public  councils  or  with 
a  reasonable  regard  to  the  major  sense  of  the 
community.  If  two  thirds  of  the  whole  number 
of  members  had  been  required,  it  would,  in 
many  cases,  from  the  non-attendance  of  a  part, 
amount  in  practice  to  a  necessity  of  unanimity. 
And  the  history  of  every  political  establish¬ 
ment  in  which  this  principle  has  prevailed 
is  a  history  of  impotence,  perplexity,  and  dis¬ 
order.  Proofs  of  this  position  might  be  adduced 
from  the  examples  of  the  Roman  1  ribuneship. 
the  Polish  Diet,  and  the  States-General  of  the 
Netherlands,  did  not  an  example  at  home  ren¬ 
der  foreign  precedents  unnecessary. 

To  require  a  fixed  proportion  of  the  whole 
body  would  not,  in  all  probability,  contribute 
to  the  advantages  of  a  numerous  agency  better 
than  merely  to  require  a  proportion  of  the 
attending  members.  The  former,  by  making 
a  determinate  number  at  all  times  requisite  to 
a  resolution,  diminishes  the  motives  to  punc¬ 
tual  attendance.  The  latter,  by  making  the  ca¬ 
pacity  of  the  body  to  depend  on  a  propor¬ 
tion  which  may  be  varied  by  the  absence  01- 
presence  of  a  single  member,  has  the  contrary 
effect.  And  as,  by  promoting  punctuality,  it 
tends  to  keep  the  body  complete,  there  is  great 
likelihood  that  its  resolutions  would  generally 
be  dictated  by  as  great  a  number  in  this  case 
as  in  the  other;  while  there  would  be  much 
fewer  occasions  of  delay.  It  ought  not  to  be  for¬ 
gotten  that,  under  the  existing  Confederation, 
two  members  may,  and  usually  do,  represent  a 
State;  whence  it  happens  that  Congress,  who 
now  are  solely  invested  with  all  the  poivers  of 
the  Union,  rarely  consist  of  a  greater  number 
of  persons  than  would  compose  the  intended 
Senate.  If  we  add  to  this,  that  as  the  members 
vote  by  States,  and  that  where  there  is  only  a 
single  member  present  from  a  State,  his  vote 
is  lost,  it  will  justify  a  supposition  that  the  ac- 


NUMBER  76  225 


tive  voices  in  the  Senate,  where  the  members 
are  to  vote  indn  idually,  would  rarely  fall  short 
in  number  of  the  active  voices  in  the  existing 
Congress.  When,  in  addition  to  these  con¬ 
siderations,  we  take  into  view  the  co-operation 
of  the  President  we  shall  not  hesitate  to  infer 
that  the  people  of  America  would  have  greater 
security  against  an  improper  use  of  the  power 
of  making  treaties  under  the  new  Constitution 
than  they  now  enjoy  under  the  Confederation. 
And  when  we  proceed  still  one  step  further, 
and  look  forward  to  the  probable  augmenta¬ 
tion  of  the  Senate  by  the  erection  of  new  States, 
we  shall  not  only  perceive  ample  ground  of 
confidence  in  the  sufficiency  of  the  members 
to  whose  agency  that  power  will  be  intrusted, 
but  we  shall  probably  be  led  to  conclude  that 
a  body  more  numerous  than  the  Senate  would 
be  likely  to  become  would  be  very  little  fit  for 
the  proper  discharge  of  the  trust.  Publius 

Number  j6 

[HAMILTON] 

The  President  is  “to  nominate,  and,  by  and 
with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  to 
appoint  ambassadors,  other  public  ministers 
and  consuls,  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court,  and 
all  other  officers  of  the  United  States  whose 
appointments  are  not  otherwise  provided  for 
in  the  Constitution.  But  the  Congress  may  by 
law  vest  the  appointment  of  such  inferior  offi¬ 
cers  as  they  think  proper  in  the  President 
alone,  or  in  the  courts  of  law,  or  in  the  heads 
of  departments.  The  President  shall  have  pow¬ 
er  to  fill  up  all  vacancies  which  may  happen 
during  the  recess  of  the  Senate,  by  granting 
commissions  which  shall  expire  at  the  end  of 
their  next  session.” 

It  has  been  observed  in  a  former  paper  that 
“the  true  test  of  a  good  government  is  its  apti¬ 
tude  and  tendency  to  produce  a  good  admin¬ 
istration.”  If  the  justness  of  this  observation  be 
admitted,  the  mode  of  appointing  the  officers 
of  the  United  States  contained  in  the  foregoing 
clauses  must,  when  examined,  be  allowed  to  be 
entitled  to  particular  commendation.  It  is  not 
easy  to  conceive  a  plan  better  calculated  than 
this  to  promote  a  judicious  choice  of  men  for 
filling  the  offices  of  the  Union;  and  it  will  not 
need  proof  that  on  this  point  must  essentially 
depend  the  character  of  its  administration. 

It  will  be  agreed  on  all  hands  that  the  power 
of  appointment,  in  ordinary  cases,  ought  to 
be  modified  in  one  of  three  ways.  It  ought 
either  to  be  vested  in  a  single  man,  or  in  a  select 


assembly  of  a  moderate  number;  or  in  a  single 
man  with  the  concurrence  of  such  an  assembly. 
The  exercise  of  it  by  the  people  at  large  will 
be  readily  admitted  to  be  impracticable;  as, 
waiving  every  other  consideration,  it  would 
leave  them  little  time  to  do  anything  else. 
When,  therefore,  mention  is  made  in  the  sub¬ 
sequent  reasonings,  of  an  assembly  or  body  of 
men,  what  is  said  must  be  understood  to  relate 
to  a  select  body  or  assembly  of  the  description 
already  given.  The  people  collectively,  from 
their  number  and  from  their  dispersed  situa¬ 
tion,  cannot  be  regulated  in  their  movements 
by  that  systematic  spirit  of  cabal  and  intrigue, 
which  will  be  urged  as  the  chief  objections  to 
reposing  the  power  in  question  in  a  body  of 
men. 

Those  who  have  themselves  reflected  upon 
the  subject,  or  who  have  attended  to  the  ob¬ 
servations  made  in  other  parts  of  these  papers 
in  relation  to  the  appointment  of  the  Presi¬ 
dent,  will,  I  presume,  agree  to  the  position, 
that  there  would  always  be  great  probability 
of  having  the  place  supplied  by  a  man  of  abili¬ 
ties,  at  least  respectable.  Premising  this,  I  pro¬ 
ceed  to  lay  it  down  as  a  rule  that  one  man  of 
discernment  is  better  fitted  to  analyse  and  esti¬ 
mate  the  peculiar  qualities  adapted  to  particu¬ 
lar  offices  than  a  body  of  men  of  equal  or  per¬ 
haps  even  of  superior  discernment. 

The  sole  and  undivided  responsibility  of 
one  man  will  naturally  beget  a  livelier  sense  of 
duty  and  a  more  exact  regard  to  reputation. 
He  will,  on  this  account,  feel  himself  under 
stronger  obligations,  and  more  interested  to  in¬ 
vestigate  with  care  the  qualities  requisite  to 
the  stations  to  be  filled,  and  to  prefer  with  im¬ 
partiality  the  persons  who  may  have  the  fairest 
pretensions  to  them.  He  will  have  fewer  per¬ 
sonal  attachments  to  gratify  than  a  body  of 
men  who  may  each  be  supposed  to  have  an 
equal  number;  and  will  be  so  much  the  less 
liable  to  be  misled  by  the  sentiments  of  friend¬ 
ship  and  of  affection.  A  single  well-directed 
man,  by  a  single  understanding,  cannot  be  dis¬ 
tracted  and  warped  by  that  diversity  of  views, 
feelings,  and  interests  which  frequently  dis¬ 
tract  and  warp  the  resolutions  of  a  collective 
body.  There  is  nothing  so  apt  to  agitate  the 
passions  of  mankind  as  personal  considera¬ 
tions,  whether  they  relate  to  ourselves  or  to 
others,  who  are  to  be  the  objects  of  our  choice 
or  preference.  Hence,  in  every  exercise  of  the 
power  of  appointing  to  offices  by  an  assembly 
of  men,  we  must  expect  to  see  a  full  display  of 
all  the  private  and  party  likings  and  dislikes, 


THE  FEDERALIST 


partialities  and  antipathies,  attachments  and 
animosities,  which  are  felt  by  those  who  com¬ 
pose  the  assembly.  The  choice  which  may  at 
any  time  happen  to  be  made  under  such  cir¬ 
cumstances  will  of  course  be  the  result  either 
of  a  victory  gained  by  one  party  over  the  other 
or  of  a  compromise  between  the  parties.  In 
either  case,  the  intrinsic  merit  of  the  candidate 
will  be  too  often  out  of  sight.  In  the  first,  the 
qualifications  best  adapted  to  uniting  the  suf- 
rages  of  the  party  will  be  more  considered  than 
those  which  fit  the  person  for  the  station.  In 
the  last,  the  coalition  will  commonly  turn  up¬ 
on  some  interested  equivalent:  “Give  us  the 
man  we  wish  for  this  office,  and  you  shall  have 
the  one  you  wish  for  that/’  I  his  will  be  the 
usual  condition  of  the  bargain.  And  it  will 
rarely  happen  that  the  advancement  of  the 
public  service  will  be  the  primary  object  either 
of  party  victories  or  of  party  negotiations. 

The  truth  of  the  principles  here  advanced 
seems  to  have  been  felt  by  the  most  intelligent 
of  those  who  have  found  fault  with  the  provi¬ 
sion  made,  in  this  respect,  by  the  convention. 
They  contend  that  the  President  ought  solely 
to  have  been  authorised  to  make  the  appoint¬ 
ments  under  the  federal  government.  But  it  is 
easy  to  show  that  every  advantage  to  be  expect¬ 
ed  for  such  an  arrangement  would,  in  sub¬ 
stance,  be  derived  from  the  power  of  nomina¬ 
tion,  which  is  proposed  to  be  conferred  upon 
him;  while  several  disadvantages  which  might 
attend  the  absolute  power  of  appointment  in 
the  hands  of  that  officer  would  be  avoided.  In 
the  act  of  nomination,  his  judgment  alone 
would  be  exercised;  and  as  it  would  be  his  sole 
duty  to  point  out  the  man  who,  with  the  ap¬ 
probation  of  the  Senate,  should  fill  an  office, 
his  responsibility  would  be  as  complete  as  if  he 
were  to  make  the  final  appointment.  There 
can,  in  this  view,  be  no  different c  between 
nominating  and  appointing.  The  same  mo¬ 
tives  which  would  influence  a  proper  discharge 
of  liis  duty  in  one  case  would  exist  in  the  other. 
And  as  no  man  could  be  appointed  but  on  his 
previous  nomination,  every  man  who  might  be 
appointed  would  be,  in  fact,  his  choice. 

But  might  not  his  nomination  be  overruled? 
I  grant  it  might,  yet  this  could  only  be  to  make 
place  lor  another  nomination  by  himself.  The 
person  ultimately  appointed  must  be  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  his  preference,  though  perhaps  not  in 
the  first  degree.  It  is  also  not  very  probable  that 
his  nomination  would  often  be  overruled.  I  he 
Senate  could  not  be  tempted,  by  the  prefer¬ 
ence  they  might  feel  to  another,  to  reject  the 


one  proposed,  because  they  could  not  assure 
themselves  that  the  person  they  might  wish 
would  be  brought  forward  by  a  second  or  by  any 
subsequent  nomination.  They  could  not  even 
be  certain  that  a  future  nomination  would  pre¬ 
sent  a  candidate  in  any  degree  more  accepta¬ 
ble  to  them;  and  as  their  dissent  might  cast  a 
kind  of  stigma  upon  the  individual  rejected, 
and  might  have  the  appearance  of  a  reflection 
upon  the  judgment  of  the  chief  magistrate,  it 
is  not  likely  that  their  sanction  would  often  be 
refused  where  there  were  not  special  and  strong 
reasons  for  the  refusal. 

To  what  purpose  then  require  the  co-opera¬ 
tion  of  the  Senate?  I  answer,  that  the  necessity 
of  their  concurrence  would  have  a  powerful 
though,  in  general,  a  silent  operation.  It  would 
be  an  excellent  check  upon  a  spirit  of  favour¬ 
itism  in  the  President,  and  would  tend  greatly 
to  prevent  the  appointment  of  unfit  characters 
from  State  prejudice,  from  family  connection, 
from  personal  attachment,  or  from  a  view  to 
popularity.  In  addition  to  this,  it  would  be  an 
efficacious  source  of  stability  in  the  administra¬ 
tion. 

It  will  readily  be  comprehended  that  a  man 
who  had  himself  the  sole  disposition  of  offices 
would  be  governed  much  more  by  his  private 
inclinations  and  interests  than  when  he  was 
bound  to  submit  the  propriety  of  his  choice  to 
the  discussion  and  determination  of  a  different 
and  independent  body,  and  that  body  an  en¬ 
tire  branch  of  the  legislature.  The  possibility 
of  rejection  would  be  a  strong  motive  to  care 
in  proposing.  The  danger  to  his  own  reputa¬ 
tion  and,  in  the  case  of  an  elective  magistrate, 
to  his  political  existence  from  betraying  a 
spirit  of  favouritism,  or  an  unbecoming  pur¬ 
suit  of  popularity,  to  the  observation  of  a  body 
whose  opinion  would  have  great  weight  in 
forming  that  of  the  public,  could  not  fail  to 
operate  as  a  barrier  to  the  one  and  to  the 
other.  He  would  be  both  ashamed  and  afraid 
to  bring  forward,  for  the  most  distinguished 
or  lucrative  stations,  candidates  who  had  no 
other  merit  than  that  of  coming  from  the  same 
State  to  which  he  particularly  belonged,  or  of 
being  in  some  way  or  other  personally  allied  to 
him,  or  of  possessing  the  necessary  insignifi¬ 
cance  and  pliancy  to  render  them  the  obsequi¬ 
ous  instruments  of  his  pleasure. 

To  this  reasoning  it  has  been  objected  that 
the  President,  by  the  influence  of  the  power  of 
nomination,  may  secure  the  complaisance  of 
the  Senate  to  his  views.  This  supposition  of 
universal  venality  in  human  nature  is  little 


NUMBER  77  227 


less  an  error  in  political  reasoning  than  the 
supposition  of  universal  rectitude.  The  insti¬ 
tution  of  delegated  power  implies  that  there 
is  a  portion  of  virtue  and  honour  among  man¬ 
kind  which  may  be  a  reasonable  foundation 
of  confidence;  and  experience  justifies  the 
theory.  It  has  been  found  to  exist  in  the  most 
corrupt  periods  of  the  most  corrupt  govern¬ 
ments.  The  venality  of  the  British  House  of 
Commons  has  been  long  a  topic  of  accusation 
against  that  body  in  the  country  to  which  they 
belong  as  well  as  in  this;  and  it  cannot  be 
doubted  that  the  charge  is,  to  a  considerable 
extent,  well  founded.  But  it  is  as  little  to  be 
doubted  that  there  is  always  a  large  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  body  which  consists  of  independent 
and  public-spirited  men,  who  have  an  influen¬ 
tial  weight  in  the  councils  of  the  nation.  Hence 
it  is  (the  present  reign  not  excepted)  that  the 
sense  of  that  body  is  often  seen  to  control  the 
inclinations  of  the  monarch,  both  with  regard 
to  men  and  to  measures.  Though  it  might 
therefore  be  allowable  to  suppose  that  the  Ex¬ 
ecutive  might  occasionally  influence  some  in¬ 
dividuals  in  the  Senate,  yet  the  supposition 
that  he  could  in  general  purchase  the  integ¬ 
rity  of  the  whole  body  would  be  forced  and 
improbable.  A  man  disposed  to  view  human 
nature  as  it  is,  without  either  flattering  its  vir¬ 
tues  or  exaggerating  its  vices,  will  see  sufficient 
ground  of  confidence  in  the  probity  of  the 
Senate  to  rest  satisfied,  not  only  that  it  will  be 
impracticable  to  the  Executive  to  corrupt  or 
seduce  a  majority  of  its  members,  but  that  the 
necessity  of  its  co-operation,  in  the  business  of 
appointments,  will  be  a  considerable  and  salu¬ 
tary  restraint  upon  the  conduct  of  that  magis¬ 
trate.  Nor  is  the  integrity  of  the  Senate  the  only 
reliance.  The  Constitution  has  provided  some 
important  guards  against  the  danger  of  execu¬ 
tive  influence  upon  the  legislative  body;  it  de¬ 
clares  that  “No  senator  or  representative  shall, 
during  the  time  for  which  he  xuas  elected ,  be 
appointed  to  any  civil  office  under  the  United 
States  which  shall  have  been  created,  or  the 
emoluments  whereof  shall  have  been  increas¬ 
ed,  during  such  time;  and  no  person,  holding 
any  office  under  the  United  States,  shall  be  a 
member  of  either  house  during  his  continu¬ 
ance  in  office.”  Publius 

Number 

[HAMILTON] 

It  has  been  mentioned  as  one  of  the  advan¬ 
tages  to  be  expected  from  the  co-operation  of 


the  Senate,  in  the  business  of  appointments, 
that  it  would  contribute  to  the  stability  of  the 
administration.  The  consent  of  that  body 
would  be  necessary  to  displace  as  well  as  to  ap¬ 
point.  A  change  of  the  Chief  Magistrate,  there¬ 
fore,  would  not  occasion  so  violent  or  so  gen¬ 
eral  a  revolution  in  the  officers  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  as  might  be  expected  if  he  were  the  sole 
disposer  of  offices.  Where  a  man  in  any  station 
had  given  satisfactory  evidence  of  his  fitness 
for  it,  a  new  President  would  be  restrained 
from  attempting  a  change  in  favour  of  a  per¬ 
son  more  agreeable  to  him  by  the  apprehen¬ 
sion  that  a  discountenance  of  the  Senate  might 
frustrate  the  attempt  and  bring  some  degree 
of  discredit  upon  himself.  Those  who  can  best 
estimate  the  value  of  a  steady  administration 
will  be  most  disposed  to  prize  a  provision 
which  connects  the  official  existence  of  public 
men  with  the  approbation  or  disapprobation 
of  that  body  which,  from  the  greater  perma¬ 
nency  of  its  own  composition,  will  in  all  prob¬ 
ability  be  less  subject  to  inconstancy  than  any 
other  member  of  the  government. 

To  this  union  of  the  Senate  with  the  Presi¬ 
dent,  in  the  article  of  appointments,  it  has  in 
some  cases  been  suggested  that  it  would  serve 
to  give  the  President  an  undue  influence  over 
the  Senate,  and  in  others  that  it  would  have  an 
opposite  tendency  — a  strong  proof  that  nei¬ 
ther  suggestion  is  true. 

To  state  the  first  in  its  proper  form  is  to  re¬ 
fute  it.  It  amounts  to  this:  the  President  would 
have  an  improper  influence  over  the  Senate, 
because  the  Senate  would  have  the  power  of 
restraining  him.  This  is  an  absurdity  in  terms. 
It  cannot  admit  of  a  doubt  that  the  entire  pow¬ 
er  of  appointment  would  enable  him  much 
more  effectually  to  establish  a  dangerous  em¬ 
pire  over  that  body  than  a  mere  power  of 
nomination  subject  to  their  control. 

Let  us  take  a  view  of  the  converse  of  the 
proposition:  “the  Senate  would  influence  the 
Executive.”  As  I  have  had  occasion  to  remark 
in  several  other  instances,  the  indistinctness 
of  the  objection  forbids  a  precise  answer.  In 
what  manner  is  this  influence  to  be  exerted? 
In  relation  to  what  objects?  The  power  of  in¬ 
fluencing  a  person,  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is 
here  used,  must  imply  a  power  of  conferring 
a  benefit  upon  him.  How  could  the  Senate  con¬ 
fer  a  benefit  upon  the  President  by  the  man¬ 
ner  of  employing  their  right  of  negative  up¬ 
on  his  nominations?  If  it  be  said  they  might 
sometimes  gratify  him  by  an  acquiescence  in  a 
favourite  choice  when  public  motives  might 


THE  FEDERALIST 


dictate  a  different  conduct,  1  answer  that  the 
instances  in  which  the  President  could  be  per¬ 
sonally  interested  in  the  result  would  be  too 
few  to  admit  of  his  being  materially  affected 
by  the  compliances  of  the  Senate.  'I  he  power 
which  can  originate  the  disposition  of  honours 
and  emoluments  is  more  likely  to  attract  than 
to  be  attracted  by  the  power  which  can  merely 
obstruct  their  course.  If  bv  influencing  the 
President  be  meant  restraining  him,  this  is 
precisely  what  must  have  been  intended.  And 
it  lias  been  shown  that  the  restraint  would  be 
salutary  at  the  same  time  that  it  would  not  be 
such  as  to  destroy  a  single  advantage  to  be  look¬ 
ed  for  from  the  uncontrolled  agency  of  that 
Magistrate.  The  right  of  nomination  would 
produce  all  the  good  of  that  of  appointment, 
and  would  in  a  great  measure  avoid  its  evils. 

Upon  a  comparison  of  the  plan  for  the  ap¬ 
pointment  of  the  officers  of  the  proposed  gov¬ 
ernment  with  that  which  is  established  by  the 
constitution  of  this  State,  a  decided  preference 
must  be  given  to  the  former.  In  that  plan  the 
power  of  nomination  is  unequivocally  vested 
in  the  Executive.  And  as  there  would  be  a  ne¬ 
cessity  of  submitting  each  nomination  to  the 
judgment  of  an  entire  branch  of  the  legisla¬ 
ture,  the  circumstances  attending  an  appoint¬ 
ment,  from  the  mode  of  conducting  it,  would 
naturally  become  matters  of  notoriety;  and  the 
public  would  be  at  no  loss  to  determine  what 
part  had  been  performed  by  the  different  ac¬ 
tors.  The  blame  of  a  bad  nomination  would 
fall  upon  the  President  singly  and  absolutely. 
The  censure  of  rejecting  a  good  one  would  lie 
entirely  at  the  door  of  the  Senate;  aggravated 
by  the  consideration  of  their  having  counter¬ 
acted  the  good  intentions  of  the  Executive.  If 
an  ill  appointment  should  be  made,  the  Exec¬ 
utive  for  nominating,  and  the  Senate  for  ap¬ 
proving,  would  participate,  though  in  differ¬ 
ent  degrees,  in  the  opprobrium  and  disgrace. 

The  reverse  of  all  this  characterises  the  man¬ 
ner  of  appointment  in  this  State.  The  council 
of  appointment  consists  of  from  three  to  five 
persons,  of  whom  the  governor  is  always  one. 
This  small  body,  shut  up  in  a  private  apart¬ 
ment,  impenetrable  to  the  public  eye,  proceed 
to  the  execution  of  the  trust  committed  to 
them.  It  is  known  that  the  governor  claims  the 
right  of  nomination,  upon  the  strength  of 
some  ambiguous  expressions  in  the  constitu¬ 
tion;  but  it  is  not  known  to  what  extent  or  in 
what  manner  lie  exercises  it;  nor  upon  what 
occasions  he  is  contradicted  or  opposed.  The 
censure  of  a  bad  appointment,  on  account  of 


the  uncertainty  of  its  author,  and  for  want  of 
a  determinate  object,  has  neither  poignancy 
nor  duration.  And  while  an  unbounded  field 
for  cabal  and  intrigue  lies  open,  all  idea  of  re¬ 
sponsibility  is  lost.  The  most  that  the  public 
can  know  is  that  the  governor  claims  the  right 
of  nomination;  that  two  out  of  the  inconsider¬ 
able  number  of  jour  men  can  too  often  be 
managed  without  much  difficulty;  that  if  some 
of  the  members  of  a  particular  council  should 
happen  to  be  of  an  uncomplying  character,  it 
is  frequently  not  impossible  to  get  rid  of  their 
opposition  by  regulating  the  times  of  meeting 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  their  attendance 
inconvenient;  and  that  from  whatever  cause 
it  may  proceed,  a  great  number  of  very  im¬ 
proper  appointments  are  from  time  to  time 
made.  Whether  a  governor  of  this  State  avails 
himself  of  the  ascendant  he  must  necessarily 
have,  in  this  delicate  and  important  part  of 
the  administration,  to  prefer  to  offices  men 
who  are  best  qualified  for  them,  or  whether  he 
prostitutes  that  advantage  to  the  advancement 
of  persons  whose  chief  merit  is  their  implicit 
devotion  to  his  will,  and  to  the  support  of  a 
despicable  and  dangerous  system  of  personal 
influence,  are  questions  which,  unfortunately 
for  the  community,  can  only  be  the  subjects 
of  speculation  and  conjecture. 

Every  mere  council  of  appointment,  how¬ 
ever  constituted,  will  be  a  conclave,  in  which 
cabal  and  intrigue  will  have  their  full  scope. 
Their  number,  without  an  unwarrantable  in¬ 
crease  of  expense,  cannot  be  large  enough  to 
preclude  a  facility  of  combination.  And  as 
each  member  will  have  his  friends  and  con¬ 
nections  to  provide  for,  the  desire  of  mutual 
gratification  will  beget  a  scandalous  barter¬ 
ing  of  votes  and  bargaining  for  places.  The 
private  attachments  of  one  man  might  easily 
be  satisfied;  but  to  satisfy  the  private  attach¬ 
ments  of  a  dozen,  or  of  twenty  men,  would  oc¬ 
casion  a  monopoly  of  all  the  principal  employ¬ 
ments  of  the  government  in  a  few  families,  and 
would  lead  more  directly  to  an  aristocracy  or 
an  oligarchy  than  any  measure  that  could  be 
contrived.  If,  to  avoid  an  accumulation  of  of¬ 
fices,  there  was  to  be  a  frequent  change  in  the 
persons  who  were  to  compose  the  council,  this 
would  involve  the  mischiefs  of  a  mutable  ad¬ 
ministration  in  their  full  extent.  Such  a  coun¬ 
cil  would  also  be  more  liable  to  executive  in¬ 
fluence  than  the  Senate,  because  they  would  be 
fewer  in  number,  and  would  act  less  immedi¬ 
ately  under  the  public  inspection.  Such  a 
council,  in  fine,  as  a  substitute  for  the  plan  of 


NUMBER  78  229 


the  convention,  would  be  productive  of  an 
increase  of  expense,  a  multiplication  of  the 
evils  which  spring  from  favouritism  and  in¬ 
trigue  in  the  distribution  of  public  honours, 
a  decrease  of  stability  in  the  administration 
of  the  government,  and  a  diminution  of  the 
security  against  an  undue  influence  of  the  Ex¬ 
ecutive.  And  yet  such  a  council  has  been 
warmly  contended  for  as  an  essential  amend¬ 
ment  in  the  proposed  Constitution. 

I  could  not  with  propriety  conclude  my  ob¬ 
servations  on  the  subject  of  appointments 
without  taking  notice  of  a  scheme  for  which 
there  have  appeared  some,  though  but  few  ad¬ 
vocates;  I  mean  that  of  uniting  the  House  of 
Representatives  in  the  power  of  making  them. 

I  shall,  however,  do  little  more  than  mention 
it,  as  I  cannot  imagine  that  it  is  likely  to  gain 
the  countenance  of  any  considerable  part  of 
the  community.  A  body  so  fluctuating,  and  at 
the  same  time  so  numerous,  can  never  be 
deemed  proper  for  the  exercise  of  that  power. 
Its  unfitness  will  appear  manifest  to  all  when 
it  is  recollected  that  in  half  a  century  it  may 
consist  of  three  or  four  hundred  persons.  All 
the  advantages  of  the  stability,  both  of  the  Ex¬ 
ecutive  and  of  the  Senate,  would  be  defeated 
by  this  union,  and  infinite  delays  and  embar¬ 
rassments  would  be  occasioned.  The  example 
of  most  of  the  States  in  their  local  constitutions 
encourages  us  to  reprobate  the  idea. 

The  only  remaining  powers  of  the  Executive 
are  comprehended  in  giving  information  to 
Congress  of  the  state  of  the  Union;  in  recom¬ 
mending  to  their  consideration  such  measures 
as  he  shall  judge  expedient;  in  convening  them, 
or  either  branch,  upon  extraordinary  occa¬ 
sions;  in  adjourning  them  when  they  cannot 
themselves  agree  upon  the  time  of  adjourn¬ 
ment;  in  receiving  ambassadors  and  other  pub¬ 
lic  ministers;  in  faithfully  executing  the  laws; 
and  in  commissioning  all  the  officers  of  the 
United  States. 

Except  some  cavils  about  the  power  of  con¬ 
vening  either  house  of  the  legislature,  and  that 
of  receiving  ambassadors,  no  objection  has 
been  made  to  this  class  of  authorities;  nor 
could  they  possibly  admit  of  any.  It  required, 
indeed,  an  insatiable  avidity  for  censure  to  in¬ 
vent  exceptions  to  the  parts  which  have  been 
excepted  to.  In  regard  to  the  power  of  con¬ 
vening  either  house  of  the  legislature,  I  shall 
barely  remark  that  in  respect  to  the  Senate  at 
least  we  can  readily  discover  a  good  reason  for 
it.  As  this  body  has  a  concurrent  power  with 
the  Executive  in  the  article  of  treaties,  it  might 


often  be  necessary  to  call  it  together  with  a 
view  to  this  object  when  it  would  be  unneces¬ 
sary  and  improper  to  convene  the  House  of 
Representatives.  As  to  the  reception  of  ambas¬ 
sadors,  what  I  have  said  in  a  former  paper  will 
furnish  a  sufficient  answer. 

We  have  now  completed  a  survey  of  the 
structure  and  powers  of  the  executive  depart¬ 
ment,  which,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show, 
combines,  as  far  as  republican  principles  will 
admit,  all  the  requisites  to  energy.  The  re¬ 
maining  inquiry  is:  Does  it  also  combine  the 
requisites  to  safety,  in  a  republican  sense— a 
due  dependence  on  the  people,  a  due  responsi¬ 
bility?  The  answer  to  this  question  has  been 
anticipated  in  the  investigation  of  its  other 
characteristics,  and  is  satisfactorily  deducible 
from  these  circumstances;  from  the  election  of 
the  President  once  in  four  years  by  persons 
immediately  chosen  by  the  people  for  that 
purpose;  and  from  his  being  at  all  times  liable 
to  impeachment,  trial,  dismission  from  office, 
incapacity  to  serve  in  any  other,  and  to  for¬ 
feiture  of  life  and  estate  by  subsequent  prose¬ 
cution  in  the  common  course  of  law.  But  these 
precautions,  great  as  they  are,  are  not  the 
only  ones  which  the  plan  of  the  convention 
has  provided  in  favour  of  the  public  security. 
In  the  only  instances  in  which  the  abuse  of 
the  executive  authority  was  materially  to  be 
feared,  the  Chief  Magistrate  of  the  United 
States  would,  by  that  plan,  be  subjected  to  the 
control  of  a  branch  of  the  legislative  body. 
What  more  could  be  desired  by  an  enlightened 
and  reasonable  people?  Publius 

Number  78 

[HAMILTON] 

We  proceed  now  to  an  examination  of  the  ju¬ 
diciary  department  of  the  proposed  govern¬ 
ment. 

In  unfolding  the  defects  of  the  existing  Con¬ 
federation,  the  utility  and  necessity  of  a  fed¬ 
eral  judicature  have  been  clearly  pointed  out. 
It  is  the  less  necessary  to  recapitulate  the  con¬ 
siderations  there  urged,  as  the  propriety  of  the 
institution  in  the  abstract  is  not  disputed;  the 
only  questions  which  have  been  raised  being 
relative  to  the  manner  of  constituting  it,  and 
to  its  extent.  To  these  points,  therefore,  our 
observations  shall  be  confined. 

The  manner  of  constituting  it  seems  to  em¬ 
brace  these  several  objects:  1st.  The  mode  of 
appointing  the  judges.  2nd.  The  tenure  by 
which  they  are  to  hold  their  places.  3rd.  The 


THE  FEDERALIST 


partition  of  the  judiciary  authority  between 
different  courts,  and  their  relations  to  each 
other. 

First.  As  to  the  mode  of  appointing  the 
judges;  this  is  the  same  with  that  of  appointing 
the  officers  of  the  Union  in  general,  and  has 
been  so  fully  discussed  in  the  two  last  numbers 
that  nothing  can  be  said  here  which  would  not 
be  useless  repetition. 

Second.  As  to  the  tenure  by  which  the 
judges  are  to  hold  their  places;  this  chiefly  con¬ 
cerns  their  duration  in  office;  the  provisions 
for  their  support;  the  precautions  for  their  re¬ 
sponsibility. 

According  to  the  plan  of  the  convention,  all 
judges  who  may  be  appointed  by  the  United 
States  are  to  hold  their  offices  during  good  be¬ 
haviour:  which  is  conformable  to  the  most  ap¬ 
proved  of  the  State  constitutions,  and  among 
the  rest,  to  that  of  this  State.  Its  propriety  hav¬ 
ing  been  drawn  into  question  by  the  adversar¬ 
ies  of  that  plan  is  no  light  symptom  of  the 
rage  for  objection  which  disorders  their  imagi¬ 
nations  and  judgments.  The  standard  of  good 
behaviour  for  the  continuance  in  office  of  the 
judicial  magistracy  is  certainly  one  of  the  most 
valuable  of  the  modern  improvements  in  the 
practice  of  government.  In  a  monarchy  it  is 
an  excellent  barrier  to  the  despotism  of  the 
prince;  in  a  republic  it  is  a  no  less  excellent 
barrier  to  the  encroachments  and  oppressions 
of  the  representative  body.  And  it  is  the  best 
expedient  which  can  be  devised  in  any  gov¬ 
ernment  to  secure  a  steady,  upright,  and  im¬ 
partial  administration  of  the  laws. 

Whoever  attentively  considers  the  different 
departments  of  power  must  perceive  that,  in  a 
government  in  which  they  arc  separated  from 
each  other,  the  judiciary,  from  the  nature  of 
its  functions,  will  always  be  the  least  danger¬ 
ous  to  the  political  rights  of  the  Constitution; 
because  it  will  be  least  in  a  capacity  to  annoy 
or  injure  them.  The  Executive  not  only  dis¬ 
penses  the  honours,  but  holds  the  sword  of  the 
community.  The  legislature  not  only  com¬ 
mands  the  purse,  but  prescribes  the  rules  by 
whit li  the  duties  and  rights  of  every  citizen 
are  to  be  regulated.  'I  he  judiciary,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  has  no  inilucnce  over  either  the  sword 
or  the  purse;  no  direction eitherol  thestrength 
or  of  the  wealth  of  the  soc  iety;  and  can  take  no 
active  resolution  whatever.  It  may  truly  be  said 
to  have  neither  i  orc;i  not  will,  but  merely 
judgment;  and  must  ultimately  depend  upon 
the  aid  of  the  executive  arm  even  lor  the  ef¬ 
ficacy  of  its  judgments. 


This  simple  view  of  the  matter  suggests  sev¬ 
eral  important  consequences.  It  proves  incon¬ 
testably  that  the  judiciary  is  beyond  compari¬ 
son  the  weakest  of  the  three  departments  of 
power;1  that  it  can  never  attack  with  success 
either  of  the  other  two;  and  that  all  possible 
care  is  requisite  to  enable  it  to  defend  itself 
against  their  attacks.  It  equally  proves  that 
though  individual  oppression  may  now  and 
then  proceed  from  the  courts  of  justice,  the 
general  liberty  of  the  people  can  never  be  en¬ 
dangered  from  that  quarter;  I  mean  so  long 
as  the  judiciary  remains  truly  distinct  from 
both  the  legislature  and  the  Executive.  For  I 
agree  that  “there  is  no  liberty,  if  the  power  of 
judging  be  not  separated  from  the  legislative 
and  executive  powers.”2  And  it  proves,  in  the 
last  place,  that  as  liberty  can  have  nothing  to 
fear  from  the  judiciary  alone,  but  would  have 
everything  to  fear  from  its  union  with  either 
of  the  other  departments;  that  as  all  the  effects 
of  such  a  union  must  ensue  from  a  dependence 
of  the  former  on  the  latter,  notwithstanding  a 
nominal  and  apparent  separation;  that  as, 
from  the  natural  feebleness  of  the  judiciary,  it 
is  in  continual  jeopardy  of  being  overpowered, 
awed,  or  influenced  by  its  co-ordinate  branch¬ 
es;  and  that  as  nothing  can  contribute  so  much 
to  its  firmness  and  independence  as  perma¬ 
nency  in  office,  this  quality  may  therefore  be 
justly  regarded  as  an  indispensable  ingredient 
in  its  constitution,  and.  in  a  great  measure,  as 
the  citadel  of  the  public  justice  and  the  public 
security. 

File  complete  independence  of  the  courts 
of  justice  is  peculiarly  essential  in  a  limited 
Constitution.  By  a  limited  Constitution  I  un¬ 
derstand  one  which  contains  certain  specified 
exceptions  to  the  legislative  authority;  such, 
for  instance,  as  that  it  shall  pass  no  bills  of 
attainder,  no  ex  post  facto  laws,  and  the  like. 
Limitations  of  this  kind  can  be  preserved  in 
practice  no  other  way  than  through  the  medi¬ 
um  of  courts  of  justice,  whose  duty  it  must  be 
to  declare  all  acts  contrary  to  the  manifest 
tenor  of  the  Constitution  void.  Without  this, 
all  the  reservations  of  particular  rights  or  priv¬ 
ileges  would  amount  to  nothing. 

Some  perplexity  respecting  the  rights  of  the 
courts  to  pronounce  legislative  acts  void,  be¬ 
cause  contrary  to  the  Constitution,  has  arisen 

»The  celebrated  Montesquieu, speaking  of  them, 
says:  "Of  the  three  powers  ai>o\e  mentioned,  the 
judiciary  is  next  to  nothing. "—Spirit  of  Laws. 
—  Pi  in  u  s 

,J  Idem. 


NUMBER  78  231 


from  an  imagination  that  the  doctrine  would 
imply  a  superiority  of  the  judiciary  to  the  leg¬ 
islative  power.  It  is  urged  that  the  authority 
which  can  declare  the  acts  of  another  void 
must  necessarily  be  superior  to  the  one  whose 
acts  may  be  declared  void.  As  this  doctrine  is 
of  great  importance  in  all  the  American  con¬ 
stitutions,  a  brief  discussion  of  the  ground  on 
which  it  rests  cannot  be  unacceptable. 

There  is  no  position  which  depends  on 
clearer  principles  than  that  every  act  of  a  dele¬ 
gated  authority,  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the 
commission  under  which  it  is  exercised,  is  void. 
No  legislative  act,  therefore,  contrary  to  the 
Constitution  can  be  valid.  To  deny  this  would 
be  to  affirm  that  the  deputy  is  greater  than  his 
principal;  that  the  servant  is  above  his  master; 
that  the  representatives  of  the  people  are  su¬ 
perior  to  the  people  themselves;  that  men  act¬ 
ing  by  virtue  of  powers  may  do  not  only  what 
their  powers  do  not  authorise,  but  what  they 
forbid. 

If  it  be  said  that  the  legislative  body  are 
themselves  the  constitutional  judges  of  their 
own  powers,  and  that  the  construction  they 
put  upon  them  is  conclusive  upon  the  other 
departments,  it  may  be  answered  that  this  can¬ 
not  be  the  natural  presumption  where  it  is 
not  to  be  collected  from  any  particular  pro¬ 
visions  in  the  Constitution.  It  is  not  otherwise 
to  be  supposed  that  the  Constitution  could  in¬ 
tend  to  enable  the  representatives  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  to  substitute  their  will  to  that  of  their  con¬ 
stituents.  It  is  far  more  rational  to  suppose 
that  the  courts  were  designed  to  be  an  inter¬ 
mediate  body  between  the  people  and  the  leg¬ 
islature,  in  order,  among  other  things,  to  keep 
the  latter  within  the  limits  assigned  to  their 
authority.  The  interpretation  of  the  laws  is 
the  proper  and  peculiar  province  of  the  courts. 
A  constitution  is,  in  fact,  and  must  be  regarded 
by  the  judges,  as  a  fundamental  law.  It  there¬ 
fore  belongs  to  them  to  ascertain  its  meaning, 
as  well  as  the  meaning  of  any  particular  act 
proceeding  from  the  legislative  body.  If  there 
should  happen  to  be  an  irreconcilable  variance 
between  the  two,  that  which  has  the  superior 
obligation  and  validity  ought,  of  course,  to  be 
preferred;  or,  in  other  words,  the  Constitution 
ought  to  be  preferred  to  the  statute,  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  the  people  to  the  intention  of  their 
agents. 

Nor  does  this  conclusion  by  any  means  sup¬ 
pose  a  superiority  of  the  judicial  to  the  legis¬ 
lative  power.  It  only  supposes  that  the  power 
of  the  people  is  superior  to  both;  and  that 


where  the  will  of  the  legislature,  declared  in 
its  statutes,  stands  in  opposition  to  that  of  the 
people,  declared  in  the  Constitution,  the  judges 
ought  to  be  governed  by  the  latter  rather  than 
the  former.  They  ought  to  regulate  their  de¬ 
cisions  by  the  fundamental  laws,  rather  than 
by  those  which  are  not  fundamental. 

This  exercise  of  judicial  discretion,  in  de¬ 
termining  between  two  contradictory  laws,  is 
exemplified  in  a  familiar  instance.  It  not  un¬ 
commonly  happens  that  there  are  two  statutes 
existing  at  one  time,  clashing  in  whole  or  in 
part  with  each  other,  and  neither  of  them  con¬ 
taining  any  repealing  clause  or  expression.  In 
such  a  case  it  is  the  province  of  the  courts  to 
liquidate  and  fix  their  meaning  and  opera¬ 
tion.  So  far  as  they  can,  by  any  fair  construc¬ 
tion,  be  reconciled  to  each  other,  reason  and 
law  conspire  to  dictate  that  this  should  be 
done;  where  this  is  impracticable,  it  becomes  a 
matter  of  necessity  to  give  effect  to  one  in  ex¬ 
clusion  of  the  other.  The  rule  which  has  ob¬ 
tained  in  the  courts  for  determining  their  rela¬ 
tive  validity  is,  that  the  last  in  order  of  time 
shall  be  preferred  to  the  first.  But  this  is  a 
mere  rule  of  construction,  not  derived  from 
any  positive  law,  but  from  the  nature  and  rea¬ 
son  of  the  thing.  It  is  a  rule  not  enjoined  upon 
the  courts  by  legislative  provision,  but  adopted 
by  themselves,  as  consonant  to  truth  and  pro¬ 
priety,  for  the  direction  of  their  conduct  as  in¬ 
terpreters  of  the  law.  They  thought  it  reason 
able  that  between  the  interfering  acts  of  an 
equal  authority,  that  which  was  the  last  indi¬ 
cation  of  its  will  should  have  the  preference. 

But  in  regard  to  the  interfering  acts  of  a 
superior  and  subordinate  authority,  of  an  orig¬ 
inal  and  derivative  power,  the  nature  and  rea¬ 
son  of  the  thing  indicate  the  converse  of  that 
rule  as  proper  to  be  followed.  They  teach  us 
that  the  prior  act  of  a  superior  ought  to  be 
preferred  to  the  subsequent  act  of  an  inferior 
and  subordinate  authority;  and  that  accord¬ 
ingly,  whenever  a  particular  statute  contra¬ 
venes  the  Constitution,  it  will  be  the  duty  of 
the  judicial  tribunals  to  adhere  to  the  latter 
and  disregard  the  former. 

It  can  be  of  no  weight  to  say  that  the  courts, 
on  the  pretence  of  a  repugnancy,  may  substi¬ 
tute  their  own  pleasure  to  the  constitutional 
intentions  of  the  legislature.  This  might  as 
well  happen  in  the  case  of  two  contradictory 
statutes;  or  it  might  as  well  happen  in  every 
adjudication  upon  any  single  statute.  The 
courts  must  declare  the  sense  of  the  law;  and 
if  they  should  be  disposed  to  exercise  will  in- 


THE  FEDERALIST 


stead  of  judgment,  the  consequence  would 
equally  be  the  substitution  of  their  pleasure  to 
that  of  the  legislative  body.  The  observation, 
if  it  prove  anything,  would  prove  that  there 
ought  to  be  no  judges  distinct  from  that  body. 

If,  then,  the  courts  of  justice  are  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  bulwarks  of  a  limited  Constitu¬ 
tion  against  legislative  encroachments,  this  con¬ 
sideration  will  afford  a  strong  argument  for 
the  permanent  tenure  of  judicial  offices,  since 
nothing  will  contribute  so  much  as  this  to 
that  independent  spirit  in  the  judges  which 
must  be  essential  to  the  faithful  performance 
of  so  arduous  a  duty. 

This  independence  of  the  judges  is  equally 
requisite  to  guard  the  Constitution  and  the 
rights  of  individuals  from  the  effects  of  those 
ill  humours,  which  the  arts  of  designing  men, 
or  the  influence  of  particular  conjunctures, 
sometimes  disseminate  among  the  people  them¬ 
selves,  and  which,  though  they  speedily  give 
place  to  better  information,  and  more  deliber¬ 
ate  reflection,  have  a  tendency,  in  the  mean¬ 
time,  to  occasion  dangerous  innovations  in  the 
government,  and  serious  oppressions  of  the 
minor  party  in  the  community.  Though  I 
trust  the  friends  of  the  proposed  Constitu¬ 
tion  will  never  concur  with  its  enemies,1  in 
questioning  that  fundamental  principle  of  re¬ 
publican  government  which  admits  the  right 
of  the  people  to  alter  or  abolish  the  established 
Constitution,  whenever  they  find  it  inconsist¬ 
ent  with  their  happiness,  yet  it  is  not  to  be  in¬ 
ferred  from  this  principle  that  the  representa¬ 
tives  of  the  people,  whenever  a  momentary  in¬ 
clination  happens  to  lay  hold  of  a  majority  of 
their  constituents,  incompatible  with  the  pro¬ 
visions  in  the  existing  constitution,  would,  on 
that  account,  be  justifiable  in  a  violation  of 
those  provisions;  or  that  the  courts  would  be 
under  a  greater  obligation  to  connive  at  in¬ 
fractions  in  this  shape  than  when  they  had 
proceeded  wholly  from  the  cabals  of  the  rep¬ 
resentative  body.  Until  the  people  have,  by 
some  solemn  and  authoritative  act,  annulled 
or  changed  the  established  form,  it  is  binding 
upon  themselves  collectively,  as  well  as  indi¬ 
vidually;  and  no  presumption,  or  even  knowl¬ 
edge,  of  their  sentiments,  can  warrant  their 
representatives  in  a  departure  from  it,  prior  to 
such  an  act.  But  it  is  easy  to  see  that  it  would 
require  an  uncommon  portion  of  fortitude  in 
the  judges  to  do  their  duty  as  faithful  guard- 

1  Vide  "Protest  of  the  Minority  of  the  Conven¬ 
tion  of  Pennsylvania,”  Martin’s  Speech,  etc.— 
Puiilius 


ians  of  the  Constitution  where  legislative  in¬ 
vasions  of  it  had  been  instigated  by  the  major 
voice  of  the  community. 

But  it  is  not  with  a  view  to  infractions  of 
the  Constitution  only  that  the  independence 
of  the  judges  may  be  an  essential  safeguard 
against  the  effects  of  occasional  ill  humours 
in  the  society.  These  sometimes  extend  no  far¬ 
ther  than  to  the  injury  of  the  private  rights  of 
particular  classes  of  citizens  by  unjust  and  par¬ 
tial  laws.  Here  also  the  firmness  of  the  judicial 
magistracy  is  of  vast  importance  in  mitigating 
the  severity  and  confining  the  operation  of 
such  laws.  It  not  only  serves  to  moderate  the 
immediate  mischiefs  of  those  which  may  have 
been  passed,  but  it  operates  as  a  check  upon 
the  legislative  body  in  passing  them;  who,  per¬ 
ceiving  that  obstacles  to  the  success  of  iniqui¬ 
tous  intention  are  to  be  expected  from  the  scru¬ 
ples  of  the  courts,  are  in  a  manner  compelled, 
by  the  very  motives  of  the  injustice  they  medi¬ 
tate  to  qualify  their  attempts.  This  is  a  cir¬ 
cumstance  calculated  to  have  more  influence 
upon  the  character  of  our  governments  than 
but  few  may  be  aware  of.  The  benefits  of  the 
integrity  and  moderation  of  the  judiciary  have 
already  been  felt  in  more  States  than  one;  and 
though  they  may  have  displeased  those  whose 
sinister  expectations  they  may  have  disap¬ 
pointed,  they  must  have  commanded  the  es¬ 
teem  and  applause  of  all  the  virtuous  and  dis¬ 
interested.  Considerate  men,  of  every  descrip¬ 
tion,  ought  to  prize  whatever  will  tend  to  be¬ 
get  or  fortify  that  temper  in  the  courts;  as  no 
man  can  be  sure  that  he  may  not  be  to-morrow 
the  victim  of  a  spirit  of  injustice,  by  which  he 
may  be  a  gainer  to-day.  And  every  man  must 
now  feel  that  the  inevitable  tendency  of  such 
a  spirit  is  to  sap  the  foundations  of  public  and 
private  confidence,  and  to  introduce  in  its 
stead  universal  distrust  and  distress. 

That  inflexible  and  uniform  adherence  to 
the  rights  of  the  Constitution,  and  of  individu¬ 
als,  which  we  perceive  to  be  indispensable  in 
the  courts  of  justice,  can  certainly  not  be  ex¬ 
pected  from  judges  who  hold  their  offices  by 
a  temporary  commission.  Periodical  appoint¬ 
ments,  however  regulated,  or  by  whomsoever 
made,  would,  in  some  way  or  other,  be  fatal  to 
their  necessary  independence.  If  the  power  of 
making  them  was  committed  either  to  the  Ex¬ 
ecutive  or  legislature,  there  would  be  danger 
of  an  improper  complaisance  to  the  branch 
which  possessed  it;  if  to  both,  there  would  be 
an  unwillingness  to  hazard  the  displeasure  of 
either;  if  to  the  people,  or  to  persons  chosen 


NUMBER  79  233 


by  them  for  the  special  purpose,  there  would 
be  too  great  a  disposition  to  consult  popular¬ 
ity,  to  justify  a  reliance  that  nothing  would  be 
consulted  but  the  Constitution  and  the  laws. 

There  is  yet  a  further  and  a  weightier  rea¬ 
son  for  the  permanency  of  the  judicial  offices 
which  is  deducible  from  the  nature  of  the 
qualifications  they  require.  It  has  been  fre¬ 
quently  remarked,  with  great  propriety,  that 
a  voluminous  code  of  laws  is  one  of  the  incon¬ 
veniences  necessarily  connected  with  the  ad¬ 
vantages  of  a  free  government.  To  avoid  an 
arbitrary  discretion  in  the  courts,  it  is  indis¬ 
pensable  that  they  should  be  bound  down  by 
strict  rules  and  precedents,  which  serve  to 
define  and  point  out  their  duty  in  every  par¬ 
ticular  case  that  comes  before  them;  and  it 
will  readily  be  conceived  from  the  variety  of 
controversies  which  grow  out  of  the  folly  and 
wickedness  of  mankind  that  the  records  of 
those  precedents  must  unavoidably  swell  to  a 
very  considerable  bulk,  and  must  demand 
long  and  laborious  study  to  acquire  a  com¬ 
petent  knowledge  of  them.  Hence  it  is,  that 
there  can  be  but  few  men  in  the  society  who 
will  have  sufficient  skill  in  the  laws  to  qualify 
them  for  the  stations  of  judges.  And  making 
the  proper  deductions  for  the  ordinary  de¬ 
pravity  of  human  nature,  the  number  must  be 
still  smaller  of  those  who  unite  the  requisite 
integrity  with  the  requisite  knowledge.  These 
considerations  apprise  us  that  the  government 
can  have  no  great  option  between  fit  char¬ 
acter;  and  that  a  temporary  duration  in  office, 
which  would  naturally  discourage  such  char¬ 
acters  from  quitting  a  lucrative  line  of  practice 
to  accept  a  seat  on  the  bench,  would  have  a 
tendency  to  throw  the  administration  of  jus¬ 
tice  into  hands  less  able,  and  less  well  quali¬ 
fied,  to  conduct  it  with  utility  and  dignity. 
In  the  present  circumstances  of  this  country, 
and  in  those  in  which  it  is  likely  to  be  for  a 
long  time  to  come,  the  disadvantages  on  this 
score  would  be  greater  than  they  may  at  first 
sight  appear;  but  it  must  be  confessed  that  they 
are  far  inferior  to  those  which  present  them¬ 
selves  under  the  other  aspects  of  the  subject. 

Upon  the  whole,  there  can  be  no  room  to 
doubt  that  the  convention  acted  wisely  in 
copying  from  the  models  of  those  constitutions 
which  have  established  good  behaviour  as  the 
tenure  of  their  judicial  offices,  in  point  of  du¬ 
ration;  and  that  so  far  from  being  blamable 
on  this  account,  their  plan  would  have  been 
inexcusably  defective,  if  it  had  wanted  this 
important  feature  of  good  government.  The 


experience  of  Great  Britain  affords  an  illus¬ 
trious  comment  on  the  excellence  of  the  insti¬ 
tution.  Publius 

Number  yg 

[HAMILTON] 

Next  to  permanency  in  office,  nothing  can 
contribute  more  to  the  independence  of  the 
judges  than  a  fixed  provision  for  their  support. 
The  remark  made  in  relation  to  the  President 
is  equally  applicable  here.  In  the  general 
course  of  human  nature,  a  power  over  a  man's 
subsistence  amounts  to  a  power  over  his  will. 
And  we  can  never  hope  to  see  realised  in  prac¬ 
tice  the  complete  separation  of  the  judicial 
from  the  legislative  power,  in  any  system  which 
leaves  the  former  dependent  for  pecuniary 
resources  on  the  occasional  grants  of  the  latter. 
The  enlightened  friends  to  good  government 
in  every  State  have  seen  cause  to  lament  the 
want  of  precise  and  explicit  precautions  in 
the  State  constitutions  on  this  head.  Some  of 
these  indeed  have  declared  that  permanent 1 
salaries  should  be  established  for  the  judges; 
but  the  experiment  has  in  some  instances 
shown  that  such  expressions  are  not  sufficiently 
definite  to  preclude  legislative  evasions.  Some¬ 
thing  still  more  positive  and  unequivocal  has 
been  evinced  to  be  requisite.  The  plan  of  the 
convention  accordingly  has  provided  that  the 
judges  of  the  United  States  “shall  at  stated 
times  receive  for  their  services  a  compensation 
which  shall  not  be  dimished  during  their  con¬ 
tinuance  in  office.” 

This,  all  circumstances  considered,  is  the 
most  eligible  provision  that  could  have  been 
devised.  It  will  readily  be  understood  that  the 
fluctuations  in  the  value  of  money  and  in  the 
state  of  society  rendered  a  fixed  rate  of  com¬ 
pensation  in  the  Constitution  inadmissible. 
What  might  be  extravagant  to-day  might  in 
half  a  century  become  penurious  and  inade¬ 
quate.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to  leave  it 
to  the  discretion  of  the  legislature  to  vary  its 
provisions  in  conformity  to  the  variations  in 
circumstances,  yet  under  such  restrictions  as 
to  put  it  out  of  the  power  of  that  body  to 
change  the  condition  of  the  individual  for  the 
worse.  A  man  may  then  be  sure  of  the  ground 
upon  which  he  stands,  and  can  never  be  de¬ 
terred  from  his  duty  by  the  apprehension  of 
being  placed  in  a  less  eligible  situation.  The 
clause  which  has  been  quoted  combines  both 

Wide  Constitution  of  Massachusetts .  chapter 
ii.,  section  1,  article  13.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


advantages.  The  salaries  of  judicial  officers  may 
from  time  to  time  be  altered,  as  occasion  shall 
require,  yet  so  as  never  to  lessen  the  allowance 
with  which  any  particular  judge  comes  into 
office,  in  respect  to  him.  It  will  be  observed 
that  a  difference  has  been  made  by  the  conven¬ 
tion  between  the  compensation  of  the  Presi¬ 
dent  and  of  the  judges.  That  of  the  former 
can  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished;  that 
of  the  latter  can  only  not  be  diminished.  This 
probably  arose  from  the  difference  in  the  du¬ 
ration  of  the  respective  offices.  As  the  Presi¬ 
dent  is  to  be  elected  for  no  more  than  four 
years,  it  can  rarely  happen  that  an  adequate 
salary,  fixed  at  the  commencement  of  that 
period,  will  not  continue  to  be  such  to  its  end. 
But  with  regard  to  the  judges,  who,  if  they 
behave  properly,  will  be  secured  in  their  places 
for  life,  it  may  well  happen,  especially  in  the 
early  stages  of  the  government,  that  a  stipend, 
which  would  be  very  sufficient  at  their  first  ap¬ 
pointment,  would  become  too  small  in  the 
progress  of  their  service. 

This  provision  for  the  support  of  the  judges 
bears  every  mark  of  prudence  and  efficacy; 
and  it  may  be  safely  affirmed  that,  together 
with  the  permanent  tenure  of  their  offices,  it 
affords  a  better  prospect  of  their  independence 
than  is  discoverable  in  the  constitutions  of  any 
of  the  States  in  regard  to  their  own  judges. 

The  precautions  for  their  responsibility  are 
comprised  in  the  article  respecting  impeach¬ 
ments.  They  are  liable  to  be  impeached  for 
malconduct  by  the  House  of  Representatives, 
and  tried  by  the  Senate;  and,  if  convicted,  may 
be  dismissed  from  office,  and  disqualified  for 
holding  any  other.  This  is  the  only  provision 
on  the  point  which  is  consistent  with  the  neces¬ 
sary  independence  of  the  judicial  character, 
and  is  the  only  one  which  we  find  in  our  own 
Constitution  in  respect  to  our  own  judges. 

The  want  of  a  provision  for  removing  the 
judges  on  account  of  inability  has  been  a  sub¬ 
ject  of  complaint.  But  all  considerate  men  will 
be  sensible  that  such  a  provision  would  cither 
not  be  practised  upon  or  would  be  more  liable 
to  abuse  than  calculated  to  answer  any  good 
purpose.  The  mensuration  of  the  faculties  of 
the  mind  has,  I  believe,  no  place  in  the  cata¬ 
logue  of  known  arts.  An  attempt  to  fix  the 
boundary  between  the  regions  of  ability  and 
inability  would  much  of  tenet  give  scope  to 
personal  and  party  attachments  and  enmities 
than  advance  the  interests  of  justice  or  the 
public  good.  The  result,  except  in  the  case  of 
insanity,  must  for  the  most  part  be  arbitrary; 


and  insanity,  without  any  formal  or  express 
provision,  may  be  safely  pronounced  to  be  a 
virtual  disqualification. 

The  constitution  of  New  York,  to  avoid  in¬ 
vestigations  that  must  for  ever  be  vague  and 
dangerous,  has  taken  a  particular  age  as  the 
criterion  of  inability.  No  man  can  be  a  judge 
beyond  sixty.  I  believe  there  are  few  at  present 
who  do  not  disapprove  of  this  provision.  There 
is  no  station,  in  relation  to  which  it  is  less 
proper  than  to  that  of  a  judge.  The  deliber¬ 
ating  and  comparing  faculties  generally  pre¬ 
serve  their  strength  much  beyond  that  period 
in  men  who  survive  it;  and  when,  in  addition 
to  this  circumstance,  we  consider  how  few 
there  are  who  outlive  the  season  of  intellectual 
vigour,  arid  how  improbable  it  is  that  any 
considerable  portion  of  the  bench,  whether 
more  or  less  numerous,  should  be  in  such  a 
situation  at  the  same  time,  we  shall  be  ready 
to  conclude  that  limitations  of  this  sort  have 
little  to  recommend  them.  In  a  republic,  where 
fortunes  are  not  affluent  and  pensions  not 
expedient,  the  dismission  of  men  from  sta¬ 
tions  in  which  they  have  served  their  country 
long  and  usefully,  on  which  they  depend  for 
subsistence,  and  from  which  it  will  be  too  late 
to  resort  to  any  other  occupation  for  a  liveli¬ 
hood,  ought  to  have  some  better  apology  to 
humanity  than  is  to  be  found  in  the  imaginary 
danger  of  a  superannuated  bench.  Publius 

Number  80 

[HAMILTON] 

To  judge  with  accuracy  of  the  proper  extent 
of  the  federal  judicature,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  consider,  in  the  first  place,  what  are  its  prop¬ 
er  objects. 

It  seems  scarcely  to  admit  of  controversy, 
that  the  judiciary  authority  of  the  Union  ought 
to  extend  to  these  several  descriptions  of  cases: 
ist,  to  all  those  which  arise  out  of  the  laws  of 
the  United  States,  passed  in  pursuance  of  their 
just  and  constitutional  powers  of  legislation; 
2nd,  to  all  those  which  concern  the  execution 
of  the  provisions  expressly  contained  in  the 
articles  of  Union;  3rd,  to  all  those  in  which 
the  United  States  arc  a  party;  4th,  to  all  those 
which  involve  the  I’EACE  of  the  Coni  1  m  racy, 
whether  they  relate  to  the  intercourse  between 
the  United  States  and  foreign  nations,  or  to 
that  between  the  States  themselves;  5th,  to  all 
those  which  originate  on  the  high  seas,  and  are 
of  admiralty  or  maritime  jurisdiction;  and, 
lastly,  to  all  those  in  which  the  State  tribunals 


NUMBER  80  235 


cannot  be  supposed  to  be  impartial  and  un¬ 
biased. 

The  first  point  depends  upon  this  obvious 
consideration,  that  there  ought  always  to  be  a 
constitutional  method  of  giving  efficacy  to 
constitutional  provisions.  What,  for  instance, 
would  avail  restrictions  on  the  authority  of 
the  State  legislatures,  without  some  consti¬ 
tutional  mode  of  enforcing  the  observance  of 
them?  The  States,  by  the  plan  of  the  conven¬ 
tion,  are  prohibited  from  doing  a  variety  of 
things,  some  of  which  are  incompatible  with 
the  interests  of  the  Union,  and  others  with  the 
principles  of  good  government.  The  imposi¬ 
tion  of  duties  on  imported  articles,  and  the 
emission  of  paper  money,  are  specimens  of 
each  kind.  No  man  of  sense  will  believe  that 
such  prohibitions  would  be  scrupulously  re¬ 
garded  without  some  effectual  power  in  the 
government  to  restrain  or  correct  the  infrac¬ 
tions  of  them.  This  power  must  either  be  a 
direct  negative  on  the  State  laws,  or  an  author¬ 
ity  in  the  federal  courts  to  overrule  such  as 
might  be  in  manifest  contravention  of  the 
articles  of  Union.  There  is  no  third  course  that 
I  can  imagine.  The  latter  appears  to  have  been 
thought  by  the  convention  preferable  to  the 
former,  and,  I  presume,  will  be  most  agree¬ 
able  to  the  States. 

As  to  the  second  point,  it  is  impossible,  by 
any  argument  or  comment,  to  make  it  clearer 
than  it  is  in  itself.  If  there  are  such  things  as 
political  axioms,  the  propriety  of  the  judicial 
power  of  a  government  being co-extensivewith 
its  legislative,  may  be  ranked  among  the  num¬ 
ber.  The  mere  necessity  of  uniformity  in  the 
interpretation  of  the  national  laws  decides  the 
question.  Thirteen  independent  courts  of  final 
jurisdiction  over  the  same  causes,  arising  upon 
the  same  laws,  is  a  hydra  in  government,  from 
which  nothing  but  contradiction  and  confu¬ 
sion  can  proceed. 

Still  less  need  be  said  in  regard  to  the  third 
point.  Controversies  between  the  nation  and 
its  members  or  citizens  can  only  be  properly 
referred  to  the  national  tribunals.  Any  other 
plan  would  be  contrary  to  reason,  to  prece¬ 
dent,  and  to  decorum. 

The  fourth  point  rests  on  this  plain  prop¬ 
osition,  that  the  peace  of  the  whole  ought 
not  to  be  left  at  the  disposal  of  a  part.  The 
Union  will  undoubtedly  be  answerable  to 
foreign  powers  for  the  conduct  of  its  members. 
And  the  responsibility  for  an  injury  ought 
ever  to  be  accompanied  with  the  faculty  of 
preventing  it.  As  the  denial  or  perversion  of 


justice  by  the  sentences  of  courts,  as  well  as 
in  any  other  manner,  is  with  reason  classed 
among  the  just  causes  of  war,  it  will  follow  that 
the  federal  judiciary  ought  to  have  cognisance 
of  all  causes  in  which  the  citizens  of  other  coun¬ 
tries  are  concerned.  This  is  not  less  essential 
to  the  preservation  of  the  public  faith  than  to 
the  security  of  the  public  tranquillity.  A  dis¬ 
tinction  may  perhaps  be  imagined  between 
cases  arising  upon  treaties  and  the  laws  of  na¬ 
tions  and  those  which  may  stand  merely  on 
the  footing  of  the  municipal  law.  The  former 
kind  may  be  supposed  proper  for  the  federal 
jurisdiction,  the  latter  for  that  of  the  States. 
But  it  is  at  least  problematical,  whether  an  un¬ 
just  sentence  against  a  foreigner,  where  the 
subject  of  controversy  was  wholly  relative  to 
the  lex  loci,  would  not,  if  unredressed  be  an 
aggression  upon  his  sovereign,  as  well  as  one 
which  violated  the  stipulations  of  a  treaty  or 
the  general  law  of  nations.  And  a  still  greater 
objection  to  the  distinction  would  result  from 
the  immense  difficulty,  if  not  impossibility,  of 
a  practical  discrimination  between  the  cases  of 
one  complexion  and  those  of  the  other.  So 
great  a  proportion  of  the  cases  in  which  for¬ 
eigners  are  parties  involve  national  questions, 
that  it  is  by  far  most  safe  and  most  expedient 
to  refer  all  those  in  which  they  are  concerned 
to  the  national  tribunals. 

The  power  of  determining  causes  between 
two  States,  between  one  State  and  the  citizens 
of  another,  and  between  the  citizens  of  differ¬ 
ent  States,  is  perhaps  not  less  essential  to  the 
peace  of  the  Union  than  that  which  has  been 
just  examined.  History  gives  us  a  horrid  pic¬ 
ture  of  the  dissensions  and  private  wars  which 
distracted  and  desolated  Germany  prior  to  the 
institution  of  the  Imperial  Chamber  by  Maxi¬ 
milian,  towards  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  cen¬ 
tury;  and  informs  us,  at  the  same  time,  of  the 
vast  influence  of  that  institution  in  appeasing 
the  disorders  and  establishing  the  tranquil¬ 
lity  of  the  empire.  This  was  a  court  invested 
with  authority  to  decide  finally  all  differences 
among  the  members  of  the  Germanic  body. 

A  method  of  terminating  territorial  disputes 
between  the  States,  under  the  authority  of  the 
federal  head,  was  not  unattended  to  even  in 
the  imperfect  system  by  which  they  have  been 
hitherto  held  together.  But  there  are  many 
other  sources,  besides  interfering  claims  of 
boundary,  from  which  bickerings  and  ani¬ 
mosities  may  spring  up  among  the  members  of 
the  Union.  To  some  of  these  we  have  been 
witnesses  in  the  course  of  our  past  experience. 


THE  FEDERALIST 


It  will  readily  be  conjectured  that  I  allude  to 
the  fraudulent  laws  which  have  been  passed 
in  too  many  of  the  States.  And  though  the 
proposed  Constitution  establishes  particular 
guards  against  the  repetition  of  those  instances 
which  have  heretofore  made  their  appearance, 
yet  it  is  warrantable  to  apprehend  that  the 
spirit  which  produced  them  will  assume  new 
shapes  that  could  not  be  foreseen  nor  specifi¬ 
cally  providedagainst.  ’Whatever  practices  may 
have  a  tendency  to  disturb  the  harmony  be¬ 
tween  the  States  are  proper  objects  of  federal 
superintendence  and  control. 

It  may  be  esteemed  the  basis  of  the  Union, 
that  “the  citizens  of  each  State  shall  be  entitled 
to  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  citizens 
of  the  several  States."  And  if  it  be  a  just  princi¬ 
ple  that  every  government  ought  to  possess  the 
means  of  executing  its  own  provisions  by  its 
own  authority ,  it  will  follow  that  in  order  to 
[preserve]  the  inviolable  maintenance  of  that 
equality  of  privileges  and  immunities  to  which 
the  citizens  of  the  Union  will  be  entitled,  the 
national  judiciary  ought  to  preside  in  all  cases 
in  which  one  State  or  its  citizens  are  opposed 
to  another  State  or  its  citizens.  To  secure  the 
full  effect  of  so  fundamental  a  provision  a- 
gainst  all  evasion  and  subterfuge,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  its  construction  should  be  committed 
to  that  tribunal  which,  having  no  local  attach¬ 
ments,  will  be  likely  to  be  impartial  between  the 
different  States  and  their  citizens,  and  which, 
owing  its  official  existence  to  the  Union,  will 
never  be  likely  to  feel  any  bias  inauspicious  to 
the  principles  on  which  it  is  founded. 

The  fifth  point  will  demand  little  animad¬ 
version.  The  most  bigoted  idolisers  of  State 
authority  have  not  thus  far  shown  a  disposi¬ 
tion  to  deny  the  national  judiciary  the  cog¬ 
nisances  of  maritime  causes.  These  so  generally 
depend  on  the  laws  of  nations,  and  so  com- 
monly  affect  the  rights  of  foreigners,  that  they 
fall  within  the  considerations  which  are  rela¬ 
tive  to  the  public  peace.  The  most  important 
part  of  them  are,  by  the  present  Confedera¬ 
tion,  submitted  to  federal  jurisdiction. 

The  reasonableness  of  the  agency  of  the  na¬ 
tional  courts  in  cases  in  which  the  State  tri¬ 
bunals  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  impartial 
speaks  for  itself.  No  man  ought  certainly  to  be 
a  judge  in  his  own  cause,  or  in  any  cause  in 
respect  to  which  he  has  the  least  interest  or 
bias.  This  principle  has  no  inconsiderable 
weight  in  designating  the  federal  courts  as  the 
proper  tribunals  for  the  determination  of  con¬ 
troversies  between  different  States  and  their 


citizens.  And  it  ought  to  have  the  same  opera¬ 
tion  in  regard  to  some  cases  between  citizens 
of  the  same  State.  Claims  to  land  under  grants 
of  different  States,  founded  upon  adverse  pre¬ 
tensions  of  boundary,  are  of  this  description. 
The  courts  of  neither  of  the  granting  States 
could  be  expected  to  be  unbiased.  The  laws  may 
have  even  prejudged  the  question,  and  tied 
the  courts  down  to  decisions  in  favour  of  the 
grants  of  the  State  to  which  they  belonged. 
And  even  where  this  had  not  been  done,  it 
would  be  natural  that  the  judges,  as  men, 
should  feel  a  strong  predilection  to  the  claims 
of  their  own  government. 

Having  thus  laid  down  and  discussed  the 
principles  which  ought  to  regulate  the  consti¬ 
tution  of  the  federal  judiciary,  we  will  proceed 
to  test,  by  these  principles,  the  particular  pow¬ 
ers  of  which,  according  to  the  plan  of  the  con¬ 
vention,  it  is  to  be  composed.  It  is  to  compre¬ 
hend  “all  cases  in  law  and  equity  arising  under 
the  Constitution,  the  laws  of  the  United  States, 
and  treaties  made,  or  which  shall  be  made, 
under  their  authority;  to  all  cases  affecting 
ambassadors,  other  public  ministers,  and  con¬ 
suls;  to  all  cases  of  admiralty  and  maritime 
jurisdiction;  to  controversies  to  which  the 
United  States  shall  be  a  party;  to  controversies 
between  two  or  more  States;  between  a  State 
and  citizens  of  another  State;  between  citizens 
of  different  States;  between  citizens  of  the  same 
State  claiming  lands  and  grants  of  different 
States;  and  between  a  State  or  the  citizens 
thereof  and  foreign  states,  citizens,  and  sub¬ 
jects."  This  constitutes  the  entire  mass  of  the 
judicial  authority  of  the  Union.  Let  us  now 
review  it  in  detail.  It  is,  then,  to  extend: 

First.  To  all  cases  in  law  and  equity  arising 
under  the  Constitution  and  the  laws  of  the 
United  States.  This  corresponds  with  the  two 
first  classes  of  causes,  which  have  been  enumer¬ 
ated,  as  proper  for  the  judisdiction  of  the 
United  States.  It  has  been  asked,  what  is  meant 
by  “cases  arising  under  the  Constitution,'  in 
contradistinction  front  those  “arising  under 
the  laws  of  the  United  States”?  The  difference 
has  been  already  explained.  All  the  restric¬ 
tions  upon  the  authority  of  the  State  legisla¬ 
tures  furnish  examples  of  it.  I  hey  are  not,  for 
instance,  to  emit  paper  money;  but  the  inter¬ 
diction  results  from  the  Constitution,  and  will 
have  no  connection  with  any  law  of  the  United 
States.  Should  paper  money,  notwithstanding, 
be  emitted,  the  controversies  concerning  it 
would  be  cases  arising  under  the  Constitution 
and  not  the  laws  of  the  United  States,  in  the 


NUMBER  Si 


ordinary  signification  of  the  terms.  This  may 
serve  as  a  sample  of  the  whole. 

It  has  also  been  asked,  what  need  of  the 
word  “equity"?  What  equitable  causes  can 
grow  out  of  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  the 
United  States?  There  is  hardly  a  subject  of 
litigation  between  individuals,  which  may  not 
involve  those  ingredients  of  fraud ,  accident , 
trust ,  or  hardship ,  which  would  render  the 
matter  an  object  of  equitable  rather  than  of 
legal  jurisdiction,  as  the  distinction  is  known 
and  established  in  several  of  the  States.  It  is 
the  peculiar  province,  for  instance,  of  a  court 
of  equity  to  relieve  against  what  are  called 
hard  bargains:  these  are  contracts  in  which, 
though  there  may  have  been  no  direct  fraud 
or  deceit,  sufficient  to  invalidate  them  in  a 
court  of  law,  yet  there  may  have  been  some 
undue  and  unconscionable  advantage  taken 
of  the  necessities  or  misfortunes  of  one  of  the 
parties  which  a  court  of  equity  would  not  toler¬ 
ate.  In  such  cases,  where  foreigners  were  con¬ 
cerned  on  either  side,  it  would  be  impossible 
for  the  federal  judicatories  to  do  justice  with¬ 
out  an  equitable  as  well  as  a  legal  jurisdiction. 
Agreements  to  convey  lands  claimed  under  the 
grants  of  different  States  may  afford  another 
example  of  the  necessity  of  an  equitable  juris¬ 
diction  in  the  federal  courts.  This  reasoning 
may  not  be  so  palpable  in  those  States  where 
the  formal  and  technical  distinction  between 
law  and  equity  is  not  maintained,  as  in  this 
State,  where  it  is  exemplified  by  every  day’s 
practice. 

The  judiciary  authority  of  the  Union  is  to 
extend: 

Second .  To  treaties  made,  or  which  shall  be 
made,  under  the  authority  of  the  U  nited  States, 
and  to  all  cases  affecting  ambassadors,  other 
public  ministers,  and  consuls.  These  belong 
to  the  fourth  class  of  the  enumerated  cases,  as 
they  have  an  evident  connection  with  the  pres¬ 
ervation  of  the  national  peace. 

Third.  To  cases  of  admiralty  and  maritime 
jurisdiction.  These  form,  altogether,  the  fifth 
of  the  enumerated  classes  of  causes  proper  for 
the  cognisance  of  the  national  courts. 

Fourth.  Tocontroversies  to  which  the  United 
States  shall  be  a  party.  These  constitute  the 
third  of  those  classes. 

Fifth.  To  controversies  between  two  or  more 
States;  between  a  State  and  citizens  of  another 
State;  between  citizens  of  different  States.  These 
belong  to  the  fourth  of  those  classes,  and  par¬ 
take,  in  some  measure,  of  the  nature  of  the 
last. 


237 

Sixth.  To  cases  between  the  citizens  of  the 
same  State,  claiming  lands  under  gratits  of  dif¬ 
ferent  States.  These  fall  within  the  last  class, 
and  are  the  only  instances  in  which  the  pro¬ 
posed  Constitution  directly  contemplates  the 
cognisance  of  disputes  between  the  citizens  of 
the  same  State. 

Seventh.  To  cases  between  a  State  and  the 
citizens  thereof,  and  foreign  States,  citizens, 
or  subjects.  These  have  been  already  explained 
to  belong  to  the  fourth  of  the  enumerated 
classes,  and  have  been  shown  to  be,  in  a  pecul¬ 
iar  manner,  the  proper  subjects  of  the  nation¬ 
al  judicature. 

From  this  review  of  the  particular  powers 
of  the  federal  judiciary,  as  marked  out  in  the 
Constitution,  it  appears  that  they  are  all  con¬ 
formable  to  the  principles  which  ought  to  have 
governed  the  structure  of  that  department, 
and  which  were  necessary  to  the  perfection  of 
the  system.  If  some  partial  inconveniences 
should  appear  to  be  connected  with  the  incor¬ 
poration  of  any  of  them  into  the  plan,  it  ought 
to  be  recollected  that  the  national  legislature 
will  have  ample  authority  to  make  such  excep¬ 
tions ,  and  to  prescribe  such  regulations  as  will 
be  calculated  to  obviate  or  remove  these  in¬ 
conveniences.  The  possibility  of  particular  mis¬ 
chiefs  can  never  be  viewed,  by  a  well-informed 
mind,  as  a  solid  objection  to  a  general  princi¬ 
ple,  which  is  calculated  to  avoid  general  mis¬ 
chiefs  and  to  obtain  general  advantages. 

Publius 

Number  81 

[HAMILTON] 

Let  us  now  return  to  the  partition  of  the  judi¬ 
ciary  authority  between  different  courts,  and 
their  relations  to  each  other. 

“The  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  is” 
(by  the  plan  of  the  convention)  “to  be  vested 
in  one  Supreme  Court,  and  in  such  inferior 
courts  as  the  Congress  may,  from  time  to  time, 
ordain  and  establish.”1 

That  there  ought  to  be  one  court  of  supreme 
and  final  judisdiction  is  a  proposition  which 
is  not  likely  to  be  contested.  The  reasons  for 
it  have  been  assigned  in  another  place,  and  are 
too  obvious  to  need  repetition.  The  only  ques¬ 
tion  that  seems  to  have  been  raised  concerning 
it  is  whether  it  ought  to  be  a  distinct  body  or  a 
branch  of  the  legislature.  The  same  contra¬ 
diction  is  observable  in  regard  to  this  matter 
which  has  been  remarked  in  several  other 

1  Article  3,  section  1.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


cases.  The  very  men  who  object  to  the  Senate 
as  a  court  of  impeachments,  on  the  ground  of 
an  improper  intermixture  of  powers,  advocate, 
by  implication  at  least,  the  propriety  of  vest¬ 
ing  the  ultimate  decision  of  all  causes  in  the 
whole  or  in  a  part  of  the  legislative  body. 

The  arguments,  or  rather  suggestions,  upon 
which  this  charge  is  founded,  are  to  this  effect: 
‘The  authorityof  the  proposed  SupremeCourt 
of  the  United  States,  which  is  to  be  a  separate 
arid  independent  body,  will  be  superior  to  that 
of  the  legislature.  The  power  of  construing 
the  laws  according  to  the  spirit  of  the  Consti¬ 
tution,  will  enable  that  court  to  mould  them 
into  whatever  shape  it  may  think  proper; 
especially  as  its  decisions  will  not  be  in  any 
manner  subject  to  the  revision  or  correction 
of  the  legislative  body.  This  is  as  unprece¬ 
dented  as  it  is  dangerous.  In  Britain,  the  judi¬ 
cial  power,  in  the  last  resort,  resides  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  which  is  a  branch  of  the  legis¬ 
lature;  and  this  part  of  the  British  govern¬ 
ment  has  been  imitated  in  the  State  constitu¬ 
tions  in  general.  The  Parliament  of  Great 
Britain,  and  the  legislatures  of  the  several 
States,  can  at  any  time  rectify,  by  law,  the  ex¬ 
ceptionable  decisions  of  theirrespective  courts. 
But  the  errors  and  usurpations  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States  will  be  uncontrol¬ 
lable  and  remediless.”  This,  upon  examination, 

will  be  found  to  be  made  up  altogether  of  false 
reasoning  upon  misconceived  fact. 

In  the  first  place,  there  is  not  a  syllable  in 
the  plan  under  consideration  which  directly 
empowers  the  national  courts  to  construe  the 
laws  according  to  the  spirit  of  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  or  which  gives  them  any  greater  latitude 
in  this  respect  than  may  be  claimed  by  the 
courts  of  every  State.  1  admit,  however,  that  the 
Constitution  ought  to  be  the  standard  of  con¬ 
struction  tor  the  laws,  and  that  whcre\cr  there 
is  an  evident  opposition,  the  laws  ought  to  give 
place  to  the  Constitution.  But  this  doctrine  is 
not  deducible  from  any  circumstance  peculiar 
to  the  plan  of  thcconvention,  but  from  thegen- 
eral  theory  of  a  limited  Constitution;  and  as 
far  as  it  is  true,  is  equally  applicable  to  most,  if 
not  to  all  the  State  governments.  There  can  be 
noobjection,  therefore,  on  this  account,  to  the 
federal  judicature  which  will  not  lie  against 
the  local  judicatures  in  general,  and  which  will 
not  serve  to  condemn  every  constitution  that 
attempts  to  set  bounds  to  legislative  discre¬ 
tion. 

But  perhaps  the  force  of  the  objection  may 
be  thought  toconsist  in  thcparticular  organisa¬ 


tion  of  the  Supreme  Court;  in  its  being  com¬ 
posed  of  a  distinct  body  of  magistrates,  instead 
of  being  one  of  the  branches  of  the  legislature, 
as  in  the  government  of  Great  Britain  and  that 
of  the  State.  To  insist  upon  this  point,  the 
authors  of  the  objection  must  renounce  the 
meaning  they  have  laboured  to  annex  to  the 
celebrated  maxim,  requiring  a  separation  of 
the  departments  of  power.  It  shall,  neverthe¬ 
less,  be  conceded  to  them,  agreeably  to  the 
interpretation  given  to  that  maxim  in  the 
course  of  these  papers,  that  it  is  not  violated 
by  vesting  the  ultimate  power  of  judging  in  a 
part  of  the  legislative  body.  But  though  this 
be  not  an  absolute  violation  of  that  excellent 
rule,  yet  it  verges  so  nearly  upon  it  as  on  this 
account  alone  to  be  less  eligible  than  the  mode 
preferred  by  the  convention.  From  a  body 
which  had  even  a  partial  agency  in  passing 
bad  laws  we  could  rarely  expect  a  disposition 
to  temper  and  moderate  them  in  the  applica¬ 
tion.  The  same  spirit  which  had  operated  in 
making  them  would  be  too  apt  in  interpret¬ 
ing  them;  still  less  could  it  be  expected  that 
men  who  had  infringed  the  Constitution  in  the 
character  of  legislators  would  be  disposed  to 
repair  the  breach  in  the  character  of  judges. 
Nor  is  this  all.  Every  reason  which  recommends 
the  tenure  of  good  behaviour  for  judicial  offices 
militates  against  placing  the  judiciary  power, 
in  the  last  resort,  in  a  body  composed  of  men 
chosen  for  a  limited  period.  There  is  an  absurd¬ 
ity  in  referring  the  determination  of  causes, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  judges  of  permanent 
standing;  in  the  last,  to  those  of  a  temporary 
and  mutable  constitution.  And  there  is  a  still 
greater  absurdity  in  subjecting  the  decisions 
of  men.  selected  for  their  knowledge  of  the 
laws,  acquired  by  long  and  laborious  study, 
to  the  revision  and  control  of  men  who,  for 
want  of  the  same  advantage,  cannot  but  be 
deficient  in  that  knowledge.  The  members  of 
the  legislature  will  rarely  bediosen  with  a  view 
to  those  qualifications  which  fit  men  for  the 
stations  of  judges;  and  as,  on  this  account, 
there  will  be  great  reason  to  apprehend  all  the 
ill  consequences  of  defective  information,  so, 
on  account  of  the  natural  propensity  of  such 
bodies  to  party  divisions,  there  will  be  no  less 
reason  to  fear  that  the  pestilential  breath  of 
faction  ma\  poison  the  fountains  of  justice. 
The  habit  of  being  continually  marshalled  on 
opposite  sides  will  be  too  apt  to  stifle  the  voice 
both  of  law  and  of  equity. 

These  considerations  teach  us  to  applaud 
the  wisdom  of  those  States  who  have  com- 


NUMBER  8 1  239 


mitted  the  judicial  power,  in  the  last  resort, 
not  to  a  part  of  the  legislature,  but  to  distinct 
and  independent  bodies  of  men.  Contrary  to 
the  supposition  of  those  who  have  represented 
the  plan  of  the  convention,  in  this  respect,  as 
novel  and  unprecedented,  it  is  but  a  copy  of 
the  constitutions  of  New  Hampshire,  Massa¬ 
chusetts,  Pennsylvania,  Delaware,  Maryland, 
Virginia,  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  and 
Georgia;  and  the  preference  which  has  been 
given  to  those  models  is  highly  to  be  com¬ 
mended. 

It  is  not  true,  in  the  second  place,  that  the 
Parliament  of  Great  Britain,  or  the  legislatures 
of  the  particular  States,  can  rectify  the  excep¬ 
tionable  decisions  of  their  respective  courts 
in  any  other  sense  than  might  be  done  by  a 
future  legislature  of  the  United  States.  The 
theory,  neither  of  the  British,  nor  the  State 
constitutions,  authorises  the  revisal  of  a  judi¬ 
cial  sentence  by  a  legislative  act.  Nor  is  there 
anything  in  the  proposed  Constitution,  more 
than  in  either  of  them,  by  which  it  is  forbidden. 
In  the  former,  as  well  as  in  the  latter,  the  im¬ 
propriety  of  the  thing,  on  the  general  princi¬ 
ples  of  law  and  reason,  is  the  sole  obstacle.  A 
legislature,  without  exceeding  its  province, 
cannot  reverse  a  determination  once  made  in 
a  particular  case;  though  it  may  prescribe  a 
new  rule  for  future  cases.  This  is  the  principle, 
and  it  applies  in  all  its  consequences,  exactly 
in  the  same  manner  and  extent,  to  the  State 
governments,  as  to  the  national  government 
now  under  consideration.  Not  the  least  differ¬ 
ence  can  be  pointed  out  in  any  view  of  the 
subject. 

It  may  in  the  last  place  be  observed  that  the 
supposed  danger  of  judiciary  encroachments 
on  the  legislative  authority,  which  has  been 
upon  many  occasions  reiterated,  is  in  reality 
a  phantom.  Particular  misconstructions  and 
contraventions  of  the  will  of  the  legislature 
may  now  and  then  happen;  but  they  can  never 
be  so  extensive  as  to  amount  to  an  inconven¬ 
ience,  or  in  any  sensible  degree  to  affect  the 
order  of  the  political  system.  This  may  be  in¬ 
ferred  with  certainty  from  the  general  nature 
of  the  judicial  power,  from  the  objects  to 
which  it  relates,  front  the  manner  in  which  it 
is  exercised,  from  its  comparative  weakness, 
and  from  its  total  incapacity  to  support  its 
usurpations  by  force.  And  the  inference  is 
greatly  fortified  by  the  consideration  of  the 
important  constitutional  check  which  the  pow¬ 
er  of  instituting  impeachments  in  one  part  of 
the  legislative  body,  and  of  determining  upon 


them  in  the  other,  would  give  to  that  body 
upon  the  members  of  the  judicial  department. 
This  is  alone  a  complete  security.  There  never 
can  be  danger  that  the  judges,  by  a  series  of 
deliberate  usurpations  on  the  authority  of  the 
legislature,  would  hazard  the  united  resent¬ 
ment  of  the  body  intrusted  with  it,  while  this 
body  was  possessed  of  the  means  of  punishing 
their  presumption  by  degrading  them  from 
their  stations.  While  this  ought  to  remove  all 
apprehensions  on  the  subject,  it  affords,  at  the 
same  time,  a  cogent  argument  for  constituting 
the  Senate  a  court  for  the  trial  of  impeach¬ 
ments. 

Having  now  examined  and,  I  trust,  removed 
the  objections  to  the  distinct  and  independent 
organisation  of  the  Supreme  Court,  I  proceed 
to  consider  the  propriety  of  the  power  of  con¬ 
stituting  inferior  courts,1  and  the  relations 
which  will  subsist  between  these  and  the 
former. 

The  power  of  constituting  inferior  courts 
is  evidently  calculated  to  obviate  the  necessity 
of  having  recourse  to  the  Supreme  Court  in 
every  case  of  federal  cognisance.  It  is  intended 
to  enable  the  national  government  to  institute 
or  authorise,  in  each  State  or  district  of  the 
United  States,  a  tribunal  competent  to  the  de¬ 
termination  of  matters  of  national  jurisdiction 
within  its  limits. 

But  why,  it  is  asked,  might  not  the  same  pur¬ 
pose  have  been  accomplished  by  the  instru¬ 
mentality  of  the  State  courts?  This  admits  of 
different  answers.  Though  the  fitness  and  com¬ 
petency  of  those  courts  should  be  allowed  in 
the  utmost  latitude,  yet  the  substance  of  the 
power  in  question  may  still  be  regarded  as  a 
necessary  part  of  the  plan,  if  it  were  only  to 
empower  the  national  legislature  to  commit 
to  them  the  cognisance  of  causes  arising  out 
of  the  national  Constitution.  To  confer  the 
power  of  determining  such  causes  upon  the 
existing  courts  of  the  several  States,  would  per¬ 
haps  be  as  much  "to  constitute  tribunals"  as 
to  create  new  courts  with  the  like  power.  But 
ought  not  a  more  direct  and  explicit  provision 
to  have  been  made  in  favour  of  the  State 

i'This  power  lias  been  absurdly  represented  as 
intended  to  abolish  all  the  county  courts  in  the 
se\eral  States,  which  are  commonly  called  inferior 
courts.  But  the  expressions  of  the  Constitution 
are,  to  constitute  “tribunals  inferior  to  the  Su¬ 
preme  Court”;  and  the  evident  design  of  the  pro¬ 
vision  is  to  enable  the  institution  of  local  courts, 
subordinate  to  the  Supreme,  either  in  States  or 
larger  districts.  It  is  ridiculous  to  imagine  that 
county  courts  were  in  contemplation.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


courts?  There  are,  in  my  opinion,  substantial 
reasons  against  such  a  provision:  the  most  dis¬ 
cerning  cannot  foresee  how  far  the  prevalency 
of  a  local  spirit  may  be  found  to  disqualify  the 
local  tribunals  for  the  jurisdiction  of  national 
causes;  whilst  every  man  may  discover  that 
courts  constituted  like  those  of  some  of  the 
States  would  be  improper  channels  of  the  judi¬ 
cial  authority  of  the  Union.  State  judges,  hold¬ 
ing  their  oliices  during  pleasure,  or  from  year  to 
year,  will  be  too  little  independent  to  be  re¬ 
lied  upon  for  an  inflexible  execution  of  the 
national  laws.  And  if  there  was  a  necessity  for 
confiding  the  original  cognisance  of  catisesaris- 
ing  under  those  laws  to  them,  there  would  be 
a  correspondent  necessity  for  leaving  the  door 
of  appeal  as  wide  as  possible.  In  proportion 
to  the  grounds  of  confidence  in,  or  distrust  of, 
the  subordinate  tribunals,  ought  to  be  the 
facility  or  difficulty  of  appeals.  And  well  satis¬ 
fied  as  I  am  of  the  propriety  of  the  appellate 
jurisdiction,  in  the  several  classes  of  causes  to 
which  it  is  extended  by  the  plan  of  the  con¬ 
vention.  I  should  consider  everything  calcu¬ 
lated  to  give,  in  practice,  an  unrestrained 
course  to  appeals  as  a  source  of  public  and  pri¬ 
vate  inconvenience. 

I  am  not  sure  but  that  it  will  be  found  high¬ 
ly  expedient  and  useful  to  divide  the  United 
States  into  four  or  five  or  half  a  dozen  districts; 
and  to  institute  a  federal  court  in  each  dis¬ 
trict  in  lieu  of  one  in  every  State.  The  judges 
of  these  courts,  with  the  aid  of  the  State  judges, 
may  hold  circuits  for  the  trial  of  causes  in  the 
several  parts  of  the  respective  districts.  Justice 
through  them  may  be  administered  with  ease 
and  despatch;  and  appeals  may  be  safely  cir¬ 
cumscribed  within  a  narrow  compass.  This  plan 
appears  to  me  at  present  the  most  eligible  of 
any  that  could  be  adopted,  and  in  order  to  it, 
it  is  necessary  that  the  power  of  constituting 
inferior  courts  should  exist  in  the  full  extent 
in  which  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  proposed 
Constitution. 

These  reasons  seem  sufficient  to  satisfy  a 
candid  mind  that  the  want  of  such  a  power 
would  have  been  a  great  defect  in  the  plan. 
Let  us  now  examine  in  what  manner  the  judi¬ 
cial  authority  is  to  be  distributed  between  the 
supreme  and  the  inferior  courts  of  the  Union. 

The  Supreme  Court  is  to  be  invested  with 
original  jurisdiction  only  “in  cases  affecting 
ambassadors,  other  public  ministers,  and  con 
suls,  and  those  in  which  a  S  i  A  l  t.  shall  be  a 
party.”  Public  ministers  of  every  class  arc  the 
immediate  representatives  of  their  sovereigns. 


All  questions  in  which  they  are  concerned  are 
so  directly  connected  with  the  public  peace 
that,  as  well  for  the  preservation  of  this  as  out 
of  respect  to  the  sovereignties  they  represent, 
it  is  both  expedient  and  proper  that  such  ques¬ 
tions  should  be  submitted  in  the  first  instance 
to  thehighest  judicatory  of  the  nation.  Though 
consuls  have  not  in  strictness  a  diplomatic 
character,  yet  as  they  are  the  public  agents  of 
the  nations  to  which  they  belong,  the  same 
observation  is  in  a  great  measure  applicable 
to  them.  In  cases  in  which  a  State  might  hap¬ 
pen  to  be  a  party  it  would  ill  suit  its  dignity 
to  be  turned  over  to  an  inferior  tribunal. 

Though  it  may  rather  be  a  digression  from 
the  immediate  subject  of  this  paper,  I  shall 
take  occasion  to  mention  here  a  supposition 
which  has  excited  some  alarm  upon  very  mis¬ 
taken  grounds.  It  has  been  suggested  that  an 
assignment  of  the  public  securities  of  one  State 
to  the  citizens  of  another  would  enable  them 
to  prosecute  that  State  in  the  federal  courts 
for  the  amount  of  those  securities:  a  sugges¬ 
tion  which  the  following  considerations  prove 
to  be  without  foundation. 

It  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  sovereignty 
not  to  be  amenable  to  the  suit  of  an  individual 
without  its  consent .  This  is  the  general  sense 
and  the  general  practice  of  mankind;  and  the 
exemption,  as  one  of  the  attributes  of  sover¬ 
eignty.  is  now  enjoyed  by  the  government  of 
every  State  in  the  Union.  Unless,  therefore, 
there  is  a  surrender  of  this  immunity  in  the 
plan  of  the  convention,  it  will  remain  with  the 
States,  and  the  danger  intimated  must  be 
merely  ideal.  The  circumstances  which  are  nec- 
essary  to  produce  an  alienation  of  State  sov¬ 
ereignty  were  discussed  in  considering  the  arti¬ 
cle  of  taxation,  and  need  not  be  repeated  here. 
A  recurrence  to  the  principles  there  estab¬ 
lished  will  satisfy  us  that  there  is  no  colour  to 
pretend  that  the  State  governments  would,  by 
the  adoption  of  that  plan,  be  divested  of  the 
privilege  of  paying  their  own  debts  in  their 
own  way,  free  from  every  constraint  but  that 
which  Hows  from  the  obligations  of  good  faith. 
The  contracts  between  a  nation  and  individ¬ 
uals  are  only  binding  on  the  conscience  of  the 
sovereign  and  have  no  pretensions  to  a  com¬ 
pulsive  force.  They  confer  no  right  of  action 
independent  of  the  sovereign  will.  To  what 
purpose  would  it  be  to  authorise  suits  against 
States  for  the  debts  they  owe?  llow  could  re¬ 
coveries  be  enforced?  It  is  evident  it  could  not 
be  done  without  waging  war  against  the  con¬ 
tracting  State:  and  to  ascribe  to  the  federal 


NUMBER  Si  241 


courts,  by  mere  implication,  and  in  destruc¬ 
tion  of  a  pre-existing  right  of  the  State  gov¬ 
ernments,  a  power  which  would  involve  such 
a  consequence,  would  be  altogether  forced  and 
unwarrantable. 

Let  us  resume  the  train  of  our  observations. 
We  have  seen  that  the  original  jurisdiction  of 
the  Supreme  Court  would  be  confined  to  two 
classes  of  causes,  and  those  of  a  nature  rarely 
to  occur.  In  all  other  cases  of  federal  cogni¬ 
sance,  the  original  jurisdiction  would  apper¬ 
tain  to  the  inferior  tribunals;  and  the  Supreme 
Court  would  have  nothing  more  than  an  appel¬ 
late  jurisdiction,  “with  such  exceptions  and 
under  such  regulations  as  the  Congress  shall 
make.” 

The  propriety  of  this  appellate  jurisdiction 
has  been  scarcely  called  in  question  in  regard 
to  matters  of  law;  but  the  clamours  have  been 
loud  against  it  as  applied  to  matters  of  fact. 
Some  well-intentioned  men  in  this  State,  de¬ 
riving  their  notions  from  the  language  and 
forms  which  obtain  in  our  courts,  have  been 
induced  to  consider  it  as  an  implied  superse- 
dure  of  the  trial  by  jury  in  favour  of  the  civil- 
law  mode  of  trial  which  prevails  in  our  courts  of 
admiralty,  probate,  and  chancery.  A  technical 
sense  has  been  affixed  to  the  term  “appellate,” 
which,  in  our  law  parlance,  is  commonly  used 
in  reference  to  appeals  in  the  course  of  the 
civil  law.  But  if  I  am  not  misinformed,  the 
same  meaning  would  not  be  given  to  it  in  any 
part  of  New  England.  There  an  appeal  from 
one  jury  to  another  is  familiar  both  in  lan¬ 
guage  and  practice,  and  is  even  a  matter  of 
course,  until  there  have  been  two  verdicts  on 
one  side.  The  word  “appellate,”  therefore,  will 
not  be  understood  in  the  same  sense  in  New 
England  as  in  New  York,  which  shows  the  im¬ 
propriety  of  a  technical  interpretation  derived 
from  the  jurisprudence  of  any  particular  State. 
The  expression,  taken  in  the  abstract,  denotes 
nothing  more  than  the  power  of  one  tribunal 
to  review  the  proceedings  of  another,  either 
as  to  the  law  or  fact,  or  both.  The  mode  of 
doing  it  may  depend  on  ancient  custom  or 
legislative  provision  (in  a  new  government 
it  must  depend  on  the  latter),  and  may  be 
with  or  without  the  aid  of  a  jury,  as  may  be 
judged  advisable.  If.  therefore,  the  re-exami¬ 
nation  of  a  fact  once  determined  by  a  jury 
should  in  any  case  be  admitted  under  the  pro¬ 
posed  Constitution,  it  may  be  so  regulated 
as  to  be  done  by  a  second  jury,  either  by 
remanding  the  cause  to  the  court  below  for 
a  second  trial  of  the  fact,  or  by  directing  an 


issue  immediately  out  of  the  Supreme  Court. 

But  it  does  not  follow  that  the  re-examina¬ 
tion  of  a  fact  once  ascertained  by  a  jury  will 
be  permitted  in  the  Supreme  Court.  Why  may 
not  it  be  said,  with  the  strictest  propriety, 
when  a  writ  of  error  is  brought  from  an  in¬ 
ferior  to  a  superior  court  of  law  in  this  State, 
that  the  latter  has  jurisdiction  of  the  fact  as 
well  as  the  law?  It  is  true  it  cannot  institute  a 
new  inquiry  concerning  the  fact,  but  it  takes 
cognisance  of  it  as  it  appears  upon  the  record, 
and  pronounces  the  law  arising  upon  it.1  This 
is  jurisdiction  of  both  fact  and  law;  nor  is  it 
even  possible  to  separate  them.  Though  the 
common-law  courts  of  this  State  ascertain  dis¬ 
puted  facts  by  a  jury,  yet  they  unquestionably 
have  jurisdiction  of  both  fact  and  law;  and 
accordingly  when  the  former  is  agreed  in  the 
pleadings,  they  have  no  recourse  to  a  jury,  but 
proceed  at  once  to  judgment.  I  contend,  there¬ 
fore,  on  this  ground,  that  the  expressions,  “ap¬ 
pellate  jurisdiction,  both  as  to  law  and  fact,” 
do  not  necessarily  imply  a  re-examination  in 
the  Supreme  Court  of  facts  decided  by  juries 
in  the  inferior  courts. 

The  following  train  of  ideas  may  well  be 
imagined  to  have  influenced  the  convention 
in  relation  to  this  particular  provision.  The 
appellate  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court 
(it  may  have  been  argued)  will  extend  to 
causes  determinable  in  different  modes,  some 
in  the  course  of  the  common  law,  others  in 
the  course  of  the  civil  law.  In  the  former,  the 
revision  of  the  law  only  will  be,  generally 
speaking,  the  proper  province  of  the  Supreme 
Court;  in  the  latter,  the  re-examination  of  the 
fact  is  agreeable  to  usage,  and  in  some  cases, 
of  which  prize  causes  are  an  example,  might 
be  essential  to  the  preservation  of  the  public 
peace.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  the  appel¬ 
late  jurisdiction  should,  in  certain  cases,  ex¬ 
tend  in  the  broadest  sense  to  matters  of  fact. 
It  will  not  answer  to  make  an  express  excep¬ 
tion  of  cases  which  shall  have  been  originally 
tried  by  a  jury,  because  in  the  courts  of  some 
of  the  States  all  causes  are  tried  in  this  mode;2 
and  such  an  exception  would  preclude  the  re¬ 
vision  of  matters  of  fact,  as  well  where  it  might 
be  proper,  as  where  it  might  be  improper.  To 
avoid  all  inconveniences,  it  will  be  safest  to 

1This  word  is  composed  of  jus  and  dictio,  juris 
diciio,  or  a  speaking  and  pronouncing  of  the  law. 
—Publius 

2  I  hold  that  the  States  will  have  concurrent  ju¬ 
risdiction  with  the  subordinate  federal  judicato¬ 
ries,  in  many  cases  of  federal  cognizance,  as  will 
be  explained  in  my  next  paper.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


242 

declare  generally  that  the  Supreme  Court  shall 
possess  appellate  jurisdiction  both  as  to  law 
and  fact ,  and  that  this  jurisdiction  shall  be 
subject  to  such  exceptions  and  regulations  as 
the  national  legislature  may  prescribe.  This 
will  enable  the  government  to  modify  it  in 
such  a  manner  as  will  best  answer  the  ends  of 
public  justice  and  security. 

This  view  of  the  matter,  at  any  rate,  puts  it 
out  of  all  doubt  that  the  supposed  abolition 
of  the  trial  by  jury,  by  the  operation  of  this 
provision,  is  fallacious  and  untrue.  1  he  legis¬ 
lature  of  the  United  States  would  certainly 
have  full  power  to  provide  that  in  appeals  to 
the  Supreme  Court  there  should  be  no  re¬ 
examination  of  facts  where  they  had  been  tried 
in  the  original  causes  by  juries.  This  would 
certainly  be  an  authorised  exception;  but  if, 
for  the  reason  already  intimated,  it  should  be 
thought  too  extensive,  it  might  be  qualified 
with  a  limitation  to  such  causes  only  as  are 
determinable  at  common  law  in  that  mode  of 
trial. 

The  amount  of  the  observations  hitherto 
made  on  the  authority  of  the  judicial  depart¬ 
ment  is  this:  that  it  has  been  carefully  re¬ 
stricted  to  those  causes  which  are  manifestly 
proper  for  the  cognisance  of  the  national  judi¬ 
cature;  that  in  the  partition  of  this  authority 
a  very  small  portion  of  original  jurisdiction 
has  been  preserved  to  the  Supreme  Court,  and 
the  rest  consigned  to  the  subordinate  tribu¬ 
nals;  that  the  Supreme  Court  will  possess  an 
appellate  jurisdiction,  both  as  to  law  and  fact, 
in  all  the  cases  referred  to  them,  both  subject 
to  any  exceptions  and  regulations  which  may 
be  thought  advisable:  that  this  appellate  juris¬ 
diction  does,  in  no  case,  abolish  the  trial  by 
jury;  and  that  an  ordinary  degree  of  prudence 
and  integrity  in  the  national  councils  will  in¬ 
sure  us  solid  advantages  from  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  proposed  judiciary,  without  ex¬ 
posing  us  to  any  of  the  inconveniences  which 
have  been  predicted  from  that  source. 

Publius 

Number  82 

[HAMILTON] 

The  erection  of  a  new  government,  whatever 
care  or  wisdom  may  distinguish  the  work,  can¬ 
not  fail  to  originate  questions  of  intricacy  and 
nicety ;  and  these  may,  in  a  particular  manner, 
be  expec  ted  to  flow  from  the  establishment  of 
a  constitution  founded  upon  the  total  or  par¬ 
tial  incorporation  of  a  number  of  distinct  sov¬ 


ereignties.  ’Tis  time  only  that  can  mature  and 
perfect  so  compound  a  system,  can  liquidate 
the  meaning  of  all  the  parts,  and  can  adjust 
them  to  each  other  in  a  harmonious  and  con¬ 
sistent  WHOLE. 

Such  questions,  accordingly,  have  arisen  up¬ 
on  the  plan  proposed  by  the  convention,  and 
particularly  concerning  the  judiciary  depart¬ 
ment.  The  principal  of  these  respect  the  situa¬ 
tion  of  the  State  courts  in  regard  to  those 
causes  which  are  to  be  submitted  to  federal 
jurisdiction.  Is  this  to  be  exclusive,  or  are  those 
courts  to  possess  a  concurrent  jurisdiction?  It 
the  latter,  in  what  relation  will  they  stand  to 
the  national  tribunals?  These  are  inquiries 
which  we  meet  with  in  the  mouths  of  men  of 
sense,  and  which  are  certainly  entitled  to  at¬ 
tention. 

The  principles  established  in  a  former  paper1 
teach  us  that  the  States  will  retain  all  pre-exist¬ 
ing  authorities  which  may  not  be  exclusively 
delegated  to  the  federal  head;  and  that  this 
exclusive  delegation  can  only  exist  in  one  of 
three  cases:  where  an  exclusive  authority  is. 
in  express  terms,  granted  to  the  Union;  or 
where  a  particular  authority  is  granted  to  the 
Union,  and  the  exercise  of  a  like  authority  is 
prohibited  to  the  States;  or  where  an  authority 
is  granted  to  the  Union,  with  which  a  similar 
authority  in  the  States  would  be  utterly  incom¬ 
patible.  Though  these  principles  may  not  apply 
with  the  same  force  to  the  judiciary  as  to  the 
legislative  power,  yet  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  they  are,  in  the  main,  just  with  respect  to 
the  former  as  well  as  the  latter.  And  under  this 
impression,  I  shall  lay  it  down  as  a  rule  that  the 
State  Courts  will  retain  the  jurisdiction  they 
now  have,  unless  it  appears  to  be  taken  away 
in  one  of  the  enumerated  modes. 

The  only  thing  in  the  proposed  Constitu¬ 
tion  which  wears  the  appearance  of  confining 
the  causes  of  federal  cognisance  to  the  federal 
courts  is  contained  in  this  passage:— “  The 
judicial  power  of  the  United  States  shall  be 
vested  in  one  Supreme  Court  and  in  such  in¬ 
ferior  courts  as  the  Congress  shall  from  time 
to  time  ordain  and  establish.”  I  his  might 
either  be  construed  to  signify  that  the  supreme 
and  subordinate  courts  of  the  Union  should 
alone  have  the  power  of  deciding  those  causes 
to  whi<  h  their  authority  is  to  extend;  or  simply 
to  denote  that  the  organs  of  the  national  judi¬ 
ciary  should  be  one  Supreme  Court,  and  as 
many  subordinate  courts  as  Congress  should 
think  proper  to  appoint;  or  in  other  words. 

1  Number  31. 


NUMBER  82  243 


that  the  United  States  should  exercise  the  judi¬ 
cial  power  with  which  they  are  to  be  invested 
through  one  supreme  tribunal  and  a  certain 
number  of  inferior  ones  to  be  instituted  by 
them.  The  first  excludes,  the  last  admits,  the 
concurrent  jurisdiction  of  the  State  tribunals; 
and  as  the  first  would  amount  to  an  alienation 
of  State  power  by  implication,  the  last  appears 
to  me  the  most  natural  and  the  most  defen¬ 
sible  construction. 

But  this  doctrine  of  concurrent  jurisdiction 
is  only  clearly  applicable  to  those  descriptions 
of  causes  of  which  the  State  courts  have  pre¬ 
vious  cognisance.  It  is  not  equally  evident  in 
relation  to  cases  which  may  grow  out  of,  and 
be  peculiar  to,  the  Constitution  to  be  estab¬ 
lished;  for  not  to  allow  the  State  courts  a  right 
of  jurisdiction  in  such  cases  can  hardly  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  the  abridgment  of  a  pre-existing  au¬ 
thority.  I  mean  not  therefore  to  contend  that 
the  United  States,  in  the  course  of  legislation 
upon  the  objects  intrusted  to  their  direction, 
may  not  commit  the  decision  of  causes  arising 
upon  a  particular  regulation  to  the  federal 
courts  solely,  if  such  a  measure  should  be 
deemed  expedient;  but  I  hold  that  the  State 
courts  will  be  divested  of  no  part  of  their  prim¬ 
itive  jurisdiction  further  than  may  relate  to  an 
appeal;  and  I  am  even  of  opinion  that  in  every 
case  in  which  they  were  not  expressly  exclud¬ 
ed  by  the  future  acts  of  the  national  legislature 
they  will  of  course  take  cognisance  of  the  causes 
to  which  those  acts  may  give  birth.  This  I  in¬ 
fer  from  the  nature  of  judiciary  power,  and 
from  the  general  genius  of  the  system.  The  ju¬ 
diciary  power  of  every  government  looks  be¬ 
yond  its  own  local  or  municipal  laws,  and  in 
civil  cases  lays  hold  of  all  subjects  of  litigation 
between  parties  within  its  jurisdiction,  though 
the  causes  of  dispute  are  relative  to  the  laws 
of  the  most  distant  part  of  the  globe.  Those  of 
Japan,  not  less  than  of  New  York,  may  fur¬ 
nish  the  objects  of  legal  discussion  to  our 
courts.  When  in  addition  to  this  we  consider 
the  State  governments  and  the  national  gov¬ 
ernments,  as  they  truly  are,  in  the  light  of 
kindred  systems,  and  as  parts  of  one  whole, 
the  inference  seems  to  be  conclusive  that  the 
State  courts  would  have  a  concurrent  jurisdic¬ 
tion  in  all  cases  arising  under  the  laws  of  the 
Union  where  it  was  not  expressly  prohibited. 

Here  another  question  occurs:  What  rela¬ 
tion  would  subsist  between  the  national  and 
State  courts  in  these  instances  of  concurrent 
jurisdiction?  I  answer,  that  an  appeal  would 
certainly  lie  from  the  latter  to  the  Supreme 


Court  of  the  United  States.  The  Constitution 
in  direct  terms  gives  an  appellate  jurisdiction 
to  the  Supreme  Court  in  all  the  enumerated 
cases  of  federal  cognisance  in  which  it  is  not 
to  have  an  original  one,  without  a  single  ex¬ 
pression  to  confine  its  operation  to  the  in¬ 
ferior  federal  courts.  The  objects  of  appeal, 
not  the  tribunals  from  which  it  is  to  be  made, 
are  alone  contemplated.  From  this  circum¬ 
stance,  and  from  the  reason  of  the  thing,  it 
ought  to  be  construed  to  extend  to  the  State 
tribunals.  Either  this  must  be  the  case,  or  the 
local  courts  must  be  excluded  from  a  concur¬ 
rent  jurisdiction  in  matters  of  national  con¬ 
cern,  else  the  judiciary  authority  of  the  Union 
may  be  eluded  at  the  pleasure  of  every  plain¬ 
tiff  or  prosecutor.  Neither  of  these  conse¬ 
quences  ought,  without  evident  necessity,  to 
be  involved;  the  latter  would  be  entirely  in¬ 
admissible,  as  it  would  defeat  some  of  the  most 
important  and  avowed  purposes  of  the  pro¬ 
posed  government,  and  would  essentially  em¬ 
barrass  its  measures.  Nor  do  1  perceive  any 
foundation  for  such  a  supposition.  Agreeably 
to  the  remark  already  made,  the  national  and 
State  systems  are  to  be  regarded  as  one  whole. 
The  courts  of  the  latter  will  of  course  be 
natural  auxiliaries  to  the  execution  of  the 
laws  of  the  Union,  and  an  appeal  from  them 
will  as  naturally  lie  to  that  tribunal  which  is 
destined  to  unite  and  assimilate  the  principles 
of  national  justice  and  the  rules  of  national 
decisions.  The  evident  aim  of  the  plan  of  the 
convention  is,  that  all  the  causes  of  the  speci¬ 
fied  classes  shall,  for  weighty  public  reasons, 
receive  their  original  or  final  determination  in 
the  courts  of  the  Union.  To  confine,  therefore, 
the  general  expression  giving  appellate  juris¬ 
diction  to  the  Supreme  Court  to  appeals  from 
the  subordinate  federal  courts,  instead  of  al¬ 
lowing  their  extension  to  the  State  courts, 
would  be  to  abridge  the  latitude  of  the  terms 
in  subversion  of  the  intent,  contrary  to  every 
sound  rule  of  interpretation. 

But  could  an  appeal  be  made  to  lie  from 
the  State  courts  to  the  subordinate  federal  ju¬ 
dicatories?  This  is  another  of  the  questions 
which  have  been  raised,  and  of  greater  diffi¬ 
culty  than  the  former.  The  following  consider¬ 
ations  countenance  the  affirmative.  The  plan 
of  the  convention,  in  the  first  place,  authorises 
the  national  legislature  “to  constitute  tribu¬ 
nals  inferior  to  the  Supreme  Court.”1  It  de¬ 
clares,  in  the  next  place,  that  “the  judicial 
power  of  the  United  States  shall  be  vested  in 

1  Section  8,  article  1.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


244 

one  Supreme  Court,  and  in  such  inferior 
courts  as  Congress  shall  ordain  and  establish”: 
and  it  then  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  cases  to 
which  this  judicial  power  shall  extend.  It  after¬ 
wards  divides  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme 
Court  into  original  and  appellate,  but  gives 
no  definition  of  that  of  the  subordinate  courts. 
The  only  outlines  described  for  them  are  that 
they  shall  be  “inferior  to  the  Supreme  Court.” 
and  that  they  shall  not  exceed  the  specified 
limits  of  the  federal  judiciary.  Whether  their 
authority  shall  be  original  or  appellate,  or 
both,  is  not  declared.  All  this  seems  to  be  left 
to  the  discretion  of  the  legislature.  And  this 
being  the  case,  I  perceive  at  present  no  im¬ 
pediment  to  the  establishment  of  an  appeal 
from  the  State  courts  to  the  subordinate  na¬ 
tional  tribunals;  and  many  advantages  attend¬ 
ing  the  power  of  doing  it  may  be  imagined.  It 
would  diminish  the  motives  to  the  multiplica¬ 
tion  of  federal  courts,  and  would  admit  of  ar¬ 
rangements  calculated  to  contract  the  appel¬ 
late  jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme  Court.  rI  he 
State  tribunals  may  then  be  left  with  a  more 
entire  charge  of  federal  causes;  and  appeals,  in 
most  cases  in  which  they  may  be  deemed  prop¬ 
er,  instead  of  being  carried  to  the  Supreme 
Court,  may  be  made  to  lie  from  the  State  courts 
to  district  courts  of  the  Union.  Publius 

Number  83 

[HAMILTON] 

The  objection  to  the  plan  of  the  convention 
which  has  met  with  most  success  in  this  State, 
and  perhaps  in  several  of  the  other  Slates,  is 
that  relative  to  the  want  of  a  constitutional 
provision  for  the  trial  by  jury  in  civil  cases. 
The  disingenuous  form  in  which  this  objec¬ 
tion  is  usually  stated  has  been  repeatedly  ad¬ 
verted  to  and  exposed,  but  continues  to  be 
pursued  in  all  the  conversations  and  writings 
of  the  opponents  of  the  plan.  The  mere  silence 
of  the  Constitution  in  regard  to  civil  causes  is 
represented  as  an  abolition  of  the  trial  by  jury, 
and  the  declamations  to  which  it  has  a  Horded 
a  pretext  are  artlully  calculated  to  induce  a 
persuasion  that  this  pretended  abolition  is 
complete  and  universal,  extending  not  only  to 
every  species  of  civil,  but  even  to  criminal, 
causes.  Io  argue  with  respect  to  the  latter 
would,  however,  be  as  vain  and  fruitless  as 
to  attempt  the  serious  proof  of  the  existence 
of  matter,  or  to  demonstrate  any  of  those 
propositions  which,  by  their  own  internal 
evidence,  lorce  conviction  when  expressed  in 


language  adapted  to  convey  their  meaning. 

With  regard  to  civil  causes,  subtleties  almost 
too  contemptible  for  refutation  have  been  em¬ 
ployed  to  countenance  the  surmise  that  a  thing 
which  is  only  not  provided  for  is  entirely 
abolished.  Every  man  of  discernment  must  at 
once  perceive  the  wide  difference  between  si¬ 
lence  and  abolition.  But  as  the  inventors  of 
this  fallacy  have  attempted  to  support  it  by 
certain  legal  maxims  of  interpretation,  which 
they  have  perverted  from  their  true  meaning, 
it  may  not  be  wholly  useless  to  explore  the 
ground  they  have  taken. 

The  maxims  on  which  they  rely  are  of  this 
nature:  “A  specification  of  particulars  is  an  ex¬ 
clusion  of  generals”;  or  “The  expression  of  one 
thing  is  the  exclusion  of  another.”  Hence,  say 
they,  as  the  Constitution  has  established  the 
trial  by  jury  in  criminal  cases,  and  is  silent  in 
respect  to  civil,  this  silence  is  an  implied  pro¬ 
hibition  of  trial  by  jury  in  regard  to  the  latter. 

The  rules  of  legal  interpretation  are  rules 
of  common-sense ,  adopted  by  the  courts  in  the 
construction  of  the  laws.  1  he  true  test,  there¬ 
fore,  of  a  just  application  of  them  is  its  con¬ 
formity  to  the  source  from  which  they  are  de¬ 
rived.  This  being  the  case,  let  me  ask  if  it  is 
consistent  with  common-sense  to  suppose  that 
a  provision  obliging  the  legislative  power  to 
commit  the  trial  of  criminal  causes  to  juries  is 
a  privation  of  its  right  to  authorise  or  permit 
that  mode  of  trial  in  other  cases?  Is  it  natural 
to  suppose  that  a  command  to  do  one  thing  is 
a  prohibition  to  the  doing  of  another  which 
there  was  a  previous  power  to  do  and  which  is 
not  incompatible  with  the  thing  commanded 
to  be  done?  If  such  a  supposition  would  be  un¬ 
natural  and  unreasonable,  it  cannot  be  ration¬ 
al  to  maintain  that  an  injunction  of  the  trial 
by  jury  in  certain  cases  is  an  interdiction  of  it 
in  others. 

A  power  to  constitute  courts  is  a  power  to 
prescribe  the  mode  of  trial;  and  consequently, 
if  nothing  was  said  in  the  Constitution  on  the 
subject  of  juries,  the  legislature  would  be  at 
liberty  either  to  adopt  that  institution  or  to 
let  it  alone.  I  his  discretion  in  icgaid  to  ciimi- 
nal  causes  is  abridged  by  the  express  injunc¬ 
tion  of  trial  by  jury  in  all  such  cases;  but  it  is, 
of  course,  left  at  large  in  relation  to  civil 
causes,  there  being  a  total  silence  on  this  head. 
The  specification  of  an  obligation  to  try  all 
criminal  causes  in  a  particular  inode  excludes 
indeed  the  obligation  or  necessity  of  employ¬ 
ing  the  same  mode  in  civil  causes,  but  does  not 
abridge  the  power  of  the  legislature  to  exeuise 


NUMBER  83  245 


that  mode  if  it  should  be  thought  proper.  The 
pretence,  therefore,  that  the  national  legisla¬ 
ture  would  not  be  at  full  liberty  to  submit  all 
the  civil  causes  of  federal  cognisance  to  the  de¬ 
termination  of  juries  is  a  pretence  destitute  of 
all  just  foundation. 

From  these  observations  this  conclusion  re¬ 
sults:  that  the  trial  by  jury  in  civil  cases  would 
not  be  abolished:  and  that  the  use  attempted 
to  be  made  of  the  maxims  which  have  been 
quoted  is  contrary  to  reason  and  common- 
sense,  and  therefore  not  admissible.  Even  if 
these  maxims  had  a  precise  technical  sense, 
corresponding  with  the  idea  of  those  who  em¬ 
ploy  them  upon  the  present  occasion,  which, 
however,  is  not  the  case,  they  would  still  be  in¬ 
applicable  to  a  constitution  of  government.  In 
relation  to  such  a  subject,  the  natural  and  ob¬ 
vious  sense  of  its  provisions,  apart  from  any 
technical  rules,  is  the  true  criterion  of  con¬ 
struction. 

Having  now  seen  that  the  maxims  relied 
upon  will  not  bear  the  use  made  of  them,  let 
us  endeavour  to  ascertain  their  proper  use  and 
true  meaning.  This  will  be  best  done  by  ex¬ 
amples.  The  plan  of  the  convention  declares 
that  the  power  of  Congress,  or,  in  other  words, 
of  the  national  legislature ,  shall  extend  to  cer¬ 
tain  enumerated  cases.  This  specification  of 
particulars  evidently  excludes  all  pretension 
to  a  general  legislative  authority,  because  an 
affirmative  grant  of  special  powers  would  be 
absurd,  as  well  as  useless,  if  a  general  authority 
was  intended. 

In  like  manner  the  judicial  authority  of  the 
federal  judicatures  is  declared  by  the  Consti¬ 
tution  to  comprehend  certain  cases  particular¬ 
ly  specified.  The  expression  of  those  cases  marks 
the  precise  limits,  beyond  which  the  federal 
courts  cannot  extend  their  jurisdiction,  be¬ 
cause  the  objects  of  their  cognisance  being 
enumerated,  the  specification  would  be  nuga¬ 
tory  if  it  did  not  exclude  all  ideas  of  more  ex¬ 
tensive  authority. 

These  examples  are  sufficient  to  elucidate 
the  maxims  which  have  been  mentioned,  and 
to  designate  the  manner  in  which  they  should 
be  used.  But  that  there  may  be  no  misappre¬ 
hension  upon  this  subject,  I  shall  add  one  case 
more,  to  demonstrate  the  proper  use  of  these 
maxims,  and  the  abuse  which  has  been  made 
of  them. 

Let  us  suppose  that  by  the  laws  of  this  State 
a  married  woman  was  incapable  of  conveying 
her  estate,  and  that  the  legislature,  considering 
this  as  an  evil,  should  enact  that  she  might  dis¬ 


pose  of  her  property  by  deed  executed  in  the 
presence  of  a  magistrate.  In  such  a  case  there 
can  be  no  doubt  but  the  specification  would 
amount  to  an  exclusion  of  any  other  mode  of 
conveyance,  because  the  woman  having  no 
previous  power  to  alienate  her  property  the 
specification  determines  the  particular  mode 
which  she  is,  for  that  purpose,  to  avail  herself 
of.  But  let  us  further  suppose  that  in  a  sub¬ 
sequent  part  of  the  same  act  it  should  be  de¬ 
clared  that  no  woman  should  dispose  of  any 
estate  of  a  determinate  value  without  the  con¬ 
sent  of  three  of  her  nearest  relations,  signified 
by  their  signing  the  deed;  could  it  be  inferred 
from  this  regulation  that  a  married  woman 
might  not  procure  the  approbation  of  her  rela¬ 
tions  to  a  deed  for  conveying  property  of  in¬ 
ferior  value?  The  position  is  too  absurd  to 
merit  a  refutation,  and  yet  this  is  precisely  the 
position  which  those  must  establish  who  con¬ 
tend  that  the  trial  by  juries  in  civil  cases  is 
abolished,  because  it  is  expressly  provided  for 
in  cases  of  a  criminal  nature. 

From  these  observations  it  must  appear  un¬ 
questionably  true  that  trial  by  jury  is  in  no 
case  abolished  by  the  proposed  Constitution, 
and  it  is  equally  true  that  in  those  controver¬ 
sies  between  individuals  in  which  the  great 
body  of  the  people  are  likely  to  be  interested, 
that  institution  will  remain  precisely  in  the 
same  situation  in  which  it  is  placed  by  the  State 
constitutions,  and  will  be  in  no  degree  altered 
or  influenced  by  the  adoption  of  the  plan  un¬ 
der  consideration.  The  foundation  of  this  as¬ 
sertion  is,  that  the  national  judiciary  will  have 
no  cognisance  of  them,  and  of  course  they  will 
remain  determinable  as  heretofore  by  the  State 
courts  only,  and  in  the  manner  which  the  State 
constitutions  and  laws  prescribe.  All  land 
causes,  except  where  claims  under  the  grants 
of  different  States  come  into  question,  and  all 
other  controversies  between  the  citizens  of  the 
same  State,  unless  where  they  depend  upon 
positive  violations  of  the  articles  of  union  by 
acts  of  the  State  legislatures,  will  belong  ex¬ 
clusively  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  State  tribu¬ 
nals.  Add  to  this,  that  admiralty  causes,  and 
almost  all  those  which  are  of  equity  jurisdic¬ 
tion,  are  determinable  under  our  own  govern¬ 
ment  without  the  intervention  of  a  jury,  and 
the  inference  from  the  whole  will  be  that  this 
institution,  as  it  exists  with  us  at  present,  can¬ 
not  possibly  be  affected  to  any  great  extent  by 
the  proposed  alteration  in  our  system  of  gov¬ 
ernment. 

The  friends  and  adversaries  of  the  plan  of 


THE  FEDERALIST 


246 

the  convention,  if  they  agree  in  nothing  else, 
concur  at  least  in  the  value  they  set  upon  the 
trial  by  jury;  or  if  there  is  any  difference  be¬ 
tween  them  it  consists  in  this:  the  former  re¬ 
gard  it  as  a  valuable  safeguard  to  liberty;  the 
latter  represent  it  as  the  very  palladium  of 
free  government.  For  my  own  part,  the  more 
the  operation  of  the  institution  has  fallen  un¬ 
der  my  observation,  the  more  reason  I  have 
discovered  for  holding  it  in  high  estimation; 
and  it  would  be  altogether  superfluous  to  ex¬ 
amine  to  what  extent  it  deserves  to  be  esteem¬ 
ed  useful  or  essential  in  a  representative  repub¬ 
lic,  or  how  much  more  merit  it  may  be  entitled 
to  as  a  defence  against  the  oppressions  of  an 
hereditary  monarch  than  as  a  barrier  to  the 
tyranny  of  popular  magistrates  in  a  popular 
government.  Discussions  of  this  kind  would  be 
more  curious  than  beneficial,  as  all  are  satis¬ 
fied  of  the  utility  of  the  institution  and  of  its 
friendly  aspect  to  liberty.  But  1  must  acknowl¬ 
edge  that  1  cannot  readily  discern  the  insep¬ 
arable  connection  between  the  existence  of 
liberty  and  the  trial  by  jury  in  civil  cases.  Ar¬ 
bitrary  impeachments,  arbitrary  methods  of 
prosecuting  pretended  offences,  and  arbitrary 
punishments  upon  arbitrary  convictions,  have 
ever  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  great  engines  of 
judicial  despotism;  and  these  have  all  relation 
to  criminal  proceedings.  The  trial  by  jury  in 
criminal  cases,  aided  by  the  habeas-corpus  act, 
seems  therefore  to  be  alone  concerned  in  the 
question.  And  both  of  these  are  provided  for, 
in  the  most  ample  manner,  in  the  plan  of  the 
convention. 

It  has  been  observed  that  trial  by  jury  is  a 
safeguard  against  an  oppressive  exercise  of  the 
power  of  taxation.  This  observation  deserves 
to  be  canvassed. 

It  is  evident  that  it  can  have  no  influence 
upon  the  legislature  in  regard  to  the  amount 
of  taxes  to  be  laid,  to  the  objects  upon  which 
they  are  to  be  imposed,  or  to  the  rule  by  which 
they  are  to  be  apportioned.  If  it  can  have 
any  influence,  therefore,  it  must  be  upon  the 
mode  of  collection,  and  the  conduct  of  the 
officers  intrusted  with  the  execution  of  the 
revenue  laws. 

As  to  the  mode  of  collection  in  this  State, 
under  our  own  Constitution,  the  trial  by  jury 
is  in  most  cases  out  of  use.  The  taxes  arc  usual¬ 
ly  levied  by  the  more  summary  proceeding  of 
distress  and  sale,  as  in  cases  of  rent.  And  it  is 
acknowledged  on  all  hands  that  this  is  essen¬ 
tial  to  the  efficacy  of  the  revenue  laws.  The 
dilatory  course  of  a  trial  at  law  to  recover  the 


taxes  imposed  on  individuals  would  neither 
suit  the  exigencies  of  the  public  nor  promote 
the  convenience  of  the  citizens.  It  would  often 
occasion  an  accumulation  of  costs  more  bur¬ 
densome  than  the  original  sum  of  the  tax  to  be 
levied. 

And  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  officers  of  the 
revenue,  the  provision  in  favour  of  trial  by 
jury  in  criminal  cases  will  afford  the  security 
aimed  at.  Wilful  abuses  of  a  public  authority, 
to  the  oppression  of  the  subject,  and  every 
species  of  official  extortion,  are  offences  against 
the  government,  for  which  the  persons  who 
commit  them  may  be  indicted  and  punished 
according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 

The  excellence  of  the  trial  by  jury  in  civil 
cases  appears  to  depend  on  circumstances  for¬ 
eign  to  the  preservation  of  liberty.  The  strong¬ 
est  argument  in  its  favour  is  that  it  is  a  security 
against  corruption.  As  there  is  always  more 
time  and  better  opportunity  to  tamper  with 
a  standing  body  of  magistrates  than  with  a 
jury  summoned  for  the  occasion,  there  is  room 
to  suppose  that  a  corrupt  influence  would 
more  easily  find  its  way  to  the  former  than  to 
the  latter.  The  force  of  this  consideration  is, 
however,  diminished  by  others.  The  sheriff, 
who  is  the  summoner  of  ordinary  juries,  and 
the  clerks  of  courts,  who  have  the  nomination 
of  special  juries,  are  themselves  standing  offi¬ 
cers,  and,  acting  individually,  may  be  suppos¬ 
ed  more  accessible  to  the  touch  of  corruption 
than  the  judges,  who  are  a  collective  body.  It 
is  not  difficult  to  see  that  it  would  be  in  the 
power  of  those  officers  to  select  jurors  who 
would  serve  the  purpose  of  the  party  as  well 
as  a  corrupted  bench.  I11  the  next  place,  it  may 
fairly  be  supposed  that  there  would  be  less 
difficulty  in  gaining  some  of  the  jurors  pro¬ 
miscuously  taken  from  the  public  mass  than  in 
gaining  men  who  had  been  chosen  by  the  gov¬ 
ernment  for  their  probity  and  good  character. 
But  making  every  deduction  for  these  consid¬ 
erations.  the  trial  by  jury  must  still  be  a  valu¬ 
able  chetk  upon  corruption.  It  greatly  multi¬ 
plies  the  impediments  to  its  success.  As  mat¬ 
ters  now  stand,  it  would  be  necessary  to  cor¬ 
rupt  both  court  and  jury;  for  where  the  jury 
have  gone  evidently  wrong,  the  court  will  gen¬ 
erally  grant  a  new  trial,  and  it  would  be  in 
most  cases  of  little  use  to  practise  upon  the 
jury  unless  the  court  could  be  likewise  gained. 
Here  then  is  a  double  security;  and  it  will 
readily  be  perceived  that  this  complicated 
agency  tends  to  preserve  the  purity  of  both  in¬ 
stitutions.  By  increasing  the  obstacles  to  sue- 


NUMBER  83  247 


cess  it  discourages  attempts  to  seduce  the  in¬ 
tegrity  of  either.  The  temptations  to  prostitu¬ 
tion  which  the  judges  might  have  to  surmount 
must  certainly  be  much  fewer,  while  the  co¬ 
operation  of  a  jury  is  necessary,  than  they 
might  be  if  they  had  themselves  the  exclusive 
determination  of  all  causes. 

Notwithstanding,  therefore,  the  doubts  I 
have  expressed  as  to  the  essentiality  of  trial  by 
jury  in  civil  cases  to  liberty,  I  admit  that  it  is 
in  most  cases,  under  proper  regulations,  an 
excellent  method  of  determining  questions  of 
property;  and  that  on  this  account  alone  it 
would  be  entitled  to  a  constitutional  provision 
in  its  favour  if  it  were  possible  to  fix  the  limits 
within  which  it  ought  to  be  comprehended. 
There  is,  however,  in  all  cases,  great  difficulty 
in  this;  and  men  not  blinded  by  enthusiasm 
must  be  sensible  that  in  a  federal  government, 
which  is  a  composition  of  societies  whose  ideas 
and  institutions  in  relation  to  the  matter  ma¬ 
terially  vary  from  each  other,  that  difficulty 
must  be  not  a  little  augmented.  For  my  own 
part,  at  every  new  view  I  take  of  the  subject,  I 
become  more  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the 
obstacles  which,  we  are  authoritatively  inform¬ 
ed,  prevented  the  insertion  of  a  provision  on 
this  head  in  the  plan  of  the  convention. 

The  great  difference  between  the  limits  of 
the  jury  trial  in  different  States  is  not  generally 
understood;  and  as  it  must  have  considerable 
influence  on  the  sentence  we  ought  to  pass 
upon  the  omission  complained  of  in  regard  to 
this  point  an  explanation  of  it  is  necessary. 
In  this  State,  our  judicial  establishments  re¬ 
semble,  more  nearly  than  in  any  other,  those 
of  Great  Britain.  We  have  courts  of  common 
law,  courts  of  probates  (analogous  in  certain 
matters  to  the  spiritual  courts  in  England),  a 
court  of  admiralty,  and  a  court  of  chancery.  In 
the  courts  of  common  law  only  the  trial  by  jury 
prevails,  and  this  with  some  exceptions.  In  all 
the  others  a  single  judge  presides,  and  pro¬ 
ceeds  in  general  either  according  to  the  course 
of  the  cannon  or  civil  law,  without  the  aid  of 
a  jury.1  In  New  Jersey  there  is  a  court  of  chan¬ 
cery  which  proceeds  like  ours,  but  neither 
courts  of  admiralty  nor  of  probates,  in  the 
sense  in  which  these  last  are  established  with 
us.  In  that  State  the  courts  of  common  law 

1  It  has  been  erroneously  insinuated,  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  Court  of  Chancery,  that  this  court 
generally  tries  disputed  facts  by  a  jury.  The  truth 
is,  that  references  to  a  jury  in  that  court  rarely 
happen,  and  are  in  no  case  necessary  but  where 
the  validity  of  a  devise  of  land  comes  into  ques¬ 
tion.— Publius 


have  the  cognisance  of  those  causes  which  with 
us  are  determinable  in  the  courts  of  admiralty 
and  of  probates,  and  of  course  the  jury  trial 
is  more  extensive  in  New  Jersey  than  in  New 
York.  In  Pennsylvania  this  is  perhaps  still 
more  the  case,  for  there  is  no  court  of  chancexy 
in  that  State,  and  its  common-law  courts  have 
equity  jurisdiction.  It  has  a  court  of  admiralty, 
but  none  of  probates,  at  least  on  the  plan  of 
ours.  Delaware  has  in  these  respects  imitated 
Pennsylvania.  Maryland  approaches  more 
nearly  to  New  York,  as  does  also  Virginia,  ex¬ 
cept  that  the  latter  has  a  plurality  of  chancel¬ 
lors.  North  Carolina  bears  most  affinity  to 
Pennsylvania;  South  Carolina  to  Virginia.  I 
believe,  however,  that  in  some  of  those  States 
which  have  distinct  courts  of  admiralty,  the 
causes  depending  in  them  are  triable  by  juries. 
In  Georgia  there  are  none  but  common-law 
courts,  and  an  appeal  of  course  lies  from  the 
verdict  of  one  jury  to  another,  which  is  called 
a  special  jury,  and  for  which  a  particular  mode 
of  appointments  is  marked  out.  In  Connecti¬ 
cut,  they  have  no  distinct  courts  either  of  chan¬ 
cery  or  of  admiralty,  and  their  courts  of  pro¬ 
bates  have  no  jurisdiction  of  causes.  Their 
common-law7  courts  have  admiralty  and,  to  a 
certain  extent,  equity  jurisdiction.  In  cases  of 
importance,  their  General  Assembly  is  the 
only  court  of  chancery.  In  Connecticut,  there¬ 
fore,  the  trial  by  jury  extends  in  practice  fur¬ 
ther  than  in  any  other  State  yet  mentioned. 
Rhode  Island  is,  I  believe,  in  this  particular, 
pretty  much  in  the  situation  of  Connecticut. 
Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire,  in  regard 
to  the  blending  of  law,  equity,  and  admiralty 
jurisdictions,  are  in  a  similar  predicament.  In 
the  four  Eastern  States,  the  trial  by  jury  not 
only  stands  upon  a  broader  foundation  than 
in  the  other  States,  but  it  is  attended  with  a 
peculiarity  unknowrn,  in  its  full  extent,  to  any 
of  them.  There  is  an  appeal  of  course  from  one 
jury  to  another,  till  there  have  been  two  ver¬ 
dicts  out  of  three  on  one  side. 

From  this  sketch  it  appears  that  there  is  a 
material  diversity,  as  well  in  the  modification 
as  in  the  extent  of  the  institution  of  trial  by 
jury  in  civil  cases,  in  the  several  States;  and 
from  this  fact  these  obvious  reflections  flow” 
first,  that  no  general  rule  could  have  been  fixed 
upon  by  the  convention  which  would  have  cor¬ 
responded  wTith  the  circumstances  of  all  the 
States;  and  secondly,  that  more  or  at  least  as 
much  might  have  been  hazarded  by  taking  the 
system  of  any  one  State  for  a  standard,  as  by 
omitting  a  provision  altogether  and  leaving 


THE  FEDERALIST 


248 

the  matter,  as  has  been  done,  to  legislative  reg¬ 
ulation. 

The  propositions  which  have  been  made  for 
supplying  the  omission  have  rather  served  to 
illustrate  than  to  obviate  the  difficulty  of  the 
thing.  The  minority  of  Pennsylvania  have  pro¬ 
posed  this  mode  of  expression  for  the  purpose 
—“Trial  by  jury  shall  be  as  heretofore”— and 
this  1  maintain  would  be  senseless  and  nuga¬ 
tory.  The  United  States,  in  their  united  or 
collective  capacity,  are  the  object  to  which  all 
general  provisions  in  the  Constitution  must 
necessarily  be  construed  to  refer.  Now  it  is 
evident  that  though  trial  by  jury,  with  vari¬ 
ous  limitations,  is  known  in  each  State  indi¬ 
vidually,  yet  in  the  United  States,  as  such , 
it  is  at  this  time  altogether  unknown,  because 
the  present  federal  government  has  no  ju¬ 
diciary  power  whatever;  and  consequently 
there  is  no  proper  antecedent  or  previous  es¬ 
tablishment  to  which  the  term  heretofore 
could  relate.  It  would  therefore  be  destitute  of 
a  precise  meaning,  and  inoperative  from  its 
uncertainty. 

As,  on  the  one  hand,  the  form  of  the  pro¬ 
vision  would  not  fulfil  the  intent  of  its  pro¬ 
posers,  so,  on  the  other,  if  1  apprehend  that 
intent  rightly,  it  wouldbe  in  itself  inexpedient. 

I  presume  it  to  be,  that  causes  in  the  federal 
courts  should  be  tried  by  jury,  if,  in  the  State 
where  the  courts  sat,  that  mode  of  trial  would 
obtain  in  a  similar  case  in  the  State  courts;  that 
is  to  say,  admiralty  causes  should  be  tried  in 
Connecticut  by  a  jury,  in  New  York  without 
one.  The  capricious  operation  of  so  dissimilar 
a  method  of  trial  in  the  same  cases,  under  the 
same  government,  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  indis¬ 
pose  every  well-regulated  judgment  towards 
it.  Whether  the  cause  should  be  tried  with  or 
without  a  jury  would  depend,  in  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  cases,  on  the  accidental  situation  of  the 
court  and  parties. 

But  this  is  not,  in  my  estimation,  the  great¬ 
est  objection.  I  feel  a  deep  and  deliberate  con¬ 
viction  that  there  are  many  cases  in  which  the 
trial  by  jury  is  an  ineligible  one.  1  think  it  so 
particularly  in  cases  which  concern  the  public 
peace  with  foreign  nations— that  is,  in  most 
cases  where  the  question  turns  wholly  on  the 
laws  of  nations.  Of  this  nature,  among  others, 
are  all  prize  causes.  Juries  cannot  be  supposed 
competent  to  investigations  that  require  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  laws  and  usages  ol 
nations;  and  they  will  sometimes  be  under  the 
influence  of  impressions  which  will  not  suffer 
them  to  pay  sufficient  regard  to  those  consid¬ 


erations  of  public  policy  which  ought  to  guide 
their  inquiries.  There  would  of  course  be  al¬ 
ways  danger  that  the  rights  of  other  nations 
might  be  infringed  by  their  decisions,  so  as  to 
afford  occasions  of  reprisal  and  war.  Though 
the  proper  province  of  juries  be  to  determine 
matters  of  fact,  yet  in  most  cases  legal  conse¬ 
quences  are  complicated  with  fact  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  render  a  separation  impracti¬ 
cable. 

It  will  add  great  weight  to  this  remark,  in 
relation  to  prize  causes,  to  mention  that  the 
method  of  determining  them  has  been  thought 
worthy  of  particular  regulation  in  various  trea¬ 
ties  between  different  powers  of  Europe,  and 
that,  pursuant  to  such  treaties,  they  are  de¬ 
terminable  in  Great  Britain,  in  the  last  resort, 
before  the  king  himself,  in  his  privy  council, 
where  the  fact,  as  well  as  the  law,  undergoes  a 
re-examination.  This  alone  demonstrates  the 
impolicy  of  inserting  a  fundamental  provision 
in  the  Constitution  which  would  make  the 
State  systems  a  standard  for  the  national  gov¬ 
ernment  in  the  article  under  consideration, 
and  the  danger  of  encumbering  the  govern¬ 
ment  with  any  constitutional  provisions  the 
propriety  of  which  is  not  indisputable. 

My  convictions  are  equally  strong  that  great 
advantages  result  from  the  separation  of  the 
equity  from  the  law  jurisdiction,  and  that  the 
causes  which  belong  to  the  former  would  be 
improperly  committed  to  juries.  The  great  and 
primary  use  of  a  court  of  equity  is  to  give  re¬ 
lief  in  extraordinary  cases ,  which  are  excep¬ 
tions'1  to  general  rules.  To  unite  the  jurisdic¬ 
tion  of  such  cases  with  the  ordinary  jurisdic¬ 
tion  must  have  a  tendency  to  unsettle  the  gen¬ 
eral  rules,  and  to  subject  every  case  that  arises 
to  a  special  determination;  while  a  separation 
of  the  one  from  the  other  has  the  contrary  ef¬ 
fect  of  rendering  one  a  sentinel  over  the  other, 
and  of  keeping  each  within  the  expedient  lim¬ 
its.  Besides  this,  the  circumstances  that  consti¬ 
tute  cases  proper  for  courts  of  equity  are  in 
many  instances  so  nice  and  intricate  that  they 
arc  incompatible  with  the  genius  of  trials  by 
jury.  They  require  often  such  long,  deliberate, 
and  critical  investigation  as  would  be  imprac¬ 
ticable  to  men  called  from  their  occupations, 
and  obliged  to  decide  before  they  were  per¬ 
mitted  to  return  to  them.  The  simplicity  and 

Mt  is  true  that  the  principles  by  which  that 
relief  is  governed  are  now  reduced  to  a  regular 
system;  but  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  they  are  in 
the  main  applicable  to  snxiAL  circumstances, 
which  form  exceptions  to  general  rules.— Publius 


NUMBER  83  249 


expedition  which  form  the  distinguishingchar- 
acters  of  this  mode  of  trial  require  that  the 
matter  to  be  decided  should  be  reduced  to 
some  single  and  obvious  point:  while  the  liti¬ 
gations  usual  in  chancery  frequently  compre¬ 
hend  a  long  train  of  minute  and  independent 
particulars. 

It  is  true  that  the  separation  of  the  equity 
from  the  legal  jurisdiction  is  peculiar  to  the 
English  system  of  jurisprudence:  which  is  the 
model  that  has  been  followed  in  several  of  the 
States.  But  it  is  equally  true  that  the  trial  by 
jury  has  been  unknown  in  every  case  in  which 
they  have  been  united.  And  the  separation  is 
essential  to  the  preservation  of  that  institu¬ 
tion  in  its  pristine  purity.  The  nature  of  a 
court  of  equity  will  readily  permit  the  exten¬ 
sion  of  its  jurisdiction  to  matters  of  law;  but 
it  is  not  a  little  to  be  suspected  that  the  at¬ 
tempt  to  extend  the  jurisdiction  of  the  courts 
of  law  to  matters  of  equity  will  not  only  be 
unproductive  of  the  advantages  which  may  be 
derived  from  courts  of  chancery,  on  the  plan 
upon  which  they  are  established  in  this  State, 
but  will  tend  gradually  to  change  the  nature 
of  the  courts  of  law,  and  to  undermine  the  trial 
by  jury,  by  introducing  questions  too  compli¬ 
cated  for  a  decision  in  that  mode. 

These  appeared  to  be  conclusive  reasons 
against  incorporating  the  systems  of  all  the 
States,  in  the  formation  of  the  national  ju¬ 
diciary,  according  to  what  may  be  conjectured 
to  have  been  the  attempt  of  the  Pennsylvania 
minority.  Let  us  now  examine  how  far  the 
proposition  of  Massachusetts  is  calculated  to 
remedy  the  supposed  defect. 

It  is  in  this  form:  “In  civil  actions  between 
citizens  of  different  States,  every  issue  of  fact, 
arising  in  actions  at  common  law ,  may  be  tried 
by  a  jury  if  the  parties,  or  either  of  them,  re¬ 
quest  it.” 

This,  at  best,  is  a  proposition  confined  to 
one  description  of  causes;  and  the  inference  is 
fair,  either  that  the  Massachusetts  convention 
considered  that  as  the  only  class  of  federal 
causes  in  which  the  trial  by  jury  would  be 
proper;  or  that  if  desirous  of  a  more  extensive 
provision,  they  found  it  impracticable  to  de¬ 
vise  one  which  would  properly  answer  the  end. 
If  the  first,  the  omission  of  a  regulation  re¬ 
specting  so  partial  an  object  can  never  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  material  imperfection  in  the  sys¬ 
tem.  If  the  last,  it  affords  a  strong  corrobora¬ 
tion  of  the  extreme  difficulty  of  the  thing. 

But  this  is  not  all:  if  we  advert  to  the  obser¬ 
vations  already  made  respecting  the  courts  that 


subsist  in  the  several  States  of  the  Union,  and 
the  different  powers  exercised  by  them,  it  will 
appear  that  there  are  no  expressions  more 
vague  and  indeterminate  than  those  which 
have  been  employed  to  characterise  that  spe¬ 
cies  of  causes  which  it  is  intended  shall  be  en¬ 
titled  to  a  trial  by  jury.  In  this  State,  the 
boundaries  between  actions  at  common  law 
and  actions  of  equitable  jurisdiction  are  as¬ 
certained  in  conformity  to  the  rules  which  pre¬ 
vail  in  England  upon  that  subject.  In  many 
of  the  other  States  the  boundaries  are  less  pre¬ 
cise.  In  some  of  them,  every  cause  is  to  be 
tried  in  a  court  of  common  law,  and  upon  that 
foundation  every  action  may  be  considered  as 
an  action  at  common  law,  to  be  determined  by 
a  jury,  if  the  parties,  or  either  of  them,  choose 
it.  Hence  the  same  irregularity  and  con¬ 
fusion  would  be  introduced  by  a  compliance 
with  this  proposition  that  I  have  already 
noticed  as  resulting  from  the  regulation  pro¬ 
posed  by  the  Pennsylvania  minority.  In  one 
State  a  cause  would  receive  its  determination 
from  a  jury,  if  the  parties,  or  either  of  them, 
requested  it;  but  in  another  State,  a  cause  ex¬ 
actly  similar  to  the  other  must  be  decided  with¬ 
out  the  intervention  of  a  jury,  because  the 
State  judicatories  varied  as  to  common-law 
jurisdiction. 

It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  the  Massachu¬ 
setts  proposition  upon  this  subject  cannot  op¬ 
erate  as  a  general  regulation  until  some  uni¬ 
form  plan,  with  respect  to  the  limits  of  com¬ 
mon-law  and  equitable  jurisdictions,  shall  be 
adopted  by  the  different  States.  To  devise  a 
plan  of  that  kind  is  a  task  arduous  in  itself, 
and  wThich  it  would  require  much  time  and 
reflection  to  mature.  It  would  be  extremely 
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  suggest  any  gen¬ 
eral  regulation  that  would  be  acceptable  to 
all  the  States  in  the  Union,  or  that  wrould 
perfectly  quadrate  with  the  several  State 
institutions. 

It  may  be  asked,  Why  could  not  a  reference 
have  been  made  to  the  constitution  of  this 
State,  taking  that,  w’hich  is  allowed  by  me  to 
be  a  good  one,  as  a  standard  for  the  United 
States?  I  answrer  that  it  is  not  very  probable 
the  other  States  w’ould  entertain  the  same 
opinion  of  our  institutions  as  wTe  do  ourselves. 
It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  they  are  hitherto 
more  attached  to  their  ow-n,  and  that  each 
would  struggle  for  the  preference.  If  the  plan 
of  taking  one  State  as  a  model  for  the  whole 
had  been  thought  of  in  the  convention,  it  is  to 
be  presumed  that  the  adoption  of  it  in  that 


THE  FEDERALIST 


body  would  have  been  rendered  difficult  by 
the  predilection  of  each  representation  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  its  own  government;  and  it  must  be 
uncertain  which  of  the  States  would  have  been 
taken  as  the  model.  It  has  been  shown  that 
many  of  them  would  be  improper  ones.  And  I 
leave  it  to  conjecture  whether,  tinder  ail  cir¬ 
cumstances,  it  is  most  likely  that  New  York,  or 
some  other  State,  would  have  been  preferred. 
But  admit  that  a  judicious  selection  could 
have  been  effected  in  the  convention,  still 
there  would  have  been  great  danger  of  jeal¬ 
ousy  and  disgust  in  the  other  States  at  the  par¬ 
tiality  which  had  been  shown  to  the  institu¬ 
tions  of  one.  The  enemies  of  the  plan  would 
have  been  furnished  with  a  fine  pretext  for 
raising  a  host  of  local  prejudices  against  it, 
which  perhaps  might  have  hazarded,  in  no  in¬ 
considerable  degree,  its  final  establishment. 

To  avoid  the  embarrassments  of  a  definition 
of  the  cases  which  the  trial  by  jury  ought  to 
embrace,  it  is  sometimes  suggested  by  men  of 
enthusiastic  tempers  that  a  provision  might 
have  been  inserted  for  establishing  it  in  all 
cases  whatsoever.  For  this,  I  believe,  no  prece¬ 
dent  is  to  be  found  in  any  member  of  the 
Union;  and  the  considerations  which  have 
been  stated  in  discussing  the  proposition  of 
the  minority  of  Pennsylvania  must  satisfy 
every  sober  mind  that  the  establishment  of  the 
trial  by  jury  in  all  cases  would  have  been  an 
unpardonable  error  in  the  plan. 

In  short,  the  more  it  is  considered  the  more 
arduous  will  appear  the  task  of  fashioning  a 
provision  in  such  a  form  as  not  to  express  too 
little  to  answer  the  purpose,  or  too  much  to  be 
advisable;  or  which  might  not  have  opened 
other  sources  of  opposition  to  the  great  and 
essential  object  of  introducing  a  firm  national 
government. 

I  cannot  but  persuade  myself,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  the  different  lights  in  which  the 
subject  has  been  placed  in  the  course  of  these 
observations  will  go  far  towards  removing  in 
candid  minds  the  apprehensions  they  may 
have  entertained  on  the  point.  They  have 
tended  to  show  that  the  security  of  liberty  is 
materially  concerned  only  in  the  trial  by  jury 
in  criminal  cases,  which  is  provided  for  in  the 
most  ample  manner  in  the  plan  of  the  conven¬ 
tion;  that  even  in  far  the  greatest  proportion 
of  civil  cases,  and  those  in  which  the  great  body 
of  the  community  is  interested,  that  mode  of 
trial  will  remain  in  its  full  fore e.  as  established 
in  the  State  constitutions,  untouched  and  un¬ 
affected  by  the  plan  of  the  convention;  that  it 


is  in  no  case  abolished1  by  that  plan;  and  that 
there  arc  great  if  not  insurmountable  difficul¬ 
ties  in  the  way  of  making  any  precise  and  prop¬ 
er  provision  for  it  in  a  Constitution  for  the 
United  States. 

The  best  judges  of  the  matter  will  be  the 
least  anxious  for  a  constitutional  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  trial  by  jury  in  civil  cases,  and  will 
be  the  most  ready  to  admit  that  the  changes 
which  are  continually  happening  in  the  af¬ 
fairs  of  society  may  render  a  different  mode  of 
determining  questions  of  property  preferable 
in  many  cases  in  which  that  mode  of  trial  now 
prevails.  For  my  part,  I  acknowledge  myself 
to  be  convinced  that  even  in  this  State  it  might 
be  advantageously  extended  to  some  cases  to 
which  it  does  not  at  present  apply,  and  might 
as  advantageously  be  abridged  in  others.  It  is 
conceded  by  all  reasonable  men  that  it  ought 
not  to  obtain  in  all  cases.  The  examples  of  in¬ 
novations  which  contract  its  ancient  limits,  as 
well  in  these  States  as  in  Great  Britain,  afford 
a  strong  presumption  that  its  former  extent 
has  been  found  inconvenient,  and  give  room 
to  suppose  that  future  experience  may  discover 
the  propriety  and  utility  of  other  exceptions. 

I  suspect  it  to  be  impossible  in  the  nature  of 
the  thing  to  fix  the  salutary  point  at  which  the 
operation  of  the  institution  ought  to  stop,  and 
this  is  with  me  a  strong  argument  for  leaving 
the  matter  to  the  discretion  of  the  legislature. 

This  is  now  clearly  understood  to  be  the 
case  in  Great  Britain,  and  it  is  equally  so  in  the 
State  of  Connecticut;  and  yet  it  may  be  safely 
affirmed  that  more  numerous  encroachments 
have  been  made  upon  the  trial  by  jury  in  this 
State  since  the  Revolution,  though  provided 
for  by  a  positive  article  of  our  constitution, 
than  has  happened  in  the  same  time  either  in 
Connecticut  or  Great  Britain.  It  may  be  added 
that  these  encroachments  have  generally  origi¬ 
nated  tvith  the  men  who  endeavour  to  per¬ 
suade  the  people  they  are  the  warmest  defend¬ 
ers  of  popular  liberty,  but  who  have  rarely  suf¬ 
fered  constitutional  obstacles  to  arrest  them  in 
a  favourite  career.  The  truth  is  that  the  gen¬ 
eral  gknius  of  a  government  is  all  that  can  be 
substantially  relied  upon  for  permanent  ef¬ 
fects.  Particular  provisions,  (hough  not  alto¬ 
gether  useless,  have  far  less  virtue  and  efficacy 
than  are  commonly  ascribed  to  them;  and  the 
want  ol  them  will  never  be,  with  men  of 

1  Vide  Number  71.  in  which  the  supposition  of 
its  being  abolished  by  the  appellate  jurisdiction 
in  matters  of  fact  being  vested  in  the  Supreme 
Court,  is  examined  and  refuted.— Pimiaus 


NUMBER  84  251 


sound  discernment,  a  decisive  objection  to  any 
plan  which  exhibits  the  leading  characters  of 
a  good  government. 

It  certainly  sounds  not  a  little  harsh  and  ex¬ 
traordinary  to  affirm  that  there  is  no  security 
for  liberty  in  a  Constitution  which  expressly 
establishes  the  trial  by  jury  in  criminal  cases, 
because  it  does  not  do  it  in  civil  also;  while  it 
is  a  notorious  fact  that  Connecticut,  which  has 
been  always  regarded  as  the  most  popular  State 
in  the  Union,  can  boast  of  no  constitutional 
provision  for  either.  Publius 

Number  84 

[HAMILTON] 

In  the  course  of  the  foregoing  review  of  the 
Constitution,  I  have  taken  notice  of,  and  en¬ 
deavoured  to  answer,  most  of  the  objections 
which  have  appeared  against  it.  There,  how¬ 
ever,  remain  a  few  which  either  did  not  fall 
naturally  under  any  particular  head  or  were 
forgotten  in  their  proper  places.  These  shall 
now  be  discussed;  but  as  the  subject  has  been 
drawn  into  great  length,  I  shall  so  far  consult 
brevity  as  to  comprise  all  my  observations  on 
these  miscellaneous  points  in  a  single  paper. 

The  most  considerable  of  the  remaining  ob¬ 
jections  is  that  the  plan  of  the  convention  con¬ 
tains  no  bill  of  rights.  Among  other  answers 
given  to  this,  it  has  been  upon  different  occa¬ 
sions  remarked  that  the  constitutions  of  sev¬ 
eral  of  the  States  are  in  a  similar  predicament. 
I  add  that  New  York  is  of  the  number.  And 
yet  the  opposers  of  the  new  system,  in  this 
State,  who  profess  an  unlimited  admiration 
for  its  constitution,  are  among  the  most  intem¬ 
perate  partisans  of  a  bill  of  rights.  To  justify 
their  zeal  in  this  matter,  they  allege  two  things: 
one  is,  that  though  the  constitution  of  New 
York  has  no  bill  of  rights  prefixed  to  it,  yet  it 
contains,  in  the  body  of  it,  various  provisions 
in  favour  of  particular  privileges  and  rights, 
which,  in  substance,  amount  to  the  same  thing; 
the  other  is,  that  the  Constitution  adopts,  in 
their  full  extent,  the  common  and  statute  law 
of  Great  Britain,  by  which  many  other  rights, 
not  expressed  in  it,  are  equally  secured. 

To  the  first  I  answer,  that  the  Constitution 
proposed  by  the  convention  contains,  as  well 
as  the  constitution  of  this  State,  a  number  of 
such  provisions. 

Independent  of  those  which  relate  to  the 
structure  of  the  government,  we  find  the  fol¬ 
lowing:  Article  1,  section  3,  clause  7— “Judg¬ 
ment  in  cases  of  impeachment  shall  not  extend 


further  than  to  removal  from  office,  and  dis¬ 
qualification  to  hold  and  enjoy  any  office  of 
honour,  trust,  or  profit  under  the  United 
States:  but  the  party  convicted  shall,  neverthe¬ 
less,  be  liable  and  subject  to  indictment,  trial, 
judgment,  and  punishment  according  to  law.'* 
Section  9  of  the  same  article,  clause  2— “The 
privilege  of  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  shall  not 
be  suspended,  unless  when  in  cases  of  rebel¬ 
lion  or  invasion  the  public  safety  may  require 
it.”  Clause  3— “No  bill  of  attainder  or  ex-post- 
facto  law  shall  be  passed.”  Clause  7— “No  title 
of  nobility  shall  be  granted  by  the  United 
States;  and  no  person  holding  any  office  of 
profit  or  trust  under  them,  shall,  without  the 
consent  of  the  Congress,  accept  of  any  present, 
emolument,  office,  or  title  of  any  kind  what¬ 
ever,  from  any  king,  prince,  or  foreign  state.” 
Article  3,  section  2,  clause  3— “The  trial  of  all 
crimes,  except  in  cases  of  impeachment,  shall 
be  by  jury;  and  such  trial  shall  be  held  in  the 
State  where  the  said  crimes  shall  have  been 
committed;  but  when  not  committed  within 
any  State,  the  trial  shall  be  at  such  place  or 
places  as  the  Congress  may  by  law  have  di¬ 
rected.”  Section  3  of  the  same  article— “Trea¬ 
son  against  the  United  States  shall  consist  only 
in  levying  war  against  them,  or  in  adhering  to 
their  enemies,  giving  them  aid  and  comfort. 
No  person  shall  be  convicted  of  treason,  unless 
on  the  testimony  of  two  witnesses  to  the  same 
overt  act,  or  on  confession  in  open  court.”  And 
clause  3  of  the  same  section— “The  Congress 
shall  have  power  to  declare  the  punishment  of 
treason;  but  no  attainder  of  treason  shall  work 
corruption  of  blood,  or  forfeiture,  except  dur¬ 
ing  the  life  of  the  person  attainted.” 

It  may  well  be  a  question  whether  these  are 
not,  upon  the  whole,  of  equal  importance  with 
any  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  constitution 
of  this  State.  The  establishment  of  the  writ  of 
habeas  corpus ,  the  prohibition  of  ex-post-facto 
laws,  and  of  titles  of  nobility,  to  which  we 
have  no  corresponding  provision  in  our  Con¬ 
stitution ,  are  perhaps  greater  securities  to  lib¬ 
erty  and  republicanism  than  any  it  contains. 
The  creation  of  crimes  after  the  commission 
of  the  fact,  or,  in  other  words,  the  subjecting 
of  men  to  punishment  for  things  which,  when 
they  were  done,  were  breaches  of  no  law,  and 
the  practice  of  arbitrary  imprisonments,  have 
been,  in  all  ages,  the  favourite  and  most  for¬ 
midable  instruments  of  tyranny.  The  observa¬ 
tions  of  the  judicious  Blackstone,1  in  reference 

1  Vide  Blackstone’s  Commentaries ,  vol.  1.,  p.  136. 
—Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


252 

to  the  latter,  are  well  worthy  of  recital:  “To 
bereave  a  man  of  life,  [says  he,]  or  by  violence 
to  confiscate  his  estate,  without  accusation  or 
trial  would  be  so  gross  and  notorious  an  act  of 
despotism,  as  must  at  once  convey  the  alarm 
of  tyranny  throughout  the  whole  nation;  but 
confinement  of  the  person,  by  secretly  hurry¬ 
ing  him  to  jail,  where  his  sufferings  are  un¬ 
known  or  forgotten,  is  a  less  public,  a  less  strik¬ 
ing,  and  therefore  a  more  dangerous  engine  of 
arbitrary  government.  And  as  a  remedy  for 
this  fatal  evil  he  is  everywhere  peculiarly  em- 
phatical  in  his  encomiums  on  the  habeas - 
corpus  act,  which  in  one  place  he  calls  the 
bulwark  of  the  British  Constitution. 

Nothing  need  be  said  to  illustrate  the  im¬ 
portance  of  the  prohibition  of  titles  of  nobil¬ 
ity.  This  may  truly  be  denominated  the  corner¬ 
stone  of  republican  government;  for  so  long 
as  they  are  excluded  there  can  never  be  serious 
danger  that  the  government  will  be  any  other 
than  that  of  the  people. 

To  the  second-that  is,  to  the  pretended  es¬ 
tablishment  of  the  common  and  statute  law  by 
the  Constitution,  I  answer,  that  they  are  ex¬ 
pressly  made  subject  “to  such  alterations  and 
provisions  as  the  legislature  shall  from  time  to 
time  make  concerning  the  same.”  They  are 
therefore  at  any  moment  liable  to  repeal  by 
the  ordinary  legislative  power,  and  of  course 
have  no  constitutional  sanction.  The  only  use 
of  the  declaration  was  to  recognise  the  ancient 
law,  and  to  remove  doubts  which  might  have 
been  occasioned  by  the  Revolution.  This  con¬ 
sequently  can  be  considered  as  no  part  of  a 
declaration  of  rights,  which  under  our  con¬ 
stitutions  must  be  intended  as  limitations  of 
the  power  of  the  government  itself. 

it  has  been  several  times  truly  remarked  that 
bills  of  rights  arc,  in  their  origin,  stipulations 
between  kings  and  their  subjects,  abridgments 
of  prerogative  in  favour  of  privilege,  reserva¬ 
tions  of  rights  not  surrendered  to  the  prince. 
Such  was  Magna  Cmarta.  obtained  by  the 
barons,  sword  in  hand,  from  King  John.  Such 
were  the  subsequent  confirmations  of  that 
charter  by  succeeding  princes.  Such  was  the 
Petition  of  Kight  assented  to  by  Charles  I.,  in 
the  beginning  of  his  reign.  Such,  also,  was  the 
Declaration  of  Right  presented  by  the  Lords 
and  Commons  to  the  Prince  of  Orange  in  1 088, 
and  afterwards  thrown  into  the  form  of  an  act 
of  parliament  called  the  Bill  o(  Rights.  It  is 
evident,  therefore,  that,  according  to  their 

1  l  idr  Blackstonc’s  Commentaries,  vol.  iv„  p. 
438.—  Ptni.ius 


primitive  signification  they  have  no  applica¬ 
tion  to  constitutions  professedly  founded  upon 
the  power  of  the  people,  and  executed  by  their 
immediate  representatives  and  servants.  Here, 
in  strictness,  the  people  surrender  nothing; 
and  as  they  retain  everything  they  have  no 
need  of  particular  reservations.  “We,  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  the  United  States,  to  secure  the  blessings 
of  liberty  to  ourselves  and  our  posterity,  do  or¬ 
dain  and  establish  this  Constitution  for  the 
United  States  of  America.”  Here  is  a  better 
recognition  of  popular  rights  than  volumes  of 
those  aphorisms  which  make  the  principal 
figure  in  several  of  our  State  bills  of  rights, 
and  which  would  sound  much  better  in  a  trea¬ 
tise  of  ethics  than  in  a  constitution  of  govern¬ 
ment. 

But  a  minute  detail  of  particular  rights  is 
certainly  far  less  applicable  to  a  Constitution 
like  that  under  consideration,  which  is  merely 
intended  to  regulate  the  general  political  in¬ 
terests  of  the  nation,  than  to  a  constitution 
which  has  the  regulation  of  every  species  of 
personal  and  private  concerns.  If,  therefoie, 
the  loud  clamours  against  the  plan  of  the  con¬ 
vention,  on  this  score,  are  well  founded,  no 
epithets  of  reprobation  will  be  too  strong  for 
the  constitution  of  this  State.  But  the  truth  is, 
that  both  of  them  contain  all  which,  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  their  objects,  is  reasonably  to  be  desired. 

I  go  further  and  affirm  that  bills  of  rights,  in 
the  sense  and  to  the  extent  in  which  they  are 
contended  for,  are  not  only  unnecessary  in  the 
proposed  Constitution,  but  would  even  be 
dangerous.  They'  would  contain  various  ex¬ 
ceptions  to  powers  not  granted;  and,  on  this 
very  account,  would  afford  a  colourable  pre¬ 
text  to  claim  more  than  were  granted.  For  why 
declare  that  things  shall  not  be  done  which 
there  is  no  power  to  do?  Why,  for  instance, 
should  it  be  said  that  the  liberty  of  the  press 
shall  not  be  restrained  when  no  power  is  given 
by  which  restrictions  may  be  imposed."  1  will 
not  contend  that  such  a  provision  would  con¬ 
fer  a  regulating  power;  but  it  is  evident  that 
it  would  furnish,  to  men  disposed  to  usurp,  a 
plausible  pretence  for  claiming  that  power. 
Vhc\  might  urge  with  a  semblance  of  reason 
that  the  Constitution  ought  not  to  be  charged 
with  the  absurdity  of  providing  against  the 
abuse  of  an  authority  which  was  not  given,  and 
that  the  provision  against  restraining  the  lib¬ 
erty  of  the  press  alfordcd  a  clear  implication 
that  a  power  to  prescribe  proper  regulations 
concerning  it  was  intended  to  be  vested  in  the 
national  government. T  his  mayserveasa  spcci- 


NUMBER  84  253 


men  of  the  numerous  handles  which  would 
be  given  to  the  doctrine  of  constructive  powers 
by  the  indulgence  of  an  injudicious  zeal  for 
bills  of  rights. 

On  the  subject  of  the  liberty  of  the  press,  as 
much  as  has  been  said,  I  cannot  forbear  adding 
a  remark  or  two:  in  the  first  place,  I  observe, 
that  there  is  not  a  syllable  concerning  it  in  the 
constitution  of  this  State;  in  the  next,  I  con¬ 
tend,  that  whatever  has  been  said  about  it  in 
that  of  any  other  State  amounts  to  nothing. 
What  signifies  a  declaration,  that  “the  liberty 
of  the  press  shall  be  inviolably  preserved”? 
What  is  the  liberty  of  the  press?  Who  can  give 
it  any  definition  which  would  not  leave  the  ut¬ 
most  latitude  for  evasion?  I  hold  it  to  be  im¬ 
practicable;  ancl  from  this  I  infer  that  its  secu¬ 
rity,  whatever  fine  declarations  may  be  inserted 
in  any  constitution  respecting  it,  must  alto¬ 
gether  depend  on  public  opinion,  and  on  the 
general  spirit  of  the  people  and  of  the  govern¬ 
ment.1  And  here,  after  all,  as  is  intimated  upon 
another  occasion,  must  we  seek  for  the  only 
solid  basis  of  all  our  rights. 

There  remains  but  one  other  view  of  this 
matter  to  conclude  the  point.  The  truth  is, 
after  all  the  declamations  we  have  heard,  that 
the  Constitution  is  itself,  in  every  rational 
sense,  and  to  every  useful  purpose,  a  bill  of 
rights.  The  several  bills  of  rights  in  Great 

1To  show  that  there  is  a  power  in  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  by  which  the  liberty  of  the  press  may  be 
affected,  recourse  has  been  had  to  the  power  of 
taxation.  It  is  said  that  duties  may  be  laid  upon 
the  publications  so  high  as  to  amount  to  a  pro¬ 
hibition.  I  know  not  by  what  logic  it  could  be 
maintained,  that  the  declarations  in  the  State 
constitutions,  in  favour  of  the  freedom  of  the 
press,  would  be  a  constitutional  impediment  to 
the  imposition  of  duties  upon  publications  by 
the  State  legislatures.  It  cannot  certainly  be  pre¬ 
tended  that  any  degree  of  duties,  however  low, 
would  be  an  abridgment  of  the  liberty  of  the 
press.  We  know  that  newspapers  are  taxed  in 
Great  Britain,  and  yet  it  is  notorious  that  the  press 
nowhere  enjoys  greater  liberty  than  in  that  coun¬ 
try.  And  if  duties  of  any  kind  may  be  laid  without 
a  violation  of  that  liberty,  it  is  evident  that  the 
extent  must  depend  on  legislative  discretion,  reg- 
ulated  by  public  opinion;  so  that,  after  all,  gen¬ 
eral  declarations  respecting  the  liberty  of  the 
press  will  give  it  no  greater  security  than  it  will 
have  without  them.  The  same  invasions  of  it  may 
be  effected  under  the  State  constitutions  which 
contain  those  declarations  through  the  means  of 
taxation,  as  under  the  proposed  Constitution, 
which  has  nothing  of  the  kind.  It  would  be  quite 
as  significant  to  declare  that  government  ought 
to  be  free,  that  taxes  ought  not  to  be  excessive, 
etc.,  as  that  the  liberty  of  the  press  ought  not  to 
be  restrained— Publius 


Britain  form  its  Constitution,  and  conversely 
the  constitution  of  each  State  is  its  bill  of  rights. 
And  the  proposed  Constitution,  if  adopted, 
will  be  the  bill  of  rights  of  the  Union.  Is  it  one 
object  of  a  bill  of  rights  to  declare  and  specify 
the  political  privileges  of  the  citizens  in  the 
structure  and  administration  of  the  govern¬ 
ment?  This  is  done  in  the  most  ample  and  pre¬ 
cise  manner  in  the  plan  of  the  convention; 
comprehending  various  precautions  for  the 
public  security,  which  are  not  to  be  found  in 
any  of  the  State  constitutions.  Is  another  ob¬ 
ject  of  a  bill  of  rights  to  define  certain  immu¬ 
nities  and  modes  of  proceeding,  which  are 
relative  to  personal  and  private  concerns?  This 
we  have  seen  has  also  been  attended  to,  in  a 
variety  of  cases,  in  the  same  plan.  Adverting 
therefore  to  the  substantial  meaning  of  a  bill 
of  rights,  it  is  absurd  to  allege  that  it  is  not  to 
be  found  in  the  work  of  the  convention.  It 
may  be  said  that  it  does  not  go  far  enough, 
though  it  will  not  be  easy  to  make  this  appear; 
but  it  can  with  no  propriety  be  contended  that 
there  is  no  such  thing.  It  certainly  must  be 
immaterial  what  mode  is  observed  as  to  the 
order  of  declaring  the  rights  of  the  citizens,  if 
they  are  to  be  found  in  any  part  of  the  instru¬ 
ment  which  establishes  the  government.  And 
hence  it  must  be  apparent  that  much  of  what 
has  been  said  on  this  subject  rests  merely  011 
verbal  and  nominal  distinctions,  entirely  for¬ 
eign  from  the  substance  of  the  thing. 

Another  objection  which  has  been  made, 
and  which,  from  the  frequencyof  its  repetition, 
it  is  to  be  presumed  is  relied  on,  is  of  this  na¬ 
ture:  “It  is  improper  [say  the  objectors]  to  con¬ 
fer  such  large  powers,  as  are  proposed,  upon  the 
national  government,  because  the  seat  of  that 
government  must  of  necessity  be  too  remote 
from  many  of  the  States  to  admit  of  a  proper 
knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  constituent  of 
the  conduct  of  the  representative  body.”  This 
argument,  if  it  proves  anything,  proves  that 
there  ought  to  be  no  general  government  what¬ 
ever.  For  the  powers  which,  it  seems  to  be 
agreed  on  all  hands,  ought  to  be  vested  in  the 
Union  cannot  be  safely  intrusted  to  a  body 
which  is  not  under  every  requisite  control. 
But  there  are  satisfactory  reasons  to  show  that 
the  objection  is  in  reality  not  well  founded. 
There  is  in  most  of  the  arguments  which  relate 
to  distance  a  palpable  illusion  of  the  imagina¬ 
tion.  What  are  the  sources  of  information  by 
which  the  people  in  Montgomery  County  must 
regulate  their  judgment  of  the  conduct  of 
their  representatives  in  the  State  legislature? 


THE  FEDERALIST 


2  54 

Of  personal  observation  they  can  have  no  bene¬ 
fit.  This  is  confined  to  the  citizens  on  the  spot. 
They  must  therefore  depend  on  the  informa¬ 
tion  of  intelligent  men,  in  whom  they  confide; 
and  how  must  these  men  obtain  their  informa¬ 
tion?  Evidently  from  the  complexion  of  public 
measures,  from  the  public  prints,  from  corre¬ 
spondences  with  their  representatives,  and 
with  other  persons  who  reside  at  the  place  of 
their  deliberations.  This  does  not  apply  to 
Montgomery  County  only,  but  to  all  the  coun¬ 
ties  at  any  considerable  distance  from  the  seat 
of  government. 

It  is  equally  evident  that  the  same  sources 
of  information  would  be  open  to  the  people 
in  relation  to  the  conduct  of  their  representa¬ 
tives  in  the  general  government,  and  the  im¬ 
pediments  to  a  prompt  communication  which 
distance  may  be  supposed  to  create  will  be 
overbalanced  by  the  effects  of  the  vigilance  of 
the  State  governments.  The  executive  and  leg¬ 
islative  bodies  of  each  State  will  be  so  many 
sentinels  over  the  persons  employed  in  every 
department  of  the  national  administration; 
and  as  it  will  be  in  their  power  to  adopt  and 
pursue  a  regular  and  effectual  system  of  intelli¬ 
gence,  they  can  never  be  at  a  loss  to  know  the 
behaviour  of  those  who  represent  their  con¬ 
stituents  in  the  national  councils,  and  can 
readily  communicate  the  same  knowledge  to 
the  people.  Their  disposition  to  apprise  the 
community  of  whatever  may  prejudice  its  in¬ 
terests  from  another  quarter  may  be  relied 
upon,  if  it  were  only  from  the  rivalship  of 
power  And  we  may  conclude  with  the  fullest 
assurance  that  the  people,  through  that  chan¬ 
nel.  will  be  better  informed  of  the  conduct  of 
their  national  reprcscntati\es  than  they  can  be 
by  any  means  they  now  possess  of  that  of  their 
State  representatives. 

It  ought  also  to  be  remembered  that  the 
citizens  who  inhabit  the  country  at  and  near 
the  scat  of  government  will,  in  all  questions 
that  affect  the  general  liberty  and  prosperity, 
have  the  same  interest  with  those  who  arc  at 
a  distance,  and  that  they  will  stand  ready  to 
sound  the  alarm  when  necessary,  and  to  point 
out  the  actors  in  any  pernicious  project.  I’hc 
public  papers  will  be  expeditious  messengers 
of  intelligence  to  the  most  remote  inhabitants 
of  the  Union. 

Among  the  many  curious  objections  which 
have  appeared  against  the  proposed  Consti¬ 
tution,  the  most  extraordinary  and  the  least 
colourable  is  derived  from  the  want  of  sonic 
provision  respecting  the  debts  due  to  the 


United  States.  This  has  been  represented  as  a 
tacit  relinquishment  of  those  debts,  and  as  a 
wicked  contrivance  to  screen  public  defaulters. 
The  newspapers  have  teemed  with  the  most 
inflammatory  railings  on  this  head;  yet  there 
is  nothing  clearer  than  that  the  suggestion  is 
entirely  void  of  foundation,  the  offspring  of 
extreme  ignorance  or  extreme  dishonesty.  In 
addition  to  the  remarks  I  have  made  upon  the 
subject  in  another  place,  I  shall  only  observe 
that  as  it  is  a  plain  dictate  of  common-sense, 
so  it  is  also  an  established  doctrine  of  politi¬ 
cal  law,  that  “ states  neither  lose  any  of  their 
rights ,  nor  are  discharged  from  any  of  their  ob¬ 
ligations ,  by  a  change  in  the  form  of  their  civil 
government  ,fl 

The  last  objection  of  any  consequence, 
which  I  at  present  recollect,  turns  upon  the 
article  of  expense.  If  it  were  even  true  that  the 
adoption  of  the  proposed  government  would 
occasion  a  considerable  increase  of  expense,  it 
would  be  an  objection  that  ought  to  have  no 
weight  against  the  plan. 

The  great  bulk  of  the  citizens  of  America 
are  with  reason  convinced  that  Union  is  the 
basis  of  their  political  happiness.  Men  of  sense 
of  all  parties  now,  with  few  exceptions,  agree 
that  it  cannot  be  preserved  under  the  present 
system,  nor  without  radical  alterations;  that 
new  and  extensive  powers  ought  to  be  granted 
to  the  national  head,  and  that  these  require  a 
different  organisation  of  the  federal  govern¬ 
ment— a  single  body  being  an  unsafe  deposi¬ 
tary  of  such  ample  authorities.  In  conceding 
all  this,  the  question  of  expense  must  be  given 
up;  for  it  is  impossible,  with  any  degree  of 
safety,  to  narrow  the  foundation  upon  which 
the  system  is  to  stand.  The  two  branches  of  the 
legislature  arc,  in  the  first  instance,  to  consist 
of  only  sixty-five  persons,  which  is  the  same 
number  of  which  Congress,  under  the  existing 
Confederation,  may  be  composed.  It  is  true 
that  this  number  is  intended  to  be  increased; 
but  this  is  to  keep  pace  with  the  progress  of  the 
population  and  resources  of  the  country.  It 
is  evident  that  a  less  number  wotdd,  even  in 
the  first  instance,  have  been  unsafe,  and  that  a 
continuance  of  the  present  number  would,  in 
a  more  advanced  stage  of  population,  be  a  very 
inadequate  representation  of  the  people. 

Whence  is  the  dreaded  augmentation  of 
expense  to  spring?  One  source  indicated  is 
the  multiplication  of  offices  under  the  new 

i  p/'c/r  Rutherford's  Institutes,  vol.  ii.,  book  II, 
chap,  x.,  sects,  xiv.  and  \v.  Vide  also  Giotius, 
book  u,  chap,  ix.,  sects,  viii.  and  ix.— Punuus 


NUMBER  84  255 


government.  Let  us  examine  this  a  little. 

It  is  evident  that  the  principal  departments 
of  the  administration  under  the  present  gov¬ 
ernment  are  the  same  which  will  be  required 
under  the  new.  There  are  now  a  Secretary  of 
War,  a  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs,  a  Secretary 
for  Domestic  Affairs,  a  Board  of  Treasury,  con¬ 
sisting  of  three  persons,  a  Treasurer,  assist¬ 
ants,  clerks,  etc.  These  officers  are  indispen¬ 
sable  under  any  system,  and  will  suffice  under 
the  new  as  well  as  the  old.  As  to  ambassadors 
and  other  ministers  and  agents  in  foreign 
countries,  the  proposed  Constitution  can  make 
no  other  difference  than  to  render  their  char¬ 
acters,  where  they  reside,  more  respectable, 
and  their  services  more  useful.  As  to  persons  to 
be  employed  in  the  collection  of  the  revenues, 
it  is  unquestionably  true  that  these  will  form 
a  very  considerable  addition  to  the  number  of 
federal  officers;  but  it  will  not  follow  that  this 
will  occasion  an  increase  of  public  expense. 
It  will  be  in  most  cases  nothing  more  than  an 
exchange  of  State  for  national  officers.  In  the 
collection  of  all  duties,  for  instance,  the  per¬ 
sons  employed  will  be  wholly  of  the  latter  de¬ 
scription.  The  States  individually  will  stand  in 
no  need  of  any  for  this  purpose.  What  differ¬ 
ence  can  it  make  in  point  of  expense  to  pay 
officers  of  the  customs  appointed  by  the  State  or 
by  the  United  States?  There  is  no  good  reason 
to  suppose  that  either  the  number  or  the  salaries 
of  the  latter  will  be  greater  than  those  of  the 
former. 

Where  then  are  we  to  seek  for  those  addi¬ 
tional  articles  of  expense  which  are  to  swell 
the  account  to  the  enormous  size  that  has  been 
represented  to  us?  The  chief  item  which  occurs 
to  me  respects  the  support  of  the  judges  of  the 
United  States.  1  do  not  add  the  President, 
because  there  is  now  a  president  of  Congress, 
whose  expenses  may  not  be  far,  if  anything, 
short  of  those  which  will  be  incurred  on  ac¬ 
count  of  the  President  of  the  United  States. 
The  support  of  the  judges  will  clearly  be  an 
extra  expense,  but  to  what  extent  will  depend 
on  the  particular  plan  which  may  be  adopted 
in  regard  to  this  matter.  But  upon  no  reason¬ 
able  plan  can  it  amount  to  a  sum  which  will 
be  an  object  of  material  consequence. 

Let  us  now  see  what  there  is  to  counter¬ 
balance  any  extra  expense  that  may  attend  the 
establishment  of  the  proposed  government. 
The  first  thing  which  presents  itself  is  that  a 
great  part  of  the  business  which  now  keeps 
Congress  sitting  through  the  )ear  will  be  trans¬ 
acted  by  the  President.  Even  the  management 


of  foreign  negotiations  will  naturally  devolve 
upon  him,  according  to  general  principles  con¬ 
certed  with  the  Senate,  and  subject  to  their 
final  concurrence.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  a 
portion  of  the  year  will  suffice  for  the  session 
of  both  the  Senate  and  the  House  of  Repre¬ 
sentatives;  we  may  suppose  about  a  fourth  for 
the  latter  and  a  third,  or  perhaps  half,  for  the 
former.  The  extra  business  of  treaties  and 
appointments  may  give  this  extra  occupation 
to  the  Senate.  From  this  circumstance  we  may 
infer  that,  until  the  House  of  Representatives 
shall  be  increased  greatly  beyond  its  present 
number,  there  will  be  a  considerable  saving  of 
expense  from  the  difference  between  the  con¬ 
stant  session  of  the  present  and  the  temporary 
session  of  the  future  Congress. 

But  there  is  another  circumstance  of  great 
importance  in  the  view  of  economy.  The  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  United  States  has  hitherto  occupied 
the  State  legislatures,  as  well  as  Congress.  The 
latter  has  made  requisitions  which  the  former 
have  had  to  provide  for.  Hence  it  has  hap¬ 
pened  that  the  sessions  of  the  State  legislatures 
have  been  protracted  greatly  beyond  what  was 
necessary  for  the  execution  of  the  mere  local 
business  of  the  States.  More  than  half  their 
time  has  been  frequently  employed  in  matters 
which  related  to  the  United  States.  Now  the 
members  who  compose  the  legislatures  of  the 
several  States  amount  to  two  thousand  and 
upwards,  which  number  has  hitherto  perform¬ 
ed  what  under  the  new  system  will  be  done  in 
the  first  instance  by  sixty-five  persons,  and 
probably  at  no  future  period  by  above  a  fourth 
or  a  fifth  of  that  number.  The  Congress  under 
the  proposed  government  will  do  all  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  the  United  States  themselves,  without 
the  intervention  of  the  State  legislatures,  who 
thenceforth  will  have  only  to  attend  to  the 
affairs  of  their  particular  States,  and  will  not 
have  to  sit  in  any  proportion  as  long  as  they 
have  heretofore  done.  This  difference  in  the 
time  of  the  sessions  of  the  State  legislatures 
will  be  clear  gain,  and  will  alone  form  an  arti¬ 
cle  of  saving  which  may  be  regarded  as  an 
equivalent  for  any  additional  objects  of  ex¬ 
pense  that  may  be  occasioned  by  the  adoption 
of  the  new  system. 

The  result  from  these  observations  is,  that 
the  sources  of  additional  expense  from  the 
establishment  of  the  proposed  Constitution 
are  much  fewer  than  may  have  been  imagined; 
that  they  are  counterbalanced  by  considerable 
objects  of  saving;  and  that  while  it  is  question¬ 
able  on  which  side  the  scale  will  preponderate. 


256  THE  FEDERALIST 


it  is  certain  that  a  government  less  expensive 
would  be  incompetent  to  the  purposes  of  the 
Union.  Publius 

Number  8j 

[HAMILTON] 

According  to  the  formal  division  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  these  papers,  announced  in  my  first 
number,  there  would  appear  still  to  remain 
for  discussion  two  points:  “the  analogy  of  the 
proposed  government  to  your  own  State  con¬ 
stitution,”  and  “the  additional  security  which 
its  adoption  will  afford  to  republican  govern¬ 
ment,  to  liberty,  and  to  property.”  But  these 
heads  have  been  so  fully  anticipated  and  ex¬ 
hausted  in  the  progress  of  the  work  that  it 
would  now  scarcely  be  possible  to  do  anything 
more  than  repeat,  in  a  more  dilated  form, 
what  has  been  heretofore  said,  which  the  ad¬ 
vanced  stage  of  the  question,  and  the  time  al¬ 
ready  spent  upon  it,  conspire  to  forbid. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  resemblance  of  the 
plan  of  the  convention  to  the  act  which  organ¬ 
ises  the  government  of  this  State  holds,  not  less 
with  regard  to  many  of  the  supposed  defects 
than  to  the  real  excellences  of  the  former. 
Among  the  pretended  defects  are  the  re-eligi- 
bility  of  the  Executive,  the  want  of  a  council, 
the  omission  of  a  formal  bill  of  rights,  the  omis¬ 
sion  of  a  provision  respecting  the  liberty  of 
the  press.  These  and  several  others  which  have 
been  noted  in  the  course  of  our  inquiries  are  as 
much  chargeable  on  the  existing  constitution 
of  this  State  as  on  the  one  proposed  for  the 
Union;  and  a  man  must  have  slender  preten¬ 
sions  to  consistency  who  can  rail  at  the  latter 
for  imperfections  which  he  finds  no  difficulty 
in  excusing  in  the  former.  Nor  indeed  can 
there  be  a  better  proof  of  the  insincerity  and 
affectation  of  some  of  the  zealous  adversaries 
of  the  plan  of  the  convention  among  us,  who 
profess  to  be  the  devoted  admirers  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment  under  which  they  live,  than  the  fury 
with  which  they  have  attacked  that  plan,  for 
matters  in  legard  to  which  our  own  constitu¬ 
tion  is  equally  or  perhaps  more  vulnerable. 

The  additional  securities  to  republican  gov¬ 
ernment,  to  liberty,  and  to  property,  to  be  de¬ 
rived  from  the  adoption  of  the  plan  under 
consideration,  consist  chiefly  in  the  restraints 
which  the  preservation  of  the  Union  will  im¬ 
pose  on  local  factions  and  insurrections,  and 
on  the  ambition  of  powerful  individuals  in 
single  States  who  may  acquire  credit  and  influ¬ 
ence  enough,  from  leaders  and  favourites,  to 


become  the  despots  of  the  people;  in  the 
diminution  of  the  opportunities  to  foreign 
intrigue,  which  the  dissolution  of  the  Confed¬ 
eracy  would  invite  and  facilitate;  in  the  pre¬ 
vention  of  extensive  military  establishments, 
which  could  not  fail  to  grow  out  of  wars  be¬ 
tween  the  States  in  a  disunited  situation;  in  the 
express  guaranty  of  a  republican  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment  to  each;  in  the  absolute  and  universal 
exclusion  of  titles  of  nobility;  and  in  the  pre¬ 
cautions  against  the  repetition  of  those  prac- 
ticeson  the  part  of  the  State  governments  which 
have  undermined  the  foundations  of  property 
and  credit,  have  planted  mutual  distrust  in 
the  breasts  of  all  classes  of  citizens,  and  have 
occasioned  an  almost  universal  prostration  of 
morals. 

Thus  have  I,  fellow-citizens,  executed  the 
task  I  had  assigned  to  myself;  with  what  suc¬ 
cess,  your  conduct  must  determine.  I  trust  at 
least  you  will  admit  that  I  have  not  failed  in 
the  assurance  I  gave  you  respecting  the  spirit 
with  which  my  endeavours  should  be  con¬ 
ducted.  1  have  addressed  myself  purely  to  your 
judgments,  and  have  studiously  avoided  those 
asperities  which  are  too  apt  to  disgrace  politi¬ 
cal  disputants  of  all  parties,  and  which  have 
been  not  a  little  provoked  by  the  language  and 
conduct  of  the  opponents  of  the  Constitution. 
The  charge  of  a  conspiracy  against  the  liberties 
of  the  people,  which  has  been  indiscriminately 
brought  against  the  advocates  of  the  plan,  has 
something  in  it  too  wanton  and  to  malignant 
not  to  excite  the  indignation  of  every  man 
who  feels  in  his  own  bosom  a  refutation  of  the 
calumny.  The  perpetual  changes  which  have 
been  rung  upon  the  wealthy,  the  well-born, 
and  the  great,  have  been  such  as  to  inspire  the 
disgust  of  all  sensible  men.  And  the  unwar¬ 
rantable  concealments  and  misrepresentations 
which  have  been  in  various  ways  practised  to 
keep  the  truth  from  the  public  eye,  have  been 
of  a  nature  to  demand  the  reprobation  of  all 
honest  men.  It  is  not  impossible  that  these  cir¬ 
cumstances  may  have  occasionally  betrayed  me 
into  intemperances  of  expression  which  I  did 
not  intend;  it  is  certain  that  1  have  frequently 
felt  a  struggle  between  sensibility  and  modera¬ 
tion;  and  if  the  former  has  in  some  instances 
prevailed.it  must  be  my  excuse  that  it  has  been 
neither  often  nor  much. 

Let  us  now  pause  and  ask  ourselves  whether, 
in  the  course  of  these  papers,  the  proposed 
Constitution  has  not  been  satisfactorily  vindi¬ 
cated  from  the. aspersions  thrown  upon  it;  and 
whether  it  has  not  been  shown  to  be  worthy  of 


NUMBER  85  257 


the  public  approbation,  and  necessary  to  the 
public  safety  and  prosperity.  Every  man  is 
bound  to  answer  these  questions  to  himself, 
according  to  the  best  of  his  conscience  and 
understanding,  and  to  act  agreeably  to  the 
genuine  and  sober  dictates  of  his  judgment. 
This  is  a  duty  from  which  nothing  can  give 
him  a  dispensation.  ’Tis  one  that  he  is  called 
upon,  nay,  constrained  by  all  the  obligations 
that  form  the  bands  of  society,  to  discharge 
sincerely  and  honestly.  No  partial  motive,  no 
particular  interest,  no  pride  of  opinion,  no 
temporary  passion  or  prejudice,  will  justify  to 
himself,  to  his  country,  or  to  his  posterity,  an 
improper  election  of  the  part  he  is  to  act.  Let 
him  beware  of  an  obstinate  adherence  to  party; 
let  him  reflect  that  the  object  upon  which  he 
is  to  decide  is  not  a  particular  interest  of  the 
community,  but  the  very  existence  of  the  na¬ 
tion;  and  let  him  remember  that  a  majority  of 
America  has  already  given  its  sanction  to  the 
plan  which  he  is  to  approve  or  reject. 

I  shall  not  dissemble  that  I  feel  an  entire 
confidence  in  the  arguments  which  recommend 
the  proposed  system  to  your  adoption,  and 
that  I  am  unable  to  discern  any  real  force  in 
those  by  which  it  has  been  opposed.  I  am  per¬ 
suaded  that  it  is  the  best  which  our  political 
situation,  habits,  and  opinions  will  admit,  and 
superior  to  any  the  revolution  has  produced. 

Concessions  on  the  part  of  the  friends  of  the 
plan,  that  it  has  not  a  claim  to  absolute  perfec¬ 
tion,  have  afforded  matter  of  no  small  triumph 
to  its  enemies.  “Why,"  say  they,  “should  we 
adopt  an  imperfect  thing?  Why  not  amend  it 
and  make  it  perfect  before  it  is  irrevocably 
established?"  This  may  be  plausible  enough, 
but  it  is  only  plausible.  In  the  first  place,  I  re¬ 
mark  that  the  extent  of  these  concessions  has 
been  greatly  exaggerated.  They  have  been 
stated  as  amounting  to  an  admission  that  the 
plan  is  radically  defective,  and  that  without 
material  alterations  the  rights  and  the  inter¬ 
ests  of  the  community  cannot  be  safely  con¬ 
fided  to  it.  This,  as  far  as  I  have  understood 
the  meaning  of  those  who  make  the  conces¬ 
sions,  is  an  entire  perversion  of  their  sense.  No 
advocate  of  the  measure  can  be  found  who  will 
not  declare  as  his  sentiment  that  the  system, 
though  it  may  not  be  perfect  in  every  part,  is, 
upon  the  whole,  a  good  one;  is  the  best  that  the 
present  views  and  circumstances  of  the  country 
will  permit;  and  is  such  an  one  as  promises 
every  species  of  security  which  a  reasonable 
people  can  desire. 

I  answer,  in  the  next  place,  that  I  should 


esteem  it  the  extreme  of  imprudence  to  pro¬ 
long  the  precarious  state  of  our  national  affairs, 
and  to  expose  the  Union  to  the  jeopardy  of 
successive  experiments,  in  the  chimerical  pur¬ 
suit  of  a  perfect  plan.  I  never  expect  to  see  a 
perfect  work  from  imperfect  man.  The  result 
of  the  deliberations  of  all  collective  bodies 
must  necessarily  be  a  compound,  as  well  of  the 
errors  and  prejudices  as  of  the  good  sense  and 
wisdom,  of  the  individuals  of  whom  they  are 
composed.  The  compacts  which  are  to  embrace 
thirteen  distinct  States  in  a  common  bond  of 
amity  and  union,  must  as  necessarily  be  a  com¬ 
promise  of  as  many  dissimilar  interests  and  in¬ 
clinations.  How  can  perfection  spring  from 
such  materials? 

The  reasons  assigned  in  an  excellent  little 
pamphlet  lately  published  in  this  city1  are  un¬ 
answerable  to  show  the  utter  improbability 
of  assembling  a  new  convention,  under  circum¬ 
stances  in  any  degree  so  favourable  to  a  happy 
issue  as  those  in  which  the  late  convention  met, 
deliberated,  and  concluded.  I  will  not  repeat 
the  arguments  there  used,  as  I  presume  the 
production  itself  has  had  an  extensive  circula¬ 
tion.  It  is  certainly  well  worthy  the  perusal  of 
every  friend  to  his  country.  There  is,  however, 
one  point  of  light  in  which  the  subject  of 
amendments  still  remains  to  be  considered, 
and  in  which  it  has  not  yet  been  exhibited  to 
public  view.  I  cannot  resolve  to  conclude  with¬ 
out  first  taking  a  survey  of  it  in  this  aspect. 

It  appears  to  me  susceptible  of  absolute  dem¬ 
onstration  that  it  will  be  far  more  easy  to 
obtain  subsequent  than  previous  amendments 
to  the  Constitution.  The  moment  an  alteration 
is  made  in  the  present  plan,  it  becomes,  to  the 
purpose  of  adoption,  a  new  one,  and  must  un¬ 
dergo  a  new  decision  of  each  State.  To  its  com¬ 
plete  establishment  throughout  the  Union,  it 
will  therefore  require  the  concurrence  of  thir¬ 
teen  States.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  proposed  should  once  be  ratified  by  all 
the  States  as  it  stands,  alterations  in  it  may  at 
any  time  be  effected  by  nine  States.  Here,  then, 
the  chances  are  as  thirteen  to  nine 2  in  favour 
of  subsequent  amendment,  rather  than  of  the 
original  adoption  of  an  entire  system. 

This  is  not  all.  Every  Constitution  for  the 
United  States  must  inevitably  consist  of  a  great 
variety  of  particulars,  in  which  thirteen  inde- 

1  Entitled  “An  Address  to  the  People  of  the 
State  of  New  York. ’’-Publius 

2  It  may  rather  be  said  ten,  for  though  two 
thirds  may  set  on  foot  the  measure,  three  fourths 
must  ratify.— Publius 


THE  FEDERALIST 


pendent  States  are  to  be  accommodated  in 
their  interests  or  opinions  of  interest.  We  may 
of  course  expect  to  see,  in  any  body  of  men 
charged  with  its  original  formation,  very  differ¬ 
ent  combinations  of  the  parts  upon  different 
points.  Many  of  those  who  form  a  majority 
on  one  question  may  become  the  minority  on 
a  second,  and  an  association  dissimilar  to  either 
may  constitute  the  majority  on  a  third.  Hence 
the  necessity  of  moulding  and  arranging  all 
the  particulars  which  are  to  compose  the  whole 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  satisfy  all  the  parties  to 
the  compact;  and  hence,  also,  an  immense 
multiplication  of  difficulties  and  casualties  in 
obtaining  the  collective  assent  to  a  final  act. 
The  degree  of  that  multiplication  must  evi¬ 
dently  be  in  a  ratio  to  the  number  of  partic¬ 
ulars  and  the  number  of  parties. 

But  every  amendment  to  the  Constitution, 
if  once  established,  would  be  a  single  proposi¬ 
tion,  and  might  be  brought  forward  singly. 
There  would  then  be  no  necessity  for  manage¬ 
ment  or  compromise,  in  relation  to  any  other 
point— no  giving  nor  taking.  I  he  will  of  the 
requisite  number  would  at  once  bring  the  mat¬ 
ter  to  a  decisive  issue.  And  consequently,  when¬ 
ever  nine,  or  rather  ten  States,  were  united  in 
the  desire  of  a  particular  amendment,  that 
amendment  must  infallibly  take  place.  There 
can,  therefore,  be  no  comparison  between  the 
facility  of  effecting  an  amendment,  and  that 
of  establishing  in  the  first  instance  a  complete 
Constitution. 

In  opposition  to  the  probability  of  subse¬ 
quent  amendments,  it  has  been  urged  that  the 
persons  delegated  to  the  administration  of  the 
national  government  will  always  be  disinclined 
to  yield  up  any  portion  of  the  authority  of 
which  they  were  once  possessed.  For  my  own 
part,  I  acknowledge  a  thorough  conviction  that 
any  amendments  which  may,  upon  mature 
consideration,  be  thought  useful,  will  be  ap¬ 
plicable  to  the  organisation  of  the  government, 
not  to  the  mass  of  its  powers;  and  on  this 
account  alone  I  think  there  is  no  weight  in  the 
observation  just  stated.  I  also  think  there  is 
little  weight  in  it  on  another  account.  The 
intrinsic  difficulty  of  governing  thirteen  States 
at  any  rate,  independent  of  calculations  upon 
an  ordinary  degree  of  public  spirit  and  integ¬ 
rity,  will,  in  my  opinion,  constantly  impose  on 
the  national  rulers  the  necessity  of  a  spirit  of 
accommodation  to  the  reasonable  expectations 
of  their  constituents.  But  there  is  yet  a  further 
consideration,  which  proves  beyond  the  possi 
bility  of  a  doubt  that  the  observation  is  futile. 


It  is  this,  that  the  national  rulers,  whenever 
nine  States  concur,  will  have  no  option  upon 
the  subject.  By  the  fifth  article  of  the  plan,  the 
Congress  will  be  obliged  “on  the  application 
of  the  legislatures  of  two  thirds  of  the  States 
[which  at  present  amount  to  nine],  to  call  a 
convention  for  proposing  amendments,  which 
shall  be  valid,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  as 
part  of  the  Constitution,  when  ratified  by  the 
legislatures  of  three  fourths  of  the  States,  or 
by  conventions  in  three  fourths  thereof.”  The 
words  of  this  article  are  peremptory.  The  Con¬ 
gress  “shall  call  a  convention .“  Nothing  in  this 
particular  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  that  body. 
And  of  consequence,  all  the  declamation  about 
the  disinclination  to  a  change  vanishes  in  air. 
Nor  however  difficult  it  may  be  supposed  to 
unite  two  thirds  or  three  fourths  of  the  State 
legislatures,  in  amendments  which  may  affect 
local  interests,  can  there  be  any  room  to  ap¬ 
prehend  any  such  difficulty  in  a  union  on 
points  which  are  merely  relative  to  the  general 
liberty  or  security  of  the  people.  We  may  safely 
rely  on  the  disposition  of  the  State  legislatures 
to  erect  barriers  against  the  encroachments  of 
the  national  authority. 

If  the  foregoing  argument  is  a  fallacy,  cer¬ 
tain  it  is  that  I  am  myself  deceived  by  it,  for  it 
is,  in  my  conception,  oneof  those  rare  instances 
in  which  a  political  truth  can  be  brought  to  the 
test  of  a  mathematical  demonstration.  Those 
who  see  the  matter  in  the  same  light  with  me, 
however  zealous  they  may  be  for  amendments, 
must  agree  in  the  propriety  of  a  previous  adop¬ 
tion,  as  the  most  directroad  to  their  own  object. 

The  zeal  for  attempts  to  amend,  prior  to  the 
establishment  of  the  Constitution,  must  abate 
in  every  man  who  is  ready  to  accede  to  the 
truth  of  the  following  observations  of  a  writer 
equally  solid  and  ingenious:  “To  balance  a 
large  state  or  society  [says  he],  whether  mo¬ 
narchical  or  republican,  on  general  laws,  is  a 
work  of  so  great  difficulty,  that  no  human 
genius,  however  comprehensive,  is  able,  by  the 
mere  dint  of  reason  and  reflection,  to  effect  it. 
The  judgments  of  many  must  unite  in  the 
work;  experience  must  guide  their  labour; 
time  must  bring  it  to  perfection,  and  the  feel¬ 
ing  of  inconveniences  must  correct  the  mis¬ 
takes  which  they  inevitably  fall  into  in  their 
first  trials  and  experiments.”1  These  judicious 
reflections  contain  a  lesson  of  moderation  to 
all  the  sincere  lovers  of  the  Union,  and  ought 
to  put  them  upon  their  guard  against  hazard- 

1  Hume's  Assays,  vol.  i.,  page  128:  "The  Rise  o! 
Arts  and  Sciences."— Publius 


NUMBER  8 5  259 


ing  anarchy,  civil  war,  a  perpetual  alienation 
of  the  States  from  each  other,  and  perhaps  the 
military  despotism  of  a  victorious  demagogue, 
in  the  pursuit  of  what  they  are  not  likely  to 
obtain  but  from  time  and  experience.  It  may 
be  in  me  a  defect  of  political  fortitude,  but  I 
acknowledge  that  I  cannot  entertain  an  equal 
tranquillity  with  those  who  affect  to  treat  the 
dangers  of  a  longer  continuance  in  our  present 
situation  as  imaginary.  A  nation  without  a  na¬ 
tional  government  is,  in  my  view,  an  awful 
spectacle.  The  establishment  of  a  Constitution, 
in  time  of  profound  peace,  by  the  voluntary 


consent  of  a  whole  people,  is  a  prodigy  to  the 
completion  of  which  I  look  forward  with  trem¬ 
bling  anxiety.  I  can  reconcile  it  to  no  rules  of 
prudence  to  let  go  the  hold  we  now  have,  in 
so  arduous  an  enterprise,  upon  seven  out  of 
the  thirteen  States,  and  after  having  passed 
over  so  considerable  a  part  of  the  ground,  to 
recommence  the  course.  I  dread  the  more  the 
consequences  of  new  attempts,  because  I  know 
that  powerful  individuals,  in  this  and  in  other 
States,  are  enemies  to  a  general  national  gov¬ 
ernment  in  every  possible  shape. 

Publius 


' 


ON  LIBERTY 

REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 
UTILITARIANISM 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 
John  Stuart  Mill,  1806-1873 


Mill,  in  his  Autobiography,  declared  that  his 
intellectual  development  was  due  primarily 
to  the  influence  of  two  people:  his  father, 
James  Mill,  and  his  wife. 

James  Mill  elaborated  for  his  son  a  com¬ 
prehensive  educational  program,  modelled  up¬ 
on  the  theories  of  Helvetius  and  Bentham.  It 
was  encyclopaedic  in  scope  and  equipped  Mill 
by  the  time  he  was  thirteen  with  the  equivalent 
of  a  thorough  university  education.  The  father 
acted  as  the  boy's  tutor  and  constant  compan¬ 
ion,  allowing  Mill  to  work  in  the  same  room 
with  him  and  even  to  interrupt  him  as  he  was 
writing  his  History  of  India  or  his  articles  for 
the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica.  Mill  later  de¬ 
scribed  the  result  as  one  that  “made  me  appear 
as  a  ‘made’  or  manufactured  man,  having  had 
a  certain  impress  of  opinion  stamped  upon  me 
which  I  could  only  reproduce.” 

The  education  began  with  Greek  and  arith¬ 
metic  at  the  age  of  three.  By  the  time  he  was 
eight  Mill  had  read  through  the  whole  of 
Herodotus,  six  dialogues  of  Plato,  and  con¬ 
siderable  history.  Before  he  was  twelve  he  had 
studied  Euclid  and  algebra,  the  Greek  and 
Latin  poets,  and  some  English  poetry.  His  in¬ 
terest  in  history  continued,  and  he  even  at¬ 
tempted  writing  an  account  of  Roman  gov¬ 
ernment.  At  twelve  he  was  introduced  to  logic 
in  Aristotle’s  Organon  and  the  Latin  scholastic 
manuals  on  the  subject.  The  last  year  under 
his  father’s  direct  supervision,  his  thirteenth, 
was  devoted  to  political  economy;  the  son’s 
notes  later  served  the  elder  Mill  in  his  Elements 
of  Political  Econotny .  He  furthered  his  educa¬ 
tion  by  a  period  of  studies  with  his  father’s 
friends,  reading  law  with  Austin  and  economics 
with  Ricardo,  and  completed  it  by  himself 
with  Bentham’s  treatise  on  legislation,  which 
he  felt  gave  him  “a  creed,  a  doctrine,  a  philoso¬ 
phy  ...  a  religion”  and  made  a  “different  be¬ 
ing  of  him.” 

Although  Mill  never  actually  severed  rela¬ 
tions  with  his  father,  he  experienced,  at  the 
age  of  twenty,  a  “crisis”  in  his  mental  history. 


It  occurred  to  him  to  pose  the  question:  “Sup¬ 
pose  that  all  your  objects  in  life  were  realized; 
that  all  the  changes  in  institutions  and  opin¬ 
ions  which  you  are  looking  forward  to,  could 
be  completely  effected  at  this  very  instant: 
would  this  be  a  great  joy  and  happiness  to 
you?”  He  reported  that  “an  irrepressible 
self-consciousness  distinctly  answered,  ‘No,’  ” 
and  he  was  overcome  by  a  depression  which 
lasted  for  several  years.  The  first  break  in  his 
“gloom”  came  while  reading  Marmontel’s 
Memoires:  “I  .  .  .  came  to  the  passage  which 
relates  his  father’s  death,  the  distressed  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  family,  and  the  sudden  inspira¬ 
tion  by  which  he,  then  a  mere  boy,  felt  and 
made  them  feel  that  he  would  be  everything 
to  them— would  supply  the  place  of  all  that 
they  had  lost.”  He  was  moved  to  tears  by  the 
scene,  and  from  this  moment  his  “burden  grew 
lighter.” 

From  the  time  he  was  seventeen,  Mill  sup¬ 
ported  himself  by  working  for  the  East  India 
Company,  where  his  father  was  an  official. 
Although  he  began  nominally  as  a  clerk,  he 
was  soon  promoted  to  assistant-examiner,  and 
for  twenty  years,  from  his  father’s  death  in 
1836,  until  the  Company's  activities  were  tak¬ 
en  over  by  the  British  Government,  he  had 
charge  of  the  relations  with  the  Indian  states, 
which  gave  him  wide  practical  experience  in 
the  problems  of  government.  In  addition  to 
his  regular  employment,  he  took  part  in  many 
activities  tending  to  prepare  public  opinion 
for  legislative  reform.  He,  his  father,  and  their 
friends  formed  the  group  known  as  “philo¬ 
sophical  radicals,”  which  made  a  major  contri¬ 
bution  to  the  debates  leading  to  the  Reform 
Bill  of  i832.  Mill  was  active  in  exposing  what 
he  considered  departures  from  sound  prin¬ 
ciple  in  parliament  and  the  courts  of  justice. 
He  wrote  often  for  the  newspapers  friendly  to 
the  “radical”  cause,  helped  to  found  and  edit 
the  Westminster  Review  as  a  “radical”  organ, 
and  participated  in  several  reading  and  de¬ 
bating  societies,  devoted  to  the  discussion 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


264 

of  the  contemporary  intellectual  and  social 
problems. 

These  activities  did  not  prevent  him  from 
pursuing  his  own  intellectual  interests.  He 
edited  Bentham’s  Rationale  of  Judicial  Evi¬ 
dence.  He  studied  logic  and  science  with  the 
aim  of  reconciling  syllogistic  logic  with  the 
methods  of  inductive  science,  and  published 
his  System  of  Logic  (1843).  At  the  same  time 
he  pushed  his  inquiries  in  the  field  of  eco¬ 
nomics.  These  first  took  the  form  of  Essays  on 
Some  Unsettled  Questions  in  Political  Econ¬ 
omy  and  were  later  given  systematic  treatment 
in  the  Principles  of  Political  Economy  (1848). 

The  development  and  productivity  of  these 
years  he  attributed  to  his  relationship  with 
Mrs.  Harriet  Taylor,  who  became  his  wife  in 
1851.  Mill  had  known  her  for  twenty  years, 
since  shortly  after  his  “crisis,”  and  he  could 
never  praise  too  highly  her  influence  upon  his 
work.  Although  he  published  less  during  the 
seven  years  of  his  married  life  than  at  any 
other  period  of  his  career,  he  thought  out  and 
partly  wrote  many  of  his  important  works, 
including  the  essay  On  Liberty  (1859),  the 
Thoughts  on  Parliamentary  Reform ,  which 


later  led  to  the  Representative  Government 
(1861),  and  Utilitarianism  (1863).  He  attrib¬ 
uted  to  her  especially  his  understanding  of  the 
human  side  of  the  abstract  reforms  he  advo¬ 
cated.  After  her  death  he  stated:  “Her  memory 
is  to  me  a  religion,  and  her  approbation  the 
standard  by  which,  summing  up  as  it  does 
all  worthiness,  I  endeavour  to  regulate  my 
life.” 

Mill  devoted  a  large  part  of  his  last  years  di¬ 
rectly  to  political  activity.  I11  addition  to  his 
writings,  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the 
first  women’s  suffrage  society  and,  in  1865, 
consented  to  become  a  member  of  Parliament. 
Voting  with  the  radical  wing  of  the  Liberal 
Party,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  debates 
on  Disraeli’s  Reform  Bill  and  promoted  the 
measures  which  he  had  long  advocated,  such 
as  the  representation  of  women,  thereform  of 
London  government,  and  the  alteration  of 
land  tenure  in  Ireland.  Largely  because  of  his 
support  of  unpopular  measures,  he  was  de¬ 
feated  for  re-election.  He  retired  to  his  cot¬ 
tage  in  Avignon,  which  had  been  built  so  that 
he  might  be  close  to  the  grave  of  his  wife,  and 
died  there  May  8,  1873. 


CONTENTS:  ON  LIBERTY 


Biographical  Note  263 

1.  Introductory  267 

2.  Of  the  Liberty  of  Thought  and  Discus¬ 

sion  274 

3.  Of  Individuality,  as  one  of  the  Ele¬ 

ments  of  Well-being  293 

4.  Of  the  Limits  to  the  Authority  of  So¬ 

ciety  over  the  Individual  302 

5.  Applications  312 


ON  LIBERTY 


The  grand,  leading  principle,  towards  which  every  argument  unfolded  in 
these  pages  directly  converges,  is  the  absolute  and  essential  importance  of 
human  development  in  its  richest  diversity. 

Wilhelm  von  Humboldt:  Sphere  and  Duties  of  Government 


T 0  the  beloved  and  deplored  memory  of  her  who  was  the  inspirer ,  and  in  part  the 
author ,  of  all  that  is  best  in  my  writings — the  friend  and  wife  whose  exalted  sense  of 
truth  and  right  was  my  strongest  incitement ,  and  whose  approbation  was  my  chief  re¬ 
ward — I dedicate  this  volume .  Like  all  that  I  have  written  for  many  years,  it  belongs  as 
much  to  her  as  to  me;  but  the  work  as  it  stands  has  had,  in  a  very  insufficient  degree,  the 
inestimable  advantage  of  her  revision;  some  of  the  most  important  portions  having  been 
reserved  for  a  more  careful  re-examination,  which  they  are  now  never  destined  to  re¬ 
ceive.  Were  I  but  capable  of  interpreting  to  the  world  one  half  the  great  thoughts  and 
noble  feelings  which  are  buried  in  her  grave,  I  should  be  the  medium  of  a  greater  bene¬ 
fit  to  it,  than  is  ever  likely  to  arise  from  anything  that  I  can  write,  unprompted  and 
unassisted  by  her  all  but  unrivalled  wisdom. 


Chapter  i 

Introductory 

The  subject  of  this  Essay  is  not  the  so-called 
Liberty  of  the  Will,  so  unfortunately  opposed 
to  the  misnamed  doctrine  of  Philosophical 
Necessity;  but  Civil,  or  Social  Liberty:  the  na¬ 
ture  and  limits  of  the  power  which  can  be  le¬ 
gitimately  exercised  by  society  over  the  indi¬ 
vidual.  A  question  seldom  stated,  and  hardly 
ever  discussed,  in  general  terms,  but  which  pro¬ 
foundly  influences  the  practical  controversies 
of  the  age  by  its  latent  presence,  and  is  likely 
soon  to  make  itself  recognised  as  the  vital  ques¬ 
tion  of  the  future.  It  is  so  far  from  being  new, 
that,  in  a  certain  sense,  it  has  divided  man¬ 
kind,  almost  from  the  remotest  ages;  but  in  the 
stage  of  progress  into  which  the  more  civilised 
portions  of  the  species  have  now  entered,  it 
presents  itself  under  new  conditions,  and  re¬ 
quires  a  different  and  more  fundamental  treat¬ 
ment. 

267 


The  struggle  between  Liberty  and  Author¬ 
ity  is  the  most  conspicuous  feature  in  the  por¬ 
tions  of  history  with  which  we  are  earliest  fa¬ 
miliar,  particularly  in  that  of  Greece,  Rome, 
and  England.  But  in  old  times  this  contest  was 
between  subjects,  or  some  classes  of  subjects, 
and  the  Government.  By  liberty,  was  meant 
protection  against  the  tyranny  of  the  political 
rulers.  The  rulers  were  conceived  (except  in 
some  of  the  popular  governments  of  Greece) 
as  in  a  necessarily  antagonistic  position  to  the 
people  whom  they  ruled.  They  consisted  of  a 
governing  One,  or  a  governing  tribe  or  caste, 
who  derived  their  authority  from  inheritance 
or  conquest,  who,  at  all  events,  did  not  hold 
it  at  the  pleasure  of  the  governed,  and  whose 
supremacy  men  did  not  venture,  perhaps  did 
not  desire,  to  contest,  whatever  precautions 
might  be  taken  against  its  oppressive  exercise. 
Their  power  was  regarded  as  necessary,  but 
also  as  highly  dangerous;  as  a  weapon  which 
they  would  attempt  to  use  against  their  sub- 


ON  LIBERTY 


jects,  no  less  than  against  external  enemies.  To 
prevent  the  weaker  members  of  the  commu¬ 
nity  from  being  preyed  upon  by  innumerable 
vultures,  it  was  needful  that  there  should  be 
an  animal  of  prey  stronger  than  the  rest,  com¬ 
missioned  to  keep  them  down.  But  as  the  king 
of  the  vultures  would  be  no  less  bent  upon 
preying  on  the  flock  than  any  of  the  minor 
harpies,  it  w’as  indispensable  to  be  in  a  per¬ 
petual  attitude  of  defence  against  his  beak 
and  claws.  The  aim.  therefore,  of  patriots  was 
to  set  limits  to  the  power  which  the  ruler 
should  be  suffered  to  exercise  over  the  com¬ 
munity;  and  this  limitation  was  what  they 
meant  by  liberty.  It  was  attempted  in  two  ways. 
First,  by  obtaining  a  recognition  of  certain  im¬ 
munities,  called  political  liberties  or  rights, 
which  it  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  breach  of 
duty  in  the  ruler  to  infringe,  and  which  if  he 
did  infringe,  specific  resistance,  or  general  re¬ 
bellion,  was  held  to  be  justifiable.  A  second, 
and  generally  a  later  expedient,  was  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  constitutional  checks,  by  which 
the  consent  of  the  community,  or  of  a  body  of 
some  sort,  supposed  to  represent  its  interests, 
was  made  a  necessary  condition  to  some  of  the 
more  important  acts  of  the  governing  power. 
To  the  first  of  these  modes  of  limitation,  the 
ruling  power,  in  most  European  countries,  was 
compelled,  more  or  less,  to  submit.  It  was  not 
so  with  the  second;  and,  to  attain  this,  or  when 
already  in  some  degree  possessed,  to  attain  it 
more  completely,  became  everywhere  the  prin¬ 
cipal  object  of  the  lovers  of  liberty.  And  so 
long  as  mankind  were  content  to  combat  one 
enemy  by  another,  and  to  be  ruled  by  a  mas¬ 
ter,  on  condition  of  being  guaranteed  more  or 
less  efficaciously  against  his  tyranny,  they  did 
not  carry  their  aspirations  beyond  this  point. 

A  time,  however,  came,  in  the  progress  of 
human  affairs,  when  men  ceased  to  think  it  a 
necessity  of  nature  that  their  governors  should 
be  an  independent  power,  opposed  in  interest 
to  themselves.  It  appeared  to  them  much  bet¬ 
ter  that  the  various  magistrates  of  the  State 
should  be  their  tenants  or  delegates,  revocable 
at  their  pleasure.  In  that  way  alone,  it  seemed, 
could  they  have  complete  security  that  the 
powers  of  government  would  never  be  abused 
to  their  disadvantage.  By  degrees  this  new  de¬ 
mand  for  elective  and  temporary  rulers  be¬ 
came  the  prominent  object  of  the  exertions  of 
the  popular  party,  wherever  any  such  party 
existed;  and  superseded,  to  a  considerable  ex¬ 
tent,  the  previous  efforts  to  limit  the  power 
of  rulers.  As  the  struggle  proceeded  for  making 


the  ruling  power  emanate  from  the  periodical 
choice  of  the  ruled,  some  persons  began  to 
think  that  too  much  importance  had  been  at¬ 
tached  to  the  limitation  of  the  power  itself. 
That  (it  might  seem)  was  a  resource  against 
rulers  whose  interests  were  habitually  opposed 
to  those  of  the  people.  What  was  now  wanted 
was,  that  the  rulers  should  be  identified  with 
the  people;  that  their  interest  and  will  should 
be  the  interest  and  will  of  the  nation.  The  na¬ 
tion  did  not  need  to  be  protected  against  its 
own  will.  There  was  no  fear  of  its  tyrannising 
over  itself.  Let  the  rulers  be  effectually  re¬ 
sponsible  to  it.  promptly  removable  by  it.  and 
it  could  afford  to  trust  them  with  power  of 
which  it  could  itself  dictate  the  use  to  be  made. 
Their  power  was  but  the  nation’s  own  power, 
concentrated,  and  in  a  form  convenient  for 
exercise.  This  mode  of  thought,  or  rather  per¬ 
haps  of  feeling,  was  common  among  the  last 
generation  of  European  liberalism,  in  the  Con¬ 
tinental  section  of  which  it  still  apparently 
predominates.  Those  who  admit  any  limit  to 
what  a  government  may  do,  except  in  the  case 
of  such  governments  as  they  think  ought  not 
to  exist,  stand  out  as  brilliant  exceptions 
among  the  political  thinkers  of  the  Continent. 
A  similar  tone  of  sentiment  might  by  this  time 
have  been  prevalent  in  our  own  country,  if 
the  circumstances  which  for  a  time  encouraged 
it,  had  continued  unaltered. 

But,  in  political  and  philosophical  theories, 
as  well  as  in  persons,  success  discloses  faults 
and  infirmities  which  failure  might  have  con¬ 
cealed  from  observation.  The  notion,  that  the 
people  have  no  need  to  limit  their  power  o\ei 
themselves,  might  seem  axiomatic,  when  pop¬ 
ular  government  was  a  thing  only  dreamed 
about,  or  read  of  as  having  existed  at  some 
distant  period  of  the  past.  Neither  was  that 
notion  necessarily  disturbed  by  such  temporary 
aberrations  as  those  of  the  French  Revolution, 
the  worst  of  which  were  the  work  of  a  usurping 
few,  and  which,  in  any  case,  belonged,  not  to 
the  permanent  working  of  popular  institu¬ 
tions,  but  to  a  sudden  and  convulsive  outbreak 
against  monarchical  and  aristocratic  despot¬ 
ism.  In  time,  however,  a  democratic  republic 
came  to  occupy  a  large  portion  of  the  earth’s 
surface,  and  made  itself  felt  as  one  of  the  most 
powerful  members  of  the  community  of  na¬ 
tions;  and  elective  and  responsible  govern 
ment  became  subject  to  the  observations  and 
criticisms  which  wait  upon  a  great  existing 
fact.  It  was  now  perceived  that  such  phrases 
as  "self-government,”  and  "the  power  of  the 


INTRODUCTORY  269 


people  over  themselves,”  do  not  express  the 
true  state  of  the  case.  The  “people”  who  ex¬ 
ercise  the  power  are  not  always  the  same  peo¬ 
ple  with  those  over  whom  it  is  exercised;  and 
the  “self-government”  spoken  of  is  not  the 
government  of  each  by  himself,  but  of  each  by 
all  the  rest.  The  will  of  the  people,  moreover, 
practically  means  the  will  of  the  most  numer¬ 
ous  or  the  most  active  part  of  the  people;  the 
majority,  or  those  who  succeed  in  making 
themselves  accepted  as  the  majority;  the  peo¬ 
ple,  consequently  may  desire  to  oppress  a  part 
of  their  number;  and  precautions  are  as  much 
needed  against  this  as  against  any  other  abuse 
of  power.  The  limitation,  therefore,  of  the 
power  of  government  over  individuals  loses 
none  of  its  importance  when  the  holders  of 
power  are  regularly  accountable  to  the  com¬ 
munity,  that  is,  to  the  strongest  party  therein. 
This  view  of  things,  recommending  itself 
equally  to  the  intelligence  of  thinkers  and  to 
the  inclination  of  those  important  classes  in 
European  society  to  whose  real  or  supposed 
interests  democracy  is  adverse,  has  had  no  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  establishing  itself;  and  in  political 
speculations  “the  tyranny  of  the  majority”  is 
now  generally  included  among  the  evils  against 
which  society  requires  to  be  on  its  guard. 

Like  other  tyrannies,  the  tyranny  of  the  ma¬ 
jority  was  at  first,  and  is  still  vulgarly,  held  in 
dread,  chiefly  as  operating  through  the  acts 
of  the  public  authorities.  But  reflecting  per¬ 
sons  perceived  that  when  society  is  itself  the 
tyrant— society  collectively  over  the  separate 
individuals  who  compose  it— its  means  of  tyr¬ 
annising  are  not  restricted  to  the  acts  which 
it  may  do  by  the  hands  of  its  political  function¬ 
aries.  Society  can  and  does  execute  its  own 
mandates:  and  if  it  issues  wrrong  mandates  in¬ 
stead  of  right,  or  any  mandates  at  all  in  things 
with  wThich  it  ought  not  to  meddle,  it  practises 
a  social  tyranny  more  formidable  than  many 
kinds  of  political  oppression,  since,  though  not 
usually  upheld  by  such  extreme  penalties,  it 
leaves  fewer  means  of  escape,  penetrating 
much  more  deeply  into  the  details  of  life,  and 
enslaving  the  soul  itself.  Protection,  therefore, 
against  the  tyranny  of  the  magistrate  is  not 
enough:  there  needs  protection  also  against 
the  tyranny  of  the  prevailing  opinion  and 
feeling;  against  the  tendency  of  society  to  im¬ 
pose,  by  other  means  than  civil  penalties,  its 
own  ideas  and  practices  as  rules  of  conduct  on 
those  who  dissent  from  them;  to  fetter  the  de¬ 
velopment,  and,  if  possible,  prevent  the  for¬ 
mation,  of  any  individuality  not  in  harmony 


with  its  wTays,  and  compels  all  characters  to 
fashion  themselves  upon  the  model  of  its  own. 
There  is  a  limit  to  the  legitimate  interference 
of  collective  opinion  wdth  individual  inde¬ 
pendence:  and  to  find  that  limit,  and  main¬ 
tain  it  against  encroachment,  is  as  indispensa¬ 
ble  to  a  good  condition  of  human  affairs,  as 
protection  against  political  despotism. 

But  though  this  proposition  is  not  likely  to 
be  contested  in  general  terms,  the  practical 
question,  wrhere  to  place  the  limit— howr  to 
make  the  fitting  adjustment  between  individ¬ 
ual  independence  and  social  control— is  a  sub¬ 
ject  on  which  nearly  everything  remains  to  be 
done.  All  that  makes  existence  valuable  to  any 
one,  depends  on  the  enforcement  of  restraints 
upon  the  actions  of  other  people.  Some  rules 
of  conduct,  therefore,  must  be  imposed,  by 
lawr  in  the  first  place,  and  by  opinion  on  many 
things  which  are  not  fit  subjects  for  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  law.  What  these  rules  should  be  is  the 
principal  question  in  human  affairs;  but  if  wTe 
except  a  fewT  of  the  most  obvious  cases,  it  is  one 
of  those  wdiich  least  progress  has  been  made  in 
resolving.  No  twTo  ages,  and  scarcely  any  twTo 
countries,  have  decided  it  alike;  and  the  de¬ 
cision  of  one  age  or  country  is  a  w’onder  to  an¬ 
other.  Yet  the  people  of  any  given  age  and 
country  no  more  suspect  any  difficulty  in  it, 
than  if  it  wrere  a  subject  on  which  mankind 
had  always  been  agreed.  The  rules  which  ob¬ 
tain  among  themselves  appear  to  them  self- 
evident  and  self-justifying. 

This  all  but  universal  illusion  is  one  of  the 
examples  of  the  magical  influence  of  custom, 
which  is  not  only,  as  the  proverb  says,  a  second 
nature,  but  is  continually  mistaken  for  the 
first.  The  effect  of  custom,  in  preventing  any 
misgiving  respecting  the  rules  of  conduct  w  hich 
mankind  impose  on  one  another,  is  all  the 
more  complete  because  the  subject  is  one  on 
which  it  is  not  generally  considered  necessary 
that  reasons  should  be  given,  either  by  one 
person  to  others  or  by  each  to  himself.  People 
are  accustomed  to  believe,  and  have  been  en¬ 
couraged  in  the  belief  by  some  wTho  aspire  to 
the  character  of  philosophers,  that  their  feel¬ 
ings,  on  subjects  of  this  nature,  are  better  than 
reasons,  and  render  reasons  unnecessary.  The 
practical  principle  wThich  guides  them  to  their 
opinions  on  the  regulation  of  human  conduct, 
is  the  feeling  in  each  person’s  mind  that  every¬ 
body  should  be  required  to  act  as  he,  and  those 
wfith  wThom  he  sympathises,  would  like  them  to 
act.  No  one,  indeed,  acknowdedges  to  himself 
that  his  standard  of  judgment  is  his  own  lik- 


ON  LIBERTY 


270 

ing;  but  an  opinion  on  a  point  of  conduct, 
not  supported  by  reasons,  can  only  count  as 
one  person’s  preference;  and  if  the  reasons, 
when  given,  are  a  mere  appeal  to  a  similar 
preference  felt  by  other  people,  it  is  still  only 
many  people’s  liking  instead  of  one.  To  an 
ordinary  man,  however,  his  own  preference, 
thus  supported,  is  not  only  a  perfectly  satis¬ 
factory  reason,  but  the  only  one  he  generally 
has  for  any  of  his  notions  of  morality,  taste,  or 
propriety,  which  are  not  expressly  written  in 
his  religious  creed;  and  his  chief  guide  in  the 
interpretation  even  of  that.  Men  s  opinions, 
accordingly,  on  what  is  laudable  or  blamable, 
are  affected  by  all  the  multifarious  causes 
which  influence  their  wishes  in  regard  to  the 
conduct  of  others,  and  which  are  as  numerous 
as  those  which  determine  their  wishes  on  any 
other  subject.  Sometimes  their  reason— at  other 
times  their  prejudices  or  superstitions:  often 
their  social  affections,  not  seldom  their  anti¬ 
social  ones,  their  envy  or  jealousy,  their  ar¬ 
rogance  or  contemptuousness:  but  most  com¬ 
monly  their  desires  or  fears  for  themselves— 
their  legitimate  or  illegitimate  self-interest. 

Wherever  there  is  an  ascendant  class,  a  large 
portion  of  the  morality  of  the  country  ema¬ 
nates  from  its  class  interests,  and  its  feelings  of 
class  superiority.  The  morality  between  Spar¬ 
tans  and  Helots,  between  planters  and  negroes, 
between  princes  and  subjects,  between  nobles 
and  roturicrs,  between  men  and  women,  has 
been  for  the  most  part  the  creation  of  these 
class  interests  and  feelings:  and  the  sentiments 
thus  generated  react  in  turn  upon  the  moral 
feelings  of  the  members  of  the  ascendant  class, 
in  their  relations  among  themselves.  Where,  on 
the  other  hand,  a  class,  formerly  ascendant, has 
lost  its  ascendancy,  or  where  its  ascendancy  is 
unpopular,  the  prevailing  moral  sentiments 
frequently  bear  theimpressof  an  impatient  dis¬ 
like  of  superiority.  Anothergrand  determining 
principle  of  the  rules  of  conduct,  both  in  act 
and  forbearance,  which  have  been  enforced  by 
law  or  opinion,  has  been  the  servility  of  man¬ 
kind  towards  the  supposed  preferences  or  aver¬ 
sions  of  their  temporal  masters  or  of  their  gods. 
This  servility,  though  essentially  selfish,  is  not 
hypocrisy;  it  gives  rise  to  perfectly  genuine  sen¬ 
timents  of  abhorrence;  it  made  men  burn  ma¬ 
gicians  and  heretics.  Among  so  many  baser  in¬ 
fluences,  the  general  and  obvious  interests  of 
society  have  of  course  had  a  share,  and  a  large 
one,  in  the  direction  of  the  moral  sentiments: 
less,  however,  as  a  matter  of  reason,  and  on 
their  own  account,  than  as  a  consequence  of 


the  sympathies  and  antipathies  which  grew  out 
of  them:  and  sympathies  and  antipathies  which 
had  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  the  interests  of 
society,  have  made  themselves  felt  in  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  moralities  with  quite  as  great  force. 

The  likings  and  dislikings  of  society,  or  of 
some  powerful  portion  of  it,  are  thus  the  main 
thing  which  has  practically  determined  the 
rules  laid  down  for  general  observance,  under 
the  penalties  of  law  or  opinion.  And  in  gen¬ 
eral,  those  who  have  been  in  advance  of  so¬ 
ciety  in  thought  and  feeling,  have  left  this  con¬ 
dition  of  things  unassailed  in  principle,  how¬ 
ever  they  may  have  come  into  conflict  with  it 
in  some  of  its  details.  They  have  occupied 
themselves  rather  in  inquiring  what  things 
society  ought  to  like  or  dislike,  than  in  ques¬ 
tioning  whether  its  likings  or  dislikings  should 
be  a  law  to  individuals.  They  preferred  en¬ 
deavouring  to  alter  the  feelings  of  mankind  on 
the  particular  points  on  which  they  were  them¬ 
selves  heretical,  rather  than  make  common 
cause  in  defence  of  freedom,  with  heretics 
generally.  The  only  case  in  which  the  higher 
ground  has  been  taken  on  principle  and  main¬ 
tained  with  consistency,  by  any  but  an  indi¬ 
vidual  here  and  there,  is  that  of  religious  be¬ 
lief:  a  case  instructive  in  many  ways,  and  not 
least  so  as  forming  a  most  striking  instance  of 
the  fallibility  of  what  is  called  the  moral  sense: 
for  the  odium  theologicum ,  in  a  sincere  bigot, 
is  one  of  the  most  unequivocal  cases  of  moral 
feeling.  Those  who  first  broke  the  yoke  of  what 
called  itself  the  Universal  Church,  were  in 
general  as  little  willing  to  permit  difference 
of  religious  opinion  as  that  church  itself.  But 
when  the  heat  of  the  conflict  was  over,  without 
giving  a  complete  victory  to  any  party,  and 
each  church  or  sect  was  reduced  to  limit  its 
hopes  to  retaining  possession  of  the  ground  it 
already  occupied;  minorities,  seeing  that  they 
had  no  chance  of  becoming  majorities,  were 
under  the  necessity  of  pleading  to  those  whom 
they  could  not  convert,  for  permission  to  dif¬ 
fer.  It  is  accordingly  on  this  battle  field,  al¬ 
most  solely,  that  the  rights  of  the  individual 
against  society  have  been  asserted  on  broad 
grounds  of  principle,  and  the  claim  of  society 
to  exercise  authority  over  dissentients  openly 
controverted.  The  great  writers  to  whom  the 
world  owes  what  religious  liberty  it  possesses, 
have  mostly  asserted  freedom  of  conscience  as 
an  indefeasible  right,  and  denied  absolutely 
that  a  human  being  is  accountable  to  others 
for  his  religious  belief.  ^  ct  so  natural  to  man¬ 
kind  is  intolerance  in  whatever  they  really  care 


INTRODUCTORY  271 


about,  that  religious  freedom  has  hardly  any¬ 
where  been  practically  realised,  except  where 
religious  indifference,  which  dislikes  to  have  its 
peace  disturbed  by  theological  quarrels,  has 
added  its  weight  to  the  scale.  In  the  minds  of 
almost  all  religious  persons,  even  in  the  most 
tolerant  countries,  the  duty  of  toleration  is  ad¬ 
mitted  with  tacit  reserves.  One  person  will 
bear  with  dissent  in  matters  of  church  govern¬ 
ment.  but  not  of  dogma;  another  can  tolerate 
everybody,  short  of  a  Papist  or  a  Unitarian; 
another  every  one  who  believes  in  revealed  re¬ 
ligion;  a  few  extend  their  charity  a  little  fur¬ 
ther,  but  stop  at  the  belief  in  a  God  and  in  a 
future  state.  Wherever  the  sentiment  of  the 
majority  is  still  genuine  and  intense,  it  is  found 
to  have  abated  little  of  its  claim  to  be  obeyed. 

In  England,  from  the  peculiar  circumstances 
of  our  political  history,  though  the  yoke  of 
opinion  is  perhaps  heavier,  that  of  law  is  light¬ 
er,  than  in  most  other  countries  of  Europe; 
and  there  is  considerable  jealousy  of  direct 
interference,  by  the  legislative  or  the  executive 
power,  with  private  conduct;  not  so  much 
from  any  just  regard  for  the  independence  of 
the  individual,  as  from  the  still  subsisting  habit 
of  looking  on  the  government  as  representing 
an  opposite  interest  to  the  public.  The  ma¬ 
jority  have  not  yet  learnt  to  feel  the  power  of 
the  government  their  power,  or  its  opinions 
their  opinions.  When  they  do  so,  individual 
liberty  will  probably  be  as  much  exposed  to 
invasion  from  the  government,  as  it  already  is 
from  public  opinion.  But,  as  yet,  there  is  a 
considerable  amount  of  feeling  ready  to  be 
called  forth  against  any  attempt  of  the  law  to 
control  individuals  in  things  in  which  they 
have  not  hitherto  been  accustomed  to  be  con¬ 
trolled  by  it;  and  this  with  very  little  discrimi¬ 
nation  as  to  whether  the  matter  is,  or  is  not, 
within  the  legitimate  sphere  of  legal  control; 
insomuch  that  the  feeling,  highly  salutary  on 
the  whole,  is  perhaps  quite  as  often  misplaced 
as  well  grounded  in  the  particular  instances  of 
its  application.  There  is,  in  fact,  no  recognised 
principle  by  which  the  propriety  or  impro¬ 
priety  of  government  interference  is  custom¬ 
arily  tested.  People  decide  according  to  their 
personal  preferences.  Some,  whenever  they  see 
any  good  to  be  done,  or  evil  to  be  remedied, 
would  willingly  instigate  the  government  to 
undertake  the  business;  while  others  prefer  to 
bear  almost  any  amount  of  social  evil,  rather 
than  add  one  to  the  departments  of  human  in¬ 
terests  amenable  to  governmental  control.  And 
men  range  themselves  on  one  or  the  other  side 


in  any  particular  case,  according  to  this  gen¬ 
eral  direction  of  their  sentiments;  or  according 
to  the  degree  of  interest  which  they  feel  in  the 
particular  thing  which  it  is  proposed  that  the 
government  should  do,  or  according  to  the  be¬ 
lief  they  entertain  that  the  government  would, 
or  would  not,  do  it  in  the  manner  they  prefer; 
but  very  rarely  on  account  of  any  opinion  to 
which  they  consistently  adhere,  as  to  what 
things  are  fit  to  be  done  by  a  government.  And 
it  seems  to  me  that  in  consequence  of  this 
absence  of  rule  or  principle,  one  side  is  at 
present  as  often  wrong  as  the  other;  the  inter¬ 
ference  of  government  is,  with  about  equal 
frequency,  improperly  invoked  and  improp¬ 
erly  condemned. 

The  object  of  this  Essay  is  to  assert  one  very 
simple  principle,  as  entitled  to  govern  abso¬ 
lutely  the  dealings  of  society  with  the  indi¬ 
vidual  in  the  way  of  compulsion  and  control, 
whether  the  means  used  be  physical  force  in 
the  form  of  legal  penalties,  or  the  moral  coer¬ 
cion  of  public  opinion.  That  principle  is,  that 
the  sole  end  for  which  mankind  are  warrant¬ 
ed,  individually  or  collectively,  in  interfering 
with  the  liberty  of  action  of  any  of  their  num¬ 
ber,  is  self-protection.  That  the  only  purpose 
for  which  power  can  be  rightfully  exercised 
over  any  member  of  a  civilised  community, 
against  his  will,  is  to  prevent  harm  to  others. 
His  own  good,  either  physical  or  moral,  is  not 
a  sufficient  warrant.  He  cannot  rightfully  be 
compelled  to  do  or  forbear  because  it  will  be 
better  for  him  to  do  so,  because  it  will  make 
him  happier,  because,  in  theopinionsof others, 
to  do  so  would  be  wise,  or  even  right.  These  are 
good  reasons  for  remonstrating  with  him,  or 
reasoning  with  him,  or  persuading  him,  or  en¬ 
treating  him,  but  not  for  compelling  him,  or 
visiting  him  with  any  evil  in  case  he  do  other¬ 
wise.  To  justify  that,  the  conduct  from  which 
it  is  desired  to  deter  him  must  be  calculated  to 
produce  evil  to  some  one  else.  The  only  part 
of  the  conduct  of  any  one,  for  which  he  is 
amenable  to  society,  is  that  which  concerns 
others.  In  the  part  which  merely  concerns  him¬ 
self,  his  independence  is,  of  right,  absolute. 
Over  himself,  over  his  own  body  and  mind,  the 
individual  is  sovereign. 

It  is,  perhaps,  hardly  necessary  to  say  that 
this  doctrine  is  meant  to  apply  only  to  human 
beings  in  the  maturity  of  their  faculties.  We 
are  not  speaking  of  children,  or  of  young  per¬ 
sons  below  the  age  wrhich  the  law  may  fix  as 
that  of  manhood  or  womanhood.  Those  who 
are  still  in  a  slate  to  require  being  taken  care 


ON  LIBERTY 


272 

of  by  others,  must  be  protected  against  their 
own  actions  as  well  as  against  external  injury 
For  the  same  reason,  we  may  leave  out  of  con¬ 
sideration  those  backward  states  of  society  in 
which  the  race  itself  may  be  considered  as  in 
its  nonage.  The  early  difficulties  in  the  way  of 
spontaneous  progress  are  so  great,  that  there  is 
seldom  any  choice  of  means  for  overcoming 
them;  and  a  ruler  full  of  the  spirit  of  improve¬ 
ment  is  warranted  in  the  use  of  any  expedi¬ 
ents  that  will  attain  an  end,  perhaps  otherwise 
unattainable.  Despotism  is  a  legitimate  mode 
of  government  in  dealing  with  barbarians, 
provided  the  end  be  their  improvement,  and 
the  means  justified  by  actually  effecting  that 
end.  Liberty,  as  a  principle,  has  no  applica¬ 
tion  to  any  state  of  things  anterior  to  the  time 
when  mankind  have  become  capable  of  being 
improved  by  free  and  equal  discussion.  Until 
then,  there  is  nothing  for  them  but  implicit 
obedience  to  an  Akbar  or  a  Charlemagne,  if 
they  are  so  fortunate  as  to  find  one.  But  as 
soon  as  mankind  have  attained  the  capacity 
of  being  guided  to  their  own  improvement  by 
conviction  or  persuasion  (a  period  long  since 
reached  in  all  nations  with  whom  we  need 
here  concern  ourselves),  compulsion,  either  in 
the  direct  form  or  in  that  of  pains  and  penal¬ 
ties  for  non-compliance,  is  no  longer  admis¬ 
sible  as  a  means  to  their  own  good,  and  justifi¬ 
able  only  for  the  security  of  others. 

It  is  proper  to  state  that  1  forego  any  ad¬ 
vantage  which  could  be  derived  to  my  argu¬ 
ment  from  the  idea  of  abstract  right,  as  a  thing 
independent  of  utility.  1  regard  utility  as  the 
ultimate  appeal  on  all  ethical  questions;  but  it 
must  be  utility  in  the  largest  sense,  grounded 
on  the  permanent  interests  of  a  man  as  a  pro¬ 
gressive  being.  Those  interests,  I  contend,  au¬ 
thorise  the  subjection  of  individual  spontane¬ 
ity  to  external  control,  only  in  respect  to  those 
actions  of  each,  which  concern  the  interest  of 
other  people.  If  any'  one  does  an  act  huitful  to 
others,  there  is  a  prima  facie  case  for  punishing 
him,  by  law,  or,  where  legal  penalties  are  not 
safely  applicable,  by  general  disapprobation. 

I  here  are  also  many  positive  acts  for  the  bene¬ 
fit  of  others,  which  he  may  rightfully  be  com¬ 
pelled  to  perform;  such  as  to  give  evidence  in 
a  court  of  justice;  to  bear  his  fait  share  in  the 
common  defence,  or  in  any  other  joint  work 
necessary  to  the  interest  of  the  society  of  which 
he  enjoys  the  protection;  and  to  perfoim  cer¬ 
tain  acts  of  individual  beneficence,  such  as 
saving  a  fellow  creature's  life,  or  interposing 
to  protect  the  defenceless  against  ill-usage, 


things  which  whenever  it  is  obviously  a  man  s 
duty  to  do,  he  may  rightfully  be  made  re¬ 
sponsible  to  society  for  not  doing.  A  person 
may  cause  evil  to  others  not  only  by  his  actions 
but  by  his  inaction,  and  in  either  case  he  is 
justly  accountable  to  them  for  the  injury.  The 
latter  case,  it  is  true,  requires  a  much  more 
cautious  exercise  of  compulsion  than  the  form¬ 
er.  To  make  any  one  answerable  for  doing 
evil  to  others  is  the  rule;  to  make  him  answer- 
able  for  not  preventing  evil  is,  comparatively 
speaking,  the  exception.  Yet  there  are  many 
cases  clear  enough  and  grave  enough  to  justify 
that  exception.  In  all  things  which  regard  the 
external  relations  of  the  individual,  he  is  de 
jure  amenable  to  those  whose  interests  are  con¬ 
cerned,  and,  if  need  be,  to  society  as  their  pro¬ 
tector.  There  are  often  good  reasons  for  not 
holding  him  to  the  responsibility;  but  these 
reasons  must  arise  from  the  special  expedien¬ 
cies  of  the  case:  either  because  it  is  a  kind  of 
case  in  which  he  is  on  the  whole  likely  to  act 
better,  when  left  to  his  own  discretion,  than 
when  controlled  in  any  way  in  which  society 
have  it  in  their  power  to  control  him;  or  be¬ 
cause  the  attempt  to  exercise  control  would 
produce  other  evils,  greater  than  those  which 
it  would  prevent.  When  such  reasons  as  these 
preclude  the  enforcement  of  responsibility,  the 
conscience  of  the  agent  himself  should  step 
into  the  vacant  judgment  seat,  and  protect 
those  interests  of  others  which  have  no  ex¬ 
ternal  protection;  judging  himself  all  the  more 
rigidly,  because  the  case  does  not  admit  of  his 
being  made  accountable  to  the  judgment  of 
his  fellow  creatures. 

But  there  is  a  sphere  of  action  in  which  so¬ 
ciety,  as  distinguished  from  the  individual, 
has,  if  any.  only  an  indirect  interest;  compre¬ 
hending  all  that  portion  of  a  person’s  life  and 
conduct  which  allects  only  himself,  or  if  it 
also  affects  others,  only  with  their  free,  volun¬ 
tary,  and  undeceived  consent  and  participa¬ 
tion.  When  I  say  only  himself,  I  mean  directly, 
and  in  the  first  instance;  for  whatever  affects 
himself,  may  affect  others  through  himself; 
and  the  objection  which  may  be  grounded  on 
this  contingency,  will  receive  consideration  in 
the  sequel.  This,  then,  is  the  appropriate  re¬ 
gion  of  human  liberty.  It  comprises,  first,  the 
inward  domain  of  consciousness;  demanding 
liberty  of  conscience  in  the  most  comprehen¬ 
sive  sense;  liberty  of  thought  and  feeling,  ab¬ 
solute  freedom  of  opinion  and  sentiment  on 
all  subjects,  practical  or  speculative,  scientific, 
moral,  or  theological.  I  he  libel  ty  of  expicss- 


INTRODUCTORY  273 


ing  and  publishing  opinions  may  seem  to  fall 
under  a  different  principle,  since  it  belongs  to 
that  part  of  the  conduct  of  an  individual  which 
concerns  other  people;  but,  being  almost  of 
as  much  importance  as  the  liberty  of  thought 
itself,  and  resting  in  great  part  on  the  same 
reasons,  is  practically  inseparable  from  it. 
Secondly,  the  principle  requires  liberty  of 
tastes  and  pursuits;  of  framing  the  plan  of  our 
life  to  suit  our  own  character;  of  doing  as  we 
like,  subject  to  such  consequences  as  may  fol¬ 
low:  without  impediment  from  our  fellow 
creatures,  so  long  as  what  we  do  does  not  harm 
them,  even  though  they  should  think  our  con¬ 
duct  foolish,  perverse,  or  wrong.  Thirdly,  from 
this  liberty  of  each  individual,  follows  the  lib¬ 
erty,  within  the  same  limits,  of  combination 
among  individuals;  freedom  to  unite,  for  any 
purpose  not  involving  harm  to  others:  the  per¬ 
sons  combining  being  supposed  to  be  of  full 
age,  and  not  forced  or  deceived. 

No  society  in  which  these  liberties  are  not, 
on  the  whole,  respected,  is  free,  whatever  may 
be  its  form  of  government;  and  none  is  com¬ 
pletely  free  in  which  they  do  not  exist  absolute 
and  unqualified.  The  only  freedom  which  de¬ 
serves  the  name,  is  that  of  pursuing  our  own 
good  in  our  own  way,  so  long  as  we  do  not 
attempt  to  deprive  others  of  theirs,  or  impede 
their  efforts  to  obtain  it.  Each  is  the  proper 
guardian  of  his  own  health,  whether  bodily, 
or  mental  and  spiritual.  Mankind  are  greater 
gainers  by  suffering  each  other  to  live  as  seems 
good  to  themselves,  than  by  compelling  each 
to  live  as  seems  good  to  the  rest. 

Though  this  doctrine  is  anything  but  new, 
and,  to  some  persons,  may  have  the  air  of  a  tru¬ 
ism,  there  is  no  doctrine  which  stands  more  di¬ 
rectly  opposed  to  the  general  tendency  of  ex¬ 
isting  opinion  and  practice.  Society  has  ex¬ 
pended  fully  as  much  effort  in  the  attempt 
(according  to  its  lights)  to  compel  people  to 
conform  to  its  notions  of  personal  as  of  so¬ 
cial  excellence.  The  ancient  commonwealths 
thought  themselves  entitled  to  practise,  and 
the  ancient  philosophers  countenanced,  the 
regulation  of  every  part  of  private  conduct  by 
public  authority,  on  the  ground  that  the  State 
had  a  deep  interest  in  the  whole  bodily  and 
mental  discipline  of  every  one  of  its  citizens; 
a  mode  of  thinking  which  may  have  been  ad¬ 
missible  in  small  republics  surrounded  by 
powerful  enemies,  in  constant  peril  of  being 
subverted  by  foreign  attack  or  internal  com¬ 
motion,  and  to  which  even  a  short  interval  of 
relaxed  energy  and  self-command  might  so 


easily  be  fatal  that  they  could  not  afford  to 
wait  for  the  salutary  permanent  effects  of  free¬ 
dom.  In  the  modern  world,  the  greater  size  of 
political  communities,  and,  above  all,  the  sep¬ 
aration  between  spiritual  and  temporal  au¬ 
thority  (which  placed  the  direction  of  men’s 
consciences  in  other  hands  than  those  which 
controlled  their  worldly  affairs),  prevented  so 
great  an  interference  by  law  in  the  details  of 
private  life;  but  the  engines  of  moral  repres¬ 
sion  have  been  wielded  more  strenuously 
against  divergence  from  the  reigning  opinion 
in  self-regarding,  than  even  in  social  matters; 
religion,  the  most  powerful  of  the  elements 
which  have  entered  into  the  formation  of  mor¬ 
al  feeling,  having  almost  always  been  governed 
either  by  the  ambition  of  a  hierarchy,  seeking 
control  over  every  department  of  human  con¬ 
duct,  or  by  the  spirit  of  Puritanism.  And  some 
of  those  modern  reformers  who  have  placed 
themselves  in  strongest  opposition  to  the  re¬ 
ligions  of  the  past,  have  been  noway  behind 
either  churches  or  sects  in  their  assertion  of 
the  right  of  spiritual  domination:  M.  Comte, 
in  particular,  whose  social  system,  as  unfolded 
in  his  Systeme  de  Politique  Positive ,  aims  at 
establishing  (though  by  moral  more  than  by 
legal  appliances)  a  despotism  of  society  over 
the  individual,  surpassing  anything  contem¬ 
plated  in  the  political  ideal  of  the  most  rigid  dis¬ 
ciplinarian  among  the  ancient  philosophers. 

Apart  from  the  peculiar  tenets  of  individual 
thinkers,  there  is  also  in  the  world  at  large  an 
increasing  inclination  to  stretch  unduly  the 
powers  of  society  over  the  individual,  both  by 
the  force  of  opinion  and  even  by  that  of  legis¬ 
lation;  and  as  the  tendency  of  all  the  changes 
taking  place  in  the  world  is  to  strengthen  so¬ 
ciety,  and  diminish  the  power  of  the  individu¬ 
al,  this  encroachment  is  not  one  of  the  evils 
which  tend  spontaneously  to  disappear,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  to  grow  more  and  more  for¬ 
midable.  The  disposition  of  mankind,  whether 
as  rulers  or  as  fellow-citizens,  to  impose  their 
own  opinions  and  inclinations  as  a  rule  of  con¬ 
duct  on  others,  is  so  energetically  supported 
by  some  of  the  best  and  by  some  of  the  worst 
feelings  incident  to  human  nature,  that  it  is 
hardly  ever  kept  under  restraint  by  anything 
but  want  of  power;  and  as  the  power  is  not 
declining,  but  growing,  unless  a  strong  barrier 
of  moral  conviction  can  be  raised  against  the 
mischief,  we  must  expect,  in  the  present  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  the  world,  to  see  it  increase. 

It  will  be  convenient  for  the  argument,  if. 
instead  of  at  once  entering  upon  the  general 


ON  LIBERTY 


274 

thesis,  we  confine  ourselves  in  the  first  instance 
to  a  single  branch  of  it,  on  which  the  principle 
here  stated  is,  if  not  fully,  yet  to  a  certain 
point,  recognised  by  the  current  opinions. 
This  one  branch  is  the  Liberty  of  I  bought: 
from  which  it  is  impossible  to  separate  the 
cognate  liberty  of  speaking  and  of  writing. 
Although  these  liberties,  to  some  considerable 
amount,  form  part  of  the  political  morality  of 
all  countries  which  profess  religious  toleration 
and  free  institutions,  the  grounds,  both  philo¬ 
sophical  and  practical,  on  which  they  rest,  are 
perhaps  not  so  familiar  to  the  general  mind, 
nor  so  thoroughly  appreciated  by  many  even 
of  the  leaders  of  opinion,  as  might  have  been 
expected.  Those  grounds,  when  rightly  under¬ 
stood,  are  of  much  wider  application  than  to 
only  one  division  of  the  subject,  and  a  thorough 
consideration  of  this  part  of  the  question  will 
be  found  the  best  introduction  to  the  remain¬ 
der.  Those  to  whom  nothing  which  I  am  about 
to  say  will  be  new,  may  therefore,  I  hope,  ex¬ 
cuse  me,  if  on  a  subject  which  for  now  three 
centuries  has  been  so  often  discussed,  I  venture 
on  one  discussion  more. 

Chapter  2 

Of  the  Liberty  of  Thought 
and  Discussion 

The  time,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  is  gone  by,  when 
any  defence  would  be  necessary  of  the  “liberty 
of  the  press"  as  one  of  the  securities  against 
corrupt  or  tyrannical  government.  No  argu¬ 
ment,  we  may  suppose,  can  now  be  needed, 
against  permitting  a  legislature  or  an  execu¬ 
tive,  not  identified  in  interest  with  the  people, 
to  prescribe  opinions  to  them,  and  determine 
what  doctrines  or  what  arguments  they  shall 
be  allowed  to  hear.  This  aspect  of  the  ques¬ 
tion,  besides,  has  been  so  often  and  so  tri¬ 
umphantly  enforced  by  preceding  writers,  that 
it  needs  not  be  specially  insisted  on  in  this 
place.  Though  the  law  of  England,  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  press,  is  as  servile  to  this  day  as  it 
was  in  the  time  of  the  Tudors,  there  is  little 
clanger  of  its  being  actually  put  in  force 
against  political  discussion,  except  during 
some  temporary  panic,  when  fear  of  insurrec¬ 
tion  drives  ministers  and  judges  from  their 
propriety;* 1  and, speakinggcnerally,  it  isnot,  in 

1  These  words  had  scarcely  been  written,  when, 
as  if  to  give  them  an  emphatic  contradiction,  oc¬ 
culted  the  Government  I’rcss  Prosecutions  of  1858. 
q  hat  ill  judged  interference  with  the  liberty  of 
public  discussion  lias  not,  however,  induced  me  to 


constitutional  countries,  to  be  apprehended, 
that  the  government,  whether  completely  re¬ 
sponsible  to  the  people  or  not,  will  often  at¬ 
tempt  to  control  the  expression  of  opinion, 
except  when  in  doing  so  it  makes  itself  the 
organ  of  the  general  intolerance  of  the  public. 
Let  us  suppose,  therefore,  that  the  government 
is  entirely  at  one  with  the  people,  and  never 
thinks  of  exerting  any  power  of  coercion  un¬ 
less  in  agreement  with  what  it  conceives  to  be 
their  voice.  But  I  deny  the  right  of  the  people 
to  exercise  such  coercion,  either  by  themselves 
or  by  their  government.  The  power  itself  is 
illegitimate.  The  best  government  has  no  more 
title  to  it  than  the  worst.  It  is  as  noxious,  or 
more  noxious,  when  exerted  in  accordance 
with  public  opinion,  than  when  in  opposition 
to  it.  If  all  mankind  minus  one  were  of  one 
opinion,  and  only  one  person  were  of  the 
contrary  opinion,  mankind  would  be  no  more 
justified  in  silencing  that  one  person,  than  he, 
if  he  had  the  power,  would  be  justified  in  si¬ 
lencing  mankind.  Were  an  opinion  a  personal 
possession  of  no  value  except  to  the  owner;  il 
to  be  obstructed  in  the  enjoyment  of  it  were 

alter  a  single  word  in  the  text,  nor  has  it  at  all 
weakened  my  conviction  that,  moments  of  panic 
excepted,  the  era  of  pains  and  penalties  for  politi¬ 
cal  discussion  has,  in  our  own  country,  passed 
away.  For.  in  the  first  place,  the  prosecutions  were 
not  persisted  in;  and,  in  the  second,  they  were 
never,  properly  speaking,  political  prosecutions. 
The  olfence  charged  was  not  that  of  criticising  in¬ 
stitutions,  or  the  acts  or  persons  of  rulers,  but  of 
circulating  what  was  deemed  an  immoral  doctrine, 
the  lawfulness  of  Tyrannicide. 

If  the  arguments  of  the  present  chapter  are  of 
any  validity,  there  ought  to  exist  the  fullest  lib¬ 
erty  of  professing  and  discussing,  as  a  matter  of 
ethical  conviction,  any  doctrine,  however  immoral 
it  may  he  considered.  It  would,  therefore,  he  ir¬ 
relevant  and  out  of  place  to  examine  here,  wheth¬ 
er  the  doctrine  of  Tyrannicide  deserves  that  title. 

I  shall  content  myself  with  saying  that  the  subject 
has  been  at  all  times  one  of  the  open  questions  of 
morals;  that  the  act  of  a  private  citizen  in  striking 
down  a  criminal,  who,  by  raising  himself  above 
the  law,  has  placed  himself  beyond  the  reach  of 
legal  punishment  or  control,  has  been  accounted 
by  whole  nations,  and  by  some  of  the  best  and 
wisest  of  men,  not  a  crime,  hut  an  act  of  exalted 
virtue;  and  that,  right  or  wrong,  it  is  not  of  the 
nature  of  assassination,  hut  of  civil  wm.  As  such, 
I  hold  that  the  instigation  to  it,  in  a  specific  case, 
may  lie  a  proper  subject  of  punishment,  hut  only 
if  an  overt  act  has  followed,  and  at  least  a  prob¬ 
able  connection  can  he  established  between  the 
act  and  the  instigation.  Even  then,  it  is  not  a  for¬ 
eign  government,  but  the  very  government  as¬ 
sailed,  which  alone,  in  the  exercise  of  self-defence, 
can  legitimately  punish  attacks  directed  against 
its  own  existence. 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION  275 


simply  a  private  injury,  it  would  make  some 
difference  whether  the  injury  was  inflicted 
only  on  a  few  persons  or  on  many.  But  the  pe¬ 
culiar  evil  of  silencing  the  expression  of  an 
opinion  is,  that  it  is  robbing  the  human  race; 
posterity  as  wrell  as  the  existing  generation: 
those  who  dissent  from  the  opinion,  still  more 
than  those  who  hold  it.  If  the  opinion  is  right, 
they  are  deprived  of  the  opportunity  of  ex¬ 
changing  error  for  truth:  if  wrong,  they  lose, 
what  is  almost  as  great  a  benefit,  the  clearer 
perception  and  livelier  impression  of  truth, 
produced  by  its  collision  with  error. 

It  is  necessary  to  consider  separately  these 
two  hypotheses,  each  of  which  has  a  distinct 
branch  of  the  argument  corresponding  to  it. 
We  can  never  be  sure  that  the  opinion  we  are 
endeavouring  to  stifle  is  a  false  opinion;  and  if 
we  were  sure,  stifling  it  would  be  an  evil  still. 

First:  the  opinion  which  it  is  attempted  to 
suppress  by  authority  may  possibly  be  true. 
Those  who  desire  to  suppress  it,  of  course 
deny  its  truth;  but  they  are  not  infallible. 
They  have  no  authority  to  decide  the  question 
for  all  mankind,  and  exclude  every  other  per¬ 
son  from  the  means  of  judging.  To  refuse  a 
hearing  to  an  opinion,  because  they  are  sure 
that  it  is  false,  is  to  assume  that  their  certainty 
is  the  same  thing  as  absolute  certainty.  All 
silencing  of  discussion  is  an  assumption  of  in¬ 
fallibility.  Its  condemnation  may  be  allowed  to 
rest  on  this  common  argument,  not  the  worse 
for  being  common. 

Unfortunately  for  the  good  sense  of  man¬ 
kind,  the  fact  of  their  fallibility  is  far  from 
carrying  the  weight  in  their  practical  judg¬ 
ment  which  is  always  allowed  to  it  in  theory; 
for  while  every  one  well  knows  himself  to  be 
fallible,  few  think  it  necessary  to  take  any  pre¬ 
cautions  against  their  own  fallibility,  or  admit 
the  supposition  that  any  opinion,  of  which 
they  feel  very  certain,  may  be  one  of  the  ex¬ 
amples  of  the  error  to  which  they  acknowledge 
themselves  to  be  liable.  Absolute  princes,  or 
others  who  are  accustomed  to  unlimited  defer¬ 
ence,  usually  feel  this  complete  confidence  in 
their  own  opinions  on  nearly  all  subjects.  Peo¬ 
ple  more  happily  situated,  who  sometimes  hear 
their  opinions  disputed,  and  are  not  wholly 
unused  to  be  set  right  when  they  are  wrong, 
place  the  same  unbounded  reliance  only  on 
such  of  their  opinions  as  are  shared  by  all  who 
surround  them,  or  to  whom  they  habitually 
defer;  for  in  proportion  to  a  man’s  want  of 
confidence  in  his  own  solitary  judgment,  does 


he  usually  repose,  with  implicit  trust,  on  the 
infallibility  of  “the  world”  in  general.  And 
the  world,  to  each  individual,  means  the  part 
of  it  with  which  he  comes  in  contact;  his  party, 
his  sect,  his  church,  his  class  of  society;  the 
man  may  be  called,  by  comparison,  almost  lib¬ 
eral  and  large-minded  to  whom  it  means  any¬ 
thing  so  comprehensive  as  his  own  country  or 
his  own  age.  Nor  is  his  faith  in  this  collective 
authority  at  all  shaken  by  his  being  aware  that 
other  ages,  countries,  sects,  churches,  classes, 
and  parties  have  thought,  and  even  now  think, 
the  exact  reverse.  He  devolves  upon  his  own 
world  the  responsibility  of  being  in  the  right 
against  the  dissentient  worlds  of  other  people; 
and  it  never  troubles  him  that  mere  accident 
has  decided  which  of  these  numerous  worlds 
is  the  object  of  his  reliance,  and  that  the  same 
causes  which  make  him  a  Churchman  in  Lon¬ 
don,  would  have  made  him  a  Buddhist  or  a 
Confucian  in  Pekin.  Yet  it  is  as  evident  in  it¬ 
self,  as  any  amount  of  argument  can  make  it, 
that  ages  are  no  more  infallible  than  indi¬ 
viduals;  every  age  having  held  many  opinions 
which  subsequent  ages  have  deemed  not  only 
false  but  absurd;  and  it  is  as  certain  that  many 
opinions  now  general  will  be  rejected  by  fu¬ 
ture  ages,  as  it  is  that  many,  once  general,  are 
rejected  by  the  present. 

The  objection  likely  to  be  made  to  this  argu¬ 
ment  would  probably  take  some  such  form  as 
the  following.  There  is  no  greater  assumption 
of  infallibility  in  forbidding  the  propagation 
of  error,  than  in  any  other  thing  which  is  done 
by  public  authority  on  its  own  judgment  and 
responsibility.  Judgment  is  given  to  men  that 
they  may  use  it.  Because  it  may  be  used  er¬ 
roneously,  are  men  to  be  told  that  they  ought 
not  to  use  it  at  all?  To  prohibit  what  they 
think  pernicious,  is  not  claiming  exemption 
from  error,  but  fulfilling  the  duty  incumbent 
on  them,  although  fallible,  of  acting  on  their 
conscientious  conviction.  If  we  were  never  to 
act  on  our  opinions,  because  those  opinions 
may  be  wrong,  we  should  leave  all  our  interests 
uncared  for,  and  all  our  duties  unperformed. 
An  objection  which  applies  to  all  conduct  can 
be  no  valid  objection  to  any  conduct  in  par¬ 
ticular.  It  is  the  duty  of  governments,  and  of 
individuals,  to  form  the  truest  opinions  they 
can;  to  form  them  carefully,  and  never  impose 
them  upon  others  unless  they  are  quite  sure 
of  being  right.  But  when  they  are  sure  (such 
reasoners  may  say),  it  is  not  conscientiousness 
but  cowardice  to  shrink  from  acting  on  their 
opinions,  and  allow  doctrines  which  they  hon- 


ON  LIBERTY 


estlv  diink  dangerous  to  the  -welfare  of  man¬ 
kind,  either  in  this  life  or  in  another,  to  be 
scattered  abroad  without  restraint,  because 
other  people,  in  less  enlightened  times,  have 
persecuted  opinions  now  believed  to  be  true. 
Let  us  take  care,  it  may  be  said,  not  to  make 
the  same  mistake:  but  governments  and  na¬ 
tions  have  made  mistakes  in  other  things, 
which  are  not  denied  to  be  fit  subjects  for  the 
exercise  of  authority:  they  have  laid  on  bad 
taxes,  made  unjust  wars.  Ought  we  therefore 
to  lay  on  no  taxes,  and,  under  whatever  prov¬ 
ocation,  make  no  wars?  Men,  and  govern¬ 
ments,  must  act  to  the  best  of  their  ability. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  certainty, 
but  there  is  assurance  sufficient  for  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  human  life.  We  may,  and  must,  assume 
our  opinion  to  be  true  for  the  guidance  of  our 
own  conduct:  and  it  is  assuming  no  more  when 
we  forbid  bad  men  to  pervert  society  by  the 
propagation  of  opinions  which  we  regard  as 
false  and  pernicious. 

I  answer,  that  it  is  assuming  very  much  more. 
There  is  the  greatest  difference  between  pre¬ 
suming  an  opinion  to  be  true,  because,  with 
every  opportunity  for  contesting  it,  it  has  not 
been  refuted,  and  assuming  its  truth  for  the 
purpose  of  not  permitting  its  refutation.  Com¬ 
plete  liberty  of  contradicting  and  disproving 
our  opinion  is  the  very  condition  which  justi¬ 
fies  us  in  assuming  its  truth  for  purposes  of 
action;  and  on  no  other  terms  can  a  being 
with  human  faculties  have  any  rational  assur¬ 
ance  of  being  right. 

When  we  consider  either  the  history  of  opin¬ 
ion.  or  the  ordinary  conduct  of  human  life, 
10  what  is  it  to  be  ascribed  that  the  one  and 
the  other  are  no  worse  than  they  are?  Not 
certainly  to  the  inherent  force  of  the  human 
understanding;  for,  on  any  matter  not  self-evi¬ 
dent.  there  are  ninety-nine  persons  totally  in¬ 
capable  of  judging  of  it  for  one  who  is  capable; 
and  the  capacity  of  the  hundredth  person  is 
only  comparative;  for  the  majority  of  the  emi¬ 
nent  men  of  every  past  generation  held  many 
opinions  now  known  to  be  erroneous,  and  did 
or  approved  numerous  things  which  no  one 
will  now  justify.  Why  is  it,  then,  that  there 
is  on  the  whole  a  preponderance  among  man¬ 
kind  ot  rational  opinions  and  rational  con¬ 
duct?  11  there  really  is  this  preponderance— 
which  there  must  be  unless  human  alfairs  are, 
and  have  always  been,  in  an  almost  desperate 
state— it  is  owing  to  a  quality  of  the  human 
mind,  the  source  of  everything  respectable  in 
man  either  as  an  intellectual  or  as  a  moral 


being,  namely,  that  his  errors  are  corrigible.  He 
is  capable  of  rectifying  his  mistakes,  by  discus¬ 
sion  and  experience.  Not  by  experience  alone. 
There  must  be  discussion,  to  show  how  expe¬ 
rience  is  to  be  interpreted.  Wrong  opinions 
and  practices  gradually  yield  to  fact  and  argu¬ 
ment;  but  facts  and  arguments,  to  produce  any 
effect  on  the  mind,  must  be  brought  before  it. 
Very  few  facts  are  able  to  tell  their  own  story, 
without  comments  to  bring  out  their  mean¬ 
ing.  The  whole  strength  and  value,  then,  of 
human  judgment,  depending  on  the  one  prop¬ 
erty,  that  it  can  be  set  right  when  it  is  wrong, 
reliance  can  be  placed  on  it  only  when  the 
means  of  setting  it  right  are  kept  constantly 
at  hand.  In  the  case  of  any  person  whose  judg¬ 
ment  is  really  deserving  of  confidence,  how 
has  it  become  so?  Because  he  has  kept  his  mind 
open  to  criticism  of  his  opinions  and  conduct. 
Because  it  has  been  his  practice  to  listen  to  all 
that  could  be  said  against  him;  to  profit  by  as 
much  of  it  as  was  just,  and  expound  to  himself, 
and  upon  occasion  to  others,  the  fallacy  of 
what  was  fallacious.  Because  he  has  felt,  that 
the  only  way  in  which  a  human  being  can 
make  some  approach  to  knowing  the  whole  of 
a  subject,  is  by  hearing  what  can  be  said  about 
it  by  persons  of  every  variety  of  opinion,  and 
studying  all  modes  in  which  it  can  be  looked 
at  by  every  character  of  mind.  No  wise  man 
ever  acquired  his  wisdom  in  any  mode  but  this; 
nor  is  it  in  the  nature  of  human  intellect  to 
become  wise  in  any  other  manner.  The  steady 
habit  of  correcting  and  completing  his  own 
opinion  by  collating  it  with  those  of  others,  so 
far  from  causing  doubt  and  hesitation  in  carry¬ 
ing  it  into  practice,  is  the  only  stable  founda¬ 
tion  for  a  just  reliance  on  it:  for,  being  cogni¬ 
sant  of  all  that  can,  at  least  obviously,  be  said 
against  him,  and  having  taken  up  his  position 
against  all  gainsayers— knowing  that  he  has 
sought  for  objections  and  difficulties,  instead 
of  avoiding  them,  and  has  shut  out  no  light 
which  can  be  thrown  upon  the  subject  from 
any  quarter-he  has  a  right  to  think  his  judg¬ 
ment  better  than  that  of  any  person,  or  any 
multitude,  who  have  not  gone  through  a  similar 
process. 

It  is  not  too  much  to  require  that  what  the 
wisest  of  mankind,  those  who  are  best  entitled 
to  trust  their  own  judgment,  find  necessary  to 
warrant  their  relying  on  it,  should  be  sub¬ 
mitted  to  by  that  miscellaneous  collection  of 
a  few  wise  and  many  foolish  individuals,  called 
the  public.  The  most  intolerant  of  churches, 
the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  even  at  the  canon- 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION  277 


isation  of  a  saint,  admits,  and  listens  patiently 
to,  a  “devil’s  advocate.”  The  holiest  of  men, 
it  appears,  cannot  be  admitted  to  posthumous 
honours,  until  all  that  the  devil  could  say 
against  him  is  known  and  weighed.  If  even  the 
Newtonian  philosophy  were  not  permitted  to 
be  questioned,  mankind  could  not  feel  as  com¬ 
plete  assurance  of  its  truth  as  they  now  do.  The 
beliefs  which  we  have  most  warrant  for  have  no 
safeguard  to  rest  on,  but  a  standing  invitation 
to  the  whole  world  to  prove  them  unfounded. 
If  the  challenge  is  not  accepted,  or  is  accepted 
and  the  attempt  fails,  we  are  far  enough  from 
certainty  still;  but  we  have  done  the  best  that 
the  existing  state  of  human  reason  admits  of; 
we  have  neglected  nothing  that  could  give  the 
truth  a  chance  of  reaching  us:  if  the  lists  are 
kept  open,  we  may  hope  that  if  there  be  a 
better  truth,  it  will  be  found  when  the  human 
mind  is  capable  of  receiving  it;  and  in  the 
meantime  we  may  rely  on  having  attained  such 
approach  to  truth  as  is  possible  in  our  own 
day.  This  is  the  amount  of  certainty  attainable 
by  a  fallible  being,  and  this  the  sole  way  of 
attaining  it. 

Strange  it  is,  that  men  should  admit  the  va¬ 
lidity  of  the  arguments  for  free  discussion,  but 
object  to  their  being  “pushed  to  an  extreme”; 
not  seeing  that  unless  the  reasons  are  good  for 
an  extreme  case,  they  are  not  good  for  any  case. 
Strange  that  they  should  imagine  that  they  are 
not  assuming  infallibility,  when  they  acknowl¬ 
edge  that  there  should  be  free  discussion  on 
all  subjects  which  can  possibly  be  doubtful , 
but  think  that  some  particular  principle  or 
doctrine  should  be  forbidden  to  be  questioned 
because  it  is  so  certain ,  that  is,  because  they  are 
certain  that  it  is  certain.  To  call  any  proposi¬ 
tion  certain,  while  there  is  any  one  who  would 
deny  its  certainty  if  permitted,  but  who  is  not 
permitted,  is  to  assume  that  we  ourselves,  and 
those  who  agree  with  us,  are  the  judges  of  cer¬ 
tainty,  and  judges  without  hearing  the  other 
side. 

In  the  present  age— which  has  been  described 
as  “destitute  of  faith,  but  terrified  at  scepti¬ 
cism”— in  which  people  feel  sure,  not  so  much 
that  their  opinions  are  true,  as  that  they  should 
not  know  what  to  do  without  them— the  claims 
of  an  opinion  to  be  protected  from  public 
attack  are  rested  not  so  much  on  its  truth,  as 
on  its  importance  to  society.  There  are,  it  is 
alleged,  certain  beliefs  so  useful,  not  to  say  in¬ 
dispensable,  to  well-being  that  it  is  as  much  the 
duty  of  governments  to  uphold  those  beliefs,  as 
to  protect  any  other  of  the  interests  of  society. 


In  a  case  of  such  necessity,  and  so  directly  in 
the  line  of  their  duty,  something  less  than  in¬ 
fallibility  may,  it  is  maintained,  warrant,  and 
even  bind,  governments  to  act  on  their  own 
opinion,  confirmed  by  the  general  opinion  of 
mankind.  It  is  also  often  argued,  and  still 
oftener  thought,  that  none  but  bad  men  would 
desire  to  weaken  these  salutary  beliefs;  and 
there  can  be  nothing  wrong,  it  is  thought,  in 
restraining  bad  men,  and  prohibiting  what 
only  such  men  would  wish  to  practise.  This 
mode  of  thinking  makes  the  justification  of 
restraints  on  discussion  not  a  question  of  the 
truth  of  doctrines,  but  of  their  usefulness;  and 
flatters  itself  by  that  means  to  escape  the  re¬ 
sponsibility  of  claiming  to  be  an  infallible 
judge  of  opinions. 

But  those  who  thus  satisfy  themselves,  do 
not  perceive  that  the  assumption  of  infallibil¬ 
ity  is  merely  shifted  from  one  point  to  another. 
The  usefulness  of  an  opinion  is  itself  matter  of 
opinion:  as  disputable,  as  open  to  discussion, 
and  requiring  discussion  as  much  as  the  opin¬ 
ion  itself.  There  is  the  same  need  of  an  infal¬ 
lible  judge  of  opinions  to  decide  an  opinion  to 
be  noxious,  as  to  decide  it  to  be  false,  unless 
the  opinion  condemned  has  full  opportunity 
of  defending  itself.  And  it  will  not  do  to  say 
that  the  heretic  may  be  allowed  to  maintain 
the  utility  or  harmlessness  of  his  opinion, 
though  forbidden  to  maintain  its  truth.  The 
truth  of  an  opinion  is  part  of  its  utility.  If  we 
would  know  whether  or  not  it  is  desirable  that 
a  proposition  should  be  believed,  is  it  possible 
to  exclude  the  consideration  of  whether  or  not 
it  is  true?  In  the  opinion,  not  of  bad  men,  but 
of  the  best  men,  no  belief  which  is  contrary  to 
truth  can  be  really  useful:  and  can  you  pre¬ 
vent  such  men  from  urging  that  plea,  when 
they  are  charged  with  culpability  for  denying 
some  doctrine  which  they  are  told  is  useful, 
but  which  they  believe  to  be  false?  Those  who 
are  on  the  side  of  received  opinions  never  fail 
to  take  all  possible  advantage  of  this  plea;  you 
do  not  find  them  handling  the  question  of  util¬ 
ity  as  if  it  could  be  completely  abstracted  from 
that  of  truth:  on  the  contrary,  it  is,  above  all, 
because  their  doctrine  is  “the  truth,”  that  the 
knowledge  or  the  belief  of  it  is  held  to  be  so  in¬ 
dispensable.  There  can  be  no  fair  discussion 
of  the  question  of  usefulness  when  an  argu¬ 
ment  so  vital  may  be  employed  on  one  side, 
but  not  on  the  other.  And  in  point  of  fact,  when 
law  or  public  feeling  do  not  permit  the  truth 
of  an  opinion  to  be  disputed,  they  are  just  as 
little  tolerant  of  a  denial  of  its  usefulness.  The 


ON  LIBERTY 


278 

utmost  they  allow  is  an  extenuation  of  its  abso¬ 
lute  necessity,  or  of  the  positive  guilt  of  reject¬ 
ing  it. 

In  order  more  fully  to  illustrate  the  mis¬ 
chief  of  denying  a  hearing  to  opinions  because 
%ve,  in  our  own  judgment,  have  condemned 
them,  it  will  be  desirable  to  fix  down  the  dis¬ 
cussion  to  a  concrete  case;  and  I  choose,  by 
preference,  the  cases  which  are  least  favour¬ 
able  to  me— in  which  the  argument  against 
freedom  of  opinion,  both  on  the  score  of  truth 
and  on  that  of  utility,  is  considered  the  strong¬ 
est.  Let  the  opinions  impugned  be  the  belief 
in  a  God  and  in  a  future  state,  or  any  of  the 
commonly  received  doctrines  of  morality.  To 
fight  the  battle  on  such  ground  gives  a  great 
advantage  to  an  unfair  antagonist,  since  he 
will  be  sure  to  say  (and  many  who  have  no 
desire  to  be  unfair  will  say  it  internally),  Are 
these  the  doctrines  which  you  do  not  deem 
sufficiently  certain  to  be  taken  under  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  law?  Is  the  belief  in  a  God  one  of 
the  opinions  to  feel  sure  of  which  you  hold  to 
be  assuming  infallibility?  But  I  must  be  per¬ 
mitted  to  observe,  that  it  is  not  the  feeling 
sure  of  a  doctrine  (be  it  what  it  may)  which  I 
call  an  assumption  of  infallibility.  It  is  the 
undertaking  to  decide  that  question  for  others, 
without  allowing  them  to  hear  what  can  be 
said  on  the  contrary  side.  And  I  denounce  and 
reprobate  this  pretension  not  the  less,  if  put 
forth  on  the  side  of  my  most  solemn  convic¬ 
tions.  However  positive  any  one’s  persuasion 
may  be,  not  only  of  the  falsity  but  of  the  perni¬ 
cious  consequences— not  only  of  the  pernicious 
consequences,  but  (to  adopt  expressions  which 
I  altogether  condemn)  the  immorality  and  im¬ 
piety  of  an  opinion;  yet  if,  in  pursuance  of  that 
private  judgment,  though  backed  by  the  pub¬ 
lic  judgment  of  his  country  or  his  contempo¬ 
raries,  he  prevents  the  opinion  from  being 
heard  in  its  defence,  he  assumes  infallibility. 
And  so  far  from  the  assumption  being  less  ob- 
jci  tionable  or  less  dangerous  because  the  opin¬ 
ion  is  called  immoral  01  impious,  this  is  the 
case  of  all  others  in  which  it  is  most  fatal.  These 
are  exactly  the  occasions  on  which  the  men  of 
one  generation  commit  those  dreadful  mis¬ 
takes  which  excite  theastoiiishmciitand horror 
of  posterity.  It  is  among  such  that  we  find  the 
instant  es  memorable  in  history,  when  the  arm 
ol  the  law  lias  been  employed  to  root  out  the 
best  men  and  the  noblest  doctrines;  with  de¬ 
plorable  success  as  to  the  men,  though  some 
ol  the  doctrines  have  survived  to  be  (as  if  in 
mockery)  invoked  in  defence  of  similai  con¬ 


duct  towards  those  who  dissent  from  them ,  or 
from  their  received  interpretation. 

Mankind  can  hardly  be  too  often  reminded, 
that  there  was  once  a  man  named  Socrates*  be¬ 
tween  whom  and  the  legal  authorities  and  pub¬ 
lic  opinion  of  his  time  there  took  place  a  mem¬ 
orable  collision.  Born  in  an  age  and  country 
abounding  in  individual  greatness,  this  man 
has  been  handed  down  to  us  by  those  who  best 
knew  both  him  and  the  age,  as  the  most  virtu¬ 
ous  man  in  it;  while  we  knowr  him  as  the  head 
and  prototype  of  all  subsequent  teachers  of 
virtue,  the  source  equally  of  the  lofty  inspira¬ 
tion  of  Plato  and  the  judicious  utilitarianism 
of  Aristotle,  "i  mastri  di  color  che  sanno,”  the 
tw?o  headsprings  of  ethical  as  of  all  other  phi¬ 
losophy.  This  acknowledged  master  of  all  the 
eminent  thinkers  who  have  since  lived— whose 
fame,  still  growing  after  more  than  two  thou¬ 
sand  years,  all  but  outweighs  the  whole  re¬ 
mainder  of  the  names  w’hich  make  his  native 
city  illustrious— was  put  to  death  by  his  coun¬ 
trymen,  after  a  judicial  conviction,  for  impiety 
and  immorality.  Impiety,  in  denying  the  gods 
recognised  by  the  State;  indeed  his  accuser  as¬ 
serted  (see  the  Apologia)  that  he  believed  in 
no  gods  at  all.  Immorality,  in  being,  by  his 
doctrines  and  instructions,  a  “corruptor  of 
youth.”  Of  these  charges  the  tribunal,  there  is 
every  ground  for  believing,  honestly  found 
him  guilty,  and  condemned  the  man  w’ho  prob¬ 
ably  of  all  then  born  had  deserved  best  of 
mankind  to  be  put  to  death  as  a  criminal. 

To  pass  from  this  to  the  only  other  instance 
of  judicial  iniquity,  the  mention  of  which,  after 
the  condemnation  of  Socrates,  wrould  not  be  an 
anti-climax:  the  event  w’hich  took  place  011 
Calvary  rather  more  than  eighteen  hundred 
years  ago.  The  man  who  left  on  the  memory  of 
those  who  witnessed  his  life  and  conversation 
such  an  impression  of  his  moral  grandeui  rh.u 
eighteen  subsequent  centuries  have  done  hom¬ 
age  to  him  as  the  Almighty  in  person,  wras 
ignominiously  put  to  death,  as  what?  As  a  blas¬ 
phemer.  Men  did  not  merely  mistake  their 
benefactor;  they  mistook  him  foi  the  exact  con¬ 
trary  of  what  he  was,  and  treated  him  as  that 
prodigy  of  impiety  which  they  themselves  are 
now  held  to  be  for  their  treatment  of  him.  The 
feelings  with  which  mankind  now’  regard  these 
lamentable  transactions,  especially  the  later  of 
the  two,  render  them  extremely  unjust  in  their 
judgment  of  the  unhappy  actors.  1  hesc  were, 
to  all  appearance,  not  bad  men-not  worse 
than  men  commonly  arc,  but  rather  the  con¬ 
trary;  men  who  possessed  in  a  full,  or  some- 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION  279 


what  more  than  a  full  measure,  the  religious, 
moral,  and  patriotic  feelings  of  their  time  and 
people:  the  very  kind  of  men  who,  in  all  times, 
our  own  included,  have  every  chance  of  pass¬ 
ing  through  life  blameless  and  respected.  The 
high-priest  who  rent  his  garments  when  the 
words  were  pronounced,  which,  according  to 
all  the  ideas  of  his  country,  constituted  the 
blackest  guilt,  was  in  all  probability  quite  as 
sincere  in  his  horror  and  indignation  as  the 
generality  of  respectable  and  pious  men  now 
are  in  the  religious  and  moral  sentiments  they 
profess;  and  most  of  those  who  now  shudder 
at  his  conduct,  if  they  had  lived  in  his  time, 
and  been  born  Jews,  would  have  acted  pre¬ 
cisely  as  he  did.  Orthodox  Christians  who  are 
tempted  to  think  that  those  who  stoned  to 
death  the  first  martyrs  must  have  been  worse 
men  than  they  themselves  are,  ought  to  re¬ 
member  that  one  of  those  persecutors  was  Saint 
Paul. 

Let  us  add  one  more  example,  the  most 
striking  of  all,  if  the  impressiveness  of  an  error 
is  measured  by  the  wisdom  and  virtue  of  him 
who  falls  into  it.  If  ever  any  one,  possessed  of 
power,  had  grounds  for  thinking  himself  the 
best  and  most  enlightened  among  his  contem¬ 
poraries,  it  was  the  Emperor  Marcus  Aurelius. 
Absolute  monarch  of  the  whole  civilised  world, 
he  preserved  through  life  not  only  the  most 
unblemished  justice,  but  what  was  less  to  be 
expected  from  his  Stoical  breeding,  the  tender- 
est  heart.  The  few  failings  which  are  attributed 
to  him  were  all  on  the  side  of  indulgence: 
while  his  writings,  the  highest  ethical  product 
of  the  ancient  mind,  differ  scarcely  perceptibly, 
if  they  differ  at  all,  from  the  most  characteristic 
teachings  of  Christ.  This  man,  a  better  Chris¬ 
tian  in  all  but  the  dogmatic  sense  of  the  word 
than  almost  any  of  the  ostensibly  Christian 
sovereigns  who  have  since  reigned,  persecuted 
Christianity.  Placed  at  the  summit  of  all  the  pre¬ 
vious  attainments  of  humanity,  with  an  open, 
unfettered  intellect,  and  a  character  which  led 
him  of  himself  to  embody  in  his  moral  writ¬ 
ings  the  Christian  ideal,  he  yet  failed  to  see 
that  Christianity  was  to  be  a  good  and  not  an 
evil  to  the  world,  with  his  duties  to  which  he 
was  so  deeply  penetrated.  Existing  society  he 
knew  to  be  in  a  deplorable  state.  But  such  as  it 
was,  he  saw,  or  thought  he  saw,  that  it  was  held 
together,  and  prevented  from  being  worse,  by 
belief  and  reverence  of  the  received  divinities. 
As  a  ruler  of  mankind,  he  deemed  it  his  duty 
not  to  suffer  society  to  fall  in  pieces;  and  saw 
not  how,  if  its  existing  ties  were  removed,  any 


others  could  be  formed  which  could  again  knit 
it  together.  The  new  religion  openly  aimed  at 
dissolving  these  ties:  unless,  therefore,  it  was 
his  duty  to  adopt  that  religion,  it  seemed  to  be 
his  duty  to  put  it  down.  Inasmuch  then  as  the 
theology  of  Christianity  did  not  appear  to  him 
true  or  of  divine  origin;  inasmuch  as  this 
strange  history  of  a  crucified  God  was  not  cred¬ 
ible  to  him,  and  a  system  which  purported  to 
rest  entirely  upon  a  foundation  to  him  so 
wholly  unbelievable,  could  not  be  foreseen  by 
him  to  be  that  renovating  agency  which,  after 
all  abatements,  it  has  in  fact  proved  to  be;  the 
gentlest  and  most  amiable  of  philosophers  and 
rulers,  under  a  solemn  sense  of  duty,  author¬ 
ised  the  persecution  of  Christianity. 

To  my  mind  this  is  one  of  the  most  tragical 
facts  in  all  history.  It  is  a  bitter  thought,  how 
different  a  thing  the  Christianity  of  the  world 
might  have  been,  if  the  Christian  faith  had 
been  adopted  as  the  religion  of  the  empire  un¬ 
der  the  auspices  of  Marcus  Aurelius  instead  of 
those  of  Constantine.  But  it  would  be  equally 
unjust  to  him  and  false  to  truth  to  deny,  that 
no  one  plea  which  can  be  urged  for  punishing 
anti-Christian  teaching  was  wanting  to  Marcus 
Aurelius  for  punishing,  as  he  did,  the  propa¬ 
gation  of  Christianity.  No  Christian  more  firm¬ 
ly  believes  that  Atheism  is  false,  and  tends  to 
the  dissolution  of  society,  than  Marcus  Aurelius 
believed  the  same  things  of  Christianity;  he 
who,  of  all  men  then  living,  might  have  been 
thought  the  most  capable  of  appreciating  it. 
Unless  any  one  who  approves  of  punishment 
for  the  promulgation  of  opinions,  flatters  him¬ 
self  that  he  is  a  wiser  and  better  man  than 
Marcus  Aurelius— more  deeply  versed  in  the 
wisdom  of  his  time,  more  elevated  in  his  in¬ 
tellect  above  it— more  earnest  in  his  search  for 
truth,  or  more  single-minded  in  his  devotion 
to  it  when  found;  let  him  abstain  from  that 
assumption  of  the  joint  infallibility  of  him¬ 
self  and  the  multitude,  which  the  great  Antoni¬ 
nus  made  with  so  unfortunate  a  result. 

Aware  of  the  impossibility  of  defending  the 
use  of  punishment  for  restraining  irreligious 
opinions  by  any  argument  which  will  not  jus¬ 
tify  Marcus  Antoninus,  the  enemies  of  reli¬ 
gious  freedom,  when  hard  pressed,  occasion¬ 
ally  accept  this  consequence,  and  say,  with  Dr. 
Johnson,  that  the  persecutors  of  Christianity 
were  in  the  right;  that  persecution  is  an  ordeal 
through  which  truth  ought  to  pass,  and  always 
passes  successfully,  legal  penalties  being,  in  the 
end,  powerless  against  truth,  though  some¬ 
times  beneficially  effective  against  mischievous 


ON  LIBERTY 


errors.  This  is  a  form  of  the  argument  for  re¬ 
ligious  intolerance  sufficiently  remarkable  not 
to  be  passed  without  notice. 

A  theory  which  maintains  that  truth  ma\ 
justifiably  be  persecuted  because  persecution 
cannot  possibly  do  it  any  harm,  cannot  be 
charged  with  being  intentionally  hostile  to  the 
reception  of  new  truths;  but  we  cannot  com¬ 
mend  the  generosity  of  its  dealing  with  the  per¬ 
sons  to  whom  mankind  are  indebted  for  them. 
To  discover  to  the  world  something  which 
deeply  concerns  it,  and  of  which  it  was  pre¬ 
viously  ignorant;  to  prove  to  it  that  it  had  been 
mistaken  on  some  vital  point  of  temporal  or 
spiritual  interest,  is  as  important  a  service  as 
a  human  being  can  render  to  his  fellow  crea¬ 
tures,  and  in  certain  cases,  as  in  those  of  the 
early  Christians  and  of  the  Reformers,  those 
who  think  with  Dr.  Johnson  believe  it  to  have 
been  the  most  precious  gift  which  could  be 
bestowed  on  mankind.  That  the  authors  of 
such  splendid  benefits  should  be  requited  by 
martyrdom;  that  their  reward  should  be  to  be 
dealt  with  as  the  vilest  of  criminals,  is  not, 
upon  this  theory,  a  deplorable  error  and  mis¬ 
fortune,  for  which  humanity  should  mourn 
in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  but  the  normal  and 
justifiable  state  of  things.  The  propounder  of 
a  new  truth,  according  to  this  doctrine,  should 
stand,  as  stood,  in  the  legislation  of  the  Lo- 
crians,  the  proposer  of  a  new  law,  with  a  halter 
round  his  neck,  to  be  instantly  tightened  if 
the  public  assembly  did  not,  on  hearing  his 
reasons,  then  and  there  adopt  his  proposition. 
People  who  defend  this  mode  of  treating  bene¬ 
factors  cannot  be  supposed  to  set  much  value 
on  the  benefit;  and  I  believe  this  view  of  the 
subject  is  mostly  confined  to  the  sort  of  per¬ 
sons  who  think  that  new'  truths  may  have  been 
desirable  once,  but  that  we  have  had  enough 
of  them  now. 

But.  indeed,  the  dictum  that  truth  always 
triumphs  over  persecution  is  one  of  those  pleas¬ 
ant  falsehoods  which  men  repeat  after  one 
another  till  they  pass  into  commonplaces,  but 
which  all  experience  relutes.  History  teems 
with  instances  of  truth  put  down  b\  persecu¬ 
tion.  If  not  suppressed  for  ever,  it  may  be 
thrown  back  for  centuries.  To  speak  only  of  re¬ 
ligious  opinions:  the  Reformation  broke  out  at 
least  twenty  times  before  Luther,  and  was  put 
down.  Arnold  of  Brescia  was  put  down.  Fra 
Dolcino  was  put  down.  Savonarola  was  put 
down.  The  Albigeois  were  put  down.  The 
Vaudois  were  put  down.  The  Lollards  were 
put  down.  The  Hussites  were  put  down.  Even 


after  the  era  of  Luther,  wherever  persecution 
w’as  persisted  in.  it  w'as  successful.  In  Spain, 
Italy,  Flanders,  the  Austrian  empire,  Protes¬ 
tantism  was  rooted  out;  and, most  likely,  would 
have  been  so  in  England,  had  Queen  Man 
lived,  or  Queen  Elizabeth  died.  Persecution 
has  ahvays  succeeded,  save  w'here  the  heretics 
were  too  strong  a  party  to  be  effectually  per¬ 
secuted.  No  reasonable  person  can  doubt  that 
Christianity  might  have  been  extirpated  in  the 
Roman  Empire.  It  spread,  and  became  pre¬ 
dominant,  because  the  persecutions  were  only 
occasional,  lasting  but  a  short  time,  and  sepa¬ 
rated  by  long  intervals  of  almost  undisturbed 
propagandism.  It  is  a  piece  of  idle  sentimental¬ 
ity  that  truth,  merely  as  truth,  has  any  inher¬ 
ent  power  denied  to  error  of  prevailing  against 
the  dungeon  and  the  stake.  Men  are  not  more 
zealous  for  truth  than  they  often  are  for  error, 
and  a  sufficient  application  of  legal  or  even 
of  social  penalties  will  generally  succeed  in 
stopping  the  propagation  of  either.  T  he  real 
advantage  which  truth  has  consists  in  this, 
that  when  an  opinion  is  true,  it  may  be  extin¬ 
guished  once,  twice,  or  many  times,  but  in  the 
course  of  ages  there  will  generally  be  found 
persons  to  rediscover  it,  until  some  one  of  its 
reappearances  falls  on  a  time  when  from  fa¬ 
vourable  circumstances  it  escapes  persecution 
until  it  has  made  such  head  as  to  withstand  all 
subsequent  attempts  to  suppress  it. 

It  will  be  said,  that  we  do  not  now  put  to 
death  the  introducers  of  new  opinions:  we  are 
not  like  our  fathers  who  slew  the  prophets,  we 
even  build  sepulchres  to  them.  It  is  true  we  no 
longer  put  heretics  to  death;  and  the  amount 
of  penal  infliction  which  modern  feeling  would 
probably  tolerate,  even  against  the  most  obnox¬ 
ious  opinions,  is  not  sufficient  to  extirpate 
them.  But  let  us  not  flatter  ourselves  that  we 
are  vet  free  from  the  stain  even  of  legal  perse¬ 
cution.  Penalties  for  opinion,  or  at  least  for  its 
expression,  still  exist  by  law;  and  their  enforce¬ 
ment  is  not,  even  in  these  times,  so  unexampled 
as  to  make  it  at  all  incredible  that  they  may 
some  day  be  revived  in  full  force.  In  the  ycai 
1 8 57,  at  the  summer  assizes  of  the  county  of 
Cornwall,  an  unfortunate  man.'  said  to  be  of 
unexceptionable  conduct  in  all  relations  of 
life,  was  sentenced  to  twenty-one  months’  im¬ 
prisonment,  for  uttering,  and  writing  on  a 
gate,  some  offensive  w'ords  concerning  Chris¬ 
tianity.  Within  a  month  of  the  same  time,  at 

1  Thomas  Poolcy,  Bodmin  Assizes.  July  31,  1H57. 
In  December  following,  he  received  a  free  pardon 
from  the  Crown. 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION 


the  Old  Bailey,  two  persons,  on  two  separate 
occasions,1  were  rejected  as  jurymen,  and  one 
of  them  grossly  insulted  by  the  judge  and  by 
one  of  the  counsel,  because  they  honestly  de¬ 
clared  that  they  had  no  theological  belief;  and 
a  third,  a  foreigner,2  for  the  same  reason,  was 
denied  justice  against  a  thief. 

This  refusal  of  redress  took  place  in  virtue 
of  the  legal  doctrine,  that  no  person  can  be 
allowed  to  give  evidence  in  a  court  of  justice 
who  does  not  profess  belief  in  a  God  (any  god 
is  sufficient)  and  in  a  future  state;  which  is 
equivalent  to  declaring  such  persons  to  be  out¬ 
laws,  excluded  from  the  protection  of  the  tri¬ 
bunals;  who  may  not  only  be  robbed  or  as¬ 
saulted  with  impunity,  if  no  one  but  them¬ 
selves,  or  persons  of  similar  opinions,  be  pres¬ 
ent,  but  any  one  else  may  be  robbed  or  assault¬ 
ed  with  impunity,  if  the  proof  of  the  fact  de¬ 
pends  on  their  evidence.  The  assumption  on 
which  this  is  grounded  is  that  the  oath  is  worth¬ 
less  of  a  person  who  does  not  believe  in  a  fu¬ 
ture  state;  a  proposition  which  betokens  much 
ignorance  of  history  in  those  who  assent  to  it 
(since  it  is  historically  true  that  a  large  pro¬ 
portion  of  infidels  in  all  ages  have  been  persons 
of  distinguished  integrity  and  honour);  and 
would  be  maintained  by  no  one  who  had  the 
smallest  conception  how  many  of  the  persons 
in  greatest  repute  with  the  world,  both  for 
virtues  and  attainments,  are  well  known,  at 
least  to  their  intimates,  to  be  unbelievers.  The 
rule,  besides,  is  suicidal,  and  cuts  away  its  own 
foundation.  Under  pretence  that  atheists  must 
be  liars,  it  admits  the  testimony  of  all  atheists 
who  are  willing  to  lie,  and  rejects  only  those 
who  brave  the  obloquy  of  publicly  confessing 
a  detested  creed  rather  than  affirm  a  falsehood. 
A  rule  thus  self-convicted  of  absurdity  so  far  as 
regards  its  professed  purpose,  can  be  kept  in 
force  only  as  a  badge  of  hatred,  a  relic  of  per¬ 
secution;  a  persecution,  too,  having  the  pecu¬ 
liarity  that  the  qualification  for  undergoing  it 
is  the  being  clearly  proved  not  to  deserve  it. 
The  rule,  and  the  theory  it  implies,  are  hardly 
less  insulting  to  believers  than  to  infidels.  For 
if  he  who  does  not  believe  in  a  future  state 
necessarily  lies,  it  follows  that  they  who  do 
believe  are  only  prevented  from  lying,  if  pre¬ 
vented  they  are,  by  the  fear  of  hell.  We  will 
not  do  the  authors  and  abettors  of  the  rule  the 
injury  of  supposing  that  the  conception  which 

1  George  Jacob  Holyoake,  August  17,  1857;  Ed¬ 
ward  Truelove,  July,  1857. 

2  Baron  de  Gleichen,  Marlborough  Street  Police 

Court,  August  4,  1857. 


281 

they  have  formed  of  Christian  virtue  is  drawn 
from  their  own  consciousness. 

These,  indeed,  are  but  rags  and  remnants 
of  persecution,  and  may  be  thought  to  be  not 
so  much  an  indication  of  the  wish  to  persecute, 
as  an  example  of  that  very  frequent  infirmity 
of  English  minds,  which  makes  them  take  a 
preposterous  pleasure  in  the  assertion  of  a 
bad  principle,  when  they  are  no  longer  bad 
enough  to  desire  to  carry  it  really  into  practice. 
But  unhappily  there  is  no  security  in  the  state 
of  the  public  mind  that  the  suspension  of 
worse  forms  of  legal  persecution,  which  has 
lasted  for  about  the  space  of  a  generation,  will 
continue.  I11  this  age  the  quiet  surface  of  rou¬ 
tine  is  as  often  ruffled  by  attempts  to  resuscitate 
past  evils,  as  to  introduce  new  benefits.  What  is 
boasted  of  at  the  present  time  as  the  revival 
of  religion,  is  always,  in  narrow  and  unculti¬ 
vated  minds,  at  least  as  much  the  revival  of 
bigotry;  and  where  there  is  the  strong  perma¬ 
nent  leaven  of  intolerance  in  the  feelings  of  a 
people,  which  at  all  times  abides  in  the  middle 
classes  of  this  country,  it  needs  but  little  to 
provoke  them  into  actively  persecuting  those 
whom  they  have  never  ceased  to  think  proper 
objects  of  persecution.3  For  it  is  this— it  is  the 

3  Ample  warning  may  be  drawn  from  the  large 
infusion  of  the  passions  of  a  persecutor,  which 
mingled  with  the  general  display  of  the  worst 
parts  of  our  national  character  on  the  occasion  of 
the  Sepoy  insurrection.  The  ravings  of  fanatics  or 
charlatans  from  the  pulpit  may  be  unworthy  of 
notice;  but  the  heads  of  the  Evangelical  party  have 
announced  as  their  principle  for  the  government 
of  Hindoos  and  Mahometans,  that  no  schools  be 
supported  by  public  money  in  which  the  Bible  is 
not  taught,  and  by  necessary  consequence  that  no 
public  employment  be  given  to  any  but  real  or 
pretended  Christians.  An  Under-Secretary  of  State, 
in  a  speech  delivered  to  his  constituents  on  the 
12th  of  November,  1857,  is  reported  to  have  said: 
“Toleration  of  their  faith”  (the  faith  of  a  hun¬ 
dred  millions  of  British  subjects),  “the  supersti¬ 
tion  which  they  called  religion,  by  the  British 
Government,  had  had  the  effect  of  retarding  the 
ascendancy  of  the  British  name,  and  preventing 
the  salutary  growth  of  Christianity.. .  .Toleration 
was  the  great  corner-stone  of  the  religious  liber¬ 
ties  of  this  country;  but  do  not  let  them  abuse 
that  precious  word  toleration.  As  he  understood 
it,  it  meant  the  complete  liberty  to  all,  freedom 
of  worship,  c imong  Christians,  who  worshipped 
upon  the  same  foundation.  It  meant  toleration  of 
all  sects  and  denominations  of  Christians  who  be¬ 
lieved  in  the  one  mediation  ”  I  desire  to  call  at¬ 
tention  to  the  fact,  that  a  man  who  has  been 
deemed  fit  to  fill  a  high  office  in  the  government 
of  this  country  under  a  liberal  ministry,  main¬ 
tains  the  doctrine  that  all  who  do  not  believe  in 
the  divinity  of  Christ  are  beyond  the  pale  of  tol¬ 
eration.  Who,  after  this  imbecile  display,  can  in- 


ON  LIBERTY 


opinions  men  entertain,  and  the  feelings  they 
cherish,  respecting  those  who  disown  the  be¬ 
liefs  they  deem  important,  which  makes  this 
country  not  a  place  of  mental  freedom. 

For  a  long  time  past,  the  chief  mischief  of 
the  legal  penalties  is  that  they  strengthen  the 
social  stigma.  It  is  that  stigma  which  is  really 
effective,  and  so  effective  is  it,  that  the  profes¬ 
sion  of  opinions  which  are  under  the  ban  of 
society  is  much  less  common  in  England  than 
is,  in  many  other  countries,  the  avowal  of  those 
which  incur  risk  of  judicial  punishment.  In 
respect  to  all  persons  but  those  whose  pecuni¬ 
ary  circumstances  make  them  independent  of 
the  good  will  of  other  people,  opinion,  on  this 
subject,  is  as  efficacious  as  law;  men  might  as 
well  be  imprisoned,  as  excluded  from  the 
means  of  earning  their  bread.  Those  whose 
bread  is  already  secured,  and  who  desire  no 
favours  from  men  in  power,  or  from  bodies 
of  men,  or  from  the  public,  have  nothing  to 
fear  from  the  open  avowal  of  any  opinions,  but 
to  be  ill-thought  of  and  ill-spoken  of,  and  this 
it  ought  not  to  require  a  very  heroic  mould  to 
enable  them  to  bear.  There  is  no  room  for 
any  appeal  ad  misericordiam  in  behalf  of  such 
persons.  But  though  we  do  not  now  inflict  so 
much  evil  on  those  who  think  differently  from 
us  as  it  was  formerly  our  custom  to  do,  it  may 
be  that  we  do  ourselves  as  much  evil  as  ever  by 
our  treatment  of  them.  Socrates  was  put  to 
death,  but  the  Socraticphilosophy  rose  like  the 
sun  in  heaven,  and  spread  its  illumination  over 
the  whole  intellectual  firmament.  Christians 
were  cast  to  the  lions,  but  the  Christian  church 
grew  up  a  stately  and  spreading  tree,  overtop¬ 
ping  the  older  and  less  vigorous  growths,  and 
stifling  them  by  its  shade.  Our  merely  social 
intolerance  kills  no  one,  roots  out  no  opinions, 
but  induces  men  to  disguise  them,  or  to  abstain 
from  any  active  effort  for  their  diffusion.  With 
us,  heretical  opinions  do  not  perceptibly  gain, 
or  even  lose,  ground  in  each  decade  or  genera¬ 
tion;  they  never  blaze  out  far  and  wide,  but 
continue  to  smoulder  in  the  narrow  circles  of 
thinking  and  studious  persons  among  whom 
they  originate,  without  ever  lighting  up  the 
general  affairs  of  mankind  with  either  a  true 
or  a  deceptive  light. 

And  thus  is  kept  up  a  state  of  things  very 
satisfactory  to  some  minds,  because,  without 
the  unpleasant  process  of  fining  or  impris¬ 
oning  anybody,  it  maintains  all  prevailing 


dulgc  the  illusion  that  religions  persecution  has 
passed  away,  never  to  return? 


opinions  outwardly  undisturbed,  while  it  does 
not  absolutely  interdict  the  exercise  of  reason 
by  dissentients  afflicted  with  the  malady  of 
thought.  A  convenient  plan  for  having  peace 
in  the  intellectual  world,  and  keeping  all 
things  going  on  therein  very  much  as  they  do 
already.  But  the  price  paid  for  this  sort  of  in¬ 
tellectual  pacification  is  the  sacrifice  of  the  en¬ 
tire  moral  courage  of  the  human  mind.  A  state 
of  things  in  which  a  large  portion  of  the  most 
active  and  inquiring  intellects  find  it  advis¬ 
able  to  keep  the  general  principles  and  grounds 
of  their  convictions  within  their  own  breasts, 
and  attempt,  in  what  they  address  to  the  pub¬ 
lic,  to  fit  as  much  as  they  can  of  their  own  con¬ 
clusions  to  premises  which  they  have  inter¬ 
nally  renounced,  cannot  send  forth  the  open, 
fearless  characters,  and  logical,  consistent  in¬ 
tellects  who  once  adorned  the  thinking  world. 
The  sort  of  men  who  can  be  looked  for  under 
it,  are  either  mere  conformers  to  common¬ 
place,  or  time-servers  for  truth,  whose  argu¬ 
ments  on  all  great  subjects  are  meant  for  their 
hearers,  and  are  not  those  which  have  con¬ 
vinced  themselves.  Those  who  avoid  this  al¬ 
ternative,  do  so  by  narrowing  their  thoughts 
and  interests  to  things  which  can  be  spoken  of 
without  venturihg  within  the  region  of  prin¬ 
ciples,  that  is,  to  small  practical  matters, 
which  would  come  right  of  themselves,  if  but 
the  minds  of  mankind  were  strengthened  and 
enlarged,  and  which  will  never  be  made  effectu¬ 
ally  right  until  then:  while  that  which  would 
strengthen  and  enlarge  men’s  minds,  free  and 
daring  speculation  on  the  highest  subjects,  is 
abandoned. 

Those  in  whose  eyes  this  reticence  on  the 
part  of  heretics  is  no  evil  should  consider,  in 
the  first  place,  that  in  consequence  of  it  there 
is  never  any  fair  and  thorough  discussion  of 
heretical  opinions;  and  that  such  of  them  as 
could  not  stand  such  a  discussion,  though  they 
may  be  prevented  from  spreading,  do  not  dis¬ 
appear.  But  it  is  not  the  minds  of  heretics  that 
are  deteriorated  most  by  the  bail  placed  on  all 
inquiry  which  docs  not  end  in  the  orthodox 
conclusions.  The  greatest  harm  done  is  to  those 
who  are  not  heretics,  and  whose  whole  mental 
development  is  cramped,  and  their  reason 
cowed,  by  the  fear  of  heresy.  Who  can  compute 
what  the  world  loses  in  the  multitude  of  promis¬ 
ing  intellects  combined  with  timid  characters, 
who  dare  not  follow  out  any  bold,  vigorous, 
independent  train  of  thought,  lest  it  should 
land  them  in  something  which  would  admit 
of  being  considered  irreligious  or  immoral? 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION  283 


Among  them  we  may  occasionally  see  some 
man  of  deep  conscientiousness,  and  subtle  and 
refined  understanding,  who  spends  a  life  in 
sophisticating  with  an  intellect  which  he  can¬ 
not  silence,  and  exhausts  the  resources  of  in¬ 
genuity  in  attempting  to  reconcile  the  prompt¬ 
ings  of  his  conscience  and  reason  with  ortho¬ 
doxy,  which  yet  he  does  not,  perhaps,  to  the 
end  succeed  in  doing. 

No  one  can  be  a  great  thinker  who  does  not 
recognise,  that  as  a  thinker  it  is  his  first  duty 
to  follow  his  intellect  to  whatever  conclusions 
it  may  lead.  Truth  gains  more  even  by  the 
errors  of  one  who,  with  due  study  and  prepara¬ 
tion,  thinks  for  himself,  than  by  the  true  opin¬ 
ions  of  those  who  only  hold  them  because  they 
do  not  suffer  themselves  to  think.  Not  that  it  is 
solely,  or  chiefly,  to  form  great  thinkers,  that 
freedom  of  thinking  is  required.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  is  as  much  and  even  more  indispensa¬ 
ble  to  enable  average  human  beings  to  attain 
the  mental  stature  which  they  are  capable  of. 
There  have  been,  and  may  again  be,  great  in¬ 
dividual  thinkers  in  a  general  atmosphere  of 
mental  slavery.  But  there  never  has  been,  nor 
ever  will  be,  in  that  atmosphere  an  intellectu¬ 
ally  active  people.  Where  any  people  has  made 
a  temporary  approach  to  such  a  character,  it 
has  been  because  the  dread  of  heterodox  specu¬ 
lation  was  for  a  time  suspended.  Where  there 
is  a  tacit  convention  that  principles  are  not  to 
be  disputed;  where  the  discussion  of  the  great¬ 
est  questions  which  can  occupy  humanity  is 
considered  to  be  closed,  we  cannot  hope  to 
find  that  generally  high  scale  of  mental  activity 
which  has  made  some  periods  of  history  so  re¬ 
markable.  Never  when  controversy  avoided  the 
subjects  which  are  large  and  important  enough 
to  kindle  enthusiasm,  was  the  mind  of  a  people 
stirred  up  from  its  foundations,  and  the  impulse 
given  which  raised  even  persons  of  the  most 
ordinary  intellect  to  something  of  the  dignity 
of  thinking  beings.  Of  such  we  have  had  an 
example  in  the  condition  of  Europe  during  the 
times  immediately  following  the  Reformation; 
another,  though  limited  to  the  Continent  and 
to  a  more  cultivated  class,  in  the  speculative 
movement  of  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century;  and  a  third,  of  still  briefer  duration, 
in  the  intellectual  fermentation  of  Germany 
during  the  Goethian  and  Fichtean  period. 
These  periods  differed  widely  in  the  particular 
opinions  which  they  developed;  but  were  alike 
in  this,  that  during  all  three  the  yoke  of  author¬ 
ity  was  broken.  In  each,  an  old  mental  despot¬ 
ism  had  been  thrown  off,  and  no  new  one  had 


yet  taken  its  place.  The  impulse  given  at  these 
three  periods  has  made  Europe  what  it  now  is. 
Every  single  improvement  which  has  taken 
place  either  in  the  human  mind  or  in  institu¬ 
tions,  may  be  traced  distinctly  to  one  or  other 
of  them.  Appearances  have  for  some  time  in¬ 
dicated  that  all  three  impulses  are  well  nigh 
spent;  and  we  can  expect  no  fresh  start  until 
we  again  assert  our  mental  freedom. 

Let  us  now  pass  to  the  second  division  of  the 
argument,  and  dismissing  the  supposition  that 
any  of  the  received  opinions  may  be  false,  let 
us  assume  them  to  be  true,  and  examine  into 
the  worth  of  the  manner  in  which  they  are 
likely  to  be  held,  when  their  truth  is  not  freely 
and  openly  canvassed.  However  unwillingly  a 
person  who  has  a  strong  opinion  may  admit 
the  possibility  that  his  opinion  may  be  false,  he 
ought  to  be  moved  by  the  consideration  that, 
however  true  it  may  be,  if  it  is  not  fully,  fre¬ 
quently,  and  fearlessly  discussed,  it  will  be  held 
as  a  dead  dogma,  not  a  living  truth. 

There  is  a  class  of  persons  (happily  not  quite 
so  numerous  as  formerly)  who  think  it  enough 
if  a  person  assents  undoubtingly  to  what  they 
think  true,  though  he  has  no  knowledge  what¬ 
ever  of  the  grounds  of  the  opinion,  and  could 
not  make  a  tenable  defence  of  it  against  the 
most  superficial  objections.  Such  persons,  if 
they  can  once  get  their  creed  taught  from  au¬ 
thority,  naturally  think  that  no  good,  and 
some  harm,  comes  of  its  being  allowed  to  be 
questioned.  Where  their  influence  prevails, 
they  make  it  nearly  impossible  for  the  received 
opinion  to  be  rejected  wisely  and  considerately, 
though  it  may  still  be  rejected  rashly  and 
ignorantly;  for  to  shut  out  discussion  entirely 
is  seldom  possible,  and  when  it  once  gets  in, 
beliefs  not  grounded  on  conviction  are  apt  to 
give  way  before  the  slightest  semblance  of  an 
argument.  Waiving,  however,  this  possibility- 
assuming  that  the  true  opinion  abides  in  the 
mind,  but  abides  as  a  prejudice,  a  belief  inde¬ 
pendent  of,  and  proof  against,  argument— this 
is  not  the  way  in  which  truth  ought  to  be  held 
by  a  ratiohal  being.  This  is  not  knowing  the 
truth.  Truth,  thus  held,  is  but  one  superstition 
the  more,  accidentally  clinging  to  the  words 
which  enunciate  a  truth. 

If  the  intellect  and  judgment  of  mankind 
ought  to  be  cultivated,  a  thing  which  Protes¬ 
tants  at  least  do  not  deny,  on  what  can  these 
faculties  be  more  appropriately  exercised  by 
any  one,  than  on  the  things  which  concern  him 
so  much  that  it  is  considered  necessary  for  him 
to  hold  opinions  on  them?  If  the  cultivation 


ON  LIBERTY 


284 

of  the  understanding  consists  in  one  thing 
more  than  in  another,  it  is  surely  in  learning 
the  grounds  of  one’s  own  opinions.  Whatever 
people  believe,  on  subjects  on  which  it  is  of 
the  first  importance  to  believe  rightly,  they 
ought  to  be  able  to  defend  against  at  least  the 
common  objections.  But,  some  one  may  say, 
“Let  them  be  taught  the  grounds  of  their  opin¬ 
ions.  It  does  not  follow  that  opinions  must  be 
merely  parroted  because  they  are  never  heard 
controverted.  Persons  who  learn  geometry  do 
not  simply  commit  the  theorems  to  memory, 
but  understand  and  learn  likewise  the  demon¬ 
strations;  and  it  would  be  absurd  to  say  that 
they  remain  ignorant  of  the  grounds  of  geo¬ 
metrical  truths,  because  they  never  hear  any 
one  deny,  and  attempt  to  disprove  them.”  Un¬ 
doubtedly:  and  such  teaching  suffices  on  a  sub¬ 
ject  like  mathematics,  where  there  is  nothing 
at  all  to  be  said  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  ques¬ 
tion.  The  peculiarity  of  the  evidence  of  mathe¬ 
matical  truths  is  that  all  the  argument  is  on 
one  side.  There  are  no  objections,  and  no 
answers  to  objections.  But  on  every  subject  on 
which  difference  of  opinion  is  possible,  the 
truth  depends  on  a  balance  to  be  struck  be¬ 
tween  two  sets  of  conflicting  reasons.  Even  in 
natural  philosophy,  there  is  always  some  other 
explanation  possible  of  the  same  facts;  some 
geocentric  theory  instead  of  heliocentric,  some 
phlogiston  instead  of  oxygen;  and  it  has  to  be 
shown  why  that  other  theory  cannot  be  the 
true  one:  and  until  this  is  shown,  and  until  we 
know  how  it  is  shown,  we  do  not  understand 
the  grounds  of  our  opinion. 

But  when  we  turn  to  subjects  infinitely  more 
complicated,  to  morals,  religion,  politics,  social 
relations,  and  thebusiness  of  life,  three-fourths 
of  the  arguments  for  every  disputed  opinion 
consist  in  dispelling  the  appearances  which 
favour  some  opinion  different  from  it.  The 
greatest  orator,  save  one,  of  antiquity,  has  lei t 
it  on  record  that  he  always  studied  his  adver¬ 
sary’s  case  with  as  great,  if  not  still  greater,  in¬ 
tensity  than  even  his  own.  What  Cicero  prac 
tiscd  as  the  means  of  forensic  success  requires 
to  be  imitated  by  all  who  study  any  subject  in 
order  to  arrive  at  the  truth.  I  le  who knowsonlv 
his  own  side  of  the  case,  knows  little  of  that. 

1 1  is  reasons  may  be  good,  and  no  one  may  have 
been  able  to  refute  them.  But  if  he  is  equally 
unable  to  refute  the  reasons  on  the  opposite 
side;  if  he  does  not  so  nmt  h  as  know  what  they 
are,  he  has  no  ground  for  preferring  either 
opinion  1  he  rational  position  for  him  would 
be  suspension  ol  judgment,  and  unless  he  con¬ 


tents  himself  with  that,  he  is  either  led  by  au¬ 
thority,  or  adopts,  like  the  generality  of  the 
world,  the  side  to  which  he  feels  most  inclina¬ 
tion.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  he  should  hear  the 
arguments  of  adversaries  from  his  own  teachers, 
presented  as  they  state  them,  and  accompanied 
by  what  they  offer  as  refutations.  That  is  not 
the  way  to  do  justice  to  the  arguments,  or  bring 
them  into  real  contact  with  his  own  mind.  He 
must  be  able  to  hear  them  from  persons  who 
actually  believe  them;  who  defend  them  in 
earnest,  and  do  their  very  utmost  for  them.  He 
must  know  them  in  their  most  plausible  and 
persuasive  form;  he  must  feel  the  whole  force 
of  the  difficulty  which  the  true  view  of  the 
subject  has  to  encounter  and  dispose  of;  else 
he  will  never  really  possess  himself  of  the  por¬ 
tion  of  truth  which  meets  and  removes  that 
difficulty. 

Ninety-nine  in  a  hundred  of  what  are  called 
educated  men  are  in  this  condition;  even  of 
those  who  can  argue  fluently  for  their  opinions. 
Their  conclusion  may  be  true,  but  it  might  be 
false  for  anything  they  know:  they  have  never 
thrown  themselves  into  the  mental  position 
of  those  who  think  differently  from  them,  and 
considered  what  such  persons  may  have  to  say: 
and  consequently  they  do  not,  in  any  proper 
sense  of  the  word,  know  the  doctrine  which 
they  themselves  profess.  They  do  not  know 
those  parts  of  it  which  explain  and  justify  the 
remainder;  the  considerations  which  show  that 
a  fact  which  seemingly  conflicts  with  another 
is  reconcilable  with  it, or  that, of  two  apparent¬ 
ly  strong  reasons,  one  and  not  the  other  ought 
to  be  preferred.  All  that  pan  of  the  truth 
which  turns  the  scale,  and  decides  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  a  completely  informed  mind,  they  are 
strangers  to;  nor  is  it  ever  really  known,  but 
to  those  who  have  attended  equally  and  im¬ 
partially  to  both  sides,  and  endeavoured  to  see 
the  reasons  of  both  in  the  strongest  light.  So 
essential  is  this  discipline  to  a  real  understand 
ingof  moral  and  human  subjects,  that  il  oppo¬ 
nents  of  all  important  truths  do  not  exist,  it 
is  indispensable  to  imagine  them,  and  supply 
them  with  the  strongest  arguments  whith  the 
most  skill ul  devil’s  advocate  can  conjure  up. 

To  abate  the  forte  of  ihese  considerations, 
an  enemy  ol  lire  discussion  may  be  supposed 
to  s.i  v .  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  mankind  in 
general  to  know  and  understand  all  that  can 
be  said  against  or  for  their  opinions  by  philos¬ 
ophers  and  theologians.  1  hat  it  is  not  needful 
for  common  men  to  be  able  to  expose  all  the 
misstatements  or  fallacies  of  an  ingenious  oppo- 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION  285 


nent.  That  it  is  enough  if  there  is  always  some¬ 
body  capable  of  answering  them,  so  that  noth¬ 
ing  likely  to  mislead  uninstructed  persons  re¬ 
mains  unrefuted.  That  simple  minds,  having 
been  taught  the  obvious  grounds  of  the  truths 
inculcated  on  them,  may  trust  to  authority  for 
the  rest,  and  being  aware  that  they  have  neither 
knowledge  nor  talent  to  resolve  every  difficulty 
which  can  be  raised,  may  repose  in  the  as¬ 
surance  that  all  those  which  have  been  raised 
have  been  or  can  be  answered,  by  those  who 
are  specially  trained  to  the  task. 

Conceding  to  this  view  of  the  subject  the  ut¬ 
most  that  can  be  claimed  for  it  by  those  most 
easily  satisfied  with  the  amount  of  understand¬ 
ing  of  truth  which  ought  to  accompany  the  be¬ 
lief  of  it;  even  so,  the  argument  for  free  discus¬ 
sion  is  no  way  weakened.  For  even  this  doc¬ 
trine  acknowledges  that  mankind  ought  to 
have  a  rational  assurance  that  all  objections 
have  been  satisfactorily  answered;  and  how  are 
they  to  be  answered  if  that  which  requires  to 
be  answered  is  not  spoken?  or  how  can  the  an¬ 
swer  be  known  to  be  satisfactory,  if  the  objec¬ 
tors  have  no  opportunity  of  showing  that  it  is 
unsatisfactory?  If  not  the  public,  at  least  the 
philosophers  and  theologians  who  are  to  re¬ 
solve  the  difficulties,  must  make  themselves  fa¬ 
miliar  with  those  difficulties  in  their  most  puz¬ 
zling  form;  and  this  cannot  be  accomplished 
unless  they  are  freely  stated,  and  placed  in  the 
most  advantageous  light  which  they  admit  of. 
The  Catholic  Church  has  its  own  way  of  deal¬ 
ing  with  this  embarrassing  problem.  It  makes 
a  broad  separation  between  those  who  can  be 
permitted  to  receive  its  doctrines  on  convic¬ 
tion,  and  those  who  must  accept  them  on  trust. 
Neither,  indeed,  are  allowed  any  choice  as  to 
what  they  will  accept;  but  the  clergy,  such  at 
least  as  can  be  fully  confided  in,  may  admis¬ 
sibly  and  meritoriously  make  themselves  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  arguments  of  opponents, 
in  order  to  answer  them,  and  may,  therefore, 
read  heretical  books;  the  laity,  not  unless  by 
special  permission,  hard  to  be  obtained.  1  his 
discipline  recognises  a  knowledge  of  the  ene¬ 
my’s  case  as  beneficial  to  the  teachers,  but  finds 
means,  consistent  with  this,  of  denying  it  to 
the  rest  of  the  world:  thus  giving  to  the  elite 
more  mental  culture,  though  not  more  mental 
freedom,  than  it  allows  to  the  mass.  By  this  de¬ 
vice  it  succeeds  in  obtaining  the  kind  of  men¬ 
tal  superiority  which  its  purposes  require;  for 
though  culture  without  freedom  never  made 
a  large  and  liberal  mind,  it  can  make  a  clever 
nisi  prins  advocate  of  a  cause.  But  in  countries 


professing  Protestantism,  this  resource  is  de¬ 
nied;  since  Protestants  hold,  at  least  in  theory, 
that  the  responsibility  for  the  choice  of  a  re¬ 
ligion  must  be  borne  by  each  for  himself,  and 
cannot  be  thrown  off  upon  teachers.  Besides,  in 
the  present  state  of  the  world,  it  is  practically 
impossible  that  writings  which  are  read  by  the 
instructed  can  be  kept  from  the  uninstructed. 
If  the  teachers  of  mankind  are  to  be  cogni¬ 
sant  of  all  that  they  ought  to  know,  everything 
must  be  free  to  be  written  and  published  with¬ 
out  restraint. 

If,  however,  the  mischievous  operation  of  the 
absence  of  free  discussion,  when  the  received 
opinions  are  true,  were  confined  to  leaving 
men  ignorant  of  the  grounds  of  those  opinions, 
it  might  be  thought  that  this,  if  an  intellectual, 
is  no  moral  evil,  and  does  not  affect  the  worth 
of  the  opinions,  regarded  in  their  influence  on 
the  character.  The  fact,  however,  is,  that  not 
only  the  grounds  of  the  opinion  are  forgotten 
in  the  absence  of  discussion,  but  too  often  the 
meaning  of  the  opinion  itself.  The  words  which 
convey  it  cease  to  suggest  ideas,  or  suggest  only 
a  small  portion  of  those  they  were  originally 
employed  to  communicate.  Instead  of  a  vivid 
conception  and  a  living  belief,  there  remain 
only  a  few  phrases  retained  by  rote;  or,  if  any 
part,  the  shell  and  husk  only  of  the  meaning 
is  retained,  the  finer  essence  being  lost.  The 
great  chapter  in  human  history  which  this  fact 
occupies  and  fills,  cannot  be  too  earnestly 
studied  and  meditated  on. 

It  is  illustrated  in  the  experience  of  almost 
all  ethical  doctrines  and  religious  creeds.  They 
are  all  full  of  meaning  and  vitality  to  those 
who  originate  them,  and  to  the  direct  disciples 
of  the  originators.  Their  meaning  continues  to 
be  felt  in  undiminished  strength,  and  is  per¬ 
haps  brought  out  into  even  fuller  conscious¬ 
ness,  so  long  as  the  struggle  lasts  to  give  the 
doctrine  or  creed  an  ascendancy  over  other 
creeds.  At  last  it  either  prevails,  and  becomes 
the  general  opinion,  or  its  progress  stops;  it 
keeps  possession  of  the  ground  it  has  gained, 
but  ceases  to  spread  further.  When  either  of 
these  results  has  become  apparent,  contro¬ 
versy  on  the  subject  flags,  and  gradually  dies 
away.  The  doctrine  has  taken  its  place,  if  not 
as  a  received  opinion,  as  one  of  the  admitted 
sects  or  divisions  of  opinion:  those  who  hold 
it  have  generally  inherited,  not  adopted  it; 
and  conversion  from  one  of  these  doctrines 
to  another,  being  now  an  exceptional  fact,  oc¬ 
cupies  little  place  in  the  thoughts  of  their  pro¬ 
fessors.  Instead  of  being,  as  at  first,  constantly 


ON  LIBERTY 


286 

on  the  alert  either  to  defend  themselves  against 
the  world,  or  to  bring  the  world  over  to  them, 
they  have  subsided  into  acquiescence,  and 
neither  listen,  when  they  can  help  it,  to  argu¬ 
ments  against  their  creed,  nor  trouble  dis¬ 
sentients  (if  there  be  such)  with  arguments  in 
its  favour.  From  this  time  may  usually  be  dated 
the  decline  in  the  living  power  of  the  doctrine. 

We  often  hear  the  teachers  of  all  creeds  la¬ 
menting  the  difficulty  of  keeping  up  in  the 
minds  of  believers  a  lively  apprehension  of  the 
truth  which  they  nominally  recognise,  so  that 
it  may  penetrate  the  feelings,  and  acquire  a 
real  mastery  over  the  conduct.  No  such  dif¬ 
ficulty  is  complained  of  while  the  creed  is  still 
fighting  for  its  existence:  even  the  weaker  com¬ 
batants  then  know  and  feel  what  they  are  fight¬ 
ing  for,  and  the  difference  between  it  and 
other  doctrines;  and  in  that  period  of  every 
creed’s  existence,  not  a  few  persons  may  be 
found,  who  have  realised  its  fundamental  prin¬ 
ciples  in  all  the  forms  of  thought,  have  weighed 
and  considered  them  in  all  their  important 
bearings,  and  have  experienced  the  full  effect 
on  the  character  which  belief  in  that  creed 
ought  to  produce  in  a  mind  thoroughly  im¬ 
bued  with  it.  But  when  it  has  come  to  be  an 
hereditary  creed,  and  to  be  received  passively, 
not  actively — when  the  mind  is  no  longer  com¬ 
pelled,  in  the  same  degree  as  at  first,  to  exer¬ 
cise  its  vital  powers  on  the  questions  which  its 
belief  presents  to  it,  there  is  a  progressive  tend¬ 
ency  to  forget  all  of  the  belief  except  the  for¬ 
mularies.  or  to  give  it  a  dull  and  torpid  assent, 
as  if  accepting  it  on  trust  dispensed  with  the 
necessity  of  realising  it  in  consciousness,  or 
testing  it  by  personal  experience,  until  it  al¬ 
most  ceases  to  connect  itself  at  all  with  the 
inner  life  of  the  human  being.  Then  are  seen 
the  cases,  so  frequent  in  this  age  of  the  world 
as  almost  to  form  the  majority,  in  which  the 
creed  remains  as  it  were  outside  the  mind,  in- 
crusting  and  petrifying  it  against  all  other  in¬ 
fluences  addressed  to  the  higher  parts  of  our 
nature;  manifesting  its  power  by  not  suffering 
any  fresh  and  living  conviction  to  get  in,  but 
itself  doing  nothing  for  the  mind  or  heart,  ex¬ 
cept  standing  sentinel  over  them  to  keep  them 
vacant. 

Fo  what  an  extent  doctrines  intrinsically 
fitted  to  make  the  deepest  impression  upon  the 
mind  may  remain  in  it  as  dead  beliefs,  with¬ 
out  being  ever  realised  in  the  imagination,  the 
feelings,  or  the  understanding,  is  exemplified 
by  the  manner  in  which  the  majority  of  be¬ 
lievers  hold  the  doctrines  of  Christianity.  By 


Christianity  I  here  mean  what  is  accounted 
such  by  all  churches  and  sects— the  maxims  and 
precepts  contained  in  the  New  Testament. 
These  are  considered  sacred,  and  accepted  as 
laws,  by  all  professing  Christians.  Yet  it  is 
scarcely  too  much  to  say  that  not  one  Christian 
in  a  thousand  guides  or  tests  his  individual 
conduct  by  reference  to  those  laws.  The  stand¬ 
ard  to  which  he  does  refer  it,  is  the  custom  of 
his  nation,  his  class,  or  his  religious  profession. 
He  has  thus,  on  the  one  hand,  a  collection  of 
ethical  maxims,  which  he  believes  to  have  been 
vouchsafed  to  him  by  infallible  wisdom  as  rules 
for  his  government:  and  on  the  other  a  set  of 
every-day  judgments  and  practices,  which  go 
a  certain  length  with  some  of  those  maxims, 
not  so  great  a  length  with  others,  stand  in  di¬ 
rect  opposition  to  some,  and  are,  on  the  whole, 
a  compromise  between  the  Christian  creed  and 
the  interests  and  suggestions  of  worldly  life. 
To  the  first  of  these  standards  he  gives  his  hom¬ 
age;  to  the  other  his  real  allegiance. 

All  Christians  believe  that  the  blessed  are 
the  poor  and  humble,  and  those  who  are  ill- 
used  by  the  world;  that  it  is  easier  for  a  camel 
to  pass  through  the  eye  of  a  needle  than  for  a 
rich  man  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven;  that 
they  should  judge  not.  lest  they  be  judged:  that 
they  should  swear  not  at  all:  that  they  should 
love  their  neighbour  as  themselves;  that  if 
one  take  their  cloak,  they  should  give  him  their 
coat  also;  that  they  should  take  no  thought  for 
the  morrow:  that  if  they  would  be  perfect  they 
should  sell  all  that  they  have  and  give  it  to  the 
poor.  They  arc  not  insincere  when  they  say 
that  they  believe  these  things.  They  do  believe 
them,  as  people  believe  what  they  have  always 
heard  lauded  and  never  discussed.  But  in  the 
sense  of  that  living  belief  which  regulates  con¬ 
duct,  they  believe  these  doctrines  just  up  to  the 
point  to  which  it  is  usual  to  act  upon  them. 
The  doctrines  in  their  integrity  are  serviceable 
to  pelt  adversaries  with;  and  it  is  understood 
that  they  are  to  be  put  forward  (when  possi¬ 
ble)  as  the  reasons  for  whatever  people  do  that 
they  think  laudable.  But  any  one  who  remind¬ 
ed  them  that  the  maxims  require  an  infinity  ol 
things  which  they  never  even  think  ol  doing, 
would  gain  nothing  but  to  be  ( hissed  among 
those  very  unpopular  characters  who  affect  to 
be  better  than  other  people.  'Hie  doctrines 
have  no  hold  on  ordinary  believers— arc  not  a 
power  in  their  minds.  They  have  an  habitual 
respect  for  the  sound  of  them,  but  no  feeling 
which  spreads  from  the  words  to  the  things 
signified,  and  forces  the  mind  to  take  them  in, 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION  287 


and  make  them  conform  to  the  formula.  When¬ 
ever  conduct  is  concerned,  they  look  round  for 
Mr.  A  and  B  to  direct  them  how  far  to  go  in 
obeying  Christ. 

Now  we  may  be  well  assured  that  the  case 
was  not  thus,  but  far  otherwise,  with  the  early 
Christians.  Had  it  been  thus,  Christianity  never 
would  have  expanded  from  an  obscure  sect  of 
the  despised  Hebrews  into  the  religion  of  the 
Roman  empire.  When  their  enemies  said,  “See 
how  these  Christians  love  one  another”  (a  re¬ 
mark  not  likely  to  be  made  by  anybody  now), 
they  assuredly  had  a  much  livelier  feeling  of 
the  meaning  of  their  creed  than  they  have  ever 
had  since.  And  to  this  cause,  probably,  it  is 
chiefly  owing  that  Christianity  now  makes  so 
little  progress  in  extending  its  domain,  and 
after  eighteen  centuries  is  still  nearly  confined 
to  Europeans  and  the  descendants  of  Europe¬ 
ans.  Even  with  the  strictly  religious,  who  are 
much  in  earnest  about  their  doctrines,  and  at¬ 
tach  a  greater  amount  of  meaning  to  many  of 
them  than  people  in  general,  it  commonly 
happens  that  the  part  which  is  thus  compara¬ 
tively  active  in  their  minds  is  that  which  was 
made  by  Calvin,  or  Knox,  or  some  such  person 
much  nearer  in  character  to  themselves.  The 
sayings  of  Christ  coexist  passively  in  their 
minds,  producing  hardly  any  effect  beyond 
what  is  caused  by  mere  listening  to  words  so 
amiable  and  bland.  There  are  many  reasons, 
doubtless,  why  doctrines  which  are  the  badge 
of  a  sect  retain  more  of  their  vitality  than  those 
common  to  all  recognised  sects,  and  why  more 
pains  are  taken  by  teachers  to  keep  their  mean¬ 
ing  alive;  but  one  reason  certainly  is,  that  the 
peculiar  doctrines  are  more  questioned,  and 
have  to  be  oftener  defended  against  open  gain- 
sayers.  Both  teachers  and  learners  go  to  sleep 
at  their  post,  as  soon  as  there  is  no  enemy  in 
the  field. 

The  same  thing  holds  true,  generally  speak¬ 
ing,  of  all  traditional  doctrines— those  of  pru¬ 
dence  and  knowledge  of  life,  as  well  as  of 
morals  or  religion.  All  languages  and  litera¬ 
tures  are  full  of  general  observations  on  life, 
both  as  to  what  it  is,  and  how  to  conduct  one¬ 
self  in  it;  observations  which  everybody  knows, 
which  everybody  repeats,  or  hears  with  ac¬ 
quiescence,  which  are  received  as  truisms,  yet 
of  which  most  people  first  truly  learn  the 
meaning  when  experience,  generally  of  a  pain¬ 
ful  kind,  has  made  it  a  reality  to  them.  How 
often,  when  smarting  under  some  unforeseen 
misfortune  or  disappointment,  does  a  person 
call  to  mind  some  proverb  or  common  saying, 


familiar  to  him  all  his  life,  the  meaning  ot 
which,  if  he  had  ever  before  felt  it  as  he  does 
now,  would  have  saved  him  from  the  calamity. 
There  are  indeed  reasons  for  this,  other  than 
the  absence  of  discussion;  there  are  many 
truths  of  which  the  full  meaning  cannot  be 
realised  until  personal  experience  has  brought 
it  home.  But  much  more  of  the  meaning  even 
of  these  would  have  been  understood,  and 
what  was  understood  would  have  been  far 
more  deeply  impressed  on  the  mind,  if  the  man 
had  been  accustomed  to  hear  it  argued  pro 
and  con  by  people  who  did  understand  it.  The 
fatal  tendency  of  mankind  to  leave  off  think¬ 
ing  about  a  thing  when  it  is  no  longer  doubt¬ 
ful,  is  the  cause  of  half  their  errors.  A  con¬ 
temporary  author  has  well  spoken  of  “the 
deep  slumber  of  a  decided  opinion.” 

But  whatl  (it  may  be  asked)  Is  the  absence 
of  unanimity  an  indispensable  condition  of 
true  knowledge?  Is  it  necessary  that  some  part 
of  mankind  should  persist  in  error  to  enable 
any  to  realise  the  truth?  Does  a  belief  cease  to 
be  real  and  vital  as  soon  as  it  is  generally  re¬ 
ceived— and  is  a  proposition  never  thoroughly 
understood  and  felt  unless  some  doubt  of  it  re¬ 
mains?  As  soon  as  mankind  have  unanimously 
accepted  a  truth,  does  the  truth  perish  within 
them?  The  highest  aim  and  best  result  of 
improved  intelligence,  it  has  hitherto  been 
thought,  is  to  unite  mankind  more  and  more  in 
the  acknowledgment  of  all  important  truths; 
and  does  the  intelligence  only  last  as  long  as 
it  has  not  achieved  its  object?  Do  the  fruits  of 
conquest  perish  by  the  very  completeness  of  the 
victory? 

I  affirm  no  such  thing.  As  mankind  improve, 
the  number  of  doctrines  which  are  no  longer 
disputed  or  doubted  will  be  constantly  on  the 
increase:  and  the  well-being  of  mankind  may 
almost  be  measured  by  the  number  and  gravity 
of  the  truths  which  have  reached  the  point  of 
being  uncontested.  The  cessation,  on  one  ques¬ 
tion  after  another,  of  serious  controversy,  is 
one  of  the  necessary  incidents  of  the  consolida¬ 
tion  of  opinion;  a  consolidation  as  salutary  in 
the  case  of  true  opinions,  as  it  is  dangerous 
and  noxious  when  the  opinions  are  erroneous. 
But  though  this  gradual  narrowing  of  the 
bounds  of  diversity  of  opinion  is  necessary  in 
both  senses  of  the  term,  being  at  once  inevi¬ 
table  and  indispensable,  we  are  not  therefore 
obliged  to  conclude  that  all  its  consequences 
must  be  beneficial.  The  loss  of  so  important  an 
aid  to  the  intelligent  and  living  apprehension 
of  a  truth,  as  is  afforded  by  the  necessity  of  ex- 


288  ON  LIBERTY 


plaining  it  to,  or  defending  it  against,  oppo¬ 
nents,  though  not  sufficient  to  outweigh,  is  no 
trifling  drawback  from,  the  benefit  of  its  uni¬ 
versal  recognition.  Where  this  advantage  can 
no  longer  be  had,  I  confess  I  should  like  lo  see 
the  teachers  of  mankind  endeavouring  to  pro¬ 
vide  a  substitute  for  it;  some  contrivance  for 
making  the  difficulties  of  the  question  as  pres¬ 
ent  to  the  learner's  consciousness,  as  if  they 
were  pressed  upon  him  by  a  dissentient  cham¬ 
pion,  eager  for  his  conversion. 

But  instead  of  seeking  contrivances  for  this 
put-pose,  they  have  lost  those  they  formerly 
had.  The  Socratic  dialectics,  so  magnificently 
exemplified  in  the  dialogues  of  Plato,  were  a 
contrivance  of  this  description.  They  were  es¬ 
sentially  a  negative  discussion  of  the  great 
question  of  philosophy  and  life,  directed  with 
consummate  skill  to  the  purpose  of  convinc¬ 
ing  any  one  who  had  merely  adopted  the  com¬ 
monplaces  of  received  opinion  that  he  did  not 
understand  the  subject— that  he  as  yet  attached 
no  definite  meaning  to  the  doctrines  he  pro¬ 
fessed:  in  order  that,  becoming  aware  of  his 
ignorance,  he  might  be  put  in  the  way  to  ob¬ 
tain  a  stable  belief,  resting  on  a  clear  appre¬ 
hension  both  of  the  meaning  of  doctrines  and 
of  their  evidence.  The  school  disputations  of 
the  Middle  Ages  had  a  somewhat  similar  ob¬ 
ject.  They  were  intended  to  make  sure  that 
the  pupil  understood  his  own  opinion,  and 
(by  necessary  correlation)  the  opinion  opposed 
to  it,  and  could  enforce  the  grounds  of  the  one 
and  confute  those  of  the  other.  These  last-men¬ 
tioned  con  tests  had  indeed  the  incurable  defect, 
that  the  premises  appealed  to  were  taken  from 
authority,  not  from  reason;  and,  as  a  discip¬ 
line  to  the  mind,  they  were  in  every  respect  in¬ 
ferior  to  the  powerful  dialectics  which  formed 
the  intellects  of  the  “Socratici  viri";  but  the 
modern  mind  owes  far  more  to  both  than  it  is 
generally  willing  to  admit,  and  the  present 
modes  of  education  contain  nothing  which  in 
(he  smallest  degree  supplies  the  place  either 
of  the  one  or  of  the  other.  A  person  who  de¬ 
rives  all  his  instruction  from  teachers  or  books, 
even  if  he  escape  the  besetting  temptation  of 
contenting  himself  with  cram,  is  under  no 
compulsion  to  hear  both  sides;  accordingly  it 
is  far  from  a  frequent  accomplishment,  even 
among  thinkers,  to  know  both  sides;  and  the 
weakest  part  of  what  everybody  says  in  defence 
of  his  opinion  is  what  he  intends  as  a  reply  to 
antagonists. 

It  is  the  fashion  of  the  present  time  lo  dis¬ 
parage  negative  logic— that  which  points  out 


weaknesses  in  theory  or  errors  in  practice, 
without  establishing  positive  truths.  Such  neg¬ 
ative  criticism  would  indeed  be  poor  enough 
as  an  ultimate  result;  but  as  a  means  to  attain¬ 
ing  any  positive  knowledge  or  conviction  wor¬ 
thy  the  name,  it  cannot  be  valued  too  highly; 
and  until  people  are  again  systematically 
trained  to  it,  there  will  be  few  great  thinkers, 
and  a  low  general  average  of  intellect,  in  any 
but  themathematical  and  physical  departments 
of  speculation.  On  any  other  subject  no  one’s 
opinions  deserve  the  name  of  knowledge,  ex¬ 
cept  so  far  as  he  has  either  had  forced  upon 
him  by  others,  or  gone  through  of  himself,  the 
same  mental  process  which  would  have  been 
required  of  him  in  catrying  on  an  active 
controversy  with  opponents.  That,  therefore, 
which  when  absent,  it  is  so  indispensable,  but 
so  difficult,  to  create,  how  worse  than  absurd 
it  is  to  forego,  when  spontaneously  offering 
itself!  If  there  are  any  persons  who  contest  a 
received  opinion,  or  who  will  do  so  if  law  or 
opinion  will  let  them,  let  us  thank  them  for 
it,  open  our  minds  to  listen  to  them,  and  re¬ 
joice  that  there  is  some  one  to  do  for  us  what 
we  otherwise  ought,  if  we  have  any  regard  for 
either  the  certainty  or  the  vitality  of  our  con¬ 
victions,  to  do  with  much  greater  labour  for 
ourselves. 

It  still  remains  to  speak  of  one  of  the  prin¬ 
cipal  causes  which  make  diversity  of  opinion 
advantageous,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  until 
mankind  shall  have  entered  a  stage  of  intel¬ 
lectual  advancement  which  at  present  seems 
at  an  incalculable  distance.  We  have  hitherto 
considered  only  two  possibilities:  that  the  re¬ 
ceived  opinion  may  be  false,  and  some  other 
opinion,  consequently,  true;  or  that,  the  re¬ 
ceived  opinion  being  true,  a  conflict  with  the 
opposite  error  is  essential  to  a  clear  apprehen¬ 
sion  and  deej)  feeling  of  its  truth.  But  there  is 
a  commoner  case  than  cither  of  these;  when 
the  conflicting  doctrines,  instead  of  being  one 
true  and  the  other  false,  share  the  truth  be¬ 
tween  them;  and  the  nonconforming  opinion 
is  needed  to  supply  the  remainder  of  the  truth, 
of  which  the  received  doctrine  embodies  only 
a  part.  Popular  opinions,  on  subjects  not  pal¬ 
pable  to  sense,  are  often  true,  but  seldom  or 
never  the  whole  truth.  They  are  a  part  of  the 
truth;  sometimes  a  greater,  sometimes  a  small 
er  part,  but  exaggerated,  distorted,  and  dis¬ 
jointed  from  the  truths  by  which  they  ought 
to  be  accompanied  and  limited.  Heretical 
opinions,  on  the  other  hand,  arc  generally 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION  289 


some  of  these  suppressed  and  neglected  truths, 
bursting  the  bonds  which  kept  them  down, 
and  either  seeking  reconciliation  with  the 
truth  contained  in  the  common  opinion,  or 
fronting  it  as  enemies,  and  setting  themselves 
up,  with  similar  exclusiveness,  as  the  whole 
truth.  The  latter  case  is  hitherto  the  most  fre¬ 
quent,  as,  in  the  human  mind,  one-sidedness 
has  always  been  the  rule,  and  many-sidedness 
the  exception.  Hence,  even  in  revolutions  of 
opinion,  one  part  of  the  truth  usually  sets  while 
another  rises.  Even  progress,  which  ought  to 
superadd,  for  the  most  part  only  substitutes, 
one  partial  and  incomplete  truth  for  another; 
improvement  consisting  chiefly  in  this,  that  the 
new  fragment  of  truth  is  more  wanted,  more 
adapted  to  the  needs  of  the  time,  than  that 
which  it  displaces.  Such  being  the  partial  char¬ 
acter  of  prevailing  opinions,  even  when  rest¬ 
ing  on  a  true  foundation,  every  opinion  which 
embodies  somewhat  of  the  portion  of  truth 
which  the  common  opinion  omits,  ought  to 
be  considered  precious,  with  whatever  amount 
of  error  and  confusion  that  truth  may  be 
blended.  No  sober  judge  of  human  affairs  will 
feel  bound  to  be  indignant  because  those  who 
force  on  our  notice  truths  which  wre  should 
otherwise  have  overlooked,  overlook  some  of 
those  which  we  see.  Rather,  he  will  think  that 
so  long  as  popular  truth  is  one-sided,  it  is  more 
desirable  than  otherwise  that  unpopular  truth 
should  have  one-sided  assertors  too;  such  being 
usually  the  most  energetic,  and  the  most  likely 
to  compel  reluctant  attention  to  the  fragment 
of  wisdom  which  they  proclaim  as  if  it  were  the 
whole. 

Thus,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  when  near¬ 
ly  all  the  instructed,  and  all  those  of  the  un¬ 
instructed  who  were  led  by  them,  were  lost  in 
admiration  of  what  is  called  civilisation,  and 
of  the  marvels  of  modern  science,  literature, 
and  philosophy,  and  while  greatly  overrating 
the  amount  of  unlikeness  between  the  men  of 
modern  and  those  of  ancient  times,  indulged 
the  belief  that  the  whole  of  the  difference  was 
in  their  own  favour;  with  what  a  salutary 
shock  did  the  paradoxes  of  Rousseau  explode 
like  bombshells  in  the  midst,  dislocating  the 
compact  mass  of  one-sided  opinion,  and  forc¬ 
ing  its  elements  to  recombine  in  a  better  form 
and  with  additional  ingredients.  Not  that  the 
current  opinions  were  on  the  whole  farther 
from  the  truth  than  Rousseau’s  were;  on  the 
contrary,  they  were  nearer  to  it;  they  contained 
more  of  positive  truth,  and  very  much  less  of 
error.  Nevertheless  there  lay  in  Rousseau’s 


doctrine,  and  has  floated  dowm  the  stream  of 
opinion  along  with  it,  a  considerable  amount 
of  exactly  those  truths  which  the  popular  opin¬ 
ion  wanted;  and  these  are  the  deposit  which 
was  left  behind  when  the  flood  subsided.  1  he 
superior  worth  of  simplicity  of  life,  the  ener¬ 
vating  and  demoralising  effect  of  the  trammels 
and  hypocrisies  of  artificial  society,  are  ideas 
which  have  never  been  entirely  absent  from 
cultivated  minds  since  Rousseau  wrote;  and 
they  will  in  time  produce  their  due  effect, 
though  at  present  needing  to  be  asserted  as 
much  as  ever,  and  to  be  asserted  by  deeds,  for 
words,  on  this  subject,  have  nearly  exhausted 
their  power. 

In  politics,  again,  it  is  almost  a  common¬ 
place,  that  a  party  of  order  or  stability,  and  a 
party  of  progress  or  reform,  are  both  necessary 
elements  of  a  healthy  state  of  political  life; 
until  the  one  or  the  other  shall  have  so  en¬ 
larged  its  mental  grasp  as  to  be  a  party  equally 
of  order  and  of  progress,  knowing  and  distin¬ 
guishing  what  is  fit  to  be  preserved  from  what 
ought  to  be  swept  away.  Each  of  these  modes 
of  thinking  derives  its  utility  from  the  deficien¬ 
cies  of  the  other;  but  it  is  in  a  great  measure 
the  opposition  of  the  other  that  keeps  each 
within  the  limits  of  reason  and  sanity.  Unless 
opinions  favourable  to  democracy  and  to  aris¬ 
tocracy,  to  property  and  to  equality,  to  co¬ 
operation  and  to  competition,  to  luxury  and 
to  abstinence,  to  sociality  and  individuality, 
to  liberty  and  discipline,  and  all  the  other 
standing  antagonisms  of  practical  life,  are  ex¬ 
pressed  with  equal  freedom,  and  enforced  and 
defended  with  equal  talent  and  energy,  there 
is  no  chance  of  both  elements  obtaining  their 
due;  one  scale  is  sure  to  go  up,  and  the  other 
down.  Truth,  in  the  great  practical  concerns 
of  life,  is  so  much  a  question  of  the  reconciling 
and  combining  of  opposites,  that  very  few  have 
minds  sufficiently  capacious  and  impartial  to 
make  the  adjustment  with  an  approach  to  cor¬ 
rectness,  and  it  has  to  be  made  by  the  rough 
process  of  a  struggle  between  combatants  fight¬ 
ing  under  hostile  banners.  On  any  of  the  great 
open  questions  just  enumerated,  if  either  of 
the  two  opinions  has  a  better  claim  than  the 
other,  not  merely  to  be  tolerated,  but  to  be 
encouraged  and  countenanced,  it  is  the  one 
which  happens  at  the  particular  time  and 
place  to  be  in  a  minority.  That  is  the  opinion 
which,  for  the  time  being,  represents  the  neg¬ 
lected  interests,  the  side  of  human  well-being 
which  is  in  danger  of  obtaining  less  than  its 
share.  I  am  aware  that  there  is  not,  in  this 


ON  LIBERTY 


country,  any  intolerance  of  differences  of  opin¬ 
ion  on  most  of  these  topics.  They  are  adduced 
to  show,  by  admitted  and  multiplied  ex¬ 
amples.  the  universality  of  the  fact,  that  only 
through  diversity  of  opinion  is  there,  in  the 
existing  state  of  human  intellect,  a  chance  of 
fair  play  to  all  sides  of  the  truth.  When  there 
are  persons  to  be  found  who  form  an  exception 
to  the  apparent  unanimity  of  the  world  on  any 
subject,  even  if  the  world  is  in  the  right,  it  is 
always  probable  that  dissentients  have  some¬ 
thing  worth  hearing  to  say  for  themselves, 
and  that  truth  would  lose  something  by  their 
silence. 

It  may  be  objected,  “But  some  received  prin¬ 
ciples,  especially  on  the  highest  and  most  vital 
subjects,  are  more  than  half-truths.  The  Chris¬ 
tian  morality,  for  instance,  is  the  whole  truth 
on  that  subject,  and  if  any  one  teaches  a  moral¬ 
ity  which  varies  from  it,  he  is  wholly  in  error.” 
As  this  is  of  all  cases  the  most  important  in 
practice,  none  can  be  fitter  to  test  the  general 
maxim.  But  before  pronouncing  what  Chris¬ 
tian  morality  is  or  is  not,  it  would  be  desirable 
to  decide  what  is  meant  by  Christian  morality. 
If  it  means  the  morality  of  the  New  Testa¬ 
ment,  I  wonder  that  any  one  who  derives  his 
knowledge  of  this  from  the  book  itself,  can 
suppose  that  it  was  announced,  or  intended,  as 
a  complete  doctrine  of  morals.  The  Gospel  al¬ 
ways  refers  to  a  pre-existing  morality  and  con¬ 
fines  its  precepts  to  the  particulars  in  which 
that  morality  was  to  be  corrected,  or  super¬ 
seded  by  a  wider  and  higher;  expressing  itself, 
moreover,  in  terms  most  general,  often  impos¬ 
sible  to  be  interpreted  literally,  and  possessing 
rather  the  impressiveness  of  poetry  or  elo¬ 
quent  e  than  the  precision  of  legislation.  To 
extract  from  it  a  body  of  ethical  doctrine,  has 
never  been  possible  without  eking  it  out  from 
the  Old  Testament,  that  is,  from  a  system  elab¬ 
orate  indeed,  but  in  many  respects  barbarous, 
and  intended  only  for  a  barbarous  people.  St. 
Paul,  a  declared  enemy  to  this  Judaical  mode 
of  interpreting  the  doctrine  and  filling  up  the 
scheme  of  his  Master,  equally  assumes  a  pre¬ 
existing  morality,  namely  that  of  the  Greeks 
and  Romans;  and  his  advice  to  Christians  is 
in  a  great  measure  a  system  of  accommodation 
to  that;  e\en  to  the  extent  of  giving  an  appar¬ 
ent  sanction  to  slavery.  What  is  called  Chris¬ 
tian,  but  should  rather  be  termed  theological, 
morality,  was  not  the  work  of  Christ  or  the 
\  post  levs,  but  is  of  much  later  origin,  having 
been  gradually  built  up  by  the  Catholic  church 
of  the  first  five  centuries,  and  though  not  im¬ 


plicitly  adopted  by  moderns  and  Protestants, 
has  been  much  less  modified  by  them  than 
might  have  been  expected.  For  the  most  part, 
indeed,  they  have  contented  themselves  with 
cutting  off  the  additions  which  had  been  made 
to  it  in  the  Middle  Ages,  each  sect  supplying 
the  place  by  fresh  additions,  adapted  to  its  own 
character  and  tendencies. 

That  mankind  owe  a  great  debt  to  this  mor¬ 
ality,  and  to  its  early  teachers,  1  should  be  the 
last  person  to  deny;  but  I  do  not  scruple  to 
say  of  it  that  it  is,  in  many  important  points, 
incomplete  and  one-sided,  and  that  unless 
ideas  and  feelings,  not  sanctioned  by  it,  had 
contributed  to  the  formation  of  European  life 
and  character,  human  affairs  would  have  been 
in  a  worse  condition  than  they  now  are.  Chris¬ 
tian  morality  (so  called)  has  all  the  characters 
of  a  reaction;  it  is,  in  great  part,  a  protest 
against  Paganism.  Its  ideal  is  negative  rather 
than  positive;  passive  rather  than  active;  In¬ 
nocence  rather  than  Nobleness;  Abstinence 
from  Evil,  rather  than  energetic  Pursuit  of 
Good;  in  its  precepts  (as  has  been  well  said) 
“thou  shalt  not”  predominates  unduly  over 
“thou  shalt.”  In  its  horror  of  sensuality,  it 
made  an  idol  of  asceticism,  which  has  been 
gradually  compromised  away  into  one  of  legal¬ 
ity.  It  holds  out  the  hope  of  heaven  and  the 
threat  of  hell,  as  the  appointed  and  appropri¬ 
ate  motives  to  a  virtuous  life:  in  this  falling 
far  below  the  best  of  the  ancients,  and  doing 
what  lies  in  it  to  give  to  human  morality  an 
essentially  selfish  character,  by  disconnecting 
each  man’s  feelings  of  duty  from  the  interests 
of  his  fellow  creatures,  except  so  far  as  a  self- 
interested  inducement  is  offered  to  him  for 
consulting  them.  It  is  essentially  a  doctrine  of 
passive  obedience;  it  inculcates  submission  to 
all  authorities  found  established;  who  indeed 
are  not  to  be  actively  obeyed  when  they  com¬ 
mand  what  religion  forbids,  but  who  are  not 
to  be  resisted,  far  less  rebelled  against,  for  any 
amount  of  wrong  to  ourselves.  And  while,  in 
the  morality  of  the  best  Pagan  nations,  duty  to 
the  State  holds  even  a  disproportionate  place, 
infringing  on  the  just  liberty  of  the  individual; 
in  purely  Christian  ethics,  that  grand  depart¬ 
ment  of  duty  is  scarcely  noticed  or  acknowl¬ 
edged.  It  is  in  the  Koran,  not  the  New  Testa¬ 
ment,  that  we  read  the  maxim— “A  ruler  who 
appoints  any  man  to  an  ollice.  when  there  is 
in  his  dominions  another  man  better  qualified 
for  it,  sins  against  God  and  against  the  State.” 
What  little  recognition  the  idea  of  obligation 
to  the  public  obtains  in  modern  morality  is 


OF  THOUGHT  AND  DISCUSSION  291 


derived  from  Greek  and  Roman  sources,  not 
from  Christian;  as,  even  in  the  morality  of 
private  life,  whatever  exists  of  magnanimity, 
highmindedness,  personal  dignity,  even  the 
sense  of  honour,  is  derived  from  the  purely  hu¬ 
man,  not  the  religious  part  of  our  education, 
and  never  could  have  grown  out  of  a  standard 
of  ethics  in  which  the  only  worth,  professedly 
recognised,  is  that  of  obedience. 

I  am  as  far  as  any  one  from  pretending  that 
these  defects  are  necessarily  inherent  in  the 
Christian  ethics  in  every  manner  in  which  it 
can  be  conceived,  or  that  the  many  requisites 
of  a  complete  moral  doctrine  which  it  does  not 
contain  do  not  admit  of  being  reconciled  with 
it.  Far  less  would  I  insinuate  this  of  the  doc¬ 
trines  and  precepts  of  Christ  himself.  I  believe 
that  the  sayings  of  Christ  are  all  that  I  can  see 
any  evidence  of  their  having  been  intended  to 
be;  that  they  are  irreconcilable  with  nothing 
which  a  comprehensive  morality  requires:  that 
everything  which  is  excellent  in  ethics  may  be 
brought  within  them,  with  no  greater  violence 
to  their  language  than  has  been  done  to  it  by 
all  who  have  attempted  to  deduce  from  them 
any  practical  system  of  conduct  whatever.  But 
it  is  quite  consistent  with  this  to  believe  that 
they  contain,  and  were  meant  to  contain,  only 
a  part  of  the  truth:  that  many  essential  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  highest  morality  are  among  the 
things  which  are  not  provided  for.  nor  intend¬ 
ed  to  be  provided  for,  in  the  recorded  deliver¬ 
ances  of  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  and 
which  have  been  entirely  thrown  aside  in  the 
system  of  ethics  erected  on  the  basis  of  those 
deliverances  by  the  Christian  Church.  And  this 
being  so,  I  think  it  a  great  error  to  persist  in 
attempting  to  find  in  the  Christian  doctrine 
that  complete  rule  for  our  guidance  which  its 
author  intended  it  to  sanction  and  enforce, 
but  only  partially  to  provide.  I  believe,  too, 
that  this  narrow  theory  is  becoming  a  grave 
practical  evil,  detracting  greatly  from  the  mor¬ 
al  training  and  instruction  which  so  many 
well-meaning  persons  are  now  at  length  exert¬ 
ing  themselves  to  promote.  I  much  fear  that 
by  attempting  to  form  the  mind  and  feelings 
on  an  exclusively  religious  type,  and  discard¬ 
ing  those  secular  standards  (as  for  want  of  a 
better  name  they  may  be  called)  which  hereto¬ 
fore  coexisted  with  and  supplemented  the 
Christian  ethics,  receiving  some  of  its  spirit, 
and  infusing  into  it  some  of  theirs,  there  will 
result,  and  is  even  now  resulting,  a  low,  abject, 
servile  type  of  character,  which,  submit  itself 
as  it  may  to  what  it  deems  the  Supreme  Will, 


is  incapable  of  rising  to  or  sympathising  in 
the  conception  of  Supreme  Goodness.  I  be¬ 
lieve  that  other  ethics  than  any  which  can  be 
evolved  from  exclusively  Christian  sources, 
must  exist  side  by  side  with  Christian  ethics 
to  produce  the  moral  regeneration  of  man¬ 
kind;  and  that  the  Christian  system  is  no  ex¬ 
ception  to  the  rule,  that  in  an  imperfect  state 
of  the  human  mind  the  interests  of  truth  re¬ 
quire  a  diversity  of  opinions. 

It  is  not  necessary  that  in  ceasing  to  ignore 
the  moral  truths  not  contained  in  Christianity 
men  should  ignore  any  of  those  which  it  does 
contain.  Such  prejudice,  or  oversight,  when  it 
occurs,  is  altogether  an  evil;  but  it  is  one  from 
which  we  cannot  hope  to  be  always  exempt, 
and  must  be  regarded  as  the  price  paid  for  an 
inestimable  good.  The  exclusive  pretension 
made  by  a  part  of  the  truth  to  be  the  whole, 
must  and  ought  to  be  protested  against;  and  if 
a  reactionary  impulse  should  make  the  pro¬ 
testors  unjust  in  their  turn,  this  one-sidedness, 
like  the  other,  may  be  lamented,  but  must  be 
tolerated.  If  Christians  would  teach  infidels  to 
be  just  to  Christianity,  they  should  themselves 
be  just  to  infidelity.  It  can  do  truth  no  service 
to  blink  the  fact,  known  to  all  who  have  the 
most  ordinary  acquaintance  with  literary  his¬ 
tory,  that  a  large  portion  of  the  noblest  and 
most  valuable  moral  teaching  has  been  the 
work,  not  only  of  men  who  did  not  know,  but 
of  men  who  knew  and  rejected,  the  Christian 
faith. 

I  do  not  pretend  that  the  most  unlimited 
use  of  the  freedom  of  enunciating  all  possible- 
opinions  would  put  an  end  to  the  evils  of  re¬ 
ligious  or  philosophical  sectarianism,  Every 
truth  which  men  of  narrow  capacity  are  in  ear¬ 
nest  about,  is  sure  to  be  asserted,  inculcated, 
and  in  many  ways  even  acted  on,  as  if  no 
other  truth  existed  in  the  world,  or  at  all 
events  none  that  could  limit  or  qualify  the 
first.  I  acknowledge  that  the  tendency  of  all 
opinions  to  become  sectarian  is  not  cured  by 
the  freest  discussion,  but  is  often  heightened 
and  exacerbated  thereby;  the  truth  which 
ought  to  have  been,  but  was  not,  seen,  being 
rejected  all  the  more  violently  because  pro¬ 
claimed  by  persons  regarded  as  opponents.  But 
it  is  not  on  the  impassioned  partisan,  it  is  on 
the  calmer  and  more  disinterested  bystander, 
that  this  collision  of  opinions  works  its  salu¬ 
tary  effect.  Not  the  violent  conflict  between 
parts  of  the  truth,  but  the  quiet  suppression 
of  half  of  it,  is  the  formidable  evil;  there  is 
always  hope  when  people  are  forced  to  listen 


ON  LIBERTY 


to  both  sides;  it  is  when  they  attend  only  to 
one  that  errors  harden  into  prejudices,  and 
truth  itself  ceases  to  have  the  effect  of  truth. 
b\  being  exaggerated  into  falsehood.  And  since 
there  are  few  mental  attributes  more  rare  than 
that  judicial  faculty  which  can  sit  in  intelli¬ 
gent  judgment  between  two  sides  of  a  ques¬ 
tion,  of  which  only  one  is  represented  by  an 
advocate  before  it,  truth  has  no  chance  but  in 
proportion  as  every  side  of  it.  every  opinion 
which  embodies  any  fraction  of  the  truth,  not 
only  finds  advocates,  but  is  so  advocated  as  to 
be  listened  to. 

We  have  now  recognised  the  necessity  to  the 
mental  well-being  of  mankind  (on  which  all 
their  other  well-being  depends)  of  freedom  of 
opinion,  and  freedom  of  the  expression  of 
opinion,  on  four  distinct  grounds;  which  we 
will  now  briefly  recapitulate. 

First,  if  any  opinion  is  compelled  to  silence, 
that  opinion  may,  for  aught  we  can  certainly 
know,  be  true.  To  deny  this  is  to  assume  our 
own  infallibility. 

Secondly,  though  the  silenced  opinion  be  an 
error,  it  may,  and  very  commonly  does,  con¬ 
tain  a  portion  of  truth;  and  since  the  general 
or  prevailing  opinion  on  any  subject  is  rarely 
or  never  the  whole  truth,  it  is  only  by  the 
collision  of  adverse  opinions  that  the  remain¬ 
der  of  the  truth  has  any  chance  of  being 
supplied. 

Thirdly,  even  if  the  received  opinion  be  not 
only  true,  but  the  whole  truth;  unless  it  is  suf¬ 
fered  to  be,  and  actually  is,  vigorously  and  ear¬ 
nestly  contested,  it  will,  by  most  of  those  who 
receive  it,  be  held  in  the  manner  of  a  preju¬ 
dice,  with  little  comprehension  or  feeling  of 
its  rational  grounds.  And  not  only  this,  but, 
fourthly,  the  meaning  of  the  doctrine  itself 
will  be  in  danger  of  being  lost,  or  enfeebled, 
and  deprived  of  its  vital  effect  on  the  character 
and  conduct:  the  dogma  becoming  a  mere 
formal  profession,  inefficacious  for  good,  but 
cumbering  the  ground,  and  preventing  the 
growth  of  any  real  and  heartfelt  conviction, 
from  reason  or  personal  experience. 

Before  quitting  the  subject  of  freedom  of 
opinion,  it  is  fit  to  take  some  notice  of  those 
who  say  that  the  free  expression  of  all  opinions 
should  be  permitted,  on  condition  that  the 
manner  be  temperate,  and  do  not  pass  the 
bounds  of  fair  discussion.  Much  might  be  said 
on  the  impossibility  of  fixing  where  these  sup¬ 
posed  bounds  are  to  be  plated;  for  if  the  test  be 
offence  to  those  whose  opinions  are  attacked, 


I  think  experience  testifies  that  this  offence 
is  given  whenever  the  attack  is  telling  and 
powerful,  and  that  every  opponent  who  pushes 
them  hard,  and  whom  they  find  it  difficult  to 
answer,  appears  to  them,  if  he  shows  any 
strong  feeling  on  the  subject,  an  intemperate 
opponent. 

But  this,  though  an  important  consideration 
in  a  practical  point  of  view,  merges  in  a  more 
fundamental  objection.  Undoubtedly  the  man¬ 
ner  of  asserting  an  opinion,  even  though  it  be 
a  true  one,  may  be  very  objectionable,  and  may 
justly  incur  severe  censure.  But  the  principal 
offences  of  the  kind  are  such  as  it  is  mostly 
impossible,  unless  by  accidental  self-betrayal, 
to  bring  home  to  conviction.  The  gravest  of 
them  is,  to  argue  sophistically,  to  suppress 
facts  or  arguments,  to  misstate  the  elements  of 
the  case,  or  misrepresent  the  opposite  opinion. 
But  all  this,  even  to  the  most  aggravated  de¬ 
gree,  is  so  continually  done  in  perfect  good 
faith,  by  persons  who  are  not  considered,  and 
in  many  other  respects  may  not  deserve  to  be 
considered,  ignorant  or  incompetent,  that  it 
is  rarely  possible,  on  adequate  grounds,  con¬ 
scientiously  to  stamp  the  misrepresentation  as 
morally  culpable;  and  still  less  could  law  pre¬ 
sume  to  interfere  with  this  kind  of  controver¬ 
sial  misconduct.  With  regard  to  what  is  com¬ 
monly  meant  by  intemperate  discussion,  name¬ 
ly  invective,  sarcasm,  personality,  and  the  like, 
the  denunciation  of  these  weapons  would  de¬ 
serve  more  sympathy  if  it  were  ever  proposed 
to  interdict  them  equally  to  both  sides;  but 
it  is  only  desired  to  restrain  the  employment 
of  them  against  the  prevailingopinion:  against 
the  unprevailing  they  may  not  only  be  used 
without  general  disapproval,  but  will  be  likely 
to  obtain  for  him  who  uses  them  the  praise  of 
honest  zeal  and  righteous  indignation.  Vet 
whatever  mischief  arises  from  their  use  is  great¬ 
est  when  they  are  employed  against  the  com¬ 
paratively  defenceless;  and  whatever  unfair 
advantage  can  be  derived  by  any  opinion  from 
th  is  mode  of  asserting  it,  accrues  almost  ex¬ 
clusively  to  received  opinions.  The  worst  of¬ 
fence  of  this  kind  which  can  be  committed  by 
a  polemic  is  to  stigmatise  (hose  who  hold  the 
contrary  opinion  as  bad  and  immoral  men. 
To  calumny  of  this  sort,  those  who  hold  any 
unpopular  opinion  are  peculiarly  exposed,  be¬ 
cause  they  are  in  general  few  and  iininlhien- 
tial,  and  nobody  but  themselves  feels  much 
interested  in  seeing  justice  clone  them;  but 
this  weapon  is,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  de¬ 
nied  (o  those  who  attack  a  prevailingopinion: 


OF  INDIVIDUALITY  293 


they  can  neither  use  it  with  safety  to  them¬ 
selves,  nor,  if  they  could,  would  it  do  anything 
but  recoil  on  their  own  cause.  In  general,  opin¬ 
ions  contrary  to  those  commonly  received  can 
only  obtain  a  hearing  by  studied  moderation 
of  language,  and  the  most  cautious  avoidance 
of  unnecessary  offence,  from  which  they  hardly 
ever  deviate  even  in  a  slight  degree  without 
losing  ground:  while  unmeasured  vituperation 
employed  on  the  side  of  the  prevailing  opinion 
really  does  deter  people  from  professing  con¬ 
trary  opinions,  and  from  listening  to  those 
who  profess  them. 

For  the  interest,  therefore,  of  truth  and  jus¬ 
tice,  it  is  far  more  important  to  restrain  this 
employment  of  vituperative  language  than  the 
other;  and,  for  example,  if  it  were  necessary  to 
choose,  there  would  be  much  more  need  to 
discourage  offensive  attacks  on  infidelity  than 
on  religion.  It  is,  however,  obvious  that  law 
and  authority  have  no  business  with  restraining 
either,  while  opinion  ought,  in  every  instance, 
to  determine  its  verdict  by  the  circumstances 
of  the  individual  case;  condemning  every  one, 
on  whichever  side  of  the  argument  he  places 
himself,  in  whose  mode  of  advocacy  either 
want  of  candour,  or  malignity,  bigotry,  or  in¬ 
tolerance  of  feeling  manifest  themselves;  but 
not  inferring  these  vices  from  the  side  which  a 
person  takes,  though  it  be  the  contrary  side  of 
the  question  to  our  own;  and  giving  merited 
honour  to  every  one,  whatever  opinion  he  may 
hold,  who  has  calmness  to  see  and  honesty  to 
state  what  his  opponents  and  their  opinions 
really  are,  exaggerating  nothing  to  their  dis¬ 
credit,  keeping  nothing  back  which  tells,  or 
can  be  supposed  to  tell,  in  their  favour.  This 
is  the  real  morality  of  public  discussion:  and 
if  often  violated,  I  am  happy  to  think  that 
there  are  many  controversialists  who  to  a  great 
extent  observe  it,  and  a  still  greater  number 
who  conscientiously  strive  towards  it. 

Chapter  3 

Of  Individuality,  as  one  of  the 
Elements  of  Well-being 
Such  being  the  reasons  which  make  it  impera¬ 
tive  that  human  beings  should  be  free  to  form 
opinions,  and  to  express  their  opinions  with¬ 
out  reserve;  and  such  the  baneful  consequences 
to  the  intellectual,  and  through  that  to  the 
moral  nature  of  man,  unless  this  liberty  is  either 
conceded,  or  asserted  in  spite  of  prohibition; 
let  us  next  examine  whether  the  same  reasons 
do  not  require  that  men  should  be  free  to  act 


upon  their  opinions— to  carry  these  out  in  their 
lives,  without  hindrance,  either  physical  or 
moral,  from  their  fellow-men,  so  long  as  it  is 
at  their  own  risk  and  peril. 

This  last  proviso  is  of  course  indispensable. 
No  one  pretends  that  actions  should  be  as  free 
as  opinions.  On  the  contrary,  even  opinions 
lose  their  immunity  when  the  circumstances 
in  which  they  are  expressed  are  such  as  to  con¬ 
stitute  their  expression  a  positive  instigation 
to  some  mischievous  act.  An  opinion  that  corn- 
dealers  are  starvers  of  the  poor,  or  that  private 
property  is  robbery,  ought  to  be  unmolested 
when  simply  circulated  through  the  press,  but 
may  justly  incur  punishment  when  delivered 
orally  to  an  excited  mob  assembled  before  the 
house  of  a  corn-dealer,  or  when  handed  about 
among  the  same  mob  in  the  form  of  a  placard. 
Acts,  of  whatever  kind,  which,  without  justifi¬ 
able  cause,  do  harm  to  others,  may  be,  and  in 
the  more  important  cases  absolutely  require  to 
be,  controlled  by  the  unfavourable  sentiments, 
and,  when  needful,  by  the  active  interference 
of  mankind.  The  liberty  of  the  individual  must 
be  thus  far  limited;  he  must  not  make  himself 
a  nuisance  to  other  people.  But  if  he  refrains 
from  molesting  others  in  what  concerns  them, 
and  merely  acts  according  to  his  own  inclina¬ 
tion  and  judgment  in  things  which  concern 
himself,  the  same  reasons  which  show  that  opin¬ 
ion  should  be  free,  prove  also  that  he  should  be 
allowed,  without  molestation,  to  carry  his  opin¬ 
ions  into  practice  at  his  own  cost.  That  man¬ 
kind  are  not  infallible;  that  their  truths,  for 
the  most  part,  are  only  half-truths;  that  unity 
of  opinion,  unless  resulting  from  the  fullest 
and  freest  comparison  of  opposite  opinions,  is 
not  desirable,  and  diversity  not  an  evil,  but  a 
good,  until  mankind  are  much  more  capable 
than  at  present  of  recognising  all  sides  of  the 
truth,  are  principles  applicable  to  men’s  modes 
of  action,  not  less  than  to  their  opinions.  As  it 
is  useful  that  while  mankind  are  imperfect 
there  should  be  different  opinions,  so  it  is  that 
there  should  be  different  experiments  of  liv¬ 
ing;  that  free  scope  should  be  given  to  varieties 
of  character,  short  of  injury  to  others;  and  that 
the  worth  of  different  modes  of  life  should  be 
proved  practically,  when  any  one  thinks  fit  to 
try  them.  It  is  desirable,  in  short,  that  in  things 
which  do  not  primarily  concern  others,  indi¬ 
viduality  should  assert  itself.  Where,  not  the 
person’s  own  character,  but  the  traditions  or 
customs  of  other  people  are  the  rule  of  con¬ 
duct,  there  is  wanting  one  of  the  principal  in¬ 
gredients  of  human  happiness,  and  quite  the 


ON  LIBERTY 


2  94 

chief  ingredient  of  individual  and  social  prog¬ 
ress. 

In  maintaining  this  principle,  the  greatest 
difficulty  to  be  encountered  does  not  lie  in  the 
appreciation  of  means  towards  an  acknowl¬ 
edged  end,  but  in  the  indifference  of  persons 
in  general  to  the  end  itself.  If  it  were  felt  that 
the  free  development  of  individuality  is  one  of 
the  leading  essentials  of  well-being;  that  it  is 
not  only  a  co-ordinate  element  with  all  that  is 
designated  by  the  terms  civilisation,  instruc¬ 
tion,  education,  culture,  but  is  itself  a  necessary 
part  and  condition  of  all  those  things;  there 
would  be  no  danger  that  liberty  should  be  un¬ 
dervalued.  and  the  adjustment  of  the  bound¬ 
aries  between  it  and  social  control  would  pre¬ 
sent  no  extraordinary  difficulty.  But  the  evil 
is.  that  individual  spontaneity  is  hardly  recog¬ 
nised  by  the  common  modes  of  thinking  as  hav¬ 
ing  any  intrinsic  worth,  or  deserving  any  re¬ 
gard  on  its  own  account.  The  majority,  being 
satisfied  with  the  ways  of  mankind  as  they  now 
are  (for  it  is  they  who  make  them  what  they 
are),  cannot  comprehend  why  those  ways  should 
not  be  good  enough  for  everybody;  and  what 
is  more,  spontaneity  forms  no  part  of  the  ideal 
of  the  majority  of  moral  and  social  reformers, 
but  is  rather  looked  on  with  jealousy,  as  a 
troublesome  and  perhaps  rebellious  obstruc¬ 
tion  to  the  general  acceptance  of  what  these  re¬ 
formers,  in  their  own  judgment,  think  would 
be  best  for  mankind.  Few  persons,  out  of  Ger¬ 
many,  even  comprehend  the  meaning  of  the 
doctrine  which  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt,  so 
eminent  both  as  a  savant  and  as  a  politician, 
made  the  text  of  a  treatise— that  “the  end  of 
man,  or  that  which  is  prescribed  by  the  eternal 
or  immutable  dictates  of  reason,  and  not  sug¬ 
gested  by  vague  and  transient  desires,  is  the 
highest  and  most  harmonious  development  of 
his  powers  toa  complete  and  consistent  whole”; 
dial,  therefore,  the  object  “towards  which 
every  human  being  must  ceaselessly  direct  his 
efforts,  and  on  which  especially  those  who  de¬ 
sign  to  influence  their  fellow-men  must  ever 
keep  their  eyes,  is  the  individuality  of  power 
and  development”;  that  for  this  there  are  two 
requisites,  “freedom,  and  variety  of  situations”; 
and  that  from  the  union  of  these  arise  “indi¬ 
vidual  vigour  and  manifold  diversity,”  which 
combine  themselves  in  “originality.”1 

I  attic,  however,  as  people  ate  accustomed  to 
a  doctrine  like  that  of  Von  Humboldt,  and 

1  The  S f  there  and  Duties  of  Government ,  from 
the  German  of  Baron  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt, 
l>p.  1  1  13- 


surprising  as  it  may  be  to  them  to  find  so  high 
a  value  attached  to  individuality,  the  question, 
one  must  nevertheless  think,  can  only  be  one 
of  degree.  No  one’s  idea  of  excellence  in  con¬ 
duct  is  that  people  should  do  absolutely  noth¬ 
ing  but  copy  one  another.  No  one  would  assert 
that  people  ought  not  to  put  into  their  mode 
of  life,  and  into  the  conduct  of  their  concerns, 
any  impress  whatever  of  their  own  judgment, 
or  of  their  own  individual  character.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  would  be  absurd  to  pretend  that 
people  ought  to  live  as  if  nothing  whatever 
had  been  known  in  the  world  before  they  came 
into  it;  as  if  experiencehad  as  yetdone  nothing 
towards  showing  that  one  mode  of  existence, 
or  of  conduct,  is  preferable  to  another.  No¬ 
body  denies  that  people  should  be  so  taught 
and  trained  in  youth  as  to  know  and  benefit 
by  the  ascertained  results  of  human  experience. 
But  it  is  the  privilege  and  proper  condition  of 
a  human  being,  arrived  at  the  maturity  of  his 
faculties,  to  use  and  interpret  experience  in 
his  own  way.  It  is  for  him  to  find  out  what 
part  of  recorded  experience  is  properly  appli¬ 
cable  to  his  own  circumstances  and  character. 
The  traditions  and  customs  of  other  people 
are,  to  a  certain  extent,  evidence  of  what  their 
experience  has  taught  them;  presumptive  evi¬ 
dence,  and  as  such,  have  a  claim  to  his  defer¬ 
ence;  but,  in  the  first  place,  their  experience 
may  be  too  narrow;  or  they  may  not  have  in¬ 
terpreted  it  rightly.  Secondly,  their  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  experience  may  be  correct,  but  unsuit¬ 
able  to  him.  Customs  are  made  for  customary 
circumstances  and  customary  characters;  and 
his  circumstances  or  his  character  may  be  un¬ 
customary.  Thirdly,  though  the  customs  be 
both  good  as  customs,  and  suitable  to  him,  yet 
to  conform  to  custom,  merely  as  custom,  does 
not  educate  or  develop  in  him  any  of  the  quali¬ 
ties  which  arc  the  distinctive  endowment  of  a 
human  being.  The  human  faculties  of  percep¬ 
tion,  judgment,  discriminative  feeling,  mental 
activity,  and  even  moral  preference,  are  exer¬ 
cised  only  in  making  a  choice.  He  who  docs 
anything  because  it  is  the  custom  makes  no 
choice.  He  gains  no  practice  either  in  discern¬ 
ing  or  in  desiring  what  is  best.  The  mental  and 
moral,  like  the  muscular  powers,  arc  improved 
only  by  being  used.  The  faculties  are  called  in¬ 
to  no  exercise  by  doing  a  thing  merely  because 
others  do  it,  no  more  than  by  believing  a  thing 
only  because  others  believe  it,  If  the  grounds 
of  an  opinion  are  not  conclusive  to  the  person’s 
own  reason, his  reason  cannot  be  strengthened, 
but  is  likely  to  be  weakened,  by  his  adopting 


OF  INDIVIDUALITY  295 


it:  and  if  the  inducements  to  an  act  are  not 
such  as  are  consentaneous  to  his  own  feelings 
and  character  (where  affection,  or  the  rights 
of  others,  are  not  concerned)  it  is  so  much  done 
towards  rendering  his  feelings  and  character 
inert  and  torpid,  instead  of  activeand  energetic. 

He  who  lets  the  world,  or  his  own  portion  of 
it,  choose  his  plan  of  life  for  him,  has  no  need 
of  any  other  faculty  than  the  ape-like  one  of 
imitation.  He  who  chooses  his  plan  for  him¬ 
self,  employs  all  his  faculties.  He  must  use  ob¬ 
servation  to  see,  reasoning  and  judgment  to 
foresee,  activity  to  gather  materials  for  deci¬ 
sion,  discrimination  to  decide,  and  when  he 
has  decided,  firmess  and  self-control  to  hold 
to  his  deliberate  decision.  And  these  qualities 
he  requires  and  exercises  exactly  in  proportion 
as  the  part  of  his  conduct  which  he  determines 
according  to  his  own  judgment  and  feelings 
is  a  large  one.  It  is  possible  that  he  might  be 
guided  in  some  good  path,  and  kept  out  of 
harm’s  way,  without  any  of  these  things.  But 
what  will  be  his  comparative  worth  as  a  human 
being?  It  really  is  of  importance,  not  only 
what  men  do,  but  also  what  manner  of  men 
they  are  that  do  it.  Among  the  works  of  man, 
which  human  life  is  rightly  employed  in  per¬ 
fecting  and  beautifying,  the  first  in  importance 
surely  is  man  himself.  Supposing  it  were  possi¬ 
ble  to  get  houses  built,  corn  grown,  battles 
fought,  causes  tried,  and  even  churches  erected 
and  prayers  said,  by  machinery— by  automa¬ 
tons  in  human  form— it  would  be  a  considera¬ 
ble  loss  to  exchange  for  these  automatons  even 
the  men  and  women  who  at  present  inhabit 
the  more  civilised  parts  of  the  world,  and  who 
assuredly  are  but  starved  specimens  of  what 
nature  can  and  will  produce.  Human  nature  is 
not  a  machine  to  be  built  after  a  model,  and 
set  to  do  exactly  the  work  prescribed  for  it,  but 
a  tree,  which  requires  to  grow  and  develop  it¬ 
self  on  all  sides,  according  to  the  tendency  of 
the  inward  forces  which  make  it  a  living  thing. 

It  will  probably  be  conceded  that  it  is  de¬ 
sirable  people  should  exercise  their  under¬ 
standings,  and  that  an  intelligent  following 
of  custom,  or  even  occasionally  an  intelligent 
deviation  from  custom,  is  better  than  a  blind 
and  simply  mechanical  adhesion  to  it.  To  a 
certain  extent  it  is  admitted  that  our  under¬ 
standing  should  be  our  own:  but  there  is  not 
the  same  willingness  to  admit  that  our  desires 
and  impulses  should  be  our  own  likewise;  or 
that  to  possess  impulses  of  our  own,  and  of  any 
strength,  is  anything  but  a  peril  and  a  snare. 
Yet  desires  and  impulses  are  as  much  a  part 


of  a  perfect  human  being  as  beliefs  and  re¬ 
straints:  and  strong  impulses  are  only  peril¬ 
ous  when  not  properly  balanced;  when  one 
set  of  aims  and  inclinations  is  developed  into 
strength,  while  others,  which  ought  to  co-exist 
writh  them,  remain  weak  and  inactive.  It  is  not 
because  men’s  desires  are  strong  that  they  act 
ill;  it  is  because  their  consciences  are  weak. 
There  is  no  natural  connection  between  strong 
impulses  and  a  weak  conscience.  The  natural 
connection  is  the  other  way.  To  say  that  one 
person’s  desires  and  feelings  are  stronger  and 
more  various  than  those  of  another,  is  merely 
to  say  that  he  has  more  of  the  raw  material  of 
human  nature,  and  is  therefore  capable,  per¬ 
haps  of  more  evil,  but  certainly  of  more  good. 
Strong  impulses  are  but  another  name  for 
energy.  Energy  may  be  turned  to  bad  uses;  but 
more  good  may  always  be  made  of  an  energetic 
nature,  than  of  an  indolent  and  impassive  one. 
Those  who  have  most  natural  feeling  are  al¬ 
ways  those  whose  cultivated  feelings  may  be 
made  the  strongest.  The  same  strong  suscepti¬ 
bilities  which  make  the  personal  impulses  vivid 
and  powerful,  are  also  the  source  from  whence 
are  generated  the  most  passionate  love  of  vir¬ 
tue,  and  the  sternest  self-control.  It  is  through 
the  cultivation  of  these  that  society  both  does 
its  duty  and  protects  its  interests:  not  by  reject¬ 
ing  the  stuff  of  which  heroes  are  made,  because 
it  knows  not  how  to  make  them.  A  person 
whose  desires  and  impulses  are  his  own— are 
the  expression  of  his  own  nature,  as  it  has  been 
developed  and  modified  by  his  own  culture— 
is  said  to  have  a  character.  One  whose  desires 
and  impulses  are  not  his  own.  has  no  character, 
no  more  than  a  steam-engine  has  a  character. 
If,  in  addition  to  being  his  own,  his  impulses 
are  strong,  and  are  under  the  government  of  a 
strong  will,  he  has  an  energetic  character. 
Whoever  thinks  that  individuality  of  desires 
and  impulses  should  not  be  encouraged  to  un¬ 
fold  itself,  must  maintain  that  society  has  no 
need  of  strong  natures-is  not  the  better  for 
containing  many  persons  who  have  much  char- 
acter-and  that  a  high  general  average  of  en¬ 
ergy  is  not  desirable. 

In  some  early  states  of  society,  these  forces 
might  be,  and  were,  too  much  ahead  of  the 
power  which  society  then  possessed  of  disci¬ 
plining  and  controlling  them.  There  has  been 
a  time  when  the  element  of  spontaneity  anc| 
individuality  was  in  excess,  and  the  social  prin¬ 
ciple  had  a  hard  struggle  with  it.  The  diffi¬ 
culty  then  was  to  induce  men  of  strong  bodies 
or  minds  to  pay  obedience  to  any  rules  which 


ON  LIBERTY 


296 

required  them  to  control  their  impulses.  To 
overcome  this  difficulty,  law  and  discipline, 
like  the  Popes  struggling  against  the  Emperors, 
asserted  a  power  over  the  whole  man,  claiming 
to  control  all  his  life  in  order  to  control  his 
character— which  society  had  not  found  any 
other  sufficient  means  of  binding.  But  society 
has  now  fairly  got  the  better  of  individuality; 
and  the  danger  which  threatens  human  nature 
is  not  the  excess,  but  the  deficiency,  of  personal 
impulses  and  preferences.  Things  are  vastly 
changed  since  the  passions  of  those  who  were 
strong  by  station  or  by  personal  endowment 
were  in  a  state  of  habitual  rebellion  against 
laws  and  ordinances,  and  required  to  be  rigor- 
ouslv  chained  up  to  enable  the  persons  within 
their  reach  to  enjoy  any  particle  of  security. 
In  our  times,  from  the  highest  class  of  society 
down  to  the  lowest,  every  one  lives  as  under 
the  eye  of  a  hostile  and  dreaded  censorship. 
Not  only  in  what  concerns  others,  but  in  what 
concerns  only  themselves,  the  individual  or  the 
family  do  not  ask  themselves— what  do  1  pre¬ 
fer?  or,  what  would  suit  my  character  and  dis¬ 
position?  or,  what  would  allow  the  best  and 
highest  in  me  to  have  fair  play,  and  enable  it 
to  grow  and  thrive?  They  ask  themselves,  what 
is  suitable  to  mv  position?  what  is  usually  done 
by  persons  of  my  station  and  pecuniary  circum¬ 
stances?  or  (worse  still)  what  is  usually  done 
by  persons  of  a  station  and  circumstances  supe¬ 
rior  to  mine?  1  do  not  mean  that  they  choose 
what  is  customary  in  preference  to  what  suits 
their  own  inclination.  It  does  not  occur  to  them 
to  have  any  inclination,  except  for  what  is  cus¬ 
tomary.  Thus  the  mind  itself  is  bowed  to  the 
yoke:  even  in  what  people  do  for  pleasure, 
conformity  is  the  first  thing  thought  of;  they 
like  in  crowds;  they  exercise  choice  only  among 
things  commonly  done:  peculiarity  of  taste, 
eccentricity  of  conduct,  are  shunned  equally 
with  crimes:  until  by  dint  of  not  following 
their  own  nature  they  have  no  nature  to  fol¬ 
low:  their  human  capacities  are  withered  and 
starved:  they  become  incapable  of  any  strong 
wishes  or  native  pleasures,  and  are  generally 
without  cither  opinions  01  feelings  of  home 
growth,  or  properly  their  own.  Now  is  this,  or 
is  it  not,  the  desirable  condition  ol  human 
nature? 

It  is  so,  on  the  Calvin istic  theory.  According 
to  that,  the  one  great  ollcncc  of  man  is  self 
will.  All  the  good  of  which  humanity  is  capa¬ 
ble  is  comprised  in  obedience.  You  have  no 
choice;  thus  you  must  do,  and  no  otherwise: 
"whatever  is  not  a  duty,  is  a  sin."  Human 


nature  being  radically  corrupt,  there  is  no  re¬ 
demption  for  any  one  until  human  nature  is 
killed  within  him.  To  one  holding  this  theory 
of  life,  crushing  out  any  of  the  human  faculties, 
capacities,  and  susceptibilities,  is  no  evil:  man 
needs  no  capacity,  but  that  of  surrendering 
himself  to  the  will  of  God:  and  if  he  uses  any 
of  his  faculties  for  any  other  purpose  but  to  do 
that  supposed  will  more  effectually,  he  is  better 
w  ithout  them.  This  is  the  theory  of  Calvinism; 
and  it  is  held,  in  a  mitigated  form,  by  many 
who  do  not  consider  themselves  Calvinists;  the 
mitigation  consisting  in  giving  a  less  ascetic 
interpretation  to  the  alleged  will  of  God;  as¬ 
serting  it  to  be  his  will  that  mankind  should 
gratify  some  of  their  inclinations;  of  course 
not  in  the  manner  they  themselves  prefer,  but 
in  the  wray  of  obedience,  that  is,  in  a  way  pre¬ 
scribed  to  them  by  authority;  and,  therefore, 
by  the  necessary  condition  of  the  case,  the 
same  for  all. 

In  some  such  insidious  form  there  is  at  pres¬ 
ent  a  strong  tendency  to  this  narrow  theory  of 
life,  and  to  the  pinched  and  hidebound  type  of 
human  character  which  it  patronises.  Many 
persons,  no  doubt,  sincerely  think  that  human 
beings  thus  cramped  and  dwarfed  are  as  their 
Maker  designed  them  to  be;  just  as  many  have 
thought  that  trees  are  a  much  finer  thing  when 
clipped  into  pollards,  or  cut  out  into  figures  of 
animals,  than  as  nature  made  them.  But  if  it 
be  any  part  of  religion  to  believe  that  man  w-as 
made  by  a  good  Being,  it  is  more  consistent 
with  that  faith  to  believe  that  this  Being  gave 
all  human  faculties  that  they  might  be  culti¬ 
vated  and  unfolded,  not  rooted  out  and  con¬ 
sumed,  and  that  he  takes  delight  in  every 
nearer  approach  made  by  his  creatures  to  the 
ideal  conception  embodied  in  them,  every 
increase  in  any  of  their  capabilities  of  compre¬ 
hension,  of  action,  or  of  enjoyment.  There  is  a 
different  type  of  human  excellence  from  the 
Calvinistic:  a  conception  of  humanity  as  hav¬ 
ing  its  nature  bestowed  on  it  for  other  purposes 
than  merely  to  be  abnegated.  "Pagan  self-asser¬ 
tion"  is  one  of  the  elements  of  human  worth, 
as  well  as  “Christian  self-denial."1  There  is  a 
Greek  ideal  of  self-development,  which  the 
Platonic  and  Christian  ideal  of  self-govern¬ 
ment  blends  with,  but  does  not  supersede.  It 
may  be  better  to  be  a  John  Knox  than  an 
Alcihiades,  but  it  is  better  to  be  a  Pericles  than 
either;  nor  would  a  Pericles,  if  we  had  one  in 
these  days,  be  without  anything  good  which 
belonged  to  John  Knox. 

‘Sterling's  Ls.snys. 


OF  INDIVIDUALITY  297 


It  is  not  by  wearing  down  into  uniformity 
all  that  is  individual  in  themselves,  but  by  culti¬ 
vating  it,  and  calling  it  forth,  within  the  limits 
imposed  by  the  rights  and  interests  of  others, 
that  human  beings  become  a  noble  and  beauti¬ 
ful  object  of  contemplation;  and  as  the  works 
partake  the  character  of  those  who  do  them, 
by  the  same  process  human  life  also  becomes 
rich,  diversified,  and  animating,  furnishing 
more  abundant  aliment  to  high  thoughts  and 
elevating  feelings,  and  strengthening  the  tie 
which  binds  every  individual  to  the  race,  by 
making  the  race  infinitely  better  worth  belong¬ 
ing  to.  In  proportion  to  the  development  of 
his  individuality,  each  person  becomes  more 
valuable  to  himself,  and  is  therefore  capable  of 
being  more  valuable  to  others.  There  is  a 
greater  fulness  of  life  about  his  own  existence, 
and  when  there  is  more  life  in  the  units  there 
is  more  in  the  mass  which  is  composed  of  them. 
As  much  compression  as  is  necessary  to  prevent 
the  stronger  specimens  of  human  nature  from 
encroaching  on  the  rights  of  others  cannot  be 
dispensed  with;  but  for  this  there  is  ample 
compensation  even  in  the  point  of  view  of 
human  development.  The  means  of  develop¬ 
ment  which  the  individual  loses  by  being  pre¬ 
vented  from  gratifying  his  inclinations  to  the 
injury  of  others,  are  chiefly  obtained  at  the 
expense  of  the  development  of  other  people. 
And  even  to  himself  there  is  a  full  equivalent 
in  the  better  development  of  the  social  part  of 
his  nature,  rendered  possible  by  the  restraint 
put  upon  the  selfish  part.  To  be  held  to  rigid 
rules  of  justice  for  the  sake  of  others,  develops 
the  feelings  and  capacities  which  have  the  good 
of  others  for  their  object.  But  to  be  restrained 
in  things  not  affecting  their  good,  by  their 
mere  displeasure,  develops  nothing  valuable, 
except  such  force  of  character  as  may  unfold 
itself  in  resisting  the  restraint.  If  acquiesced 
in,  it  dulls  and  blunts  the  whole  nature.  To 
give  any  fair  play  to  the  nature  of  each,  it 
is  essential  that  different  persons  should  be 
allowed  to  lead  different  lives.  In  proportion 
as  this  latitude  has  been  exercised  in  any  age, 
has  that  age  been  noteworthy  to  posterity.  Even 
despotism  does  not  produce  its  worst  effects, 
so  long  as  individuality  exists  under  it;  and 
whatever  crushes  individuality  is  despotism, 
by  whatever  name  it  may  be  called,  and  whether 
it  professes  to  be  enforcing  the  will  of  God  or 
the  injunctions  of  men. 

Having  said  that  the  individuality  is  the 
same  thing  with  development,  and  that  it  is 
only  the  cultivation  of  individuality  which  pro¬ 


duces,  or  can  produce,  well-developed  human 
beings,  I  might  here  close  the  argument:  for 
what  more  or  better  can  be  said  of  any  condi¬ 
tion  of  human  affairs  than  that  it  brings  human 
beings  themselves  nearer  to  the  best  thing  they 
can  be?  or  what  worse  can  be  said  of  any  ob¬ 
struction  to  good  than  that  it  prevents  this? 
Doubtless,  however,  these  considerations  will 
not  suffice  to  convince  those  who  most  need 
convincing;  and  it  is  necessary  further  to  show, 
that  these  developed  human  beings  are  of  some 
use  to  the  undeveloped— to  point  out  to  those 
who  do  not  desire  liberty,  and  would  not  avail 
themselves  of  it,  that  they  may  be  in  some  in¬ 
telligible  manner  rewarded  for  allowing  other 
people  to  make  use  of  it  without  hindrance. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  I  would  suggest  that 
they  might  possibly  learn  something  from 
them.  It  will  not  be  denied  by  anybody,  that 
originality  is  a  valuable  element  in  human 
affairs.  There  is  always  need  of  persons  not 
only  to  discover  new  truths,  and  point  out 
when  what  were  once  truths  are  true  no  longer, 
but  also  to  commence  new  practices,  and  set 
the  example  of  more  enlightened  conduct,  and 
better  taste  and  sense  in  human  life.  This  can¬ 
not  well  be  gainsaid  by  anybody  who  does  not 
believe  that  the  world  hasalready  attained  per¬ 
fection  in  all  its  ways  and  practices.  It  is  true 
that  this  benefit  is  not  capable  of  being  ren¬ 
dered  by  everybody  alike:  there  are  but  few 
persons,  in  comparison  with  the  whole  of  man¬ 
kind,  whose  experiments,  if  adopted  by  others, 
would  be  likely  to  be  any  improvement  on 
established  practice.  But  these  few  are  the  salt 
of  the  earth;  without  them,  human  life  would 
become  a  stagnant  pool.  Not  only  is  it  they 
who  introduce  good  things  which  did  not 
before  exist;  it  is  they  who  keep  the  life  in 
those  which  already  exist.  If  there  were  noth¬ 
ing  new  to  be  done,  would  human  intellect 
cease  to  be  necessary?  Would  it  be  a  reason 
why  those  who  do  the  old  things  should  for¬ 
get  why  they  are  done,  and  do  them  like  cattle, 
not  like  human  beings?  There  is  only  too  great 
a  tendency  in  the  best  beliefs  and  practices  to 
degenerate  into  the  mechanical;  and  unless 
there  were  a  succession  of  persons  whose  ever- 
recurring  originality  prevents  the  grounds  of 
those  beliefs  and  practices  from  becoming 
merely  traditional,  such  dead  matter  would 
not  resist  the  smallest  shock  from  anything 
really  alive,  and  there  would  be  no  reason 
why  civilisation  should  not  die  out,  as  in  the 
Byzantine  Empire.  Persons  of  genius,  it  is  true, 
are,  and  are  always  likely  to  be,  a  small  minor- 


ON  LIBERTY 


298 

ity;  but  in  order  to  have  them,  it  is  necessary 
to  preserve  the  soil  in  which  they  grow.  Genius 
can  only  breathe  freely  in  an  atmosphere  of 
freedom.  Persons  of  genius  are,  ex  vi  termini 
more  individual  than  any  other  people— less 
capable,  consequently,  of  fitting  themselves, 
without  hurtful  compression,  into  any  of  the 
small  number  of  moulds  which  society  provides 
in  order  to  save  its  members  the  trouble  of 
forming  their  own  character.  If  from  timidity 
they  consent  to  be  forced  into  one  of  these 
moulds,  and  to  let  all  that  part  of  themselves 
which  cannot  expand  under  the  pressure  re¬ 
main  unexpanded,  society  will  be  little  the 
better  for  their  genius.  If  they  are  of  a  strong 
character,  and  break  their  fetters,  they  become 
a  mark  for  the  society  which  has  not  succeeded 
in  reducing  them  to  commonplace,  to  point 
out  with  solemn  warning  as  “wild,”  “erratic,” 
and  the  like;  much  as  if  one  should  complain 
of  the  Niagara  river  for  not  flowing  smoothly 
between  its  banks  like  a  Dutch  canal. 

I  insist  thus  emphatically  on  the  importance 
of  genius,  and  the  necessity  of  allowing  it  to 
unfold  itself  freely  both  in  thought  and  in 
practice,  being  well  aware  that  no  one  will 
deny  the  position  in  theory,  but  knowing  also 
that  almost  every  one,  in  reality,  is  totally  in¬ 
different  to  it.  People  think  genius  a  fine  thing 
if  it  enables  a  man  to  write  an  exciting  poem, 
or  paint  a  picture.  But  in  its  true  sense,  that 
of  originality  in  thought  and  action,  though 
no  one  says  that  it  is  not  3  thing  to  be  admired, 
nearly  all,  at  heart,  think  that  they  can  do  very 
well  without  it.  Unhappily  this  is  too  natural 
to  be  wandered  at.  Originality  is  the  one  thing 
which  unoriginal  minds  cannot  feel  the  use  of. 
They  cannot  see  what  it  is  to  do  for  them:  how 
should  they?  If  they  could  see  what  it  would 
do  for  them,  it  would  not  be  originality.  The 
first  service  which  originality  has  to  render 
them,  is  that  of  opening  their  eyes:  which 
being  once  fully  done,  they  would  have  a 
chance  of  being  themselves  original.  Mean¬ 
while,  recollecting  that  nothing  was  ever  yet 
done  which  some  one  was  not  the  first  to  do, 
and  that  all  good  things  which  exist  are  the 
fruits  of  originality,  let  them  be  modest  enough 
to  believe  that  there  is  something  still  left  for 
it  to  accomplish,  and  assure  themselves  that 
they  are  more  in  need  of  originality,  the  less 
tljey  are  conscious  of  the  want. 

In  sober  truth,  whatever  homage  may  be 
professed,  or  even  paid,  to  real  or  supposed 
mental  superiority,  the  general  tendency  of 
things  throughout  the  world  is  to  render  medi¬ 


ocrity  the  ascendant  power  among  mankind. 
In  ancient  history,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  in 
a  diminishing  degree  through  the  long  transi¬ 
tion  from  feudality  to  the  present  time,  the 
individual  was  a  power  in  himself;  and  if  he 
had  either  great  talents  or  a  high  social  posi¬ 
tion,  he  was  a  considerable  power.  At  present 
individuals  are  lost  in  the  crowd.  In  politics  it 
is  almost  a  triviality  to  say  that  public  opinion 
now  rules  the  world.  The  only  power  deserving 
the  name  is  that  of  masses,  and  of  governments 
while  they  make  themselves  the  organ  of  the 
tendencies  and  instincts  of  masses.  This  is  as 
true  in  the  moral  and  social relationsof  private 
life  as  in  public  transactions.  Those  whose  opin¬ 
ions  go  by  the  name  of  public  opinion  are  not 
always  the  same  sort  of  public:  in  America  they 
are  the  whole  white  population;  in  England, 
chiefly  the  middle  class.  But  they  are  always 
a  mass,  that  is  to  say,  collective  mediocrity. 
And  what  is  a  still  greater  novelty,  the  mass  do 
not  now  take  their  opinions  from  dignitaries 
in  Church  or  State,  from  ostensible  leaders, 
or  from  books.  Their  thinking  is  done  for 
them  by  men  much  like  themselves,  addressing 
them  or  speaking  in  their  name,  on  the  spur  of 
the  moment,  through  the  newspapers. 

I  am  not  complaining  of  all  this.  I  do  not 
assert  that  anything  better  is  compatible,  as 
a  general  rule,  with  the  present  low  state  of 
the  human  mind.  But  that  docs  not  hinder  the 
government  of  mediocrity  from  being  medi¬ 
ocre  government.  No  government  by  a  democ¬ 
racy  or  a  numerous  aristocracy,  either  in  its 
political  acts  or  in  the  opinions,  qualities,  and 
tone  of  mind  which  it  fosters,  ever  did  or  could 
rise  above  mediocrity,  except  in  so  far  as  the 
sovereign  Many  have  let  themselves  be  guided 
(which  in  their  best  times  they  always  have 
done)  by  the  counsels  and  influence  of  a  more 
highly  gifted  and  instructed  One  or  Few.  The 
initiation  of  all  wise  or  noble  things  comes  and 
must  come  from  individuals;  generally  at  first 
from  some  one  individual.  The  honour  and 
glory  of  the  average  man  is  that  he  is  capable 
of  following  that  initiative;  that  he  can  re¬ 
spond  internally  to  wise  and  noble  things,  and 
be  led  to  them  with  his  eyes  open.  I  am 
not  countenancing  the  sort  of  “hero-worship” 
which  applauds  the  strong  man  of  genius  for 
forcibly  seizing  on  the  government  of  the  world 
and  making  it  do  his  bidding  in  spite  of  itself. 
All  he  can  claim  is,  freedom  to  point  out  the 
way.  I'lic  power  of  compelling  others  into  it  is 
not  only  inconsistent  with  the  freedom  and 
development  of  all  the  rest,  but  corrupting  to 


OF  INDIVIDUALITY  299 


the  strong  man  himself.  It  does  seem,  however, 
that  when  the  opinions  of  masses  of  merely 
average  men  are  everywhere  become  or  becom¬ 
ing  the  dominant  power,  the  counterpoise  and 
corrective  to  that  tendency  would  be  the  more 
and  more  pronounced  individuality  of  those 
who  stand  on  the  higher  eminences  of  thought. 
It  is  in  these  circumstances  most  especially, 
that  exceptional  individuals,  instead  of  being 
deterred,  should  be  encouraged  in  acting  dif¬ 
ferently  from  the  mass.  In  other  times  there 
was  no  advantage  in  their  doing  so,  unless  they 
acted  not  only  differently  but  better.  In  this 
age,  the  mere  example  of  non-conformity,  the 
mere  refusal  to  bend  the  knee  to  custom,  is 
itself  a  service.  Precisely  because  the  tyranny 
of  opinion  is  such  as  to  make  eccentricity  a 
reproach,  it  is  desirable,  in  order  to  break 
through  that  tyranny,  that  people  should  be 
eccentric.  Eccentricity  has  always  abounded 
when  and  where  strength  of  character  has 
abounded;  and  the  amount  of  eccentricity  in 
a  society  has  generally  been  proportional  to 
the  amount  of  genius,  mental  vigour,  and  moral 
courage  it  contained.  That  so  few  now  dare 
to  be  eccentric  marks  the  chief  danger  of  the 
time. 

1  have  said  that  it  is  important  to  give  the 
freest  scope  possible  to  uncustomary  things,  in 
order  that  it  may  in  time  appearwhich  of  these 
are  fit  to  be  converted  into  customs.  But  in¬ 
dependence  of  action,  and  disregard  of  cus¬ 
tom,  are  not  solely  deserving  of  encourage¬ 
ment  for  the  chance  they  afford  that  better 
modes  action,  and  customs  more  worthy  of 
general  adoption,  may  fre  struck  out;  nor  is  it 
only  persons  of  decided  mental  superiority 
who  have  a  just  claim  to  carry  on  their  lives 
in  their  own  way.  There  is  no  reason  that  all 
human  existence  should  be  constructed  on 
some  one  or  some  small  number  of  patterns. 
If  a  person  possesses  any  tolerable  amount  of 
common  sense  and  experience,  his  own  mode 
of  laying  out  his  existence  is  the  best,  not  be¬ 
cause  it  is  the  best  in  itself,  but  because  it  is 
his  own  mode.  Human  beings  are  not  like 
sheep;  and  even  sheep  are  not  undistinguish- 
ably  alike.  A  man  cannot  get  a  coat  or  a  pair  of 
boots  to  fit  him  unless  they  are  either  made  to 
his  measure,  or  he  has  a  whole  warehouseful 
to  choose  from:  and  is  it  easier  to  fit  him  with 
a  life  than  with  a  coat,  or  are  human  beings 
more  like  one  another  in  their  whole  physical 
and  spiritual  conformation  than  in  the  shape 
of  their  feet?  If  it  were  only  that  people  have 
diversities  of  taste,  that  is  reason  enough  for 


not  attempting  to  shape  them  all  after  one 
model. 

But  different  persons  also  require  different 
conditions  for  their  spiritual  development; 
and  can  no  more  exist  healthily  in  the  same 
moral,  than  all  the  variety  of  plants  can  in  the 
same  physical,  atmosphere  and  climate.  The 
same  things  which  are  helps  to  one  person  to¬ 
wards  the  cultivation  of  his  higher  nature  are 
hindrances  to  another.  The  same  mode  of  life 
is  a  healthy  excitement  to  one,  keeping  all  his 
faculties  of  action  and  enjoyment  in  their  best 
order,  while  to  another  it  is  a  distracting 
burthen,  which  suspends  or  crushes  all  inter¬ 
nal  life.  Such  are  the  differences  among  human 
beings  in  their  sources  of  pleasure,  their  sus¬ 
ceptibilities  of  pain,  and  the  operation  on 
them  of  different  physical  and  moral  agencies, 
that  unless  there  is  a  corresponding  diversity 
in  their  modes  of  life,  they  neither  obtain  their 
fair  share  of  happiness,  nor  grow  up  to  the 
mental,  moral,  and  aesthetic  stature  of  which 
their  nature  is  capable.  Why  then  should  tol¬ 
erance,  as  far  as  the  public  sentiment  is  con¬ 
cerned,  extend  only  to  tastes  and  modes  of  life 
which  extort  acquiescence  by  the  multitude  of 
their  adherents?  Nowhere  (except  in  some 
monastic  institutions)  is  diversity  of  taste  en¬ 
tirely  unrecognised;  a  person  may,  without 
blame,  either  like  or  dislike  rowing,  or  smok¬ 
ing,  or  music,  or  athletic  exercises,  or  chess,  or 
cards,  or  study,  because  both  those  who  like 
each  of  these  things,  and  those  who  dislike 
them,  are  too  numerous  to  be  put  down.  But 
the  man,  and  still  more  the  woman,  who  can 
be  accused  eitherof  doing“what  nobody  does,” 
or  of  not  doing  “what  everybody  does,”  is  the 
subject  of  as  much  depreciatory  remark  as  if 
he  or  she  had  committed  some  grave  moral 
delinquency.  Persons  require  to  possess  a  title, 
or  some  other  badge  of  rank,  or  of  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  people  of  rank,  to  be  able  to  in¬ 
dulge  somewhat  in  the  luxury  of  doing  as  they 
like  without  detriment  to  their  estimation.  To 
indulge  somewhat,  I  repeat;  for  whoever  allow 
themselves  much  of  that  indulgence,  incur  the 
risk  of  something  worse  than  disparaging 
speeches— they  are  in  peril  of  a  commission  de 
lunatico ,  and  of  having  their  property  taken 
from  them  and  given  to  their  relations.1 

1  There  is  something  both  contemptible  and 
frightful  in  the  sort  of  evidence  on  which,  of  late 
years,  any  person  can  be  judicially  declared  unfit 
for  the  management  of  his  affairs;  and  after  his 
death,  his  disposal  of  hjs  property  can  be  set  aside, 
if  there  is  enough  of  it  to  pay  the  expenses  of  liti¬ 
gation— which  are  charged  on  the  property  itself. 


ON  LIBERTY 


There  is  one  characteristic  of  the  present  di¬ 
rection  of  public  opinion  peculiarly  calculated 
to  make  it  intolerant  of  any  marked  demon¬ 
stration  of  individuality.  The  general  average 
of  mankind  are  not  only  moderate  in  intellect, 
but  also  moderate  in  inclinations:  they  have 
no  tastes  or  wishes  strong  enough  to  incline 
them  to  do  anything  unusual,  and  they  con¬ 
sequently  do  not  understand  those  who  have, 
and  class  all  such  with  the  wild  and  intem¬ 
perate  whom  they  are  accustomed  to  look  down 
upon.  Now,  in  addition  to  this  fact  which  is 
general,  we  have  only  to  suppose  that  a  strong 
movement  has  set  in  towards  the  improvement 
of  morals,  and  it  is  evident  what  we  have  to 
expect.  In  these  days  such  a  movement  has 
set  in;  much  has  actually  been  effected  in  the 
way  of  increased  regularity  of  conduct  and 
discouragement  of  excesses;  and  there  is  a  phil¬ 
anthropic  spirit  abroad,  for  the  exercise  of 
which  there  is  no  more  inviting  field  than  the 
moral  and  prudential  improvement  of  our  fel¬ 
low  creatures.  These  tendencies  of  the  times 
cause  the  public  to  be  more  disposed  than  at 
most  former  periods  to  prescribe  general  rules 
of  conduct,  and  endeavour  to  make  every  one 
conform  to  the  approved  standard.  And  that 
standard,  express  or  tacit,  is  to  desire  nothing 
strongly.  Its  ideal  of  character  is  to  be  without 
any  marked  character;  to  maim  by  compression, 
like  a  Chinese  lady’s  foot,  every  part  of  human 
nature  which  stands  out  prominently,  and 


All  the  minute  details  of  his  daily  life  are  pried 
into,  and  whatevei  is  found  which,  seen  through 
the  medium  of  the  perceiving  and  describing  fac¬ 
ulties  of  the  lowest  of  the  low,  bears  an  appear¬ 
ance  unlike  absolute  commonplace,  is  laid  before 
the  jury  as  evidence  of  insanity,  and  often  with 
success;  the  jurors  being  little,  if  at  all,  less  vulgar 
and  ignorant  than  the  witnesses;  while  the  judges, 
with  that  extraordinan  want  of  knowledge  of  hu¬ 
man  nature  and  life  which  continually  astonishes 
us  in  English  lawyers,  often  help  to  mislead  them. 
These  trials  speak  volumes  as  to  the  state  of  feel¬ 
ing  and  opinion  among  the  vulgar  with  regard  to 
human  liberty.  So  far  from  setting  au>  value  on 
individuality— so  far  from  respecting  the  right  of 
each  individual  to  act,  in  things  indifferent,  as 
seems  good  to  his  own  judgment  and  inclinations, 
judges  and  juries  cannot  even  conceive  that  a  per¬ 
son  in  a  state  of  sanity  can  desire  such  freedom.  In 
former  days,  when  it  was  pioposetl  to  burn  athe¬ 
ists,  charitable  people  used  to  suggest  putting  them 
in  a  madhouse  instead:  it  would  he  nothing  sur¬ 
prising  now  a  days  were  we  to  see  this  done,  and 
the  doers  applauding  themselves,  because,  instead 
of  persecuting  lor  religion,  they  had  adopted  so 
humane  and  Christian  a  mode  of  treating  these 
unfortunates,  not  without  a  silent  satisfaction  at 
I  heir  having  thereby  obtained  their  deserts. 


tends  to  make  the  person  markedly  dissimilar 
in  outline  to  commonplace  humanity. 

As  is  usually  the  case  with  ideals  which  ex¬ 
clude  one-half  of  what  is  desirable,  the  present 
standard  of  approbation  produces  only  an  in¬ 
ferior  imitation  of  the  other  half.  Instead  of 
great  energies  guided  by  vigorous  reason,  and 
strong  feelings  strongly  controlled  by  a  con¬ 
scientious  will,  its  result  is  weak  feelings  and 
weak  energies,  which  therefore  can  be  kept 
in  outward  conformity  to  rule  without  any 
strength  either  of  will  or  of  reason.  Already 
energetic  characters  on  any  large  scale  are  be¬ 
coming  merely  traditional.  There  is  now  scarce¬ 
ly  any  outlet  for  energy  in  this  country  except 
business.  The  energy  expended  in  this  may 
still  be  regarded  as  considerable.  What  little  is 
left  from  that  employment  is  expended  on 
some  hobby;  which  may  be  a  useful,  even  a 
philanthropic  hobby,  but  is  always  some  one 
thing,  and  generally  a  thing  of  small  dimen¬ 
sions.  The  greatness  of  England  is  now  all  col¬ 
lective;  individually  small,  we  only  appear 
capable  of  anything  great  by  our  habit  of  com¬ 
bining;  and  with  this  our  moral  and  religious 
philanthropists  are  perfectly  contented.  But  it 
was  men  of  another  stamp  than  this  that  made 
England  what  it  has  been;  and  men  of  another 
stamp  will  be  needed  to  prevent  its  decline. 

The  despotism  of  custom  is  everywhere  the 
standing  hindrance  to  human  advancement, 
being  in  unceasing  antagonism  to  that  disposi¬ 
tion  to  aim  at  something  better  than  custom¬ 
ary,  which  is  called,  according  to  circumstances, 
the  spirit  of  liberty,  or  that  of  progress  or  im¬ 
provement.  The  spirit  of  improvement  is  not 
always  a  spirit  of  liberty,  for  it  may  aim  at 
forcing  improvements  on  an  unwilling  people; 
and  the  spirit  of  liberty,  in  so  far  as  it  resists 
such  attempts,  may  ally  itself  locally  and  tem¬ 
porarily  with  the  opponents  ol  improvement; 
hut  the  only  unfailing  and  permanent  source 
ol  improvement  is  liberty,  since  by  it  there  are 
as  many  possible  independent  centres  of  im¬ 
provement  as  there  are  individuals.  The  pro¬ 
gressive  ptinciple,  however,  in  either  shape, 
whether  as  the  lo\e  ol  liberty  or  of  improve¬ 
ment.  is  antagonistic  to  the  sway  of  Custom,  in¬ 
volving  at  least  emancipation  from  that  yoke; 
and  the  contest  between  the  two  constitutes 
the  chief  interest  of  the  history  of  mankind. 
I  lie  greater  part  of  the  world  lias,  properly 
speaking,  no  history,  because  the  despotism 
of  Custom  is  complete.  1  'll  is  is  the  case  over 
the  whole  East.  Custom  is  there,  in  all  things, 
the  final  appeal;  justice  and  right  mean  con- 


OF  INDIVIDUALITY  301 


formity  to  custom:  the  argument  of  custom  no 
one,  unless  some  tyrant  intoxicated  with  power, 
thinks  of  resisting.  And  we  see  the  result. 
Those  nations  must  once  have  had  originality; 
they  did  not  start  out  of  the  ground  populous, 
lettered,  and  versed  in  many  of  the  arts  of  life; 
they  made  themselves  all  this,  and  were  then 
the  greatest  and  most  powerful  nations  of  the 
world.  What  are  they  now?  The  subjects  or 
dependents  of  tribes  whose  forefathers  wan¬ 
dered  in  the  forests  when  theirs  had  magnifi¬ 
cent  palaces  and  gorgeous  temples,  but  over 
whom  custom  exercised  only  a  divided  rule 
with  liberty  and  progress. 

A  people,  it  appears,  may  be  progressive  for 
a  certain  length  of  time,  and  then  stop:  when 
does  it  stop?  When  it  ceases  to  possess  indi¬ 
viduality.  If  a  similar  change  should  befall  the 
nations  of  Europe,  it  will  not  be  in  exactly  the 
same  shape:  the  despotism  of  custom  with 
which  these  nations  are  threatened  is  not  pre¬ 
cisely  stationariness.  It  proscribes  singularity, 
but  it  does  not  preclude  change,  provided  all 
change  together.  We  have  discarded  the  fixed 
costumes  of  our  forefathers;  every  one  must 
still  dress  like  other  people,  but  the  fashion 
may  change  once  or  twice  a  year.  We  thus  take 
care  that  when  there  is  a  change,  it  shall  be  for 
change’s  sake,  and  not  from  any  idea  of  beauty 
or  convenience;  for  the  same  idea  of  beauty  or 
convenience  would  not  strike  all  the  world 
at  the  same  moment,  and  be  simultaneously 
thrown  aside  by  all  at  another  moment.  But 
we  are  progressive  as  well  as  changeable:  we 
continually  make  new  inventions  in  mechan¬ 
ical  things,  and  keep  them  until  they  are  again 
superseded  by  better;  we  are  eager  for  im¬ 
provement  in  politics,  in  education,  even  in 
morals,  though  in  this  last  our  idea  of  im¬ 
provement  chiefly  consists  in  persuading  or 
forcing  other  people  to  be  as  good  as  ourselves. 
It  is  not  progress  that  we  object  to;  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  we  flatter  ourselves  that  we  are  the  most 
progressive  people  who  ever  lived.  It  is  indi¬ 
viduality  that  we  war  against:  we  should  think 
we  had  done  wonders  if  we  had  made  our¬ 
selves  all  alike;  forgetting  that  the  unlikeness 
of  one  person  to  another  is  generally  the  first 
thing  which  draws  the  attention  of  either  to 
the  imperfection  of  his  own  type,  and  the 
superiority  of  another,  or  the  possibility,  by 
combining  the  advantages  of  both,  of  pioduc- 
ing  something  better  than  either.  We  have  a 
warning  example  in  China— a  nation  of  much 
talent,  and,  in  some  respects,  even  wisdom, 
owing  to  the  rare  good  fortune  of  having  been 


provided  at  an  early  period  with  a  particularly 
good  set  of  customs,  the  work,  in  some  meas¬ 
ure,  of  men  to  whom  even  the  most  enlight¬ 
ened  European  must  accord,  under  certain 
limitations,  the  title  of  sages  and  philosophers. 
They  are  remarkable,  too,  in  the  excellence  of 
their  apparatus  for  impressing,  as  far  as  possi¬ 
ble,  the  best  wisdom  they  possess  upon  every 
mind  in  the  community,  and  securing  that 
those  wrho  have  appropriated  most  of  it  shall 
occupy  the  posts  of  honour  and  power.  Surely 
the  people  who  did  this  have  disco\ered  the 
secret  of  human  progressiveness,  and  must 
have  kept  themselves  steadily  at  the  head  of 
the  movement  of  the  'world.  On  the  contrary, 
they  have  become  stationary— have  remained 
so  for  thousands  of  years;  and  if  they  are  ever 
to  be  farther  improved,  it  must  be  by  foreign¬ 
ers.  They  have  succeeded  beyond  all  hope  in 
what  English  philanthropists  are  so  industri¬ 
ously  working  at— in  making  a  people  all  alike, 
all  governing  their  thoughts  and  conduct  by 
the  same  maxims  and  rules;  and  these  are  the 
fruits.  The  modern  regime  of  public  opinion 
is,  in  an  unorganised  form,  what  the  Chinese 
educational  and  political  systems  are  in  an  or¬ 
ganised;  and  unless  individuality  shall  be  able 
successfully  to  assert  itself  against  this  yoke, 
Europe,  notwithstanding  its  noble  antecedents 
and  its  professed  Christianity,  will  tend  to  be¬ 
come  another  China. 

What  is  it  that  has  hitherto  preserved  Europe 
from  this  lot?  What  has  made  the  European 
family  of  nations  an  improving,  instead  of  a 
stationary  portion  of  mankind?  Not  any  supe¬ 
rior  excellence  in  them,  which,  when  it  exists, 
exists  as  the  effect  not  as  the  cause;  but  their 
remarkable  diversity  of  character  and  culture. 
Individuals,  classes,  nations,  have  been  ex¬ 
tremely  unlike  one  another:  they  have  struck 
out  a  great  variety  of  paths,  each  leading  to 
something  valuable;  and  although  at  every 
period  those  wlio  travelled  in  different  paths 
have  been  intolerant  of  one  another,  and  each 
would  have  thought  it  an  excellent  thing  if  all 
the  rest  could  have  been  compelled  to  travel 
his  road,  their  attempts  to  thwart  each  other’s 
development  have  rarely  had  any  permanent 
success,  and  each  has  in  time  endured  to  receive 
the  good  which  the  others  have  offered.  Europe 
is,  in  my  judgment,  wholly  indebted  to  this 
plurality  of  padis  for  its  progressive  and  many- 
sided  development.  But  it  already  begins  to 
possess  this  benefit  in  a  considerably  less  de¬ 
gree.  It  is  decidedly  advancing  towards  the 
Chinese  ideal  of  making  all  people  alike. 


ON  LIBERTY 


M.  de  Tocqueville,  in  his  last  important  work, 
remarks  how  much  more  the  Frenchmen  of  the 
present  day  resemble  one  another  than  did 
those  even  of  the  last  generation.  The  same 
remark  might  be  made  of  Englishmen  in  a  far 
greater  degree. 

In  a  passage  already  quoted  from  Wilhelm 
von  Humboldt,  he  points  out  two  things  as 
necessary  conditions  of  human  development, 
because  necessary  to  render  people  unlike  one 
another;  namely, freedom, and  variety  of  situa¬ 
tions.  The  second  of  these  two  conditions  is 
in  this  country  every  day  diminishing.  The  cir¬ 
cumstances  which  surround  different  classes 
and  individuals,  and  shape  their  characters, 
are  daily  becoming  more  assimilated.  Former¬ 
ly,  different  ranks,  different  neighbourhoods, 
different  trades  and  professions,  lived  in  what 
might  be  called  different  worlds;  at  present  to 
a  great  degree  in  the  same.  Comparatively 
speaking,  they  now  read  the  same  things,  listen 
to  the  same  things,  see  the  same  things,  go  to 
the  same  places,  have  their  hopes  and  fears 
directed  to  the  same  objects,  have  the  same 
rights  and  liberties,  and  the  same  means  of  as¬ 
serting  them.  Great  as  are  the  differences  of 
position  which  remain,  they  are  nothing  to 
those  which  have  ceased.  And  the  assimilation 
is  still  proceeding.  All  the  political  changes 
of  the  age  promote  it,  since  they  all  tend  to 
raise  the  low  and  to  lower  the  high.  Every  ex¬ 
tension  of  education  promotes  it,  because  edu¬ 
cation  brings  people  under  common  influ¬ 
ences,  and  gives  them  access  to  the  general 
stock  of  facts  and  sentiments.  Improvement  in 
the  means  of  communication  promotes  it,  by 
bringing  the  inhabitants  of  distant  places  into 
personal  contact,  and  keeping  up  a  rapid  flow 
of  changes  of  residence  between  one  place  and 
another.  The  increase  of  commerce  and  manu¬ 
factures  promotes  it.  by  diffusing  more  widely 
the  advantages  of  easy  circumstances,  and 
opening  all  objects  of  ambition,  even  the  high¬ 
est,  to  general  competition,  whereby  the  de¬ 
sire  of  rising  becomes  no  longer  the  character 
of  a  particular  class,  but  of  all  classes.  A  more- 
powerful  agency  than  even  all  these,  in  bring¬ 
ing  about  a  general  similarity  among  man¬ 
kind,  is  the  complete  establishment,  in  this 
and  other  free  countries,  of  the  ascendancy  of 
public  opinion  in  the  State.  As  the  various 
social  eminences  which  enabled  persons  en¬ 
trenched  on  them  to  disregard  the  opinion  of 
the  multitude  gradually  become  levelled;  as 
the  very  idea  of  resisting  the  will  of  the  public, 
when  it  is  positively  known  that  they  have  a 


will,  disappears  more  and  more  from  the  minds 
of  practical  politicians;  there  ceases  to  be  any 
social  support  for  nonconformity— any  sub¬ 
stantive  power  in  society  which,  itself  opposed 
to  the  ascendancy  of  numbers,  is  interested  in 
taking  under  its  protection  opinions  and  tend¬ 
encies  at  variance  with  those  of  the  public. 

The  combination  of  all  these  causes  forms  so 
great  a  mass  of  influences  hostile  to  Individual¬ 
ity,  that  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  it  can  stand  its 
ground.  It  will  do  so  with  increasing  difficulty, 
unless  the  intelligent  part  of  the  public  can  be 
made  to  feel  its  value— to  see  that  it  is  good 
there  should  be  differences,  even  though  not 
for  the  better,  even  though,  as  it  may  appear 
to  them,  some  should  be  for  the  worse.  If  the 
claims  of  Individuality  are  ever  to  be  asserted, 
the  time  is  now,  while  much  is  still  wanting  to 
complete  the  enforced  assimilation.  It  is  only 
in  the  earlier  stages  that  any  stand  can  be  suc¬ 
cessfully  made  against  the  encroachment.  The 
demand  that  all  other  people  shall  resemble 
ourselves  grows  by  what  it  feeds  on.  If  resist¬ 
ance  waits  till  life  is  reduced  nearly  to  one 
uniform  type,  all  deviations  from  that  type 
will  come  to  be  considered  impious,  immoral, 
even  monstrous  and  contrary  to  nature.  Man¬ 
kind  speedily  become  unable  to  conceive  di¬ 
versity,  when  they  have  been  for  some  time  un¬ 
accustomed  to  see  it. 

Chapter  4 

Of  the  Limits  to  the  Authority  of 
Society  over  the  Individual 
What,  then,  is  the  rightful  limit  to  the  sov¬ 
ereignty  of  the  individual  over  himself?  Where 
does  the  authority  of  society  begin?  How  much 
of  human  life  should  be  assigned  to  individu¬ 
ality,  and  how  much  to  society? 

Each  will  receive  its  proper  share,  if  each 
has  that  which  more  particularly  concerns  it. 
To  individuality  should  belong  the  part  ot  life 
in  which  it  is  chiefly  the  individual  that  is  in¬ 
terested;  to  society,  the  part  which  chiefly  in¬ 
terests  society. 

Though  society  is  not  founded  on  a  con¬ 
tract,  and  though  no  good  purpose  is  answered 
by  inventing  a  contract  in  order  to  deduce 
social  obligations  from  it,  every  one  who  re¬ 
ceives  the  protection  of  society  owes  a  return 
for  the  benefit,  and  the  fact  of  living  in  society 
renders  it  indispensable  that  each  should  be 
bound  to  observe  a  certain  line  of  conduct  to¬ 
wards  the  rest.  This  conduct  consists,  first,  in 
not  injuring  the  interests  of  one  another;  or 


SOCIETY  AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL  303 


rather  certain  interests,  which,  either  by  ex¬ 
press  legal  provision  or  by  tacit  understand¬ 
ing,  ought  to  be  considered  as  rights;  and  sec¬ 
ondly,  in  each  person’s  bearing  his  share  (to 
be  fixed  on  some  equitable  principle)  of  the 
labours  and  sacrifices  incurred  for  defending 
the  society  or  its  members  from  injury  and 
molestation.  These  conditions  society  is  justi¬ 
fied  in  enforcing,  at  all  costs  to  those  who  en¬ 
deavour  to  withhold  fulfilment.  Nor  is  this  all 
that  society  may  do.  The  acts  of  ah  individual 
may  be  hurtful  to  others,  or  wanting  in  due 
consideration  for  their  welfare,  without  going 
to  the  length  of  violating  any  of  their  consti¬ 
tuted  rights.  The  offender  may  then  be  justly 
punished  by  opinion,  though  not  by  law.  As 
soon  as  any  part  of  a  person’s  conduct  affects 
prejudicially  the  interests  of  others,  society  has 
jurisdiction  over  it,  and  the  question  whether 
the  general  welfare  will  or  will  hot  be  pro¬ 
moted  by  interfering  with  it,  becomes  open  to 
discussion.  But  there  is  no  room  for  entertain¬ 
ing  any  such  question  when  a  person’s  conduct 
affects  the  interests  of  no  persons  besides  him¬ 
self,  or  needs  not  affect  them  unless  they  like 
(all  the  persons  concerned  being  of  full  age, 
and  the  ordinary  amount  of  understanding). 
In  all  such  cases,  there  should  be  perfect  free¬ 
dom,  legal  and  social,  to  do  the  action  and 
stand  the  consequences. 

It  would  be  a  great  misunderstanding  of  this 
doctrine  to  suppose  that  it  is  one  of  selfish  in¬ 
difference,  which  pretends  that  human  beings 
have  no  business  with  each  other’s  conduct  in 
life,  and  that  they  should  not  concern  them¬ 
selves  about  the  well-doing  or  well-being  of 
one  another,  unless  their  own  interest  is  in¬ 
volved.  Instead  of  any  diminution,  there  is 
need  of  a  great  increase  of  disinterested  exer¬ 
tion  to  promote  the  good  of  others.  But  disin¬ 
terested  benevolence  can  find  other  instru¬ 
ments  to  persuade  people  to  their  good  than 
whips  and  scourges,  either  of  the  literal  or  the 
metaphorical  sort.  I  am  the  last  person  to  un¬ 
dervalue  the  self-regarding  virtues;  they  are 
only  second  in  importance,  if  even  second,  to 
the  social.  It  is  equally  the  business  of  educa¬ 
tion  to  cultivate  both.  But  even  education 
works  by  conviction  and  persuasion  as  well  as 
by  compulsion,  and  it  is  by  the  former  only 
that,  when  the  period  of  education  is  passed, 
the  self-regarding  virtues  should  be  inculcated. 
Human  beings  owe  to  each  other  help  to 
distinguish  the  better  from  the  worse,  and  en¬ 
couragement  to  choose  the  former  and  avoid 
the  latter.  They  should  be  for  ever  stimulat¬ 


ing  each  other  to  increased  exercise  of  their 
higher  faculties,  and  increased  direction  of 
their  feelings  and  aims  towards  wise  instead 
of  foolish,  elevating  instead  of  degrading,  ob¬ 
jects  and  contemplations.  But  neither  one  per¬ 
son,  nor  any  number  of  persons,  is  warranted 
in  saying  to  another  human  creature  of  ripe 
years,  that  he  shall  not  do  with  his  life  for 
his  own  benefit  what  he  chooses  to  do  with 
it.  He  is  the  person  most  interested  in  his 
own  well-being:  the  interest  which  any  other 
person,  except  in  cases  of  strong  personal  at¬ 
tachment,  can  have  in  it,  is  trifling,  compared 
with  that  which  he  himself  has;  the  interest 
which  society  has  in  him  individually  (except 
as  to  his  conduct  to  others)  is  fractional,  and  al¬ 
together  indirect;  while  with  respect  to  his 
own  feelings  and  circumstances,  the  most  ordi¬ 
nary  man  or  woman  has  means  of  knowledge 
immeasurably  surpassing  those  that  can  be 
possessed  by  any  one  else.  The  interference  of 
society  to  overrule  his  judgment  and  purposes 
in  what  only  regards  himself  must  be  grounded 
on  general  presumptions;  which  may  be  alto¬ 
gether  wrong,  and  even  if  right,  are  as  likely 
as  not  to  be  misapplied  to  individual  cases,  by 
persons  no  better  acquainted  with  the  circum¬ 
stances  of  such  cases  than  those  are  who  look 
at  them  merely  from  without.  In  this  depart¬ 
ment,  therefore,  of  human  affairs,  Individual¬ 
ity  has  its  proper  field  of  action.  In  the  conduct 
of  human  beings  towards  one  another  it  is 
necessary  that  general  rules  should  for  the 
most  part  be  observed,  in  order  that  people 
may  know  what  they  have  to  expect:  but  in 
each  person’s  own  concerns  his  individual 
spontaneity  is  entitled  to  free  exercise.  Con¬ 
siderations  to  aid  his  judgment,  exhortations 
to  strengthen  his  will,  may  be  offered  to  him, 
even  obtruded  on  him,  by  others:  but  he  him¬ 
self  is  the  final  judge.  All  errors  which  he  is 
likely  to  commit  against  advice  and  warning  are 
far  outweighed  by  the  evil  of  allowing  others 
to  constrain  him  to  what  they  deem  his  good. 

I  do  not  mean  that  the  feelings  with  which 
a  person  is  regarded  by  others  ought  not  to 
be  in  any  way  affected  by  his  self-regarding 
qualities  or  deficiencies.  This  is  neither  pos¬ 
sible  nor  desirable.  If  he  is  eminent  in  any  of 
the  qualities  which  conduce  to  his  own  good, 
he  is,  so  far,  a  proper  object  of  admiration. 
He  is  so  much  the  nearer  to  the  ideal  perfec¬ 
tion  of  human  nature.  If  he  is  grossly  deficient 
in  those  qualities,  a  sentiment  the  opposite  of 
admiration  will  follow.  There  is  a  degree  of 
folly,  and  a  degree  of  what  may  be  called 


ON  LIBERTY 


(though  the  phrase  is  not  unobjectionable) 
low  ness  or  depravation  of  taste,  which,  though 
it  cannot  justify  doing  harm  to  the  person  who 
manifests  it.  renders  him  necessarily  and  prop¬ 
erly  a  subject  of  distaste,  or.  in  extreme  cases, 
even  of  contempt:  a  person  could  not  have 
the  opposite  qualities  in  due  strength  without 
entertaining  these  feelings.  Though  doing  no 
wrong  to  any  one,  a  person  may  so  act  as  to 
compel  us  to  judge  him,  and  feel  to  him,  as  a 
fool,  or  as  a  being  of  an  inferior  order:  and 
since  this  judgment  and  feeling  are  a  fact 
which  he  would  prefer  to  avoid,  it  is  doing  him 
a  service  to  warn  him  of  it  beforehand,  as  of 
any  other  disagreeable  consequence  to  which 
he  exposes  himself.  It  would  be  well,  indeed, 
if  this  good  office  were  much  more  freely  ren¬ 
dered  than  the  common  notions  of  politeness 
at  present  permit,  and  if  one  person  could 
honesth  point  out  to  another  that  he  thinks 
him  in  fault,  without  being  considered  un¬ 
mannerly  or  presuming.  We  have  a  right,  also, 
in  various  ways,  to  act  upon  our  unfavourable 
opinion  of  any  one,  not  to  the  oppression  of 
his  individuality,  but  in  the  exercise  of  ours. 
We  are  not  bound,  for  example,  to  seek  his 
society;  w’e  have  a  right  to  avoid  it  (though 
not  to  parade  the  avoidance),  for  we  have  a 
right  to  choose  the  society  most  acceptable  to 
us.  We  ha\  e  a  right,  and  it  may  be  our  duty,  to 
caution  others  against  him,  if  we  think  his  ex¬ 
ample  or  conversation  likely  to  have  a  perni¬ 
cious  effect  on  those  with  whom  he  associates. 
We  may  give  others  a  preference  over  him  in 
optional  good  offices,  except  those  which  tend 
to  his  improvement.  In  these  various  modes  a 
person  may  suffer  very  severe  penalties  at  the 
hands  of  others  for  faults  which  directly  con¬ 
cern  only  himself;  but  he  suffers  these  penal¬ 
ties  only  in  so  far  as  they  arc  the  natural  and, 
as  it  were,  the  spontaneous  consequences  of 
the  faults  themselves,  not  because  they  are  pur¬ 
posely  inflicted  on  him  for  the  sake  of  punish¬ 
ment.  A  person  who  shows  rashness,  obstinacy, 
self-conceit— who  cannot  live  within  moderate 
means— w  ho  cannot  restrain  himself  from  hurt¬ 
ful  indulgences— who  pursues  animal  pleasures 
at  the  expense  of  those  of  feeling  and  intellect 
—must  expect  to  be  lowered  in  the  opinion  of 
others,  and  to  have  a  less  share  of  their  favour- 
ablc  sentiments;  but  of  this  he  has  no  right  to 
complain,  unless  he  has  merited  their  favour 
by  special  excellence  in  his  social  relations, 
and  lias  thus  established  a  title  to  their  good 
offices,  which  is  not  affected  by  his  demerits  to¬ 
wards  himself. 


What  I  contend  for  is,  that  the  inconven¬ 
iences  which  are  strictly  inseparable  from  the 
unfavourable  judgment  of  others,  are  the  only 
ones  to  which  a  person  should  ever  be  sub¬ 
jected  for  that  portion  of  his  conduct  and 
character  which  concerns  his  own  good,  but 
which  does  not  affect  the  interest  of  others  in 
their  relations  with  him.  Acts  injurious  to 
others  require  a  totally  different  treatment. 
Encroachment  on  their  rights;  infliction  on 
them  of  any  loss  or  damage  not  justified  by  his 
own  rights;  falsehood  or  duplicity  in  dealing 
with  them;  unfair  or  ungenerous  use  of  ad¬ 
vantages  over  them;  even  selfish  abstinence 
from  defending  them  against  injury— these  are 
fit  objects  of  moral  reprobation,  and,  in  grave 
cases,  of  moral  retribution  and  punishment. 
And  not  only  these  acts,  but  the  dispositions 
which  lead  to  them,  are  properly  immoral,  and 
fit  subjects  of  disapprobation  which  may  rise 
to  abhorrence.  Cruelty  of  disposition;  malice 
and  ill-nature;  that  most  anti  social  and  odi¬ 
ous  of  all  passions,  envy;  dissimulation  and  in¬ 
sincerity,  irascibility  on  insufficient  cause,  and 
resentment  disproportioned  to  the  provoca¬ 
tion;  the  love  of  domineering  over  others;  the 
desire  to  engross  more  than  one’s  share  of 
advantages  (the  ir\eovt£ia  of  the  Greeks);  the 
pride  which  derives  gratification  from  the 
abasement  of  others;  the  egotism  which  thinks 
self  and  its  concerns  more  important  than 
everything  else,  and  decides  all  doubtful  ques¬ 
tions  in  its  own  favour;— these  are  moral  vices, 
and  constitute  a  bad  and  odious  moral  char¬ 
acter:  unlike  the  self-regarding  faults  previous¬ 
ly  mentioned,  which  are  not  properly  immor¬ 
alities,  and  to  whatever  pitch  they  may  be 
carried,  do  not  constitute  wickedness.  They 
may  be  proofs  of  any  amount  of  folly,  or  want 
of  personal  dignity  and  self-respect;  but  they 
are  only  a  subject  of  moral  reprobation  when 
they  involve  a  breach  of  duty  to  others,  for 
whose  sake  the  individual  is  bound  to  have 
care  for  himself.  What  arc  called  duties  to  our¬ 
selves  are  not  socially  obligatory,  unless  cir- 
( mnstances  render  them  at  the  same  time  du¬ 
ties  to  others.  The  term  duty  to  oneself,  when 
it  means  an)  thing  more  than  prudence,  means 
self-respect  or  self-development,  and  for  none 
of  these  is  any  one  accountable  to  his  fellow’ 
creatures,  because  for  none  of  them  is  it  for  the 
good  of  mankind  that  he  be  held  accountable 
to  them. 

I  he  distinction  between  the  loss  of  con¬ 
sideration  which  a  person  may  rightly  incur 
by  defect  of  prudence  or  of  personal  dignity, 


SOCIETY  AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL  305 


and  the  reprobation  which  is  due  to  him  for 
an  offence  against  the  rights  of  others,  is  not  a 
merely  nominal  distinction.  It  makes  a  vast 
difference  both  in  our  feelings  and  in  our  con¬ 
duct  towards  him  whether  he  displeases  us  in 
things  in  which  we  think  we  have  a  right  to 
control  him,  or  in  things  in  which  we  know 
that  we  have  not.  If  he  displeases  us,  we  may 
express  our  distaste,  and  we  may  stand  aloof 
from  a  person  as  well  as  from  a  thing  that  dis¬ 
pleases  us;  but  we  shall  not  therefore  feel 
called  on  to  make  his  life  uncomfortable.  We 
shall  reflect  that  he  already  bears,  or  will  bear, 
the  whole  penalty  of  his  error;  if  he  spoils  his 
life  by  mismanagement,  we  shall  not,  for  that 
reason,  desire  to  spoil  itstill  further:  instead  of 
wishing  to  punish  him,  we  shall  rather  en¬ 
deavour  to  alleviate  his  punishment,  by  show¬ 
ing  him  how  he  may  avoid  or  cure  the  evils  his 
conduct  tends  to  bring  upon  him.  He  may  be 
to  us  an  object  of  pity,  perhaps  of  dislike,  but 
not  of  anger  or  resentment;  we  shall  not  treat 
him  like  an  enemy  of  society:  the  worst  we 
shall  think  ourselves  justified  in  doing  is  leav¬ 
ing  him  to  himself,  if  we  do  not  interfere  be¬ 
nevolently  by  showing  interest  or  concern  for 
him.  It  is  far  otherwise  if  he  has  infringed  the 
rules  necessary  for  the  protection  of  his  fellow 
creatures,  individually  or  collectively.  The  evil 
consequences  of  his  acts  do  not  then  fall  on 
himself,  but  on  others;  and  society,  as  the  pro¬ 
tector  of  all  its  members,  must  retaliate  on 
him;  must  inflict  pain  on  him  for  the  express 
purpose  of  punishment,  and  must  take  care 
that  it  be  sufficiently  severe.  In  the  one  case, 
he  is  an  offender  at  our  bar,  and  we  are  called 
on  not  only  to  sit  in  judgment  on  him,  but,  in 
one  shape  or  another,  to  execute  our  own 
sentence:  in  the  other  case,  it  is  not  our  part 
to  inflict  any  suffering  on  him,  except  what 
may  incidentally  follow  from  our  using  the 
same  liberty  in  the  regulation  of  our  own  af¬ 
fairs,  which  we  allow  to  him  in  his. 

The  distinction  here  pointed  out  between 
the  part  of  a  person’s  life  which  concerns  only 
himself,  and  that  which  concerns  others,  many 
persons  will  refuse  to  admit.  How  (it  may  be 
asked)  can  any  part  of  the  conduct  of  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  society  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the 
other  members?  No  person  is  an  entirely  iso¬ 
lated  being;  it  is  impossible  for  a  person  to  do 
anything  seriously  or  permanently  hurtful  to 
himself,  without  mischief  reaching  at  least  to 
his  near  connections,  and  often  far  beyond 
them.  If  he  injures  his  property,  he  does  harm 
to  those  who  directly  or  indirectly  derived  sup¬ 


port  from  it,  and  usually  diminishes,  by  a 
greater  or  less  amount,  the  general  resources 
of  the  community.  If  he  deteriorates  his  bodily 
or  mental  faculties,  he  not  only  brings  evil 
upon  all  who  depended  on  him  for  any  por¬ 
tion  of  their  happiness,  but  disqualifies  him¬ 
self  for  rendering  the  services  which  he  owes 
to  his  fellow  creatures  generally;  perhaps  be¬ 
comes  a  burthen  on  their  affection  or  benevo¬ 
lence;  and  if  such  conduct  were  very  frequent, 
hardly  any  offence  that  is  committed  would 
detract  more  from  the  general  sum  of  good. 
Finally,  if  by  his  vices  or  follies  a  person 
does  no  direct  harm  to  others,  he  is  never¬ 
theless  (it  may  be  said)  injurious  by  his  ex¬ 
ample;  and  ought  to  be  compelled  to  control 
himself,  for  the  sake  of  those  whom  the  sight 
or  knowledge  of  his  conduct  might  corrupt  or 
mislead. 

And  even  (it  will  be  added)  if  the  conse¬ 
quences  of  misconduct  could  be  confined  to 
the  vicious  or  thoughtless  individual,  ought 
society  to  abandon  to  their  own  guidance 
those  who  are  manifestly  unfit  for  it?  If  pro¬ 
tection  against  themselves  is  confessedly  due 
to  children  and  persons  under  age,  is  not 
society  equally  bound  to  afford  it  to  persons 
of  mature  years  who  are  equally  incapable  of 
self-government?  If  gambling,  or  drunkenness, 
or  incontinence,  or  idleness,  or  uncleanliness, 
are  as  injurious  to  happiness,  and  as  great  a 
hindrance  to  improvement,  as  many  or  most  of 
the  acts  prohibited  by  law,  why  (it  may  be 
asked)  should  not  law,  so  far  as  is  consistent 
with  practicability  and  social  convenience,  en¬ 
deavour  to  repress  these  also?  And  as  a  sup¬ 
plement  to  the  unavoidable  imperfections  of 
law,  ought  not  opinion  at  least  to  organise  a 
powerful  police  against  these  vices,  and  visit 
rigidly  with  social  penalties  those  who  are 
known  to  practise  them?  There  is  no  question 
here  (it  may  be  said)  about  restricting  individ¬ 
uality,  or  impeding  the  trial  of  new  and  origi¬ 
nal  experiments  in  living.  The  only  things  it 
is  sought  to  prevent  are  things  which  have 
been  tried  and  condemned  from  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  world  until  now;  things  which  ex¬ 
perience  has  shown  not  to  be  useful  or  suit¬ 
able  to  any  person’s  individuality.  There  must 
be  some  length  of  time  and  amount  of  experi¬ 
ence  after  which  a  moral  or  prudential  truth 
may  be  regarded  as  established:  and  it  is  mere¬ 
ly  desired  to  prevent  generation  after  genera¬ 
tion  from  falling  over  the  same  precipice  which 
has  been  fatal  to  their  predecessors. 

I  fully  admit  that  the  mischief  which  a  per- 


ON  LIBERTY 


3°6 

son  does  to  himself  may  seriously  affect,  both 
through  their  sympathies  and  their  interests, 
those  nearly  connected  with  him  and,  in  a 
minor  degree,  society  at  large.  When,  by  corn 
duct  of  this  sort,  a  person  is  led  to  violate  a 
distinct  and  assignable  obligation  to  any  other 
person  or  persons,  the  case  is  taken  out  of  the 
self-regarding  class,  and  becomes  amenable  to 
moral  disapprobation  in  the  proper  sense  of 
the  term.  If,  for  example,  a  man.  through  in¬ 
temperance  or  extravagance,  becomes  unable 
to  pay  his  debts,  or,  having  undertaken  the 
moral  responsibility  of  a  family,  becomes 
from  the  same  cause  incapable  of  supporting 
or  educating  them,  he  is  deservedly  reprobat¬ 
ed,  and  might  be  justly  punished;  but  it  is  for 
the  breach  of  duty  to  his  family  or  creditors, 
not  for  the  extravagance.  If  the  resources 
which  ought  to  have  been  devoted  to  them, 
had  been  diverted  from  them  for  the  most  pru¬ 
dent  investment,  the  moral  culpability  would 
have  been  the  same.  George  Barnwell  mur¬ 
dered  his  uncle  to  get  money  for  his  mistress, 
but  if  he  had  done  it  to  set  himself  up  in  busi¬ 
ness,  he  would  equally  have  been  hanged. 
Again,  in  the  frequent  case  of  a  man  who 
causes  grief  to  his  family  by  addiction  to  bad 
habits,  he  deserves  reproach  for  his  unkindness 
or  ingratitude;  but  so  he  may  for  cultivating 
habits  not  in  themselves  vicious,  if  they  are 
painful  to  those  with  whom  he  passeshis  life, or 
who  from  personal  ties  are  dependent  on  him 
for  their  comfort.  Whoever  fails  in  the  consid¬ 
eration  generally  due  to  the  interests  and  feel¬ 
ings  of  others,  not  being  compelled  by  some 
more  imperative  duty,  or  justified  by  allow¬ 
able  self-preference,  is  a  subject  of  moral  dis¬ 
approbation  for  that  failure,  but  not  for  the 
cause  of  it,  nor  for  the  errors,  merely  personal 
to  himself,  which  may  have  remotely  led  to  it. 
In  like  manner,  when  a  person  disables  him¬ 
self  by  (onduct  purely  self-regarding,  from  the 
performance  of  some  definite  duty  incumbent 
on  him  to  the  public,  he  is  guilty  of  a  social 
offence.  No  person  ought  to  be  punished  sim¬ 
ply  for  being  drunk;  but  a  soldier  or  a  police¬ 
man  should  be  punished  for  being  drunk  on 
duty.  Whenever,  in  short,  there  is  a  definite 
damage,  or  a  definite  risk  ot  damage,  either  to 
an  individual  or  to  the  public,  the  case  is  taken 
out  of  the  province  of  liberty,  and  placed  in 
that  of  morality  or  law. 

But  with  regard  to  the  merely  contingent, 
or,  as  it  may  be  called,  constructive  injury 
which  a  person  causes  to  society,  by  conduct 
which  neither  violates  any  specific  duty  to  the 


public,  nor  occasions  perceptible  hurt  to  any 
assignable  individual  except  himself;  the  in¬ 
convenience  is  one  which  society  can  afford  to 
bear,  for  the  sake  of  the  greater  good  of  human 
freedom.  If  grown  persons  are  to  be  punished 
for  not  taking  proper  care  of  themselves,  1 
would  rather  it  were  for  their  own  sake,  than 
under  pretence  of  preventing  them  from  im¬ 
pairing  their  capacity  or  rendering  to  society 
benefits  which  society  does  not  pretend  it  has 
a  right  to  exact.  But  I  cannot  consent  to  argue 
the  point  as  if  society  had  no  means  of  bring¬ 
ing  its  weaker  members  up  to  its  ordinary 
standard  of  rational  conduct,  except  waiting 
till  they  do  something  irrational,  and  then 
punishing  them,  legally  or  morally,  for  it.  So¬ 
ciety  has  had  absolute  power  over  them  during 
all  the  early  portion  of  their  existence:  it  has 
had  the  whole  period  of  childhood  and  nonage 
in  which  to  try  whether  it  could  make  them 
capable  of  rational  conduct  in  life.  The  exist¬ 
ing  generation  is  master  both  of  the  training 
and  the  entire  circumstances  of  the  generation 
to  come;  it  cannot  indeed  make  them  perfectly 
wise  and  good,  because  it  is  itself  so  lamentably 
deficient  in  goodness  and  wisdom;  and  its  best 
efforts  are  not  always,  in  individual  cases,  its 
most  successful  ones;  but  it  is  perfectly  well 
able  to  make  the  rising  generation,  as  a  whole, 
as  good  as,  and  a  little  better  than,  itself.  If 
society  lets  any  considerable  number  of  its 
members  grow  up  mere  children,  incapable  of 
being  acted  on  by  rational  consideration  of 
distant  motives,  society  has  itself  to  blame  for 
the  consequences.  Armed  not  only  with  all  the 
powers  of  education,  but  with  the  ascendency 
which  the  authority  of  a  received  opinion  al¬ 
ways  exercises  over  the  minds  who  are  least 
fitted  to  judge  for  themselves;  and  aided  by 
the  natural  penalties  which  cannot  be  pre¬ 
vented  from  falling  on  those  who  incur  the 
distaste  or  the  contempt  of  those  who  know 
them;  let  not  society  pretend  that  it  needs, 
besides  all  this,  the  power  to  issue  commands 
and  enforce  obedience  in  the  personal  con¬ 
cerns  of  individuals,  in  which,  on  all  princi¬ 
ples  of  justice  and  policy,  the  decision  ought 
to  rest  with  those  who  are  to  abide  the  conse¬ 
quent  es. 

Nor  is  there  anything  which  tends  more  to 
discredit  and  frustrate  the  better  means  of  in¬ 
fluencing  conduct  than  a  resort  to  the  worse. 
If  there  be  among  those  whom  it  is  attempted 
to  coerce  into  prudence  or  temperance  any  of 
the  material  of  which  vigorous  and  independ¬ 
ent  characters  arc  made,  they  will  infallibly 


SOCIETY  AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL  307 


rebel  against  the  yoke.  No  such  person  will 
ever  feel  that  others  have  a  right  to  control  him 
in  his  concerns,  such  as  they  have  to  prevent 
him  from  injuring  them  in  theirs;  and  it  easily 
comes  to  be  considered  a  mark  of  spirit  and 
courage  to  fly  in  the  face  of  such  usurped  au¬ 
thority,  and  do  with  ostentation  the  exact 
opposite  of  what  it  enjoins;  as  in  the  fashion  of 
grossness  which  succeeded,  in  the  time  of 
Charles  II.,  to  the  fanatical  moral  intolerance 
of  the  Puritans.  With  respect  to  what  is  said 
of  the  necessity  of  protecting  society  from  the 
bad  example  set  to  others  by  the  vicious  or  the 
self-indulgent;  it  is  true  that  bad  example  may 
have  a  pernicious  effect,  especially  the  example 
of  doing  wrong  to  others  with  impunity  to  the 
wrong-doer.  But  we  are  now  speaking  of  con¬ 
duct  which,  while  it  does  no  wrong  to  others,  is 
supposed  to  do  great  harm  to  the  agent  him¬ 
self:  and  I  do  not  see  how  those  who  believe 
this  can  think  otherwise  than  that  the  exam¬ 
ple,  on  the  whole,  must  be  more  salutary  than 
hurtful,  since,  if  it  displays  the  misconduct,  it 
displays  also  the  painful  or  degrading  conse¬ 
quences  which,  if  the  conduct  is  justly  cen¬ 
sured,  must  be  supposed  to  be  in  all  or  most 
cases  attendant  on  it. 

But  the  strongest  of  all  the  arguments  against 
the  interference  of  the  public  with  purely  per¬ 
sonal  conduct  is  that,  when  it  does  interfere, 
the  odds  are  that  it  interferes  wrongly,  and  in 
the  wrong  place.  On  questions  of  social  moral¬ 
ity,  of  duty  to  others,  the  opinion  of  the  pub¬ 
lic,  that  is,  of  an  overruling  majority,  though 
often  wrong,  is  likely  to  be  still  oftener  right; 
because  on  such  questions  they  are  only  re¬ 
quired  to  judge  of  their  own  interests;  of  the 
manner  in  which  some  mode  of  conduct,  if  al¬ 
lowed  to  be  practised,  would  effect  themselves. 
But  the  opinion  of  a  similar  majority,  imposed 
as  a  law  on  the  minority,  on  questions  of  self- 
regarding  conduct,  is  quite  as  likely  to  be 
wrong  as  right;  for  in  these  cases  public  opin¬ 
ion  means,  at  the  best,  some  people's  opinion 
of  what  is  good  or  bad  for  other  people;  while 
very  often  it  does  not  even  mean  that;  the  pub¬ 
lic,  with  the  most  perfect  indifference,  passing 
over  the  pleasure  or  convenience  of  those  whose 
conduct  they  censure,  and  considering  only 
their  own  preference.  There  are  many  who 
consider  as  an  injury  to  themselves  any  con¬ 
duct  which  they  have  a  distaste  for,  and  resent 
it  as  an  outrage  to  their  feelings;  as  a  religious 
bigot,  when  charged  with  disregarding  the  reli¬ 
gious  feelings  of  others,  has  been  known  to  re¬ 
tort  that  they  disregard  his  feelings,  by  per¬ 


sisting  in  their  abominable  worship  or  creed. 
But  there  is  no  parity  between  the  feeling  of  a 
person  for  his  own  opinion,  and  the  feeling  of 
another  who  is  offended  at  his  holding  it;  no 
more  than  between  the  desire  of  a  thief  to  take 
a  purse,  and  the  desire  of  the  right  owner  to 
keep  it.  And  a  person’s  taste  is  as  much  his  own 
peculiar  concern  as  his  opinion  or  his  purse. 
It  is  easy  for  any  one  to  imagine  an  ideal  public 
which  leaves  the  freedom  and  choice  of  indi¬ 
viduals  in  all  uncertain  matters  undisturbed, 
and  only  requires  them  to  abstain  from  modes 
of  conduct  which  universal  experience  has  con¬ 
demned.  But  where  has  there  been  seen  a  pub¬ 
lic  which  set  any  such  limit  to  its  censorship? 
or  when  does  the  public  trouble  itself  about 
universal  experience?  In  its  interferences  with 
personal  conduct  it  is  seldom  thinking  of  any¬ 
thing  but  the  enormity  of  acting  or  feeling  dif¬ 
ferently  from  itself;  and  this  standard  of  judg¬ 
ment,  thinly  disguised,  is  held  up  to  mankind 
as  the  dictate  of  religion  and  philosophy,  by 
nine-tenths  of  all  moralists  and  speculative 
writers.  These  teach  that  things  are  right  be¬ 
cause  they  are  right;  because  we  feel  them  to 
be  so.  They  tell  us  to  search  in  our  own  minds 
and  hearts  for  laws  of  conduct  binding  on  our¬ 
selves  and  on  all  others.  What  can  the  poor 
public  do  but  apply  these  instructions,  and 
make  their  own  personal  feelings  of  good  and 
evil,  if  they  are  tolerably  unanimous  in  them, 
obligatory  on  all  the  world? 

The  evil  here  pointed  out  is  not  one  which 
exists  only  in  theory;  and  it  may  perhaps  be  ex¬ 
pected  that  I  should  specify  the  instances  in 
which  the  public  of  this  age  and  country  im¬ 
properly  invests  its  own  preferences  with  the 
character  of  moral  laws.  I  am  not  writing  an 
essay  on  the  aberrations  of  existing  moral 
feeling.  That  is  too  weighty  a  subject  to  be 
discussed  parenthetically,  and  by  way  of  il¬ 
lustration.  Yet  examples  are  necessary  to  show 
that  the  principle  I  maintain  is  of  serious  and 
practical  moment,  and  that  I  am  not  endeav¬ 
ouring  to  erect  a  barrier  against  imaginary 
evils.  And  it  is  not  difficult  to  show,  by  abun¬ 
dant  instances,  that  to  extend  the  bounds  of 
what  may  be  called  moral  police,  until  it  en¬ 
croaches  on  the  most  unquestionably  legiti¬ 
mate  liberty  of  the  individual,  is  one  of  the 
most  universal  of  all  human  propensities. 

As  a  first  instance,  consider  the  antipathies 
which  men  cherish  on  no  better  grounds  than 
that  persons  whose  religious  opinions  are  dif¬ 
ferent  from  theirs  do  not  practise  their  re¬ 
ligious  observances,  especially  their  religious 


ON  LIBERTY 


abstinences.  To  cite  a  rather  trivial  example, 
nothing  in  the  creed  or  practice  of  Christians 
does  more  to  envenom  the  hatred  of  Mahom- 
edans  against  them  than  the  fact  of  their  eat¬ 
ing  pork.  There  are  few  acts  which  Christians 
and  Europeans  regard  with  more  unaffected 
disgust  than  Mussulmans  regard  this  particu¬ 
lar  mode  of  satisfying  hunger.  It  is,  in  the  first 
place,  an  offence  against  their  religion;  but 
this  circumstance  by  no  means  explains  either 
the  degree  or  the  kind  of  their  repugnance;  for 
wine  also  is  forbidden  by  their  religion,  and 
to  partake  of  it  is  by  all  Mussulmans  account¬ 
ed  wrong,  but  not  disgusting.  T  heir  aversion 
to  the  flesh  of  the  “unclean  beast'’  is,  on  the 
contrary,  of  that  peculiar  character,  resem¬ 
bling  an  instinctive  antipathy,  which  the  idea 
of  uncleanness,  when  once  it  thoroughly  sinks 
into  the  feelings,  seems  always  to  excite  even 
in  those  whose  personal  habits  are  anything 
but  scrupulously  cleanly,  and  of  which  the 
sentiment  of  religious  impurity,  so  intense  in 
the  Hindoos,  is  a  remarkable  example.  Sup¬ 
pose  now  that  in  a  people,  of  whom  the  ma¬ 
jority  were  Mussulmans,  that  majority  should 
insist  upon  not  permitting  pork  to  be  eaten 
within  the  limits  of  the  country.  This  would  be 
nothing  new  in  Mahomedan countries.1  Would 
it  be  a  legitimate  exercise  of  the  moral  author¬ 
ity  of  public  opinion?  and  if  not,  why  not? 
The  practice  is  really  revolting  to  such  a  pub¬ 
lic.  They  also  sincerely  think  that  it  is  forbid¬ 
den  and  abhorred  by  the  Deity.  Neither  could 
the  prohibition  be  censured  as  religious  perse¬ 
cution.  It  might  be  religious  in  its  origin,  but 
it  would  not  be  persecution  for  religion,  since 
nobody’s  religion  makes  it  a  duty  to  eat  pork. 
The  only  tenable  ground  of  condemnation 
would  be  that  with  the  personal  tastes  and  self- 
regarding  concerns  of  individuals  the  public 
has  no  business  to  interfere. 

To  come  somewhat  nearer  home:  the  major- 

i  The  <ase  of  the  Bombay  Parsecs  is  a  curious 
instance  in  point.  When  this  industrious  and  enter¬ 
prising  tiihe,  the  descendants  of  the  I  ersian  fire- 
worshippers,  fi)  ingfrom  their  native  country  before 
the  Caliphs,  arrived  in  Western  India,  they  were 
admitted  to  toleration  b)  the  Hindoo  sovereigns, 
on  condition  of  not  eating  beef.  When  those  le¬ 
gions  afterwards  fell  under  the  dominion  of  Ma¬ 
homedan  conquerors,  the  Parsers  obtained  from 
them  a  continuance  of  indulgence,  on  condition 
of  refraining  from  pork.  What  was  at  first  ohedi 
ence  to  authority  became  a  second  nature,  ami  the 
Parsecs  to  this  dav  abstain  both  from  heel  and 
pork.  T  hough  not  tequired  by  their  religion,  the 
double  abstinence  has  had  time  to  grow  into  a 
custom  of  their  tribe;  and  custom,  in  the  East,  is 
a  religion. 


it y  of  Spaniards  consider  it  a  .gross  impiety, 
offensive  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  Supreme 
Being,  to  worship  him  in  any  other  manner 
than  the  Roman  Catholic:  and  no  other  public 
worship  is  lawful  on  Spanish  soil.  The  people 
of  all  Southern  Europe  look  upon  a  married 
clergy  as  not  only  irreligious,  but  unchaste, 
indecent,  gross,  disgusting.  What  do  Protes¬ 
tants  think  of  these  perfectly  sincere  feelings, 
and  of  the  attempt  to  enforce  them  against 
non-Catholics?  Yet,  if  mankind  are  justified  in 
interfering  with  each  other’s  liberty  in  things 
which  do  not  concern  the  interests  of  others, 
on  what  principle  is  it  possible  consistently  to 
exclude  these  cases?  or  who  can  blame  people 
for  desiring  to  suppress  what  they  regard  as  a 
scandal  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man?  No 
stronger  case  can  be  shown  for  prohibiting 
anything  which  is  regarded  as  a  personal  im¬ 
morality,  than  is  made  out  for  suppressing 
these  practices  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  regard 
them  as  impieties;  and  unless  we  are  willing  to 
adopt  the  logic  of  persecutors,  and  to  say  that 
we  may  persecute  others  because  we  are  right, 
and  that  they  must  not  persecute  us  because 
they  are  wrong,  we  must  beware  of  admitting 
a  principle  of  which  we  should  resent  as  a  gross 
injustice  the  application  to  ourselves. 

The  preceding  instances  may  be  objected  to, 
although  unreasonably,  as  drawn  from  contin¬ 
gencies  impossible  among  us:  opinion,  in  this 
country,  not  being  likely  to  enforce  abstinence 
from  meats,  or  to  interfere  with  people  for 
worshipping,  and  for  either  marrying  or  not 
marrying,  according  to  their  creed  or  inclina¬ 
tion.  The  next  example,  however,  shall  be 
taken  from  an  interference  with  liberty  which 
we  have  by  no  means  passed  all  danger  of. 
Wherever  the  Puritans  have  been  sufficient¬ 
ly  powerful,  as  in  New  England,  and  in  Great 
Britain  at  the  time  of  the  Commonwealth, 
they  have  endeavoured,  with  considerable  sue 
cess,  to  put  down  all  public,  and  nearly  all 
private,  amusements:  especially  music,  danc¬ 
ing,  public  games,  or  other  assemblages  for 
purposes  of  diversion,  and  the  theatre.  I  here 
are  still  in  this  country  large  bodies  of  per¬ 
sons  by  whose  notions  of  morality  and  religion 
these  recreations  arc  condemned:  and  those 
persons  belonging  chielly  to  the  middle  class, 
who  are  the  ascendant  power  in  the  present 
social  and  political  condition  of  the  kingdom, 
it  is  by  no  means  impossible  that  persons  of 
these  sentiments  may  at  some  time  or  othci 
command  a  majority  in  Parliament.  How  will 
the  remaining  portion  of  the  community  like 


SOCIETY  AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL  309 


to  have  the  amusements  that  shall  be  permit¬ 
ted  to  them  regulated  by  the  religious  and 
moral  sentiments  of  the  stricter  Calvinists  and 
Methodists?  Would  they  not,  with  considerable 
peremptoriness,  desire  these  intrusively  pious 
members  of  society  to  mind  their  own  busi¬ 
ness?  This  is  precisely  what  should  be  said  to 
every  government  and  every  public,  who  have 
the  pretension  that  no  person  shall  enjoy  any 
pleasure  which  they  think  wrong.  But  if  the 
principle  of  the  pretension  be  admitted,  no 
one  can  reasonably  object  to  its  being  acted 
on  in  the  sense  of  the  majority,  or  other  pre¬ 
ponderating  power  in  the  country;  and  all 
persons  must  be  ready  to  conform  to  the  idea 
of  a  Christian  commonwealth,  as  understood 
by  the  early  settlers  in  New  England,  if  a  re¬ 
ligious  profession  similar  to  theirs  should  ever 
succeed  in  regaining  its  lost  ground,  as  reli¬ 
gions  supposed  to  be  declining  have  so  often 
been  known  to  do. 

To  imagine  another  contingency,  perhaps 
more  likely  to  be  realised  than  the  one  last 
mentioned.  There  is  confessedly  a  strong  tend¬ 
ency  in  the  modern  world  towards  a  demo¬ 
cratic  constitution  of  society,  accompanied  or 
not  by  popular  political  institutions.  It  is  af¬ 
firmed  that  in  the  country  where  this  tendency 
is  most  completely  realised— where  both  so¬ 
ciety  and  the  government  are  most  democratic 
—the  United  States— the  feeling  of  the  major¬ 
ity,  to  whom  any  appearance  of  a  more  showy 
or  costly  style  of  living  than  they  can  hope  to 
rival  is  disagreeable,  operates  as  a  tolerably 
effectual  sumptuary  law,  and  that  in  many 
parts  of  the  Union  it  is  really  difficult  for  a 
person  possessing  a  very  large  income  to  find 
any  mode  of  spending  it  which  will  not  incur 
popular  disapprobation.  Though  such  state¬ 
ments  as  these  are  doubtless  much  exaggerated 
as  a  representation  of  existing  facts,  the  state 
of  things  they  describe  is  not  only  a  conceiv¬ 
able  and  possible,  but  a  probable  result  of 
democratic  feeling,  combined  with  the  notion 
that  the  public  has  a  right  to  a  veto  on  the 
manner  in  which  individuals  shall  spend  their 
incomes.  We  have  only  further  to  suppose  a 
considerable  diffusion  of  Socialist  opinions, 
and  it  may  become  infamous  in  the  eyes  of  the 
majority  to  possess  more  property  than  some 
very  small  amount,  or  any  income  not  earned 
by  manual  labour.  Opinions  similar  in  prin¬ 
ciple  to  these  already  prevail  widely  among 
the  artisan  class,  and  weigh  oppressively  on 
those  who  are  amenable  to  the  opinion  chiefly 
of  that  class,  namely,  its  own  members.  It  is 


known  that  the  bad  workmen  who  form  the 
majority  of  the  operatives  in  many  branches 
of  industry,  are  decidedly  of  opinion  that  bad 
workmen  ought  to  receive  the  same  wages  as 
good,  and  that  no  one  ought  to  be  allowed, 
through  piecework  or  otherwise,  to  earn  by 
superior  skill  or  industry  more  than  others 
can  without  it.  And  they  employ  a  moral  po¬ 
lice,  which  occasionally  becomes  a  physical 
one,  to  deter  skilful  workmen  from  receiving, 
and  employers  from  giving,  a  larger  remunera¬ 
tion  for  a  more  useful  service.  If  the  public 
have  any  jurisdiction  over  private  concerns,  I 
cannot  see  that  these  people  are  in  fault,  or 
that  any  individual’s  particular  public  can  be 
blamed  for  asserting  the  same  authority  over 
his  individual  conduct  which  the  general  pub¬ 
lic  asserts  over  people  in  general. 

But,  without  dwelling  upon  supposititious 
cases,  there  are,  in  our  own  day,  gross  usurpa¬ 
tions  upon  the  liberty  of  private  life  actually 
practised,  and  still  greater  ones  threatened 
writh  some  expectation  of  success,  and  opinions 
propounded  which  assert  an  unlimited  right 
in  the  public  not  only  to  prohibit  by  law  every¬ 
thing  w7hich  it  thinks  wrong,  but,  in  order  to 
get  at  what  it  thinks  w7rong,  to  prohibit  a  num¬ 
ber  of  things  which  it  admits  to  be  innocent. 

Under  the  name  of  preventing  intemper¬ 
ance,  the  people  of  one  English  colony,  and 
of  nearly  half  the  United  States,  have  been 
interdicted  by  law  from  making  any  use  what¬ 
ever  of  fermented  drinks,  except  for  medical 
purposes:  for  prohibition  of  their  sale  is  in 
fact,  as  it  is  intended  to  be,  prohibition  of 
their  use.  And  though  the  impracticability  of 
executing  the  law7  has  caused  its  repeal  in  sev¬ 
eral  of  the  States  which  had  adopted  it,  in¬ 
cluding  the  one  from  which  it  derives  its  name, 
an  attempt  has  notwithstanding  been  com¬ 
menced,  and  is  prosecuted  with  considerable 
zeal  by  many  of  the  professed  philanthropists, 
to  agitate  for  a  similar  law  in  this  country.  The 
association,  or  “Alliance”  as  it  terms  itself, 
which  has  been  formed  for  this  purpose,  has 
acquired  some  notoriety  through  the  publicity 
given  to  a  correspondence  between  its  secre¬ 
tary  and  one  of  the  very  few  English  public 
men  who  hold  that  a  politician’s  opinions 
ought  to  be  founded  on  principles.  Lord  Stan¬ 
ley’s  share  in  this  correspondence  is  calculated 
to  strengthen  the  hopes  already  built  on  him, 
by  those  who  know  how  rare  such  qualities  as 
are  manifested  in  some  of  his  public  appear¬ 
ances  unhappily  are  among  those  who  figure  in 
political  life.  The  organ  of  the  Alliance,  who 


ON  LIBERTY 


310 

would  “deeply  deplore  the  recognition  of  any 
principle  which  could  be  wrested  to  justify 
bigotry  and  persecution/'  undertakes  to  point 
out  the  “broad  and  impassable  barrier”  which 
divides  such  principles  from  those  of  the  as¬ 
sociation.  “All  matters  relating  to  thought, 
opinion,  conscience,  appear  to  me,”  he  says, 
"to  be  without  the  sphere  of  legislation;  all 
pertaining  to  social  act.  habit,  relation,  subject 
only  to  a  discretionary  power  vested  in  the 
State  itself,  and  not  in  the  individual,  to  be 
within  it.” 

No  mention  is  made  of  a  third  class,  differ¬ 
ent  from  either  of  these,  viz.,  acts  and  habits 
which  are  not  social,  but  individual;  although 
it  is  to  this  class,  surely,  that  the  act  of  drink¬ 
ing  fermented  liquors  belongs.  Selling  fer¬ 
mented  liquors,  however,  is  trading,  and  trad¬ 
ing  is  a  social  act.  But  the  infringement  com¬ 
plained  of  is  not  on  the  liberty  of  the  seller, 
but  on  that  of  the  buyer  and  consumer;  since 
the  State  might  just  as  well  forbid  him  to  drink 
wine  as  purposely  make  it  impossible  for  him 
to  obtain  it.  The  secretary,  however,  says,  “I 
claim,  as  a  citizen,  a  right  to  legislate  when¬ 
ever  my  social  rights  are  invaded  by  the  social 
act  of  another.”  And  now  for  the  definition  of 
these  “social  rights.”  “If  anything  invades  mv 
social  rights,  certainly  the  traffic  in  strong 
drink  does.  It  destroys  my  primary  right  of  se¬ 
curity,  by  constantly  creating  and  stimulating 
social  disorder.  It  invades  my  right  of  equality, 
by  deriving  a  profit  from  the  creation  of  a 
misery  I  am  taxed  to  support.  It  impedes  my 
right  to  free  moral  and  intellectual  develop¬ 
ment.  by  surrounding  my  path  with  dangers, 
and  by  weakening  and  demoralising  society, 
from  which  I  have  a  right  to  claim  mutual  aid 
and  intercourse.”  A  theory  ol  “social  rights 
the  like  of  which  probably  never  before  found 
its  way  into  distinct  language:  being  nothing 
short  of  this — that  it  is  the  absolute  social  right 
of  every  individual,  that  every  other  individ¬ 
ual  shall  act  in  every  respect  exactly  as  he 
ought;  that  whosoever  fails  thereof  in  the 
smallest  particular  violates  my  social  right, and 
entitles  me  to  demand  from  the  legislature  the 
removal  of  the  grievame.  So  monstrous  a  prin- 
( iple  is  far  more  dangerous  than  any  single 
interference  with  liberty;  there  is  no  violation 
of  liberty  which  it  would  not  justify;  it  ac 
knowledges  no  right  to  any  freedom  whatever, 
except  perhaps  to  that  of  holding  opinions  in 
secret,  without  ever  disclosing  them:  for.  the 
moment  an  opinion  which  I  consider  noxious 
passes  any  one’s  lips,  it  invades  all  the  “social 


rights”  attributed  to  me  by  the  Alliance.  The 
doctrine  ascribes  to  all  mankind  a  vested  in¬ 
terest  in  each  other's  moral,  intellectual,  and 
even  physical  perfection,  to  be  defined  by  each 
claimant  according  to  his  own  standard. 

Another  important  example  of  illegitimate 
interference  with  the  rightful  liberty  of  the  in¬ 
dividual,  not  simply  threatened,  but  long 
since  carried  into  triumphant  effect,  is  Sabba¬ 
tarian  legislation.  Without  doubt,  abstinence 
on  one  day  in  the  week,  so  far  as  the  exigen¬ 
cies  of  life  permit,  from  the  usual  daily  occu¬ 
pation,  though  in  no  respect  religiously  bind¬ 
ing  on  any  except  Jews,  is  a  highly  beneficial 
custom.  And  inasmuch  as  this  custom  cannot 
be  observed  without  a  general  consent  to  that 
effect  among  the  industrious  classes,  therefore, 
in  so  far  as  some  persons  by  working  may  im¬ 
pose  the  same  necessity  on  others,  it  may  be 
allowable  and  right  that  the  law  should  guar¬ 
antee  to  each  the  observance  by  others  of  the 
custom,  by  suspending  the  greater  operations 
of  industry  on  a  particular  day.  But  this  justi¬ 
fication.  grounded  on  the  direct  interest  which 
others  have  in  each  individual  s  observance  of 
the  practice,  does  not  apply  to  the  self-chosen 
occupations  in  which  a  person  may  think  fit 
to  emplov  his  leisure;  nor  does  it  hold  good, 
in  the  smallest  degree,  for  legal  restrictions  on 
amusements.  It  is  true  that  the  amusement  of 
some  is  the  day's  work  of  others:  but  the  pleas¬ 
ure,  not  to  sav  the  useful  recreation,  of  many, 
is  worth  the  labour  of  a  few,  provided  the  oc¬ 
cupation  is  freely  chosen,  and  can  be  freely 
resigned.  The  operatives  are  perfectly  right  in 
thinking  that  if  all  worked  on  Sunday,  seven 
days’  work  would  have  to  be  given  for  six  days' 
wages;  but  so  long  as  the  great  mass  of  employ¬ 
ments  are  suspended,  the  small  number  who 
for  the  enjoyment  of  others  must  still  work, 
obtain  a  proportional  increase  of  earnings; 
and  they  arc  not  obliged  to  follow  those  occu¬ 
pations  if  they  prefer  leisure  to  emolument. 
If  a  further  remedy  is  sought,  it  might  be  found 
in  the  establishment  by  custom  of  a  holiday  on 
some  other  day  of  the  week  for  those  particu¬ 
lar  classes  of  persons.  The  only  ground,  there¬ 
fore,  on  which  restrictions  on  Sunday  amuse 
incuts  can  be  defended,  must  he  that  they  arc 
religiously  wrong;  a  mot iveof  legislation  which 
can  never  he  too  earnestly  protested  against. 
Dearum  injuria*  Diis  cm  a*.  It  remains  to  be 
proved  that  society  or  any  oi  its  olliccrs  holds 
a  commission  from  on  high  to  avenge  any  sup¬ 
posed  olFcnrc  to  Omnipotence,  which  is  not 
also  a  wrong  to  our  fellow  creatures.  The  no- 


SOCIETY  AND  THE  INDIVIDUAL  311 


tion  that  it  is  one  man’s  duty  that  another 
should  be  religious,  was  the  foundation  of  all 
the  religious  persecutions  ever  perpetrated, 
and.  if  admitted,  would  fully  justify  them. 
Though  the  feeling  which  breaks  out  in  the 
repeated  attempts  to  stop  railway  travelling 
on  Sunday,  in  the  resistance  to  the  opening  of 
Museums,  and  the  like,  has  not  the  cruelty  of 
the  old  persecutors,  the  state  of  mind  indicated 
by  it  is  fundamentally  the  same.  It  is  a  deter¬ 
mination  not  to  tolerateothers  in  doing  what  is 
permitted  by  their  religion,  because  it  is  not 
permitted  by  the  persecutor’s  religion.  It  is  a 
belief  that  God  not  only  abominates  the  act  of 
the  misbeliever,  but  will  not  hold  us  guiltless 
if  we  leave  him  unmolested. 

1  cannot  refrain  from  adding  to  these  ex¬ 
amples  of  the  little  account  commonly  made 
of  human  liberty,  the  language  of  downright 
persecution  which  breaks  out  from  the  press  of 
this  country  whenever  it  feels  called  on  to 
notice  the  remarkable  phenomenon  of  Mor- 
monism.  Much  might  be  said  on  the  unexpect¬ 
ed  and  instructive  fact  that  an  alleged  new 
revelation,  and  a  religion  founded  on  it.  the 
product  of  palpable  imposture,  not  even  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  prestige  of  extraordinary  quali¬ 
ties  in  its  founder,  is  believed  bv  hundreds  of 
thousands,  and  has  been  made  the  foundation 
of  a  society,  in  the  age  of  newspapers,  railways, 
and  the  electric  telegraph.  What  here  concerns 
us  is,  that  this  religion,  like  other  and  better 
religions,  has  its  martyrs:  that  its  prophet  and 
founder  was,  for  his  teaching,  put  to  death  by 
a  mob;  that  others  of  its  adherents  lost  their 
lives  by  the  same  lawless  violence;  that  they 
were  forcibly  expelled,  in  a  body,  from  the 
country  in  which  they  first  grew  up:  while, 
now  that  they  have  been  chased  into  a  solitary 
recess  in  the  midst  of  a  desert,  many  in  this 
country  openly  declare  that  it  would  be  right 
(only  that  it  is  not  convenient)  to  send  an 
expedition  against  them,  and  compel  them  by 
force  to  conform  to  the  opinions  of  other  peo¬ 
ple.  The  article  of  the  Mormonite  doctrine 
which  is  the  chief  provocative  to  the  antipathy 
which  thus  breaks  through  the  ordinary  re¬ 
straints  of  religious  tolerance,  is  its  sanction  of 
polygamy;  which,  though  permitted  to  Ma- 
homedans,  and  Hindoos,  and  Chinese,  seems 
to  excite  unquenchable  animosity  when  prac¬ 
tised  by  persons  who  speak  English  and  pro¬ 
fess  to  be  a  kind  of  Christians.  No  one  has  a 
deeper  disapprobation  than  I  have  of  this 
Mormon  institution;  both  for  other  reasons, 
and  because,  far  from  being  in  any  way  counte¬ 


nanced  by  the  principle  of  liberty,  it  is  a  direct 
infraction  of  that  principle,  being  a  mere  riv¬ 
eting  of  the  chains  of  one  half  of  the  commu¬ 
nity,  and  an  emancipation  of  the  other  from 
reciprocity  of  obligation  towards  them.  Still,  it 
must  be  remembered  that  this  relation  is  as 
much  voluntary  on  the  part  of  the  women  con¬ 
cerned  in  it,  and  who  may  be  deemed  the  suf¬ 
ferers  by  it,  as  is  the  case  with  any  other  form 
of  the  marriage  institution;  and  however  sur¬ 
prising  this  fact  may  appear,  it  has  its  explana¬ 
tion  in  the  common  ideas  and  customs  of  the 
world,  which  teaching  women  to  think  mar¬ 
riage  the  one  thing  needful,  make  it  intelligi¬ 
ble  that  many  a  woman  should  prefer  being 
one  of  several  wives,  to  not  being  a  wife  at  all. 
Other  countries  are  not  asked  to  recognise 
such  unions,  or  release  any  portion  of  their  in¬ 
habitants  from  their  own  laws  on  the  score  of 
Mormonite  opinions.  But  when  the  dissen¬ 
tients  have  conceded  to  the  hostile  sentiments 
of  others  far  more  than  could  justly  be  demand¬ 
ed:  when  they  have  left  the  countries  to  which 
their  doctrines  were  unacceptable,  and  estab¬ 
lished  themselves  in  a  remote  corner  of  the 
earth,  which  they  have  been  the  first  to  render 
habitable  to  human  beings;  it  is  difficult  to  see 
on  what  principles  but  those  of  tyranny  they 
can  be  prevented  from  living  there  under  what 
laws  they  please,  provided  they  commit  no  ag¬ 
gression  on  other  nations,  and  allow  perfect 
freedom  of  departure  to  those  who  are  dissat¬ 
isfied  with  their  ways. 

A  recent  writer,  in  some  respects  of  consid¬ 
erable  merit,  proposes  (to  use  his  own  words) 
not  a  crusade,  but  a  civilisade ,  against  this 
polygamous  community,  to  put  an  end  to  what 
seems  to  him  a  retrograde  step  in  civilisation. 
It  also  appears  so  to  me.  but  I  am  not  aware 
that  any  community  has  a  right  to  force  an¬ 
other  to  be  civilised.  So  long  as  the  sufferers 
by  the  bad  law  do  not  invoke  assistance  from 
other  communities,  I  cannot  admit  that  per¬ 
sons  entirely  unconnected  with  them  ought  to 
step  in  and  require  that  a  condition  of  things 
with  which  all  who  are  directly  interested  ap¬ 
pear  to  be  satisfied,  should  be  put  an  end  to 
because  it  is  a  scandal  to  persons  some  thou¬ 
sands  of  miles  distant,  who  have  no  part  or 
concern  in  it.  Let  them  send  missionaries,  if 
thev  please,  to  preach  against  it;  and  let  them, 
by  any  fair  means  (of  which  silencing  the 
teachers  is  not  one),  oppose  the  progress  of 
similar  doctrines  among  their  own  people.  If 
civilisation  has  got  the  better  of  barbarism 
when  barbarism  had  the  world  to  itself,  it  is 


ON  LIBERTY 


too  much  to  profess  to  be  afraid  lest  barba¬ 
rism,  after  having  been  fairly  got  under,  should 
revive  and  conquer  civilisation.  A  civilisation 
that  can  thus  succumb  to  its  vanquished  ene¬ 
my,  must  first  have  become  so  degenerate, 
that  neither  its  appointed  priests  and  teachers, 
nor  anybody  else,  has  the  capacity,  or  will  take 
the  trouble,  to  stand  up  for  it.  If  this  be  so, 
the  sooner  such  a  civilisation  receives  notice 
to  quit  the  better.  It  can  only  go  on  from  bad 
to  worse,  until  destroyed  and  regenerated  (like 
the  Western  Empire)  by  energetic  barbarians. 

Chapter  5 

Applications 

The  principles  asserted  in  these  pages  must  be 
more  generally  admitted  as  the  basis  for  dis¬ 
cussion  of  details,  before  a  consistent  applica¬ 
tion  of  them  to  all  the  various  departments  of 
government  and  morals  can  be  attempted  with 
anv  prospect  of  advantage.  The  few  observa¬ 
tions  I  propose  to  make  on  questions  of  detail 
are  designed  to  illustrate  the  piinciples,  rather 
than  to  follow  them  out  to  their  consequences. 

1  offer,  not  so  much  applications,  as  specimens 
of  application;  which  may  serve  to  bring  into 
greater  clearness  the  meaning  and  limits  of 
the  two  maxims  which  together  form  the  en¬ 
tire  doctrine  ol  this  Essay,  and  to  assist  the 
judgment  in  holding  the  balance  between 
them,  in  the  cases  where  it  appears  doubtful 
which  of  them  is  applicable  to  the  case. 

The  maxims  are,  first,  that  the  individual  is 
not  accountable  to  society  for  his  actions,  in  so 
far  as  these  concern  the  interests  of  no  person 
but  himself.  Advice,  instruction,  persuasion, 
and  avoidance  by  other  people  if  thought 
necessary  by  them  for  their  own  good,  are  the 
only  measures  by  which  society  can  justifiably 
express  its  dislike  or  disapprobation  of  his 
conduct.  Secondly,  that  for  such  actions  as  are 
prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  others,  the  indi¬ 
vidual  is  accountable,  and  may  be  subjected 
either  to  social  or  to  legal  punishment,  if  so¬ 
ciety  is  oi  opinion  that  the  one  or  the  other  is 
requisite  for  its  protection. 

In  1  he  Inst  place,  it  must  1>\  no  means  be 
supposed,  because  damage,  or  probability  of 
damage,  to  the  interests  ol  others,  can  alone 
justify  the  interference  of  society,  that  there¬ 
fore  it  always  docs  justify  such  interference.  In 
many  cases,  an  individual,  in  pursuing  a  legiti¬ 
mate  object,  necessarily  and  therefore  legit i 
matelv  causes  pain  or  loss  to  others,  or  inter¬ 
cepts  a  good  whic  h  they  had  a  reasonable  hope 


of  obtaining.  Such  oppositions  of  interest  be¬ 
tween  individuals  often  arise  from  bad  social 
institutions,  but  are  unavoidable  while  those 
institutions  last;  and  some  would  be  unavoid¬ 
able  under  any  institutions.  Whoever  succeeds 
in  an  ov  ercrowded  profession,  or  in  a  competi¬ 
tive  examination;  whoever  is  preferred  to  an¬ 
other  in  any  contest  for  an  object  which  both 
desire,  reaps  benefit  from  the  loss  of  others, 
from  their  wasted  exertion  and  their  disap¬ 
pointment.  But  it  is,  by  common  admission, 
better  for  the  general  interest  of  mankind, 
that  persons  should  pursue  their  objects  un¬ 
deterred  by  this  sort  of  consequenc  es.  In  other 
words,  society  admits  no  right,  either  legal  or 
moral,  in  the  disappointed  competitors  to  im¬ 
munity  from  this  kind  of  suffering:  and  feels 
called  on  to  interfere,  only  when  means  of  suc¬ 
cess  have  been  employed  which  it  is  contrary 
to  the  general  interest  to  permit— namely, 
fraud  or  treachery,  and  force. 

Again,  trade  is  a  social  act.  Whoever  under¬ 
takes  to  sell  any  description  of  goods  to  the 
public,  does  what  affects  the  interest  of  other 
persons,  and  of  society  in  general;  and  thus  his 
conduct,  in  principle,  comes  within  the  juris¬ 
diction  of  society;  accordingly,  it  was  once  held 
to  be  the  duty  of  governments,  in  all  cases 
which  were  considered  of  importance,  to  fix 
prices,  and  regulate  the  processes  of  manufac¬ 
ture.  But  it  is  now  recognised,  though  not  till 
after  a  long  struggle,  that  both  the  cheapness 
and  the  good  quality  of  commodities  are  most 
effectually  provided  for  by  leaving  the  pro¬ 
ducers  and  sellers  perfectly  free,  under  the  sole 
check  of  equal  freedom  to  the  buyers  for  sup¬ 
plying  themselves  elsewhere.  This  is  the  so- 
called  doctrine  of  Free  Trade,  which  rests  on 
grounds  different  from,  though  equally  solid 
with,  the  principle  of  individual  liberty  as¬ 
serted  in  this  Essay.  Restrictions  on  trade,  or 
on  production  for  purposes  of  trade,  are  in¬ 
deed  restraints;  and  all  restraint,  qua  restraint, 
is  an  evil:  but  the  restraints  in  question  affect 
only  that  part  of  conduct  which  society  is  com¬ 
petent  to  restrain,  and  are  wrong  solely  be¬ 
cause  thev  do  not  really  produce  the  results 
which  it  is  desired  to  produce  by  them.  As  the 
principle  of  individual  liberty  is  not  involved 
in  the  doc  trine  of  Free  Trade,  so  neither  is  it  in 
most  of  the  quest  ions  which  arise  respecting 
the  limits  of  that  doctrine;  as,  for  example, 
what  amount  of  public  control  is  admissible 
for  the  prevention  of  fraud  by  adulteration: 
how  far  sanitary  prec  autions,  or  arrangements 
to  protect  workpeople  employed  in  dangerous 


APPLICs 

occupations,  should  be  enforced  on  employers. 
Such  questions  involve  considerations  of  lib¬ 
erty,  only  in  so  far  as  leaving  people  to  them¬ 
selves  is  always  better,  cateris  paribus ,  than 
controlling  them:  but  that  they  may  be  legiti¬ 
mately  controlled  for  these  ends  is  in  princi¬ 
ple  undeniable.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are 
questions  relating  to  interference  with  trade 
which  are  essentially  questions  of  liberty;  such 
as  the  Maine  Law,  already  touched  upon;  the 
prohibition  of  the  importation  of  opium  into 
China;  the  restriction  of  the  sale  of  poisons; 
all  cases,  in  short,  where  the  object  of  the  in¬ 
terference  is  to  make  it  impossible  or  difficult 
to  obtain  a  particular  commodity.  These  inter¬ 
ferences  are  objectionable,  not  as  infringe¬ 
ments  on  the  liberty  of  the  producer  or  seller, 
but  on  that  of  the  buyer. 

One  of  these  examples,  that  of  the  sale  of 
poisons,  opens  a  new  question;  the  proper 
limits  of  what  may  be  called  the  functions  of 
police;  how  far  liberty  may  legitimately  be  in¬ 
vaded  for  the  prevention  of  crime,  or  of  ac¬ 
cident.  It  is  one  of  the  undisputed  functions 
of  government  to  take  precautions  against 
crime  before  it  has  been  committed,  as  well  as 
to  detect  and  punish  it  afterwards.  The  pre¬ 
ventive  function  of  government,  however,  is 
far  more  liable  to  be  abused,  to  the  prejudice 
of  liberty,  than  the  punitory  function;  for 
there  is  hardly  any  part  of  the  legitimate  free¬ 
dom  of  action  of  a  human  being  which  would 
not  admit  of  being  represented,  and  fairly  too, 
as  increasing  the  facilities  for  some  form  or 
other  of  delinquency.  Nevertheless,  if  a  pub¬ 
lic  authority,  or  even  a  private  person,  sees 
any  one  evidently  preparing  to  commit  a  crime, 
they  are  not  bound  to  look  on  inactive  until 
the  crime  is  committed,  but  may  interfere  to 
prevent  it.  If  poisons  were  never  bought  or 
used  for  any  purpose  except  the  commission  of 
murder  it  would  be  right  to  prohibit  their 
manufacture  and  sale.  They  may,  however,  be 
wanted  not  only  for  innocent  but  for  useful 
purposes,  and  restrictions  cannot  be  imposed 
in  the  one  case  without  operating  in  the  other. 
Again,  it  is  a  proper  office  of  public  authority 
to  guard  against  accidents.  If  either  a  public 
officer  or  any  one  else  saw  a  person  attempting 
to  cross  a  bridge  which  had  been  ascertained  to 
be  unsafe,  and  there  were  no  time  to  warn  him 
of  his  danger,  they  might  seize  him  and  turn 
him  back,  without  any  real  infringement  of 
his  liberty;  for  liberty  consists  in  doing  what 
one  desires,  and  he  does  not  desire  to  fall  into 
the  river.  Nevertheless,  when  there  is  not  a 


TIONS  313 

certainty,  but  only  a  danger  of  mischief,  no 
one  but  the  person  himself  can  judge  of  the 
sufficiency  of  the  motive  which  may  prompt 
him  to  incur  the  risk:  in  this  case,  therefore 
(unless  he  is  a  child,  or  delirious,  or  in  some 
state  of  excitement  or  absorption  incompatible 
with  the  full  use  of  the  reflecting  faculty),  he 
ought,  I  conceive,  to  be  only  warned  of  the 
danger;  not  forcibly  prevented  from  exposing 
himself  to  it.  Similar  considerations,  applied 
to  such  a  question  as  the  sale  of  poisons,  may 
enable  us  to  decide  which  among  the  possible 
modes  of  regulation  are  or  are  not  contrary  to 
principle.  Such  a  precaution,  for  example,  as 
that  of  labelling  the  drug  with  some  word  ex¬ 
pressive  of  its  dangerous  character,  may  be  en¬ 
forced  without  violation  of  liberty:  the  buyer 
cannot  wish  not  to  know  that  the  thing  he 
possesses  has  poisonous  qualities.  But  to  re¬ 
quire  in  all  cases  the  certificate  of  a  medical 
practitioner  would  make  it  sometimes  impos¬ 
sible,  always  expensive,  to  obtain  the  article 
for  legitimate  uses. 

The  only  mode  apparent  to  me,  in  which 
difficulties  may  be  thrown  in  the  w^ay  of  crime 
committed  through  this  means,  without  any 
infringement  worth  taking  into  account  upon 
the  liberty  of  those  who  desire  the  poisonous 
substance  for  other  purposes,  consists  in  pro¬ 
viding  what,  in  the  apt  language  of  Bentham, 
is  called  “preappointed  evidence.”  This  pro¬ 
vision  is  familiar  to  every  one  in  the  case  of 
contracts.  It  is  usual  and  right  that  the  law', 
when  a  contract  is  entered  into,  should  require 
as  the  condition  of  its  enforcing  performance, 
that  certain  formalities  should  be  observed, 
such  as  signatures,  attestation  of  witnesses,  and 
the  like,  in  order  that  in  case  of  subsequent 
dispute  there  may  be  evidence  to  prove  that 
the  contract  was  really  entered  into,  and  that 
there  was  nothing  in  the  circumstances  to 
render  it  legally  invalid:  the  effect  being  to 
throw  great  obstacles  in  the  way  of  fictitious 
contracts,  or  contracts  made  in  circumstances 
which,  if  known,  would  destroy  their  validity. 
Precautions  of  a  similar  nature  might  be  en¬ 
forced  in  the  sale  of  articles  adapted  to  be 
instruments  of  crime.  The  seller,  for  example, 
might  be  required  to  enter  in  a  register  the 
exact  time  of  the  transaction,  the  name  and 
address  of  the  buyer,  the  precise  quality  and 
quantity  sold;  to  ask  the  purpose  for  which  it 
was  wanted,  and  record  the  answer  he  receiv¬ 
ed.  When  there  was  no  medical  prescription, 
the  presence  of  some  third  person  might  be 
required,  to  bring  home  the  fact  to  the  pur- 


ON  LIBERTY 


3*4 

chaser,  in  case  there  should  afterwards  be  rea¬ 
son  to  believe  that  the  article  had  been  applied 
to  criminal  purposes.  Such  regulations  'would 
in  general  be  no  material  impediment  to  ob¬ 
taining  the  article,  but  a  very  considerable  one 
to  making  an  improper  use  of  it  without  detec¬ 
tion. 

The  right  inherent  in  society,  to  ward  off 
crimes  against  itself  by  antecedent  precautions, 
suggests  the  obvious  limitations  to  the  maxim, 
that  purely  self-regarding  misconduct  cannot 
properly  be  meddled  with  in  the  way  of  pre¬ 
vention  or  punishment.  Drunkenness,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  in  ordinary  cases,  is  not  a  fit  subject  for 
legislative  interference:  but  1  should  deem  it 
perfectly  legitimate  that  a  person,  who  had 
once  been  convicted  of  any  act  of  violence  to 
others  under  the  influence  of  drink,  should  be 
placed  under  a  special  legal  restriction,  per¬ 
sonal  to  himself:  that  if  he  were  afterwards 
found  drunk,  he  should  be  liable  to  a  penalty, 
and  that  if  when  in  that  state  he  committed 
another  offence,  the  punishment  to  which  he 
would  be  liable  for  that  other  offence  should 
be  increased  in  severity.  The  making  himself 
drunk,  in  a  person  whom  drunkenness  excites 
to  do  harm  to  others,  is  a  crime  against  others. 
So,  again,  idleness,  except  in  a  person  receiv¬ 
ing  support  from  the  public,  or  except  when 
it  constitutes  a  breach  of  contract,  cannot  with¬ 
out  tyranny  be  made  a  subject  of  legal  punish¬ 
ment;  but  if,  either  from  idleness  or  from  any 
other  avoidable  cause,  a  man  fails  to  perform 
his  legal  duties  to  others,  as  for  instance  to 
support  his  children,  it  is  no  tyranny  to  force 
him  to  fulfil  that  obligation,  by  compulsory 
labour,  if  no  other  means  are  available. 

Again,  there  are  many  acts  which,  being  di¬ 
rectly  injurious  only  to  the  agents  themselves, 
ought  not  to  be  legally  interdicted,  but  which, 
if  done  publicly,  are  a  violation  of  good  man¬ 
ners,  and  coming  thus  within  the  category  of 
offences  against  others,  may  rightly  be  prohib¬ 
ited.  Of  this  kind  are  offences  against  decency; 
on  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell,  the  rather 
as  they  are  only  connected  indirectly  with  our 
subject,  the  objection  to  publicity  being  equal¬ 
ly  strong  in  the  case  of  many  actions  not  in 
themselves condcmnable,  nor  supposed  to  be  so. 

There  is  another  question  to  which  an  an¬ 
swer  must  be  found,  consistent  with  the  prin¬ 
ciples  which  have  been  laid  down.  In  cases  of 
personal  conduct  supposed  to  be  blamable, 
but  which  respect  for  liberty  precludes  society 
from  preventing  or  punishing,  because  the  evil 
directly  resulting  falls  wholly  on  the  agent. 


what  the  agent  is  free  to  do,  ought  other  per¬ 
sons  to  be  equally  free  to  counsel  or  instigate.-' 
This  question  is  not  free  from  difficulty.  The 
case  of  a  person  who  solicits  another  to  do  an 
act  is  not  strictly  a  case  of  self-regarding  con¬ 
duct.  To  give  advice  or  offer  inducements  to 
any  one  is  a  social  act,  and  may,  therefore,  like 
actions  in  general  which  affect  others,  be  sup¬ 
posed  amenable  to  social  control.  But  a  little 
reflection  corrects  the  first  impression,  by 
showing  that  if  the  case  is  not  strictly  within 
the  definition  of  individual  liberty,  yet  the  rea¬ 
sons  on  which  the  principle  of  individual  lib¬ 
erty  is  grounded  are  applicable  to  it.  If  peo¬ 
ple  must  be  allowed,  in  whatever  concerns  only 
themselves,  to  act  as  seems  best  to  themselves, 
at  their  own  peril,  they  must  equally  be  free 
to  consult  with  one  another  about  what  is  fit 
to  be  so  done:  to  exchange  opinions,  and  give 
and  receive  suggestions.  Whatever  it  is  per¬ 
mitted  to  do,  it  must  be  permitted  to  advise  to 
do.  The  question  is  doubtful  only  when  the 
instigator  derives  a  personal  benefit  from  his 
advice:  when  he  makes  it  his  occupation,  for 
subsistence  or  pecuniary  gain,  to  promote 
what  society  and  the  State  consider  to  be  an 
evil.  Then,  indeed,  a  new  element  of  compli¬ 
cation  is  introduced;  namely,  the  existence  of 
classes  of  persons  with  an  interest  opposed  to 
what  is  considered  as  the  public  weal,  and 
whose  mode  of  living  is  grounded  on  the 
counteraction  of  it.  Ought  this  to  be  interfered 
with,  or  not?  Fornication,  for  example,  must 
be  tolerated,  and  so  must  gambling;  but  should 
a  person  be  free  to  be  a  pimp,  or  to  keep  a 
gambling-house?  The  case  is  one  of  those 
which  lie  on  the  exact  boundary  line  between 
two  principles,  and  it  is  not  at  once  apparent 
to  which  of  the  two  it  properly  belongs. 

There  are  arguments  on  both  sides.  On  the 
side  of  toleration  it  may  be  said  that  the  fact 
of  following  anything  as  an  occupation,  and 
living  or  profiting  by  the  practice  of  it.  cannot 
make  that  criminal  which  would  otherwise  he 
admissible;  that  the  act  should  cither  he  con¬ 
sistently  permitted  or  consistently  prohibited; 
that  if  the  principles  which  we  have  hitherto 
defended  are  true,  society  has  no  business,  os 
society,  to  decide  am  thing  to  be  wrong  which 
concerns  only  the  indi\  idual:  that  it  cannot  go 
beyond  dissuasion,  and  that  one  person  should 
be  as  free  to  persuade  as  another  to  dissuade. 
In  opposition  to  t li is  it  may  be  contended,  that 
although  the  public,  or  the  State,  are  not  war¬ 
ranted  in  authoritatively  deciding,  for  pur¬ 
poses  of  repression  or  punishment,  that  such 


APPLICATIONS  315 


or  such  conduct  affecting  only  the  interests  of 
the  individual  is  good  or  bad,  they  are  fully 
justified  in  assuming,  if  they  regard  it  as  bad, 
that  its  being  so  or  not  is  at  least  a  disputable 
question:  That,  this  being  supposed,  they  can¬ 
not  be  acting  wrongly  in  endeavouring  to  ex¬ 
clude  the  influence  of  solicitations  which  are 
not  disinterested,  of  instigators  who  cannot 
possibly  be  impartial— who  have  a  direct  per¬ 
sonal  interest  on  one  side,  and  that  side  the 
one  which  the  State  believes  to  be  wrong,  and 
who  confessedly  promote  it  for  personal  ob¬ 
jects  only.  There  can  surely,  it  may  be  urged, 
be  nothing  lost,  no  sacrifice  of  good,  by  so 
ordering  matters  that  persons  shall  make  their 
election,  either  wisely  or  foolishly,  on  their 
own  prompting,  as  free  as  possible  from  the 
arts  of  persons  who  stimulate  their  inclina¬ 
tions  for  interested  purposes  of  their  own. 
Thus  (it  may  be  said)  though  the  statutes  re¬ 
specting  unlawful  games  are  utterly  indefensi¬ 
ble— though  all  persons  should  be  free  to  gam¬ 
ble  in  their  own  or  each  other’s  houses,  or  in 
any  place  of  meeting  established  by  their  own 
subscriptions,  and  open  only  to  the  members 
and  their  visitors— yet  public  gambling-houses 
should  not  be  permitted.  It  is  true  that  the 
prohibition  is  never  effectual,  and  that,  what¬ 
ever  amount  of  tyrannical  power  may  be  given 
to  the  police,  gambling-houses  can  always  be 
maintained  under  other  pretences;  but  they 
may  be  compelled  to  conduct  their  operations 
with  a  certain  degree  of  secrecy  and  mystery, 
so  that  nobody  knows  anything  about  them  but 
those  who  seek  them;  and  more  than  this  so¬ 
ciety  ought  not  to  aim  at. 

There  is  considerable  force  in  these  argu¬ 
ments.  J  will  not  venture  to  decide  whether 
they  are  sufficient  to  justify  the  moral  anomaly 
of  punishing  the  accessary,  when  the  principal 
is  (and  must  be)  allowed  to  go  free;  of  fining 
or  imprisoning  the  procurer,  but  not  the  forni¬ 
cator— the  gambling-house  keeper,  but  not  the 
gambler.  Still  less  ought  the  common  opera¬ 
tions  of  buying  and  selling  to  be  interfered 
with  on  analogous  grounds.  Almost  every  arti¬ 
cle  which  is  bought  and  sold  may  be  used  in 
excess,  and  the  sellers  have  a  pecuniary  interest 
in  encouraging  that  excess;  but  no  argument 
can  be  founded  on  this,  in  favour,  for  instance, 
of  the  Maine  Law;  because  the  class  of  dealers 
in  strong  drinks,  though  interested  in  their 
abuse,  are  indispensably  required  for  the  sake 
of  their  legitimate  use.  The  interest,  however, 
of  these  dealers  in  promoting  intemperance  is 
a  real  evil,  and  justifies  the  State  in  imposing 


restrictions  and  requiring  guarantees  which, 
but  for  that  justification,  would  be  infringe¬ 
ments  of  legitimate  liberty. 

A  further  question  is,  whether  the  State, 
while  it  permits,  should  nevertheless  indirectly 
discourage  conduct  which  it  deems  contrary  to 
the  best  interests  of  the  agent:  whether,  for 
example,  it  should  take  measures  to  render 
the  means  of  drunkenness  more  costly,  or  add 
to  the  difficulty  of  procuring  them  by  limiting 
the  number  of  the  places  of  sale.  On  this  as 
on  most  other  practical  questions,  many  dis¬ 
tinctions  require  to  be  made.  To  tax  stimu¬ 
lants  for  the  sole  purpose  of  making  them  more 
difficult  to  be  obtained,  is  a  measure  differing 
only  in  degree  from  their  entire  prohibition; 
and  would  be  justifiable  only  if  that  were  justi¬ 
fiable.  Every  increase  of  coist  is  a  prohibition, 
to  those  w7hose  means  do  not  come  up  to  the 
augmented  price;  and  to  those  who  do,  it  is 
a  penalty  laid  on  them  for  gratifying  a  partic¬ 
ular  taste.  Their  choice  of  pleasures,  and  their 
mode  of  expending  their  income,  after  satisfy¬ 
ing  their  legal  and  moral  obligations  to  the 
State  and  to  individuals,  are  their  own  con¬ 
cern,  and  must  rest  with  their  own  judgment. 
These  considerations  may  seem  at  first  sight  to 
condemn  the  selection  of  stimulants  as  special 
subjects  of  taxation  for  purposes  of  revenue. 
But  it  must  be  remembered  that  taxation  for 
fiscal  purposes  is  absolutely  inevitable;  that  in 
most  countries  it  is  necessary  that  a  consider¬ 
able  part  of  that  taxation  should  be  indirect; 
that  the  State,  therefore,  cannot  help  imposing 
penalties,  w7hich  to  some  persons  may  be  pro¬ 
hibitory,  on  the  use  of  some  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption.  It  is  hence  the  duty  of  the  State  to 
consider,  in  the  imposition  of  taxes,  what  com¬ 
modities  the  consumers  can  best  spare;  and 
a  fortiori ,  to  select  in  preference  those  of  which 
it  deems  the  use,  beyond  a  very  moderate 
quantity,  to  be  positively  injurious.  Taxation, 
therefore,  of  stimulants,  up  to  the  point  which 
produces  the  largest  amount  of  revenue  (sup¬ 
posing  that  the  State  needs  all  the  revenue 
which  it  yields)  is  not  only  admissible,  but  to 
be  approved  of. 

The  question  of  making  the  sale  of  these 
commodities  a  more  or  less  exclusive  privilege, 
must  be  answered  differently,  according  to  the 
purposes  to  which  the  restriction  is  intended 
to  be  subservient.  All  places  of  public  resort 
require  the  restraint  of  a  police,  and  places  of 
this  kind  peculiarly,  because  offences  against 
society  are  especially  apt  to  originate  there.  It 
is,  therefore,  fit  to  confine  the  pow7er  of  selling 


ON  LIBERTY 


316 

these  commodities  (at  least  for  consumption 
on  the  spot)  to  persons  of  known  or  vouched- 
for  respectability  of  conduct;  to  make  such 
regulations  respecting  hours  of  opening  and 
closing  as  may  be  requisite  for  public  surveil¬ 
lance,  and  to  withdraw  the  licence  if  breaches 
of  the  peace  repeatedly  take  place  through  the 
connivance  or  incapacity  of  the  keeper  of  the 
house,  or  if  it  becomes  a  rendezvous  for  con¬ 
cocting  and  preparing  offences  against  the 
law.  Any  further  restriction  I  do  not  conceive 
to  be,  in  principle,  justifiable.  The  limitation 
in  number,  for  instance,  of  beer  and  spirit 
houses,  for  the  exptess  purpose  of  rendering 
them  more  difficult  of  access,  and  dim  idling 
the  occasions  of  temptation,  not  only  exposes 
all  to  an  inconvenience  because  there  are  some 
by  whom  the  facility  would  be  abused,  but  is 
suited  only  to  a  state  of  society  in  which  the  la- 
bouringclassesare  avowedly  treated  as  children 
or  savages,  and  placed  under  an  education  of 
restraint,  to  fit  them  for  future  admission  to 
the  privileges  of  freedom.  This  is  not  the  prin¬ 
ciple  on  which  the  labouring  classes  are  pro¬ 
fessedly  governed  in  any  free  country;  and  no 
person  who  sets  due  value  on  freedom  will 
give  his  adhesion  to  their  being  so  governed, 
unless  after  all  efforts  have  been  exhausted  to 
educate  them  for  freedom  and  govern  them  as 
freemen,  and  it  has  been  definitively  proved 
that  they  tan  only  be  governed  as  children. 
The  bare  statement  of  the  alternative  shows 
die  absurdity  ol  supposing  that  such  efforts 
have  been  made  in  any  case  which  needs  be 
considered  here.  It  is  only  because  the  insti¬ 
tutions  of  this  country  are  a  mass  of  inconsist¬ 
encies,  that  things  find  admittance  into  our 
practice  which  belong  to  the  system  ol  des¬ 
potic,  or  what  is  called  paternal,  government, 
while  the  general  freedom  of  our  institutions 
precludes  thccxcrcisc  of  the  amount  of  control 
necessary  to  render  the  restraint  ol  any  real 
efficacy  as  a  moral  education. 

It  was  pointed  out  in  an  early  part  of  this 
Kssay,  that  the  liberty  of  the  individual,  in 
things  wherein  the  individual  is  alone  con¬ 
cerned,  implies  a  corresponding  libci  tv  in  am 
number  of  individuals  to  regulate  by  mutual 
agreement  such  things  as  regard  them  jointly, 
and  regard  no  persons  but  themselves.  1  his 
question  piescut*  no  difficulty,  so  long  as  the 
will  of  all  the  persons  implicated  remains  un¬ 
altered:  hut  since  that  will  may  change,  it  is 
often  nc<  e.'Sary.  even  in  tilings  in  which  tluy 
alone  are  concerned,  that  thev  should  enter 
into  engagements  with  one  another;  and  when 


they  do,  it  is  fit,  as  a  general  rule,  that  those 
engagements  should  be  kept.  Vet,  in  the  laws, 
probably,  of  every  country,  this  general  rule 
has  some  exceptions.  Not  only  persons  are  not 
held  to  engagements  which  violate  the  rights  of 
thiid  parties,  but  it  is  sometimes  considered 
a  sufficient  reason  for  releasing  them  from  an 
engagement,  that  it  is  injurious  to  themselves. 
In  this  and  most  other  civilised  countries,  for 
example,  an  engagement  by  which  a  person 
should  sell  himself,  or  allow  himself  to  be  sold, 
as  a  slave,  would  be  null  and  void;  neither  en¬ 
forced  by  law  nor  by  opinion.  T.  he  ground  for 
thus  limiting  his  power  of  voluntarily  dispos¬ 
ing  of  his  own  lot  in  life,  is  apparent,  and  is 
very  clearly  seen  in  this  extreme  case.  The 
reason  for  not  interfering,  unless  for  the  sake 
of  others,  with  a  person’s  voluntary  acts,  is 
consideration  for  his  liberty.  His  voluntary 
choice  is  evidence  that  what  he  so  chooses  is 
desirable,  or  at  least  endurable,  to  him,  and 
his  good  is  on  the  whole  best  prov  ided  for  bv 
allowing  him  to  take  his  own  means  of  pursu¬ 
ing  it.  But  by  selling  himself  for  a  slave,  be 
abdicates  his  liberty;  he  foregoes  any  future  use 
of  it  beyond  that  single  act.  He  therefore  de¬ 
feats,  in  his  own  case,  the  very  purpose  which 
is  the  justification  of  allowing  him  to  dispose 
of  himself.  He  is  no  longer  free;  but  is  (hence¬ 
forth  in  a  position  which  has  no  longer  the  pre¬ 
sumption  in  its  favour,  that  would  be  afforded 
by  his  voluntarily  remaining  in  it.  Hie  princi¬ 
ple  of  freedom  cannot  require  that  he  should 
he  free  not  to  he  free.  It  is  not  freedom  to  be 
allowed  to  alienate  his  freedom.  These  reasons, 
the  force  of  which  is  so  conspicuous  in  this 
peculiar  case,  arc  evidently  of  far  wider  appli¬ 
cation;  yet  a  limit  is  everywhere  set  to  them 
by  (he  necessities  of  life,  which  continually 
require,  not  indeed  that  we  should  resign  0111 
freedom,  but  that  we  should  consent  to  this 
and  the  other  limitation  of  it.  The  principle, 
however,  which  demands  uncontrolled  Iree- 
dont  of  action  in  all  that  concerns  only  the 
agents  themselves,  requires  that  those  who  have 
become  bound  to  one  another,  in  tilings  which 
concern  no  third  party,  should  he  able  to  re¬ 
lease  one  another  from  the  engagement:  and 
even  without  such  voluntary  release  there  are 
perhaps  no  contracts  or  engagements,  except 
those  that  relate  to  money  or  money’s  worth, 
ol  which  one  can  venture  to  say  that  there 
ought  to  be  no  liberty  whatever  of  retrac  tation. 

Baron  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt,  in  the  cx- 
u  Hem  essay  fiom  whic  h  1  havcalready  quoted, 
states  it  as  his  conviction,  that  engagements 


APPLICATIONS  3*7 


which  involve  personal  relations  or  services 
should  never  be  legally  binding  beyond  a 
limited  duration  of  time;  and  that  the  most 
important  of  these  engagements,  marriage,  hav¬ 
ing  the  peculiarity  that  its  objects  are  frustrated 
unless  the  feelings  of  both  the  parties  are  in 
harmony  with  it,  should  require  nothing  more 
than  the  declared  will  of  either  party  to  dis¬ 
solve  it.  This  subject  is  too  important,  and 
too  complicated,  to  be  discussed  in  a  paren¬ 
thesis,  and  I  touch  on  it  only  so  far  as  is  neces- 
sarv  for  purposes  of  illustration.  If  the  con¬ 
ciseness  and  generality  of  Baron  Humboldt’s 
dissertation  had  not  obliged  him  in  this  in¬ 
stance  to  content  himself  with  enunciating  his 
conclusion  without  discussing  the  premises,  he 
would  doubtless  have  recognised  that  the  ques¬ 
tion  cannot  be  decided  on  grounds  so  simple 
as  those  to  which  he  confines  himself.  When  a 
person,  either  bv  express  promise  or  by  con¬ 
duct,  has  encouraged  another  to  rely  upon  his 
continuing  to  act  in  a  certain  way— to  build  ex¬ 
pectations  and  calculations,  and  stake  any 
part  of  his  plan  of  life  upon  that  supposition 
—a  new  series  of  moral  obligations  arises  on 
his  part  towards  that  person,  which  may  possi- 
blv  be  overruled,  but  cannot  be  ignored.  And 
again,  if  the  relation  between  two  contracting 
parties  has  been  followed  by  consequences  to 
others;  if  it  has  placed  third  parties  in  any 
peculiar  position,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  marriage, 
has  even  called  third  parties  into  existence, 
obligations  arise  on  the  part  of  both  the  con¬ 
tracting  parties  towards  those  third  persons, 
the  fulfilment  of  which,  or  at  all  events  the 
mode  of  fulfilment,  must  be  greatly  affected 
by  the  continuance  or  disruption  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  between  the  original  parties  to  the  con¬ 
tract.  It  does  not  follow,  nor  can  I  admit,  that 
these  obligations  extend  to  requiring  the  ful¬ 
filment  of  the  contract  at  all  costs  to  the  hap¬ 
piness  of  the  reluctant  party;  but  they  are  a 
necessary  element  in  the  question;  and  even 
if,  as  Von  Humboldt  maintains,  they  ought  to 
make  no  difference  in  the  legal  freedom  of  the 
parties  to  release  themselves  from  the  engage¬ 
ment  (and  I  also  hold  that  they  ought  not  to 
make  much  difference),  they  necessarily  make 
a  great  difference  in  the  moral  freedom.  A 
person  is  bound  to  take  all  these  circumstances 
into  account  before  resolving  on  a  step  which 
mav  affect  such  important  interests  of  others; 
and  if  he  does  not  allow  proper  weight  to  those 
interests,  he  is  morally  responsible  for  the 
wrong.  I  have  made  these  obvious  remarks  for 
the  better  illustration  of  the  general  principle 


of  liberty,  and  not  because  they  are  at  all  need¬ 
ed  on  the  particular  question,  which,  on  the 
contrary,  is  usually  discussed  as  if  the  interest 
of  children  was  everything,  and  that  of  grown 
persons  nothing. 

I  have  already  observed  that,  owing  to  the 
absence  of  any  recognised  general  principles, 
liber  tv  is  often  granted  where  it  should  be 
withheld,  as  well  as  withheld  where  it  should 
be  granted;  and  one  of  the  cases  in  which,  in 
the  modern  European  world,  the  sentiment  of 
liberty  is  the  strongest,  is  a  case  where,  in 
mv  view,  it  is  altogether  misplaced.  A  person 
should  be  free  to  do  as  he  likes  in  his  own 
concerns;  but  he  ought  not  to  be  free  to  do 
as  he  likes  in  acting  for  another,  under  the 
pretext  that  the  affairs  of  the  other  are  his 
own  affairs.  The  State,  while  it  respects  the 
liberty  of  each  in  what  specially  regards  him¬ 
self,  is  bound  to  maintain  a  vigilant  control 
over  his  exercise  of  any  power  which  it  allows 
him  to  possess  over  others.  This  obligation  is 
almost  entirely  disregarded  in  the  case  of  the 
family  relations,  a  case,  in  its  direct  influence 
on  human  happiness,  more  important  than  all 
others  taken  together.  The  almost  despotic 
power  of  husbands  over  wives  needs  not  be 
enlarged  upon  here,  because  nothing  more  is 
needed  for  the  complete  removal  of  the  evil 
than  that  wives  should  have  the  same  rights, 
and  should  receive  the  protection  of  law  in  the 
same  manner,  as  all  other  persons;  and  be¬ 
cause,  on  this  subject,  the  defenders  of  estab¬ 
lished  injustice  do  not  avail  themselves  of  the 
plea  of  liberty,  but  stand  forth  openly  as  the 
champions  of  power.  It  is  in  the  case  of  chil¬ 
dren  that  misapplied  notions  of  liberty  are  a 
real  obstacle  to  the  fulfilment  by  the  State  of 
its  duties.  One  would  almost  think  that  a  man’s 
children  were  supposed  to  be  literally,  and 
not  metaphorically,  a  part  of  himself,  so  jeal¬ 
ous  is  opinion  of  the  smallest  interference  of 
law  with  his  absolute  and  exclusive  control 
over  them;  more  jealous  than  of  almost  any 
interference  with  his  own  freedom  of  action: 
so  much  less  do  the  generality  of  mankind 
value  liberty  than  power.  Consider,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  case  of  education.  Is  it  not  almost  a 
self-evident  axiom,  that  the  State  should  re¬ 
quire  and  compel  the  education,  up  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  standard,  of  every  human  being  who  is 
born  its  citizen?  Yet  who  is  there  that  is  not 
afraid  to  recognise  and  assert  this  truth?  Hard¬ 
ly  any  one  indeed  will  deny  that  it  is  one  of  the 
most  sacred  duties  of  the  parents  (or,  as  law 
and  usage  now  stand,  the  father),  after  sum- 


ON  LIBERTY 


moning  a  human  being  into  the  world,  to  give 
to  that  being  an  education  fitting  him  to  per¬ 
form  his  part  well  in  life  towards  others  and 
towards  himself.  But  while  this  is  unanimously 
declared  to  be  the  father’s  duty,  scarcely  any¬ 
body,  in  this  country,  will  bear  to  hear  of 
obliging  him  to  perform  it.  Instead  of  his  being 
required  to  make  any  exertion  or  sacrifice  for 
securing  education  to  his  child,  it  is  left  to 
his  choice  to  accept  it  or  not  when  it  is  pro¬ 
vided  gratis!  It  still  remains  unrecognised, 
that  to  bring  a  child  into  existence  without  a 
fair  prospect  of  being  able,  not  only  to  provide 
food  for  its  body,  but  instruction  and  training 
for  its  mind,  is  a  moral  crime,  both  against  the 
unfortunate  offspring  and  against  society;  and 
that  if  the  parent  does  not  fulfil  this  obliga¬ 
tion,  the  State  ought  to  see  it  fulfilled,  at  the 
charge,  as  far  as  possible,  of  the  parent. 

Were  the  duty  of  enforcing  universal  edu¬ 
cation  once  admitted  there  would  be  an  end 
to  the  difficulties  about  what  the  State  should 
teach,  and  how  it  should  teach,  which  now 
convert  the  subject  into  a  mere  battlefield  for 
sects  and  parties,  causing  the  time  and  labour 
which  should  have  been  spent  in  educating 
to  be  wasted  in  quarreling  about  education. 
If  the  government  would  make  up  its  mind  to 
require  for  every  child  a  good  education,  it 
might  save  itself  the  trouble  of  providing  one. 
It  might  leave  to  parents  to  obtain  the  educa¬ 
tion  where  and  how  they  pleased,  and  content 
itself  with  helping  to  pay  the  school  fees  of 
the  poorer  classes  of  children,  and  defraying 
the  entire  school  expenses  of  those  who  have 
no  one  else  to  pay  for  them.  The  objections 
which  are  urged  with  reason  against  State  edu¬ 
cation  do  not  apply  to  the  enforcement  of 
education  by  the  State,  but  to  the  State’s  taking 
upon  itself  to  direct  that  education;  which  is  a 
totally  different  thing.  That  the  whole  or  any 
large  part  of  the  education  of  the  people  should 
be  in  State  hands,  I  go  as  far  as  any  one  in 
deprecating.  All  that  has  been  said  of  the 
importance  of  individuality  of  character,  and 
diversity  in  opinions  and  modes  of  conduct, 
involves,  as  of  the  same  unspeakable  impor¬ 
tance,  diversity  of  education.  A  general  State 
education  is  a  mere  contrivance  for  moulding 
people  to  be  exactly  like  one  another:  and  as 
the  mould  in  which  it  casts  them  is  that  which 
pleases  the  predominant  power  in  the  govern¬ 
ment,  whether  this  be  a  monarch,  a  priest¬ 
hood,  an  aristocracy,  or  the  majority  of  the 
existing  generation;  in  proportion  as  it  is  effi¬ 
cient  and  successful,  it  establishes  a  despotism 


over  the  mind,  leading  by  natural  tendency  to 
one  over  the  body.  An  education  established 
and  controlled  by  the  State  should  only  exist, 
if  it  exist  at  all,  as  one  among  many  competing 
experiments,  carried  on  for  the  purpose  of 
example  and  stimulus,  to  keep  the  others  up 
to  a  certain  standard  of  excellence.  Unless,  in¬ 
deed,  when  society  in  general  is  in  so  back¬ 
ward  a  state  that  it  could  not  or  would  not 
provide  for  itself  any  proper  institutions  of 
education  unless  the  government  undertook 
the  task:  then,  indeed,  the  government  may, 
as  the  less  of  two  great  evils,  take  upon  itself 
the  business  of  schools  and  universities,  as  it 
may  that  of  joint  stock  companies,  when  pri¬ 
vate  enterprise,  in  a  shape  fitted  for  under¬ 
taking  great  works  of  industry,  does  not  exist 
in  the  country.  But  in  general,  if  the  country 
contains  a  sufficient  number  of  persons  quali¬ 
fied  to  provide  education  under  government 
auspices,  the  same  persons  would  be  able  and 
willing  to  give  an  equally  good  education  on 
the  voluntary  principle,  under  the  assurance 
of  remuneration  afforded  by  a  law  rendering 
education  compulsory,  combined  with  State 
aid  to  those  unable  to  defray  the  expense. 

The  instrument  for  enforcing  the  law  could 
be  no  other  than  public  examinations,  extend¬ 
ing  to  all  children,  and  beginning  at  an  early 
age.  An  age  might  be  fixed  at  which  every  child 
must  be  examined,  to  ascertain  if  he  (or  she) 
is  able  to  read.  If  a  child  proves  unable,  the 
father,  unless  he  has  some  sufficient  ground  of 
excuse,  might  be  subjected  to  a  moderate  fine, 
to  be  worked  out,  if  necessary,  by  his  labour, 
and  the  child  might  be  put  to  school  at  his  ex¬ 
pense.  Once  in  every  year  the  examination 
should  be  renewed,  with  a  gradually  extending 
range  of  subjects,  so  as  to  make  the  universal 
acquisition,  and  what  is  more,  retention,  of  a 
certain  minimum  of  general  knowledge  virtu¬ 
ally  compulsory.  Beyond  that  minimum  there 
should  be  voluntary  examinations  on  all  sub 
jects,  at  which  all  who  come  up  to  a  certain 
standard  of  proficiency  might  claim  a  certifi¬ 
cate.  To  prevent  the  State  from  exercising, 
through  these  arrangements,  an  improper  in¬ 
fluence  over  opinion,  the  knowledge  required 
for  passing  an  examination  (beyond  the  mere¬ 
ly  instrumental  parts  ol  knowledge,  such  as 
languages  and  their  use)  should,  even  in  the 
higher  classes  of  examinations,  he  confined  to 
facts  and  positive  science  exclusively.  I  he  ex¬ 
aminations  on  religion,  politics,  or  other  dis¬ 
puted  topics,  should  not  turn  on  the  truth  or 
falsehood  of  opinions,  but  on  the  matter  of 


APPLICATIONS  319 


fact  that  such  and  such  an  opinion  is  held,  on 
such  grounds,  by  such  authors,  or  schools,  or 
churches. 

Under  this  system,  the  rising  generation 
would  be  no  worse  oft  in  regard  to  all  disputed 
truths  than  they  are  at  present;  they  would  be 
brought  up  either  churchmen  or  dissenters  as 
they  now  are,  the  State  merely  taking  care  that 
they  should  be  instructed  churchmen,  or  in¬ 
structed  dissenters.  There  would  be  nothing  to 
hinder  them  from  being  taught  religidn,  if 
their  parents  chose,  at  the  same  schools  where 
they  were  taught  other  things.  All  attempts  by 
the  State  to  bias  the  conclusions  of  its  citizens 
on  disputed  subjects  are  evil;  but  it  may  very 
properly  offer  to  ascertain  and  certify  that  a 
person  possesses  the  knowledge  requisite  to 
make  his  conclusions,  on  any  given  subject, 
worth  attending  to.  A  student  of  philosophy 
would  be  the  better  for  being  able  to  stand  an 
examination  both  in  Locke  and  in  Kant, 
whichever  of  the  two  he  takes  up  with,  or  even 
if  with  neither:  and  there  is  no  reasonable 
objection  to  examining  an  atheist  in  the  evi¬ 
dences  of  Christianity,  provided  he  is  not  re¬ 
quired  to  profess  a  belief  in  them.  The  exam¬ 
inations,  however,  in  the  higher  branches  of 
knowledge  should,  I  conceive,  be  entirely  vol¬ 
untary.  It  would  be  giving  too  dangerous  a 
power  to  governments  were  they  allowed  to 
exclude  any  one  from  professions,  even  from 
the  profession  of  teacher,  for  alleged  deficiency 
of  qualifications:  and  I  think,  with  Wilhelm 
von  Humboldt,  that  degrees,  or  other  public 
certificates  of  scientific  or  professional  acquire¬ 
ments,  should  be  given  to  all  who  present 
themselves  for  examination,  and  stand  the 
test;  but  that  such  certificates  should  confer  no 
advantage  over  competitors  other  than  the 
weight  which  may  be  attached  to  their  testi¬ 
mony  by  public  opinion. 

It  is  not  in  the  matter  of  education  only 
that  misplaced  notions  of  liberty  prevent  moral 
obligations  on  the  part  of  parents  from  being 
recognised,  and  legal  obligations  from  being 
imposed,  where  there  are  the  strongest  grounds 
for  the  former  always,  and  in  many  cases  for 
the  latter  also.  The  fact  itself,  of  causing  the 
existence  of  a  human  being,  is  one  of  the  most 
responsible  actions  in  the  range  of  human  life. 
To  undertake  this  responsibility— to  bestow 
a  life  which  may  be  either  a  curse  or  a  blessing 
—unless  the  being  on  whom  it  is  to  be  bestowed 
will  have  at  least  the  ordinary  chances  of  a 
desirable  existence,  is  a  crime  against  that  be¬ 
ing.  And  in  a  country  either  over-peopled,  or 


threatened  with  being  so,  to  produce  children, 
beyond  a  very  small  number,  with  the  effect  of 
reducing  the  reward  of  labour  by  their  compe¬ 
tition,  is  a  serious  offence  against  all  who  live 
by  the  remuneration  of  their  labour.  The  laws 
which,  in  many  countries  on  the  Continent, 
forbid  marriage  unless  the  parties  can  show 
that  they  have  the  means  of  supporting  a  fam¬ 
ily,  do  not  exceed  the  legitimate  powers  of  the 
State:  and  whether  such  laws  be  expedient  or 
not  (a  question  mainly  dependent  on  local  cir¬ 
cumstances  arid  feelings),  they  are  not  objec¬ 
tionable  as  violations  of  liberty.  Such  laws  are 
interferences  of  the  State  to  prohibit  a  mis¬ 
chievous  act— an  act  injurious  to  others,  which 
ought  to  be  a  subject  of  reprobation,  and  social 
stigma,  even  when  it  is  not  deemed  expedient 
to  superadd  legal  punishment.  Yet  the  current 
ideas  of  liberty,  which  bend  so  easily  to  real 
infringements  of  the  freedom  of  the  individual 
in  things  which  concern  only  himself,  would 
repel  the  attempt  to  put  any  restraint  upon  his 
inclinations  when  the  consequence  of  their 
indulgence  is  a  life  or  lives  of  wretchedness 
and  depravity  to  the  offspring,  with  manifold 
evils  to  those  sufficiently  within  reach  to  be  in 
any  way  affected  by  their  actions.  When  we 
compare  the  strange  respect  of  mankind  for 
liberty,  with  their  strange  want  of  respect  for 
it,  we  might  imagine  that  a  man  had  an  indis¬ 
pensable  right  to  do  harm  to  others,  and  no 
right  at  all  to  please  himself  without  giving 
pain  to  any  one. 

I  have  reserved  for  the  last  place  a  large  class 
of  questions  respecting  the  limits  of  govern¬ 
ment  interference,  which,  though  closely  con¬ 
nected  with  the  subject  of  this  Essay,  do  not, 
in  strictness,  belong  to  it.  These  are  cases  in 
which  the  reasons  against  interference  do  not 
turn  upon  the  principle  of  liberty:  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  not  about  restraining  the  actions  of  in¬ 
dividuals,  but  about  helping  them;  it  is  asked 
whether  the  government  should  do,  or  cause 
to  be  done,  something  for  their  benefit,  in¬ 
stead  of  leaving  it  to  be  done  by  themselves, 
individually  or  in  voluntary  combination. 

The  objections  to  government  interference, 
when  it  is  not  such  as  to  involve  infringement 
of  liberty,  may  be  of  three  kinds. 

The  first  is,  when  the  thing  to  be  done  is 
likely  to  be  better  done  by  individuals  than  by 
the  government.  Speaking  generally,  there  is 
no  one  so  fit  to  conduct  any  business,  or  to 
determine  how  or  by  whom  it  shall  be  con¬ 
ducted,  as  those  who  are  personally  interested 
in  it.  This  principle  condemns  the  interfer- 


ON  LIBERTY 


ences,  once  so  common,  of  the  legislature,  or 
the  officers  of  government,  with  the  ordinary 
processes  of  industry.  But  this  part  of  the  sub¬ 
ject  has  been  sufficiently  enlarged  upon  by 
political  economists,  and  is  not  particularly  re¬ 
lated  to  the  principles  of  this  Essay. 

The  second  objection  is  more  nearly  allied 
to  our  subject.  In  many  cases,  though  indi¬ 
viduals  may  not  do  the  particular  thing  so 
well,  on  the  average,  as  the  officers  of  govern¬ 
ment,  it  is  nevertheless  desirable  that  it  should 
be  done  by  them,  rather  than  by  the  govern¬ 
ment,  as  a  means  to  their  own  mental  educa¬ 
tion— a  mode  of  strengthening  their  active  fac¬ 
ulties,  exercising  their  judgment,  and  giving 
them  a  familiar  knowledge  of  the  subjects 
with  which  they  are  thus  left  to  deal.  This  is 
a  principal,  though  not  the  sole,  recommenda¬ 
tion  of  jury  trial  (in  cases  not  political):  of 
free  and  popular  local  and  municipal  institu¬ 
tions:  of  the  conduct  of  industrial  and  philan¬ 
thropic  enterprises  by  voluntary  associations. 
These  are  not  questions  of  liberty,  and  are  con- 
nected  with  that  subject  only  by  remote  tend¬ 
encies:  but  they  are  questions  of  development. 
It  belongs  to  a  different  occasion  from  the 
present  to  dwell  on  these  things  as  parts  of 
national  education:  as  being,  in  truth,  the 
peculiar  training  of  a  citizen,  the  practical 
part  of  the  political  education  of  a  free  people, 
taking  them  out  of  the  narrow  circle  of  person¬ 
al  and  family  selfishness,  and  accustoming  them 
to  the  comprehension  of  joint  interests,  the 
management  of  joint  concerns— habituating 
them  to  act  from  public  or  semi-public  mo¬ 
tives,  and  guide  their  conduct  by  aims  which 
unite  instead  of  isolating  them  from  one  an¬ 
other.  Without  these  habits  and  powers,  a  free 
constitution  can  neither  be  worked  nor  pre¬ 
served:  as  is  exemplified  by  the  too-often  tran¬ 
sitory  nature  of  political  freedom  in  countries 
where  it  docs  not  rest  upon  a  sufficient  basis 
of  local  liberties.  The  management  of  purely 
lex  al  business  by  the  localities,  and  of  the  great 
enterprises  of  industry  by  the  union  of  those 
who  voluntarily  supply  the  pecuniary  means, 
is  further  recommended  by  all  the  advantages 
which  have  been  set  forth  in  this  Essay  as 
belonging  to  inclis  icluality  of  development, 
and  cli\ ersi ty  of  inodes  of  action.  Government 
operations  tend  to  lie  everywhere  alike.  With 
individuals  and  voluntary  associations,  on  the 
contrary,  (here  are  varied  experiments,  and 
endless  diversity  of  experience.  What  the  State 
can  usefully  do  is  to  make  itself  a  central  de¬ 
pository,  and  active  circulator  and  diffuser,  of 


the  experience  resulting  from  many  trials.  Its 
business  is  to  enable  each  experimentalist  to 
benefit  by  the  experiments  of  others:  instead 
of  tolerating  no  experiments  but  its  own. 

The  third  and  most  cogent  reason  for  re¬ 
stricting  the  interference  of  government  is  the 
great  e\  il  of  adding  unnecessarily  to  its  power. 
Every  function  superadded  to  those  already 
exercised  by  the  government  causes  its  influ¬ 
ence  over  hopes  and  fears  to  be  mote  widelv 
diffused,  and  converts,  more  and  more,  the  ac¬ 
tive  and  ambitious  part  of  the  public  into  hang¬ 
ers-on  of  the  government,  or  of  some  party 
which  aims  at  becoming  the  government.  If  the 
roads,  the  railways,  the  banks,  the  insurance  of¬ 
fices,  the  great  joint-stock  companies,  the  uni¬ 
versities,  and  the  public  charities,  were  all  of 
them  branches  of  the  government:  if,  in  addi¬ 
tion.  the  municipal  corporations  and  local 
boards,  with  all  that  now  devolves  on  them, 
became  departments  of  the  central  administra¬ 
tion:  if  the  employes  of  all  these  different  en¬ 
terprises  were  appointed  and  paid  by  the  gov¬ 
ernment.  and  looked  to  the  government  for 
every  rise  in  life:  not  all  the  freedom  ol  the 
press  and  popular  constitution  of  the  legisla¬ 
ture  would  make  this  or  any  other  country  free 
otherwise  than  in  name.  And  the  evil  would  be 
greater,  the  more  efficiently  and  scientifically 
the  administrative  machinery  was  constructed 
—the  more  skilful  the  arrangements  for  obtain¬ 
ing  the  best  qualified  hands  and  heads  with 
which  to  work  it.  In  England  it  has  of  late  been 
proposed  that  all  the  members  of  the  civil  serv¬ 
ice  of  government  should  be  selected  by  com¬ 
petitive  examination,  to  obtain  for  these  em¬ 
ployments  the  most  intelligent  and  instructed 
persons  procurable;  and  much  has  been  said 
and  written  for  and  against  this  proposal.  One 
of  the  arguments  most  insisted  on  by  its  oppo¬ 
nents  is  that  the  occupation  of  a  permanent 
official  servant  of  the  State  does  not  hold  out 
sufficient  prospects  of  emolument  and  impor¬ 
tance  to  attract  the  highest  talents,  which  will 
always  be  able  to  find  a  more  inviting  (area 
in  the  professions,  or  in  the  service  ol  compa¬ 
nies  and  other  public  bodies.  One  would  not 
have  been  surprised  if  this  argument  had  been 
used  bv  the  friends  of  the  proposition,  as  an 
answer  to  its  principal  difficult).  Coming  horn 
the  opponents  it  is  strange  enough.  What  is 
urged  as  an  objection  is  the  safety-valve  of  the 
proposed  system.  If  indeed  all  the  high  talent 
of  the  country  could  be  drawn  into  the  service 
of  the  government, a  proposal  tending  lo  bring 
about  that  result  might  well  inspire  uneasi- 


APPLICATIONS  321 


ness.  If  every  part  of  the  business  of  society 
which  required  organised  concert,  or  large  and 
comprehensive  views,  were  in  the  hands  of  the 
government,  and  if  government  offices  were 
universally  filled  by  the  ablest  men,  all  the  en¬ 
larged  culture  and  practised  intelligence  in 
the  country,  except  the  purely  speculative, 
would  be  concentrated  in  a  numerous  bureau¬ 
cracy,  to  whom  alone  the  rest  of  the  commu¬ 
nity  would  look  for  all  things:  the  multitude 
for  direction  and  dictation  in  all  they  had  to 
do;  the  able  and  aspiring  for  personal  advance¬ 
ment.  To  be  admitted  into  the  ranks  of  this 
bureaucracy,  and  when  admitted,  to  rise  there¬ 
in,  would  be  the  sole  objects  of  ambition.  Un¬ 
der  this  regime ,  not  only  is  the  outside  public 
ill-qualified,  for  want  of  practical  experience, 
to  criticise  or  check  the  mode  of  operation  of 
the  bureaucracy,  but  even  if  the  accidents  of 
despotic  or  the  natural  working  of  popular 
institutions  occasionally  raise  to  the  summit  a 
ruler  or  rulers  of  reforming  inclinations,  no 
reform  can  be  effected  which  is  contrary  to  the 
interest  of  the  bureaucracy. 

Such  is  the  melancholy  condition  of  the 
Russian  empire,  as  shown  in  the  accounts  of 
those  who  have  had  sufficient  opportunity  of 
observation.  The  Czar  himself  is  powerless 
against  the  bureaucratic  body;  he  can  send  any 
one  of  them  to  Siberia,  but  he  cannot  govern 
without  them,  or  against  their  will.  On  every 
decree  of  his  they  have  a  tacit  veto,  by  merely- 
refraining  from  carrying  it  into  effect.  In  coun¬ 
tries  of  more  advanced  civilisation  and  of  a 
more  insurrectionary  spirit,  the  public,  accus¬ 
tomed  to  expect  everything  to  be  done  for 
them  by  the  State,  or  at  least  to  do  nothing  for 
themselves  without  asking  from  the  State  not 
only  leave  to  do  it,  but  even  how  it  is  to  be 
done,  naturally  hold  the  State  responsible  for 
all  evil  which  befalls  them,  and  when  the  evil 
exceeds  their  amount  of  patience,  they  rise 
against  the  government,  and  make  what  is 
called  a  revolution;  whereupon  somebody  else, 
with  or  without  legitimate  authority  from  the 
nation,  vaults  into  the  seat,  issues  his  orders 
to  the  bureaucracy,  and  everything  goes  on 
much  as  it  did  before:  the  bureaucracy  being 
unchanged,  and  nobody  else  being  capable  of 
taking  their  place. 

A  very  different  spectacle  is  exhibited  among 
a  people  accustomed  to  transact  their  own  busi¬ 
ness.  In  France,  a  large  part  of  the  people,  hav¬ 
ing  been  engaged  in  military  service,  many  of 
whom  have  held  at  least  the  rank  of  non  com¬ 
missioned  officers,  there  are  in  every  popular 


insurrection  several  persons  competent  to  take 
the  lead,  and  improvise  some  tolerable  plan 
of  action.  What  the  French  are  in  military 
affairs,  the  Americans  are  in  every  kind  of  civil 
business;  let  them  be  left  without  a  govern¬ 
ment,  every  body  of  Americans  is  able  to  im¬ 
provise  one,  and  to  carry  on  that  or  any  other 
public  business  with  a  sufficient  amount  of  in¬ 
telligence,  order,  and  decision.  This  is  what 
every  free  people  ought  to  be:  and  a  people 
capable  of  this  is  certain  to  be  free;  it  will 
never  let  itself  be  enslaved  by  any  man  or 
bodv  of  men  because  these  are  able  to  seize 
and  pull  the  reins  of  the  central  administra¬ 
tion.  No  bureaucracy  can  hope  to  make  such 
a  people  as  this  do  or  undergo  anything  that 
they  do  not  like.  But  where  everything  is  done 
through  the  bureaucracy,  nothing  to  which  the 
bureaucracy  is  really  adverse  can  be  done  at 
all.  The  constitution  of  such  countries  is  an 
organisation  of  the  experience  and  practical 
ability  of  the  nation  into  a  disciplined  body 
for  the  purpose  of  governing  the  rest;  and  the 
more  perfect  that  organisation  is  in  itself,  the 
more  successful  in  drawing  to  itself  and  edu¬ 
cating  for  itself  the  persons  of  greatest  capac¬ 
ity  from  all  ranks  of  the  community,  the  more 
complete  is  the  bondage  of  all,  the  members 
of  the  bureaucracy  included.  For  the  governors 
are  as  much  the  slaves  of  their  organisation 
and  discipline  as  the  governed  are  of  the  gov¬ 
ernors.  A  Chinese  mandarin  is  as  much  the 
tool  and  creature  of  a  despotism  as  the  hum¬ 
blest  cultivator.  An  individual  Jesuit  is  to  the 
utmost  degree  of  abasement  the  slave  of  his 
order,  though  the  order  itself  exists  for  the  col¬ 
lective  power  and  importance  of  its  members. 

It  is  not,  also,  to  be  forgotten,  that  the  ab¬ 
sorption  of  all  the  principal  ability  of  the 
country  into  the  governing  body  is  fatal,  soon¬ 
er  or  later,  to  the  mental  activity  and  progres¬ 
siveness  of  the  body  itself.  Banded  together  as 
they  are— working  a  system  which,  like  all  sys¬ 
tems,  necessarily  proceeds  in  a  great  measure 
by  fixed  rules— the  official  body  are  under  the 
constant  temptation  of  sinking  into  indolent 
routine,  or,  if  they  now  and  then  desert  that 
mill-horse  round,  of  rushing  into  some  half- 
examined  cruditv  which  has  struck  the  fancy 
of  some  leading  member  of  the  corps;  and  the 
sole  check  to  these  closely  allied,  though  seem¬ 
ingly  opposite,  tendencies,  the  only  stimulus 
which  can  keep  the  ability  of  the  body  itself 
up  to  a  high  standard,  is  liability  to  the  watch¬ 
ful  criticism  of  equal  ability  outside  the  body. 
It  is  indispensable,  therefore,  that  the  means 


ON  LIBERTY 


should  exist,  independently  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  of  forming  such  ability,  and  furnishing 
it  with  the  opportunities  and  experience  neces¬ 
sary  for  a  correct  judgment  of  great  practical 
affairs.  If  we  would  possess  permanently  a  skil¬ 
ful  aild  efficient  body  of  functionaries— above 
all,  a  body  able  to  originate  and  willing  to 
adopt  improvements;  if  we  would  not  have 
our  bureaucracy  degenerate  into  a  pedantoc- 
racy,  this  body  must  not  engross  all  the  occupa¬ 
tions  which  form  and  cultivate  the  faculties  re¬ 
quired  for  the  government  of  mankind. 

To  determine  the  point  at  which  evils,  so 
formidable  to  human  freedom  and  advance¬ 
ment.  begin,  or  rather  at  which  they  begin  to 
predominate  over  the  benefits  attending  the 
collective  application  of  the  force  of  society, 
under  its  recognised  chiefs,  for  the  removal  of 
the  obstacles  which  stand  in  the  way  of  its  well¬ 
being;  to  secure  as  much  of  the  advantages  of 
centralised  power  and  intelligence  as  can  be 
had  without  turning  into  governmental  chan¬ 
nels  too  great  a  proportion  of  the  general  ac¬ 
tivity— is  one  of  the  most  difficult  and  com¬ 
plicated  questions  in  the  art  ol  government. 
It  is,  in  a  great  measure,  a  question  of  detail, 
in  which  many  and  various  considerations 
must  be  kept  in  view,  and  no  absolute  rule 
can  be  laid  down.  But  I  believe  that  the  prac¬ 
tical  principle  in  which  safety  resides,  the  ideal 
to  be  kept  in  view,  the  standard  by  which  to 
test  all  arrangements  intended  for  overcoming 
the  difficulty,  may  be  conveyed  in  these  words: 
the  greatest  dissemination  of  power  consistent 
with  efficiency;  but  the  greatest  possible  cen¬ 
tralisation  of  information,  and  diffusion  of  it 
from  the  centre.  I  hus,  in  municipal  admin¬ 
istration,  there  would  be,  as  in  the  New  Eng¬ 
land  States,  a  very  minute  division  among 
separate  officers,  chosen  by  the  localities,  of 
all  business  which  is  not  better  left  to  the  per¬ 
sons  directly  interested;  but  besides  this,  there 
would  be,  in  each  department  of  local  affairs,  a 
central  superintendence,  forming  a  branch  of 
the  general  government.  The  organ  of  this 
superintendence  would  concentrate,  as  in  a 
focus,  the  variety  of  information  and  experi¬ 
ence  derived  from  the  conduct  of  that  branch 
of  public  business  in  all  tbc  localities,  from 
everything  analogous  which  is  done  in  foreign 
countries,  and  from  the  general  principles  of 
political  science.  Ellis  central  organ  should 
have  a  right  to  know  all  that  is  clone,  and  its 
special  duty  should  be  that  of  making  the 
knowledge  acquired  in  one  place  available  for 
others.  Emancipated  from  the  petty  prejudices 


and  narrow  views  of  a  locality  by  its  elevated 
position  and  comprehensive  sphere  of  observa¬ 
tion,  its  advice  would  naturally  carry  much 
authority;  but  its  actual  power,  as  a  permanent 
institution,  should,  I  conceive,  be  limited  to 
compelling  the  local  officers  to  obey  the  laws 
laid  down  for  their  guidance.  In  all  things  not 
provided  for  by  general  rules,  those  officers 
should  be  left  to  their  own  judgment,  under 
responsibility  to  their  constituents.  For  the 
violation  of  rules,  they  should  be  responsible 
to  law,  and  the  rules  themselves  should  be  laid 
down  by  the  legislature;  the  central  adminis¬ 
trative  authority  only  watching  over  their  ex¬ 
ecution,  and  if  they  were  not  properly  carried 
into  effect,  appealing,  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  case,  to  the  tribunals  to  enforce  the  law, 
or  to  the  constituencies  to  dismiss  the  function¬ 
aries  who  had  not  executed  it  according  to  its 
spirit. 

Such,  in  its  general  conception,  is  the  central 
superintendence  which  the  Poor  Law  Board  is 
intended  to  exercise  over  the  administrators  of 
the  Poor  Rate  throughout  the  country.  What¬ 
ever  powers  the  Board  exercises  beyond  this 
limit  were  right  and  necessary  in  that  peculiar 
case,  for  the  cure  of  rooted  habits  of  malad¬ 
ministration  in  matters  deeply  affecting  not 
the  localities  merely,  but  the  whole  commu¬ 
nity;  since  no  locality  has  a  moral  right  to  make 
itself  by  mismanagement  a  nest  of  pauperism, 
necessarilv  overllowing  into  other  localities, 
and  impairing  the  moral  and  physical  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  whole  labouring  community.  The 
powers  of  administrative  coercion  and  subor¬ 
dinate  legislation  possessed  by  the  Poor  Law 
Board  (but  which,  owing  to  the  state  of  opin¬ 
ion  on  the  subject,  are  very  scantily  exercised 
by  them),  though  perfectly  justifiable  in  a  case 
of  first-rate  national  interest,  would  be  wholly 
out  of  place  in  the  superintendence  of  inter¬ 
ests  purely  local.  But  a  central  organ  of  infor¬ 
mation  and  instruction  for  all  the  localities 
would  be  equally  valuable  in  all  departments 
of  administration.  A  government  cannot  have 
too  much  ol  the  kind  of  activity  which  docs 
not  impede,  but  aids  and  stimulates,  individ¬ 
ual  exertion  and  development.  1  he  mischief 
begins  when,  instead  of  calling  forth  the  ac¬ 
tivity  and  powers  of  individuals  and  bodies,  it 
substitutes  its  own  activity  for  theirs;  when,  in¬ 
stead  of  informing,  advising,  and,  upon  oc¬ 
casion.  denouncing,  it  makes  them  work  in 
fetters,  or  bids  them  stand  aside  and  docs  their 
work  instead  of  them.  The  worth  of  a  State,  in 
the  long  run,  is  the  worth  of  the  individuals 


APPLIC. 

composing  it;  and  a  State  which  postpones  the 
interests  of  their  mental  expansion  and  eleva¬ 
tion  to  a  little  more  of  administrative  skill,  or 
of  that  semblance  of  it  which  practice  gives,  in 
the  details  of  business;  a  State  which  dwarfs 
its  men,  in  order  that  they  may  be  more  docile 
instruments  in  its  hands  even  for  beneficial 


TIONS  323 

purposes— will  find  that  with  small  men  no 
great  thing  can  really  be  accomplished;  and 
that  the  perfection  of  machinery  to  which  it 
has  sacrificed  everything  will  in  the  end  avail 
it  nothing,  for  want  of  the  vital  power  which, 
in  order  that  the  machine  might  work  more 
smoothly,  it  has  preferred  to  banish. 


CONTENTS:  REPRESENTATIVE 
GOVERNMENT 


1.  TO  WHAT  EXTENT  FORMS  OF  GOVERNMENT 

are  a  Matter  of  Choice  327 

2.  The  Criterion  of  a  Good  Form  of  Gov¬ 

ernment  332 

3.  That  the  ideally  best  Form  of  Govern¬ 

ment  is  Representative  Government  341 

4.  Under  what  Social  Conditions  Rep¬ 

resentative  Government  is  Inappli¬ 
cable  35° 

5.  Of  the  Proper  Functions  of  Represent¬ 

ative  Bodies  355 

6.  Of  the  Infirmities  and  Dangers  to 

which  Representative  Government  is 
Liable  3^2 

7.  Of  True  and  False  Democracy;  Repre¬ 

sentation  of  All,  and  Representa¬ 
tion  of  the  Majority  only  370 

8.  Of  the  Extension  of  the  Suffrage  380 

9.  Should  there  be  Two  Stages  of  Elec¬ 

tion?  389 

10.  Of  the  Mode  of  Voting  392 

11.  Of  the  Duration  of  Parliaments  400 

12.  Ought  Pledges  to  be  Required  from 

Members  of  Parliament?  401 

13.  Of  a  Second  Chamber  406 

14.  Of  the  Executive  in  a  Representative 

Government  4°9 

15.  Of  Local  Representative  Bodies  417 

16.  Of  Nationality,  as  Connected  with 

Representative  Government  424 

17.  Of  Federal  Representative  Govern¬ 

ments  428 

18.  Of  the  Government  of  Dependencies 

by  a  Free  State  433 


REPRESENTATIVE 

GOVERNMENT 


PREFACE 

THOSE  who  have  done  me  the  honour  of  reading  my  previous  writings  will  prob¬ 
ably  receive  no  strong  impression  of  novelty  from  the  present  volume;  for  the  principles 
are  those  to  which  I  have  been  working  up  during  the  greater  part  of  my  life,  and  most 
of  the  practical  suggestions  have  been  anticipated  by  others  or  by  myself.  There  is  nov¬ 
elty,  however,  in  the  fact  of  bringing  them  together,  and  exhibiting  them  in  their  con¬ 
nection;  and  also,  I  believe,  in  much  that  is  brought  forward  in  their  support.  Several 
of  the  opinions  at  all  events,  if  not  new,  are  for  the  present  as  little  likely  to  meet  with 
general  acceptance  as  if  they  were. 

It  seems  to  me,  however,  from  various  indications,  and  from  none  more  than  the  re¬ 
cent  debates  on  Reform  of  Parliament,  that  both  Conservatives  and  Liberals  {if  I  may 
continue  to  call  them  what  they  still  call  themselves )  have  lost  confidence  in  the  political 
creeds  which  they  nominally  profess,  while  neither  side  appears  to  have  made  any  prog¬ 
ress  in  providing  itself  with  a  better.  Yet  such  a  better  doctrine  must  be  possible;  not  a 
mere  compromise,  by  splitting  the  difference  between  the  two,  but  something  wider  than 
either,  which,  in  virtue  of  its  superior  comprehensiveness,  might  be  adopted  by  either 
Liberal  or  Conservative  without  renouncing  anything  which  he  really  feels  to  be  valu¬ 
able  in  his  own  creed.  When  so  many  feel  obscurely  the  want  of  such  a  doctrine,  and  so 
few  even  flatter  themselves  that  they  have  attained  it,  any  one  may  without  presumption 
offer  what  his  own  thoughts,  and  the  best  that  he  knows  of  those  of  others,  are  able  to 
contribute  towards  its  formation. 


Chapter  i 

To  what  extent  Forms  of  Government 
are  a  Matter  of  Choice 

All  speculations  concerning  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment  bear  the  impress,  more  or  less  exclusive, 
of  two  conflicting  theories  respecting  political 
institutions;  or,  to  speak  more  properly,  con¬ 
flicting  conceptions  of  what  political  institu¬ 
tions  are. 

By  some  minds,  government  is  conceived  as 
strictly  a  practical  art,  giving  rise  to  no  ques¬ 
tions  but  those  of  means  and  an  end.  Forms  of 
government  are  assimilated  to  any  other  ex¬ 


pedients  for  the  attainment  of  human  objects. 
They  are  regarded  as  wholly  an  affair  of  in¬ 
vention  and  contrivance.  Being  made  by  man, 
it  is  assumed  that  man  has  the  choice  either  to 
make  them  or  not,  and  how  or  on  what  pat¬ 
tern  they  shall  be  made.  Government,  accord¬ 
ing  to  this  conception,  is  a  problem,  to  be 
worked  like  any  other  question  of  business. 
The  first  step  is  to  define  the  purposes  which 
governments  are  required  to  promote.  The 
next,  is  to  inquire  what  form  of  government  is 
best  fitted  to  fulfil  those  purposes.  Having 
satisfied  ourselves  on  these  two  points,  and  as¬ 
certained  the  form  of  government  which  com* 


327 


REPRESENTATIVE  GO  VERNMENT 


bines  the  greatest  amount  of  good  with  the 
least  of  evil,  what  further  remains  is  to  obtain 
the  concurrence  of  our  countrymen,  or  those 
for  whom  the  institutions  are  intended,  in  the 
opinion  which  we  have  privately  arrived  at. 
To  find  the  best  form  of  government;  to  per¬ 
suade  others  that  it  is  the  best;  and  having 
done  so,  to  stir  them  up  to  insist  on  having  it, 
is  the  order  of  ideas  in  the  minds  of  those  who 
adopt  this  view  of  political  philosophy.  They 
look  upon  a  constitution  in  the  same  light 
(difference  of  scale  being  allowed  for)  as  they 
would  upon  a  steam  plough,  or  a  threshing 
machine. 

To  these  stand  opposed  another  kind  of 
political  reasoners,  who  are  so  far  from  assimi¬ 
lating  a  form  of  government  to  a  machine, 
that  they  regard  it  as  a  sort  of  spontaneous 
product,  and  the  science  of  government  as  a 
branch  (so  to  speak)  of  natural  history.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  them,  forms  of  government  are  not 
a  matter  of  choice.  We  must  take  them,  in  the 
main,  as  we  find  them.  Governments  cannot  be 
constructed  by  premeditated  design.  They  "are 
not  made,  but  grow.”  Our  business  with  them, 
as  with  the  other  facts  of  the  universe,  is  to  ac¬ 
quaint  ourselves  with  their  natural  properties, 
and  adapt  ourselves  to  them.  The  fundamen¬ 
tal  political  institutions  of  a  people  are  con¬ 
sidered  by  this  school  as  a  sort  of  organic 
growth  from  the  nature  and  life  of  that  peo¬ 
ple:  a  product  of  their  habits,  instincts,  and 
unconscious  wants  and  desires,  scarcely  at  all 
of  their  deliberate  purposes.  Their  will  has 
had  no  part  in  the  matter  but  that  of  meeting 
the  necessities  of  the  moment  by  the  contriv¬ 
ances  of  the  moment,  which  contrivances,  if  in 
sufficient  conformity  to  the  national  feelings 
and  character,  commonly  last,  and  by  succes¬ 
sive  aggregation  constitute  a  polity,  suited  to 
the  people  who  possess  it,  but  which  it  would 
be  vain  to  attempt  to  superduce  upon  any 
people  whose  nature  and  circumstances  had 
not  spontaneously  evolved  it. 

ft  is  difficult  to  decide  which  of  these  doc¬ 
trines  would  be  the  most  absurd,  if  we  could 
suppose  either  of  them  held  as  an  exclusive 
theory.  But  the  principles  which  men  profess, 
on  any  controverted  subject,  are  usually  a  very 
incomplete  exponent  of  the  opinions  they 
really  hold.  No  one  believes  that  every  peo¬ 
ple  is  capable  of  working  every  sort  of  institu¬ 
tions.  Carry  the  analogy  of  mechanical  con¬ 
trivances  as  far  as  we  will,  a  man  does  not 
(  boose  even  an  instrument  of  timber  and  iron 
on  the  sole  ground  that  it  is  in  itself  the  best. 


He  considers  whether  he  possesses  the  other 
requisites  which  must  be  combined  with  it  to 
render  its  employment  advantageous,  and  in 
particular  whether  those  by  whom  it  will  have 
to  be  worked  possess  the  knowledge  and  skill 
necessary  for  its  management.  On  the  other 
hand,  neither  are  those  who  speak  of  institu¬ 
tions  as  if  they  were  a  kind  of  living  organisms 
really  the  political  fatalists  they  give  them¬ 
selves  out  to  be.  They  do  not  pretend  that 
mankind  have  absolutely  no  range  of  choice 
as  to  the  government  they  will  live  under,  or 
that  a  consideration  of  the  consequences  which 
flow  from  different  forms  of  polity  is  no  ele¬ 
ment  at  all  in  deciding  which  of  them  should 
be  preferred.  But  though  each  side  greatly  ex¬ 
aggerates  its  own  theory,  out  of  opposition  to 
the  other,  and  no  one  holds  without  modifica¬ 
tion  to  either,  the  two  doctrines  correspond  to 
a  deep-seated  difference  between  two  modes 
of  thought;  and  though  it  is  evident  that 
neither  of  these  is  entirely  in  the  right,  yet  it 
being  equally  evident  that  neither  is  wholly 
in  the  wrong,  we  must  endeavour  to  get  down 
to  what  is  at  the  root  of  each,  and  avail  our¬ 
selves  of  the  amount  of  truth  which  exists  in 
either. 

Let  us  remember,  then,  in  the  first  place, 
that  political  institutions  (however  the  propo¬ 
sition  may  be  at  times  ignored)  are  the  work 
of  men;  owe  their  origin  and  their  whole  ex¬ 
istence  to  human  will.  Men  did  not  wake  on  a 
summer  morning  and  find  them  sprung  up. 
Neither  do  they  resemble  trees,  which,  once 
planted,  "are  aye  growing”  while  men  "are 
sleeping.”  In  every  stage  of  their  existence 
they  are  made  what  they  are  by  human  volun¬ 
tary  agency.  Like  all  things,  therefore,  which 
are  made  by  men,  they  may  be  either  well  or  ill 
made;  judgment  and  skill  may  have  been  exer¬ 
cised  in  their  production,  or  the  reverse  of 
these.  And  again,  if  a  people  have  omitted,  or 
from  outward  pressure  have  not  had  it  in  their 
power,  to  give  themselves  a  constitution  bv  the 
tentative  process  of  applying  a  corrective  to 
each  evil  as  it  arose,  or  as  the  sufferers  gained 
strength  to  resist  it,  this  retardation  of  politi¬ 
cal  progress  is  no  doubt  a  great  disadvantage 
to  them,  but  it  does  not  prove  that  what  has 
been  found  good  for  others  would  not  have 
been  good  also  for  them,  and  will  not  be  so 
still  when  they  think  fit  to  adopt  it. 

On  t fie  other  hand,  it  is  also  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  political  machinery  docs  not  act  of 
itself.  As  it  is  first  made,  so  it  has  to  be  worked, 
by  men.  and  even  by  ordinary  men.  It  needs, 


FORMS  OF  GOVERNMENT  329 


not  their  simple  acquiescence,  but  their  active 
participation:  and  must  be  adjusted  to  the  ca¬ 
pacities  and  qualities  of  such  men  as  are  avail¬ 
able.  This  implies  three  conditions.  The  peo¬ 
ple  for  whom  the  form  of  government  is  in¬ 
tended  must  be  willing  to  accept  it:  or  at  least 
not  so  unwilling  as  to  oppose  an  insurmount¬ 
able  obstacle  to  its  establishment.  They  must 
be  willing  and  able  to  do  what  is  necessary  to 
keep  it  standing.  And  they  must  be  willing 
and  able  to  do  what  it  requires  of  them  to  en¬ 
able  it  to  fulfil  its  purposes.  The  word  “do”  is 
to  be  understood  as  including  forbearances  as 
well  as  acts.  They  must  be  capable  of  fulfilling 
the  conditions  of  action,  and  the  conditions  of 
self-restraint,  which  are  necessary  either  for 
keeping  the  established  polity  in  existence,  or 
for  enabling  it  to  achieve  the  ends,  its  condu¬ 
civeness  to  which  forms  its  recommendation. 

The  failure  of  any  of  these  conditions  ren¬ 
ders  a  form  of  government,  whatever  favour¬ 
able  promise  it  may  otherwise  hold  out,  un¬ 
suitable  to  the  particular  case. 

The  first  obstacle,  the  repugnance  of  the 
people  to  the  particular  form  of  government, 
needs  little  illustration,  because  it  never  can 
in  theory  have  been  overlooked.  The  case  is  of 
perpetual  occurrence.  Nothing  but  foreign 
force  would  induce  a  tribe  of  North  American 
Indians  to  submit  to  the  restraints  of  a  regular 
and  civilised  government.  The  same  might 
have  been  said,  though  somewhat  less  abso¬ 
lutely,  of  the  barbarians  who  overran  the 
Roman  Empire.  It  required  centuries  of  time, 
and  an  entire  change  of  circumstances,  to  dis¬ 
cipline  them  into  regular  obedience  even  to 
their  own  leaders,  when  not  actually  serving 
under  their  banner.  There  are  nations  who 
will  not  \oluntarily  submit  to  any  government 
but  that  of  certain  families,  which  have  from 
time  immemorial  had  the  privilege  of  supply¬ 
ing  them  with  chiefs.  Some  nations  could  not, 
except  by  foreign  conquest,  be  made  to  endure 
a  monarchy:  others  are  equally  averse  to  a  re¬ 
public.  The  hindrance  often  amounts,  for  the 
time  being,  to  impracticability. 

But  there  are  also  cases  in  which,  though  not 
averse  to  a  form  of  government— possibly  even 
desiring  it— a  people  may  be  unwilling  or  un¬ 
able  to  fulfil  its  conditions.  They  may  be  in¬ 
capable  of  fulfilling  such  of  them  as  are  neces¬ 
sary  to  keep  the  government  even  in  nominal 
existence.  Thus  a  people  may  prefer  a  free 
government,  but  if,  from  indolence,  or  care¬ 
lessness,  or  cowardice,  or  want  of  public  spirit, 
they  are  unequal  to  the  exertions  necessary  for 


preserving  it:  if  they  will  not  fight  for  it  when 
it  is  directly  attacked:  if  they  can  be  deluded 
by  the  artifices  used  to  cheat  them  out  of  it;  if 
by  momentary  discouragement,  or  temporary- 
panic,  or  a  fit  of  enthusiasm  for  an  individual, 
they  can  be  induced  to  lay  their  liberties  at  the 
feet  even  of  a  great  man,  or  trust  him  with 
powers  which  enable  him  to  subvert  their  in¬ 
stitutions:  in  all  these  cases  they  are  more  or 
less  unfit  for  liberty:  and  though  it  may  be  for 
their  good  to  have  had  it  even  for  a  short  time, 
they  are  unlikely  long  to  enjoy  it.  Again,  a 
people  may  be  unwilling  or  unable  to  fulfil 
the  duties  which  a  particular  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  requires  of  them.  A  rude  people,  though 
in  some  degree  alive  to  the  benefits  of  civilised 
society,  may  be  unable  to  practise  the  forbear¬ 
ance  which  it  demands:  their  passions  may  be 
too  violent,  or  their  personal  pride  too  exact¬ 
ing,  to  forego  private  conflict,  and  leave  to  the 
laws  the  avenging  of  their  real  or  supposed 
wrongs.  In  such  a  case,  a  civilised  government, 
to  be  really  advantageous  to  them,  will  re¬ 
quire  to  be  in  a  considerable  degree  despotic: 
to  be  one  over  which  they  do  not  themselves 
exercise  control,  and  which  imposes  a  great 
amount  of  forcible  restraint  upon  their  actions. 

Again,  a  people  must  be  considered  unfit 
for  more  than  a  limited  and  qualified  freedom, 
who  will  not  co-operate  actively  with  the  law 
and  the  public  authorities  in  the  repression  of 
evil-doers.  A  people  who  are  more  disposed  to 
shelter  a  criminal  than  to  apprehend  him; 
who.  like  the  Hindoos,  will  perjure  themselves 
to  screen  the  man  who  has  robbed  them,  rather 
than  take  trouble  or  expose  themselves  to  vin¬ 
dictiveness  by  giving  evidence  against  him; 
who.  like  some  nations  of  Europe  down  to  a 
recent  date,  if  a  man  poniards  another  in  the 
public  street,  pass  by  on  the  other  side,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  the  business  of  the  police  to  look 
to  the  matter,  and  it  is  safer  not  to  interfere  in 
what  does  not  concern  them:  a  people  who  are 
revolted  by  an  execution,  but  not  shocked  at 
an  assassination— require  that  the  public  au¬ 
thorities  should  be  armed  with  much  sterner 
powers  of  repression  than  elsewhere,  since  the 
first  indispensable  requisites  of  civilised  life 
have  nothing  else  to  rest  on.  1  hese  deplorable 
states  of  feeling,  in  any  people  who  have 
emerged  from  savage  life,  are,  no  doubt,  usual¬ 
ly  the  consequence  of  previous  bad  govern¬ 
ment,  which  has  taught  them  to  regard  the  law 
as  made  for  other  ends  than  their  good,  and 
its  administrators  as  worse  enemies  than  those 
who  openly  violate  it.  But  however  little  blame 


33° 

may  be  due  to  those  in  whom  these  mental 
habits  have  grown  up,  and  however  the  habits 
may  be  ultimately  conquerable  by  better  gov¬ 
ernment,  yet  while  they  exist  a  people  so  dis¬ 
posed  cannot  be  governed  with  as  little  power 
exercised  over  them  as  a  people  whose  sympa¬ 
thies  are  on  the  side  of  the  law,  and  who  are 
willing  to  give  active  assistance  in  its  enforce¬ 
ment.  Again,  representative  institutions  are  of 
little  value,  and  may  be  a  mere  instrument  of 
tvranny  or  intrigue,  when  the  generality  of 
electors  are  not  sufficiently  interested  in  their 
own  government  to  give  their  vote,  or,  if  they 
vote  at  all,  do  not  bestow  their  suffrages  on 
public  grounds,  but  sell  them  for  money,  or 
vote  at  the  beck  of  some  one  who  has  control 
over  them,  or  whom  for  private  reasons  they 
desire  to  propitiate.  Popular  election  thus 
practised,  instead  of  a  security  against  misgov- 
ernment,  is  but  an  additional  wheel  in  its  ma¬ 
chinery. 

Besides  these  moral  hindrances,  mechanical 
difficulties  are  often  an  insuperable  impedi¬ 
ment  to  forms  of  government.  In  the  ancient 
world,  though  there  might  be,  and  often  was, 
great  individual  or  local  independence,  there 
could  be  nothing  like  a  regulated  popular  gov¬ 
ernment  beyond  the  bounds  of  a  single  city- 
community;  because  there  did  not  exist  the 
physical  conditions  for  the  formation  and 
propagation  of  a  public  opinion,  exceptamong 
those  who  could  be  brought  together  to  discuss 
public  matters  in  the  same  agora.  1  his  obsta¬ 
cle  is  generally  thought  to  have  ceased  by  the 
adoption  of  the  representative  system.  But  to 
surmount  it  completely,  required  the  press,  and 
even  the  newspaper  press,  the  real  equivalent, 
though  not  in  all  respects  an  adequate  one,  of 
the  Pnyx  and  the  Forum.  There  have  been 
states  of  society  in  which  even  a  monarchy  of 
any  great  territorial  extent  could  not  subsist, 
but  unavoidably  broke  up  into  petty  princi¬ 
palities,  either  mutually  independent,  or  held 
together  by  a  loose  tie  like  the  leudal:  because 
the  machinery  of  authority  was  not  perfect 
enough  to  carry  orders  into  ellect  at  a  great  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  person  ol  the  ruler.  1  le  depend¬ 
ed  mainly  upon  voluntary  fidelity  lor  the 
obedience  even  ol  his  army,  nor  did  there  exist 
the  means  of  making  the  people  pay  an  amount 
of  taxes  .sufficient  for  keeping  up  the  forte 
necessary  to  compel  obedience  throughout  a 
large  territory.  In  these  and  all  similar  cases, 
it  must  be  understood  that  the  amount  ol  the 
hindrance  may  be  either  greater  or  less.  It  may 
be  so  great  as  to  make  the  lorm  of  government 


GOVERNMEN  T 

work  very  ill,  without  absolutely  precluding 
its  existence,  or  hindering  it  from  being  prac¬ 
tically  preferable  to  any  other  which  can  be 
had.  This  last  question, mainly  depends  upon 
a  consideration  which  we  have  not  yet  arrived 
at— the  tendencies  of  different  forms  of  gov¬ 
ernment  to  promote  Progress. 

We  have  now  examined  the  three  funda¬ 
mental  conditions  of  the  adaptation  of  forms 
of  government  to  the  people  who  are  to  be 
governed  by  them.  If  the  supporters  of  what 
may  be  termed  the  naturalistic  theory  of  poli¬ 
tics,  mean  but  to  insist  on  the  necessity  of  these 
three  conditions;  if  they  only  mean  that  no 
government  can  permanently  exist  which  does 
not  fulfil  the  first  and  second  conditions,  and, 
in  some  considerable  measure,  the  third;  their 
doctrine,  thus  limited,  is  incontestable.  What¬ 
ever  they  mean  more  than  this  appears  to  me 
untenable.  All  that  we  are  told  about  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  an  historical  basis  for  institutions,  of 
their  being  in  harmony  with  the  national  us¬ 
ages  and  character,  and  the  like,  means  either 
this,  or  nothing  to  the  purpose.  There  is  a 
great  quantity  of  mere  sentimentality  con¬ 
nected  with  these  and  similar  phrases,  over 
and  above  the  amount  of  rational  meaning 
contained  in  them.  But.  considered  practical¬ 
ly,  these  alleged  requisites  of  political  institu¬ 
tions  arc  merely  so  many  facilities  for  realising 
the  three  conditions.  When  an  institution,  or 
a  set  of  institutions,  has  the  way  prepared  for 
it  by  the  opinions,  tastes,  and  habits  of  the 
people,  they  are  not  only  more  easily  induced 
to  accept  it,  but  will  more  easily  learn,  and 
will  be,  from  the  beginning,  better  disposed, 
to  do  what  is  required  of  them  both  for  the 
preservation  of  the  institutions,  and  for  bring¬ 
ing  them  into  such  action  as  enables  them  to 
produce  their  best  results.  It  would  be  a  great 
mistake  in  any  legislator  not  to  shape  his  meas¬ 
ures  so  as  to  take  advantage  of  such  pre-exist¬ 
ing  habits  and  feelings  when  available.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  an  exaggeration  to  elevate 
these  mere  aids  and  facilities  into  necessary 
conditions.  People  are  more  easily  induced  to 
do,  and  do  more  easily,  what  they  are  already 
used  to;  but  people  also  learn  to  do  things  new 
to  them.  Familiarity  is  a  great  help;  hut  much 
dwelling  on  an  idea  will  make  it  familiar, 
even  when  strange  at  first.  There  are  abundant 
instances  in  which  a  whole  people  have  been 
eager  for  untried  things.  The  amount  of  ca¬ 
pacity  which  a  people  possess  lor  doing  new 
things,  and  adapting  themselves  to  new  cir¬ 
cumstances;  is  itself  one  of  the  elements  ol  the 


REPRESEN T A  T IV E 


FORMS  OF  GOVERNMENT  331 


question.  It  is  a  quality  in  which  different  na¬ 
tions,  and  different  stages  of  civilisation,  differ 
much  from  one  another.  The  capability  of 
any  given  people  for  fulfilling  the  conditions 
of  a  given  form  of  government  cannot  be  pro¬ 
nounced  on  by  any  sweeping  rule.  Knowledge 
of  the  particular  people,  and  general  practical 
judgment  and  sagacity,  must  be  the  guides. 

There  is  also  another  consideration  not  to 
be  lost  sight  of.  A  people  may  be  unprepared 
for  good  institutions;  but  to  kindle  a  desire 
for  them  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  preparation. 
To  recommend  and  advocate  a  particular  in¬ 
stitution  or  form  of  government,  and  set  its 
advantages  in  the  strongest  light,  is  one  of  the 
modes,  often  the  only  mode  within  reach,  of 
educating  the  mind  of  the  nation  not  only  for 
accepting  or  claiming,  but  also  for  working, 
the  institution.  What  means  had  Italian  patri¬ 
ots,  during  the  last  and  present  generation,  of 
preparing  the  Italian  people  for  freedom  in 
unity,  but  by  inciting  them  to  demand  it? 
Those,  however,  who  undertake  such  a  task, 
need  to  be  duly  impressed,  not  solely  with  the 
benefits  of  the  institution  or  polity  which  they 
recommend,  but  also  with  the  capacities,  mor¬ 
al,  intellectual,  and  active,  required  for  work¬ 
ing  it;  that  they  may  avoid,  if  possible,  stirring 
up  a  desire  too  much  in  advance  of  the  ca¬ 
pacity. 

The  result  of  what  has  been  said  is,  that, 
within  the  limits  set  by  the  three  conditions 
so  often  adverted  to,  institutions  and  forms  of 
government  are  a  matter  of  choice.  To  inquire 
into  the  best  form  of  government  in  the  ab¬ 
stract  (as  it  is  called)  is  not  a  chimerical,  but  a 
highly  practical  employment  of  scientific  in¬ 
tellect;  and  to  introduce  into  any  country  the 
best  institutions  which,  in  the  existing  state  of 
that  country,  are  capable  of,  in  any  tolerable 
degree,  fulfilling  the  conditions,  is  one  of  the 
most  rational  objects  to  which  practical  ef¬ 
fort  can  address  itself.  Everything  which  can 
be  said  by  way  of  disparaging  the  efficacy  of 
human  will  and  purpose  in  matters  of  govern¬ 
ment  might  be  said  of  it  in  every  other  of  its 
applications.  In  all  things  there  are  very  strict 
limits  to  human  power.  It  can  only  act  by 
wielding  some  one  or  more  of  the  forces  of 
nature.  Forces,  therefore,  that  can  be  applied 
to  the  desired  use  must  exist;  and  will  only  act 
according  to  their  own  laws.  We  cannot  make 
the  river  run  backwards;  but  we  do  not  there¬ 
fore  say  that  watermills  “are  not  made,  but 
grow.”  In  politics,  as  in  mechanics,  the  power 
which  is  to  keep  the  engine  going  must  be 


sought  for  outside  the  machinery;  and  if  it  is 
not  forthcoming,  or  is  insufficient  to  surmount 
the  obstacles  which  may  reasonably  be  ex¬ 
pected,  the  contrivance  will  fail.  This  is  no 
peculiarity  of  the  political  art;  and  amounts 
only  to  saying  that  it  is  subject  to  the  same 
limitations  and  conditions  as  all  other  arts. 

At  this  point  we  are  met  by  another  objec¬ 
tion,  or  the  same  objection  in  a  different  form. 
The  forces,  it  is  contended,  on  which  the  great¬ 
er  political  phenomena  depend,  are  not  amen¬ 
able  to  the  direction  of  politicians  or  philoso¬ 
phers.  The  government  of  a  country,  it  is  af¬ 
firmed,  is,  in  all  substantial  respects,  fixed  and 
determined  beforehand  by  the  state  of  the 
country  in  regard  to  the  distribution  of  the 
elements  of  social  power.  Whatever  is  the 
strongest  power  in  society  will  obtain  the  gov¬ 
erning  authority;  and  a  change  in  the  political 
constitution  cannot  be  durable  unless  pre¬ 
ceded  or  accompanied  by  an  altered  distribu¬ 
tion  of  power  in  society  itself.  A  nation,  there¬ 
fore,  cannot  choose  its  form  of  government. 
The  mere  details,  and  practical  organisation,  it 
may  choose;  but  the  ess.ence  of  the  whole,  the 
seat  of  the  supreme  power,  is  determined  for 
it  by  social  circumstances. 

That  there  is  a  portion  of  truth  in  this  doc¬ 
trine  I  at  once  admit;  but  to  make  it  of  any 
use,  it  must  be  reduced  to  a  distinct  expres¬ 
sion  and  proper  limits.  When  it  is  said  that 
the  strongest  power  in  society  will  make  itself 
strongest  in  the  government,  what  is  meant 
by  power?  Not  thews  and  sinews;  otherwise 
pure  democracy  would  be  the  only  form  of 
polity  that  could  exist.  To  mere  muscular 
strength,  add  two  other  elements,  property 
and  intelligence,  and  we  are  nearer  the  truth, 
but  far  from  having  yet  reached  it.  Not  only 
is  a  greater  number  often  kept  down  by  a  less, 
but  the  greater  number  may  have  a  prepon¬ 
derance  in  property,  and  individually  in  intel¬ 
ligence,  and  may  yet  be  held  in  subjection, 
forcibly  or  otherwise,  by  a  minority  in  both 
respects  inferior  to  it.  To  make  these  various 
elements  of  power  politically  influential  they 
must  be  organised;  and  the  advantage  in  or¬ 
ganisation  is  necessarily  with  those  who  are  in 
possession  of  the  government.  A  much  weaker 
party  in  all  other  elements  of  power  may  great¬ 
ly  preponderate  when  the  powers  of  govern¬ 
ment  are  thrown  into  the  scale;  and  may  long 
retain  its  predominance  through  this  alone; 
though,  no  doubt,  a  government  so  situated  is 
in  the  condition  called  in  mechanics  unstable 
equilibrium,  like  a  thing  balanced  on  its  small- 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


er  end,  which,  if  once  disturbed,  tends  more 
and  more  to  depart  from,  instead  of  reverting 
to,  its  previous  state. 

But  there  are  still  stronger  objections  to  this 
theory  of  government  in  the  terms  in  which  it 
is  usually  stated.  The  power  in  society  which 
has  any  tendency  to  convert  itself  into  politi¬ 
cal  power  is  not  power  quiescent,  power  mere¬ 
ly  passive,  but  active  power:  in  other  words, 
power  actually  exerted:  that  is  to  say,  a  very 
small  portion  of  all  the  power  in  existence. 
Politically  speaking,  a  great  part  of  all  power 
consists  in  will.  How  is  it  possible,  then,  to 
compute  the  elements  of  political  power,  while 
we  omit  from  the  computation  anything  which 
acts  on  the  will?  To  think  that  because  those 
who  wield  the  power  in  society  wield  in  the 
end  that  of  government,  therefore  it  is  of  no 
use  to  attempt  to  influence  the  constitution  of 
the  government  by  acting  on  opinion,  is  to 
forget  that  opinion  is  itself  one  of  the  great¬ 
est  active  social  forces.  One  person  with  a  be¬ 
lief  is  a  social  power  equal  to  ninety-nine  who 
have  only  interests.  They  who  can  succeed  in 
creating  a  general  persuasion  that  a  certain 
form  of  government,  or  social  fact  of  any  kind, 
deserves  to  be  preferred,  have  made  nearly  the 
most  important  step  which  can  possibly  be 
taken  towards  ranging  the  powers  of  society 
on  its  side.  On  the  day  when  the  proto-martyr 
was  stoned  to  death  at  Jerusalem,  while  he  who 
was  to  be  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  stood  by 
“consenting  unto  his  death,”  would  any  one 
have  supposed  that  the  party  of  that  stoned 
man  were  then  and  there  the  strongest  power 
in  society?  And  has  not  the  event  proved  that 
they  were  so?  Because  theirs  was  the  most 
powerful  of  then  existing  beliefs.  The  same 
element  made  a  monk  of  Wittenberg,  at  the 
meeting  of  the  Diet  of  Worms,  a  more  power¬ 
ful  social  force  than  the  Emperor  Charles  the 
Fifth,  and  all  the  primes  there  assembled.  But 
these,  it  may  be  said,  arc  cases  in  which  reli¬ 
gion  was  concerned,  and  religious  convictions 
arc  something  peculiar  in  their  strength.  Then 
let  us  take  a  case  purely  political,  where  reli¬ 
gion.  so  far  as  concerned  at  all,  was  chiefly  on 
the  losing  side.  II  any  one  requires  to  be  con- 
viiued  that  spec  illative  thought  is  one  of  the 
i  hie!  elements  of  social  power,  let  him  bethink 
himself  of  the  age  in  which  there  was  scarce!) 
a  throne  in  Europe  which  was  not  filled  by  a 
librfal  and  relomiing  king,  a  liberal  and  re¬ 
forming  emperor,  or,  strangest  ol  all,  a  liberal 
and  reforming  pope;  the  age  of  Frederic  the 
Circa t,  of  Catherine  the  Second,  of  Joseph  the 


Second,  of  Peter  Leopold,  of  Benedict  XIV., 
of  Ganganelli,  of  Pombal,  of  Aranda:  when  the 
very  Bourbons  of  Naples  were  liberals  and  re¬ 
formers,  and  all  the  active  minds  among  the 
noblesse  of  France  were  filled  with  the  ideas 
which  were  soon  after  to  cost  them  so  dear. 
Surely  a  conclusive  example  how  far  mere  phys¬ 
ical  and  economic  power  is  from  being  the 
whole  of  social  power. 

It  w’as  not  by  any  change  in  the  distribution 
of  material  interests,  but  by  the  spread  of  mor¬ 
al  convictions,  that  negro  slavery  has  been  put 
an  end  to  in  the  British  Empire  and  elsewhere. 
The  serfs  in  Russia  ow’e  their  emancipation,  if 
not  to  a  sentiment  of  duty,  at  least  to  the 
grow  th  of  a  more  enlightened  opinion  respect¬ 
ing  the  true  interest  of  the  State.  It  is  what  men 
think  that  determines  howr  they  act:  and 
though  the  persuasions  and  convictions  of  av¬ 
erage  men  are  in  a  much  greater  degree  de¬ 
termined  by  their  personal  position  than  by 
reason,  no  little  power  is  exercised  over  them 
by  the  persuasions  and  convictions  of  those 
whose  personal  position  is  different,  and  by 
the  united  authority  of  the  instructed.  When, 
therefore,  the  instructed  in  general  can  be 
brought  10  recognise  one  social  arrangement, 
or  political  or  other  institution,  as  good,  and 
another  as  bad,  one  as  desirable,  another  as 
condemnable,  very  much  has  been  done  to¬ 
wards  giving  to  the  one.  or  withdrawing  from 
the  other,  that  preponderance  of  social  force 
w'hich  enables  it  to  subsist.  And  the  maxim,  that 
the  government  of  a  country  is  what  the  social 
forces  in  existence  compel  it  to  he.  is  true  only 
in  the  sense  in  which  it  favours,  instead  of  dis¬ 
couraging,  the  attempt  to  exercise,  among  all 
forms  of  government  practicable  in  the  exist¬ 
ing  condition  of  society,  a  rational  choice. 

Chapter  2 

The  Criterion  of  a  Good  Form  of 
Government 

Tut:  form  of  government  for  any  given  coun¬ 
try  being  (within  certain  definite  conditions) 
amenable  to  choice,  it  is  now  10  be  considered 
by  what  test  the  choice  should  lie  directed: 
what  are  the  distinctive  characteristics  of  the* 
form  of  government  best  fitted  to  promote  the 
interests  of  any  given  society. 

Before  entering  into  this  inquiry,  it  may 
seem  necessary  to  decide  what  are  the  proper 
functions  of  government:  for,  government  al¬ 
together  being  only  a  menus,  the  eligibility  of 
the  means  must  depend  on  their  adaptation 


THE  CRITERION 

to  the  end.  But  this  mode  of  stating  the  prob¬ 
lem  gives  less  aid  to  its  investigation  than 
might  be  supposed,  and  does  not  even  bring 
the  whole  of  the  question  into  view.  For,  in 
the  first  place,  the  proper  functions  of  a  gov¬ 
ernment  are  not  a  fixed  thing,  but  different  in 
different  states  of  society;  much  more  exten¬ 
sive  in  a  backward  than  in  an  advanced  state. 
And,  secondly,  the  character  of  a  government 
or  set  of  political  institutions  cannot  be  suf¬ 
ficiently  estimated  while  we  confine  our  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  legitimate  sphere  of  governmental 
functions.  For  though  the  goodness  of  a  gov¬ 
ernment  is  necessarily  circumscribed  within 
that  sphere,  its  badness  unhappily  is  not.  Every 
kind  and  degree  of  evil  of  which  mankind  are 
susceptible  may  be  inflicted  on  them  by  their 
government;  and  none  of  the  good  which  so¬ 
cial  existence  is  capable  of  can  be  any  further 
realised  than  as  the  constitution  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  is  compatible  with,  and  allows  scope  for, 
its  attainment.  Not  to  speak  of  indirect  effects, 
the  direct  meddling  of  the  public  authorities 
has  no  necessary  limits  but  those  of  human  ex¬ 
istence;  and  theinfiuenceof  government  on  the 
well-being  of  society  can  be  considered  or  esti¬ 
mated  in  reference  to  nothing  less  than  the 
whole  of  the  interests  of  humanity. 

Being  thus  obliged  to  place  before  ourselves, 
as  the  test  of  good  and  bad  government,  so 
complex  an  object  as  the  aggregate  interests 
of  society,  we  would  willingly  attempt  some 
kind  of  classification  of  those  interests,  which, 
bringing  them  before  the  mind  in  definite 
groups,  might  give  indication  of  the  qualities 
by  which  a  form  of  government  is  fitted  to 
promote  those  various  interests  respectively. 
It  would  be  a  great  facility  if  we  could  say  the 
good  of  society  consists  of  such  and  such  ele¬ 
ments;  one  of  these  elements  requires  such 
conditions,  another  such  others;  the  govern¬ 
ment,  then,  which  unites  in  the  greatest  degree 
all  these  conditions,  must  be  the  best.  The 
theory  of  government  would  thus  he  built  up 
from  the  separate  theorems  of  the  elements 
which  compose  a  good  state  of  society. 

Unfortunately,  to  enumerate  and  classify 
the  constituents  of  social  well-being,  so  as  to 
admit  of  the  formation  of  such  theorems,  is  no 
easv  task.  Most  of  those  who,  in  the  last  or 
present  generation,  have  applied  themselves  to 
the  philosophy  of  politics  in  any  comprehen¬ 
sive  spirit,  have  felt  the  importance  of  such  a 
classification;  but  the  attempts  which  have 
been  made  towards  it  are  as  yet  limited,  so  far 
as  1  am  aware,  to  a  single  step.  The  classifica- 


OF  A  GOOD  FORM  333 

tion  begins  and  ends  with  a  partition  of  the 
exigencies  of  society  between  the  two  heads 
of  Order  and  Progress  (in  the  phraseology  of 
French  thinkers);  Permanence  and  Progres¬ 
sion  in  the  words  of  Coleridge.  This  division  is 
plausible  and  seductive,  from  the  apparently 
clean-cut  opposition  between  its  two  members, 
and  the  remarkable  difference  between  the 
sentiments  to  which  they  appeal.  But  I  appre¬ 
hend  that  (however  admissible  for  purposes 
of  popular  discourse)  the  distinction  between 
Order,  or  Permanence,  and  Progress,  employed 
to  define  the  qualities  necessary  in  a  govern¬ 
ment,  is  unscientific  and  incorrect. 

For,  first,  what  are  Order  and  Progress? 
Concerning  Progress  there  is  no  difficulty,  or 
none  which  is  apparent  at  first  sight.  When 
Progress  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  the  wants  of 
human  society,  it  may  be  supposed  to  mean 
Improvement.  That  is  a  tolerably  distinct  idea. 
But  what  is  Order?  Sometimes  it  means  more, 
sometimes  less,  but  hardly  ever  the  whole  of 
what  human  society  needs  except  improve¬ 
ment. 

In  its  narrowest  acceptation  Order  means 
Obedience.  A  government  is  said  to  preserve 
order  if  it  succeeds  in  getting  itself  obeyed.  But 
there  are  different  degrees  of  obedience,  and 
it  is  not  every  degree  that  is  commendable. 
Only  an  unmitigated  despotism  demands  that 
the  individual  citizen  shall  obey  uncondition¬ 
ally  every  mandate  of  persons  in  authority.  We 
must  at  least  limit  the  definition  to  such  man¬ 
dates  as  are  general  and  issued  in  the  deliberate 
form  of  laws.  Order,  thus  understood,  ex  presses, 
doubtless,  an  indispensable  attribute  of  gov¬ 
ernment.  Those  who  are  unable  to  make  their 
ordinances  obeyed,  cannot  be  said  to  govern. 
But  though  a  necessary  condition,  this  is  not  the 
object  of  government.  That  it  should  make  it¬ 
self  obeyed  is  requisite,  in  order  that  it  may 
accomplish  some  other  purpose.  We  are  still 
to  seek  what  is  this  other  purpose,  which  gov¬ 
ernment  ought  to  fulfil,  abstractedly  from  the 
idea  of  improvement,  and  which  has  to  be  ful¬ 
filled  in  every  society,  whether  stationary  or 
progressive. 

In  a  sense  somewhat  more  enlarged,  Order 
means  the  preservation  of  peace  by  the  cessa¬ 
tion  of  private  violence.  Order  is  said  to  exist 
where  the  people  of  the  country  have,  as  a  gen¬ 
eral  rule,  ceased  to  prosecute  their  quarrels  by 
private  force,  and  acquit ed  the  habit  of  refer¬ 
ring  the  decision  of  their  disputes  and  the  re¬ 
dress  of  their  injuries  to  the  public  authorities. 
But  in  this  larger  use  of  the  term,  as  well  as  in 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


334 

the  former  narrow  one.  Order  expresses  rather 
one  of  the  conditions  of  government,  than 
either  its  purpose  or  the  criterion  of  its  ex¬ 
cellence.  For  the  habit  may  be  well  established 
of  submitting  to  the  government,  and  referring 
all  disputed  matters  to  its  authority,  and  yet 
the  manner  in  which  the  government  deals 
with  thosedisputed  matters,  and  with  the  other 
things  about  which  it  concerns  itself,  may  dif¬ 
fer  bv  the  whole  interval  which  divides  the 
best  from  the  worst  possible. 

If  we  intend  to  comprise  in  the  idea  of  Order 
all  that  society  requires  from  its  government 
which  is  not  included  in  the  idea  of  Progress, 
we  must  define  Order  as  the  preservation  of 
all  kinds  and  amounts  of  good  which  already 
exist,  and  Progress  as  consisting  in  the  increase 
of  them.  This  distinction  does  comprehend  in 
one  or  the  other  section  everything  which  a 
government  can  be  required  to  promote.  But, 
thus  understood,  it  affords  no  basis  for  a  phi¬ 
losophy  of  government.  We  cannot  say  that, 
in  constituting  a  polity,  certain  provisions 
ought  to  be  made  for  Order  and  certain  others 
for  Progress:  since  the  conditions  of  Order,  in 
the  sense  now  indicated,  and  those  of  Progress, 
are  not  opposite,  but  the  same.  The  agencies 
which  tend  to  preserve  the  social  good  which 
already  exists  are  the  very  same  which  promote 
the  increase  of  it,  and  vice  versa:  the  sole  dif¬ 
ference  being,  that  a  greater  degree  of  those 
agencies  is  required  for  the  latter  purpose  than 
for  the  former. 

What,  for  example,  are  the  qualities  in  the 
citizens  individually  which  conduce  most  to 
keep  up  the  amount  of  good  conduct,  of  good 
management,  of  success  and  prosperity,  which 
a  1  read)  exist  in  society?  Everybody  will  agree 
that  those  qualities  are  industry,  integrity,  jus¬ 
tice.  and  prudence.  But  are  not  these,  of  all 
qualities,  the  most  conducive  to  improvement? 
and  is  not  any  growth  of  these  virtues  in  the 
community  in  itself  the  greatest  of  improve¬ 
ments?  If  so,  whatever  qualities  in  the  govern¬ 
ment  are  promotive  of  industry,  integrity,  jus¬ 
tice.  and  prudence,  conduce  alike  to  perma¬ 
nence  and  to  progression;  only  there  is  needed 
more  of  those  qualities  to  make  the  society  de¬ 
cidedly  progressive  than  merely  to  keep  it  per¬ 
manent. 

What,  again,  are  the  particular  attributes  in 
human  beings  whic h  seem  to  have  a  more  cspe- 
<  ial  referent  e  to  Progress,  and  do  not  so  direct¬ 
ly  suggest  die  ideas  of  Order  and  Preservation? 
They  are  chiefly  the  qualities  of  mental  activ¬ 
ity,  enterprise,  and  courage.  But  are  not  all 


these  qualities  fully  as  much  required  for  pre¬ 
serving  the  good  we  have,  as  for  adding  to  it? 
If  there  is  anything  certain  in  human  affairs, 
it  is  that  valuable  acquisitions  are  only  to  be 
retained  by  the  continuation  of  the  same  en¬ 
ergies  which  gained  them.  Things  left  to  take 
care  of  themselves  inevitably  decay.  Those 
whom  success  induces  to  relax  their  habits  of 
care  and  thoughtfulness,  and  their  willingness 
to  encounter  disagreeables,  seldom  long  re¬ 
tain  their  good  fortune  at  its  height.  The  men¬ 
tal  attribute  which  seems  exclusively  dedicated 
to  Progress,  and  is  the  culmination  of  the  tend¬ 
encies  to  it.  is  Originality,  or  Invention.  Yet 
this  is  no  less  necessary  for  Permanence:  since, 
in  the  inevitable  changes  of  human  affairs, 
new  inconveniences  and  dangers  continually 
grow  up,  which  must  be  encountered  by  new 
resources  and  contrivances,  in  order  to  keep 
things  going  on  even  only  as  well  as  they  did 
before.  Whatever  qualities,  therefore,  in  a  gov¬ 
ernment.  tend  to  encourage  activity,  energy, 
courage,  originality,  are  requisites  of  Perma¬ 
nence  as  well  as  of  Progress;  only  a  somewhat 
less  degree  of  them  will  on  the  average  suffice 
for  the  former  purpose  than  for  the  latter. 

To  pass  now  from  the  mental  to  the  out¬ 
ward  and  objective  requisites  of  society:  it  is 
impossible  to  point  out  any  contrivance  in 
politics,  or  arrangement  of  social  affairs,  which 
conduces  to  Order  only,  or  to  Progress  only; 
whatever  tends  to  either  promotes  both.  Take, 
for  instance,  the  common  institution  of  a 
police.  Order  is  the  object  which  seems  most 
immediately  interested  in  the  efficiency  of  this 
part  of  the  social  organisation.  Yet  if  it  is  effec¬ 
tual  to  promote  Order,  that  is,  if  it  represses 
crime,  and  enables  every  one  to  feel  his  person 
and  property  secure,  can  any  state  of  things 
be  more  conducive  to  Progress?  The  greater 
security  of  property  is  one  of  the  main  condi¬ 
tions  and  causes  of  greater  production,  which 
is  Progress  in  its  most  familiar  and  vulgarest 
aspect.  The  better  repression  of  crime  represses 
the  dispositions  which  tend  to  crime,  and  this 
is  Progress  in  a  somewhat  higher  sense.  The 
release  of  the  individual  from  the  cares  and 
anxieties  of  a  state  of  imperfect  protection, 
sets  his  faculties  free  to  be  employed  in  am 
new  effort  for  improving  his  own  state  and  that 
of  others:  while  the  same  cause,  by  attaching 
him  to  social  existence,  and  making  him  no 
longer  see  present  or  prospective  enemies  in 
his  fellow  creatures,  fosters  all  those  feelings 
of  kindness  and  fellowship  towards  others,  and 
interest  in  the  general  well-being  of  the  com- 


THE  CRITERION 

munity,  which  are  such  important  parts  of  so¬ 
cial  improvement. 

Take,  again,  such  a  familiar  case  as  that  of 
a  good  system  of  taxation  and  finance.  This 
would  generally  be  classed  as  belonging  to  the 
province  of  Order.  Yet  what  can  be  more  con¬ 
ducive  to  Progress?  A  financial  system  which 
promotes  the  one,  conduces,  by  the  very  same 
excellences,  to  the  other.  Economy,  for  ex¬ 
ample.  equally  preserves  the  existing  stock  of 
national  wealth,  and  favours  the  creation  of 
more.  A  just  distribution  of  burthens,  by  hold¬ 
ing  up  to  every  citizen  an  example  of  morality 
and  good  conscience  applied  to  difficult  adjust¬ 
ments,  and  an  evidence  of  the  value  which 
the  highest  authorities  attach  to  them,  tends  in 
an  eminent  degree  to  educate  the  moral  senti¬ 
ments  of  the  community,  both  in  respect  of 
strength  and  of  discrimination.  Such  a  mode 
of  levying  the  taxes  as  does  not  impede  the 
industry,  or  unnecessarily  interfere  with  the 
liberty,  of  the  citizen,  promotes,  not  the  preser¬ 
vation  only,  but  the  increase  of  the  national 
wealth,  and  encourages  a  more  active  use  of 
the  individual  faculties.  And  vice  versa,  all 
errors  in  finance  and  taxation  which  obstruct 
the  improvement  of  the  people  in  wealth 
and  morals  tend  also,  if  of  sufficiently  serious 
amount,  positively  to  impoverish  and  demor¬ 
alise  them.  It  holds,  in  short,  universally,  that 
when  Order  and  Permanence  are  taken  in 
their  widest  sense,  for  the  stability  of  existing 
advantages,  the  requisites  of  Progress  are  but 
the  requisites  of  Order  in  a  greater  degree; 
those  of  Permanence  merely  those  of  Progress 
in  a  somewhat  smaller  measure. 

In  support  of  the  position  that  Order  is  in¬ 
trinsically  different  from  Progress,  and  that 
preservation  of  existing  and  acquisition  of 
additional  good  are  sufficiently  distinct  to  af¬ 
ford  the  basis  of  a  fundamental  classification, 
we  shall  perhaps  be  reminded  that  Progress  may 
be  at  the  expense  of  Order;  that  while  we  are 
acquiring,  or  striving  to  acquire,  good  of  one 
kind,  we  may  be  losing  ground  in  respect  to 
others;  thus  there  may  be  progress  in  wealth, 
while  there  is  deterioration  in  virtue.  Granting 
this,  what  it  proves  is  not  that  Progress  is  ge- 
nerically  a  different  thing  from  Permanence, 
but  that  wealth  is  a  different  thing  from  virtue. 
Progress  is  permanence  and  something  more; 
and  it  is  no  answer  to  this  to  say  that  Progress 
in  one  thing  does  not  imply  Permanence  in 
everything.  No  more  does  Progress  in  one 
thing  imply  Progress  in  everything.  Progress 
of  any  kind  includes  Permanence  in  that  same 


OF  A  GOOD  FORM  335 

kind;  whenever  Permanence  is  sacrificed  to 
some  particular  kind  of  Progress,  other  Prog¬ 
ress  is  still  more  sacrificed  to  it;  and  if  it  be  not 
worth  the  sacrifice,  not  the  interest  of  Perma¬ 
nence  alone  has  been  disregarded,  but  the  gen¬ 
eral  interest  of  Progress  has  been  mistaken. 

If  these  improperly  contrasted  ideas  are  to 
be  used  at  all  in  the  attempt  to  give  a  first 
commencement  of  scientific  precision  to  the 
notion  of  good  government,  it  would  be  more 
philosophically  correct  to  leave  out  of  the  defi¬ 
nition  the  word  Order,  and  to  say  that  the  best 
government  is  that  which  is  most  conducive 
to  Progress.  For  Progress  includes  Order,  but 
Order  does  not  include  Progress.  Progress  is  a 
greater  degree  of  that  of  which  Order  is  a  less. 
Order,  in  any  other  sense,  stands  only  for  a 
part  of  the  pre-requisites  of  good  government, 
not  for  its  idea  and  essence.  Order  would  find 
a  more  suitable  place  among  the  conditions  of 
Progress;  since,  if  we  would  increase  our  sum 
of  good,  nothing  is  more  indispensable  than 
to  take  due  care  of  what  we  already  have.  If 
we  are  endeavouring  after  more  riches,  our 
very  first  rule  should  be  not  to  squander  use¬ 
lessly  our  existing  means.  Order,  thus  con¬ 
sidered,  is  not  an  additional  end  to  be  recon¬ 
ciled  with  Progress,  but  a  part  and  means  of 
Progress  itself.  If  a  gain  in  one  respect  is  pur¬ 
chased  by  a  more  than  equivalent  loss  in  the 
same  or  in  any  other,  there  is  not  Progress. 
Conduciveness  to  Progress,  thus  understood, 
includes  the  whole  excellence  of  a  government. 

But,  though  metaphysically  defensible,  this 
definition  of  the  criterion  of  good  government 
is  not  appropriate,  because,  though  it  contains 
the  whole  of  the  truth,  it  recalls  only  a  part. 
What  is  suggested  by  the  term  Progress  is  the 
idea  of  moving  onward,  whereas  the  meaning 
of  it  here  is  quite  as  much  the  prevention  of 
falling  back.  The  very  same  social  causes— the 
same  beliefs,  feelings,  institutions,  and  prac¬ 
tices— are  as  much  required  to  prevent  society 
from  retrograding,  as  to  produce  a  further 
advance.  Were  there  no  improvement  to  be 
hoped  for,  life  would  not  be  the  less  an  un¬ 
ceasing  struggle  against  causes  of  deteriora¬ 
tion;  as  it  even  now  is.  Politics,  as  conceived 
by  the  ancients,  consisted  wholly  in  this.  The 
natural  tendency  of  men  and  their  works  was 
to  degenerate,  which  tendency,  however,  by 
good  institutions  virtuously  administered,  it 
might  be  possible  for  an  indefinite  length  of 
time  to  counteract.  Though  we  no  longer  hold 
this  opinion;  though  most  men  in  the  present 
age  profess  the  contrary  creed,  believing  that 


996  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


the  tendency  of  things,  on  the  whole,  is  to¬ 
wards  improvement;  we  ought  not  to  forget 
that  there  is  an  incessant  and  ever-flowing 
current  of  human  affairs  towards  the  worse, 
consisting  of  all  the  follies,  all  the  vices,  all 
the  negligences,  indolences,  and  supinenesses 
of  mankind;  which  is  only  controlled,  and  kept 
from  sweeping  all  before  it,  by  the  exertions 
which  some  persons  constantly,  and  others  by 
fits,  put  forth  in  the  direction  of  good  and 
worthy  objects.  It  gives  a  very  insufficient  idea 
of  the  importance  of  the  strivings  which  take 
place  to  improve  and  elevate  human  nature 
and  life,  to  suppose  that  their  chief  value  con¬ 
sists  in  the  amount  of  actual  improvement 
realised  by  their  means,  and  that  ihe  conse¬ 
quence  of  their  cessation  would  merely  be  that 
we  should  remain  as  we  are.  A  very  small  dimi¬ 
nution  of  those  exertions  would  not  only  put 
a  stop  to  improvement,  but  would  turn  the 
general  tendency  of  things  towards  deteriora¬ 
tion;  which,  once  begun,  would  proceed  with 
increasingly  rapidity,  and  become  more  and 
more  difficult  to  check,  until  it  reached  a  state 
often  seen  in  history,  and  in  which  many  large 
portions  of  mankind  even  now  grovel;  when 
hardlv  anything  short  of  superhuman  power 
seems  sufficient  to  turn  the  tide,  and  give  a 
fresh  commencement  to  the  upward  movement. 

These  reasons  make  the  word  Progress  as 
unapt  as  the  terms  Ol  der  and  Permanence  to 
become  the  basis  for  a  classification  of  the  req¬ 
uisites  of  a  form  of  government.  The  funda¬ 
mental  antithesis  which  these  words  express 
does  not  lie  in  the  things  themselves,  so  much 
as  in  the  types  of  human  character  which 
answer  to  them.  There  are,  we  know,  some 
minds  in  which  caution,  and  others  in  which 
boldness,  predominates:  in  some,  the  desire  to 
avoid  imperilling  what  is  already  possessed  is 
a  stronger  sentiment  than  that  which  prompts 
to  improve  the  old  and  acquire  new  advan¬ 
tages;  while  there  are  others  who  lean  the  con¬ 
trary  way,  and  are  more  eager  for  future  than 
careful  of  present  good.  The  road  to  the  ends 
of  both  is  the  same;  but  they  are  liable  to 
wander  from  it  in  opposite  directions.  This 
consideration  is  of  importance  in  composing 
the  personnel  of  any  political  body:  persons  of 
both  types  ought  to  be  int  hided  in  it,  that  the 
tendencies  of  each  may  be  tempered,  in  so  far 
as  they  are  excessive,  by  a  due  proportion  ol 
the  other.  There  needs  no  express  provision  to 
ensure  this  object,  provided  care  is  taken  to 
admit  nothing  inconsistent  with  it.  1  he  natu¬ 
ral  and  spontaneous  admixture  of  the  old  and 


the  young,  of  those  whose  position  and  repu¬ 
tation  are  made  and  those  who  have  them  still 
to  make,  will  in  general  sufficiently  answer  the 
purpose,  if  only  this  natural  balance  is  not 
disturbed  by  artificial  regulation. 

Since  the  distinction  most  commonly  adopt¬ 
ed  for  the  classification  of  social  exigencies  does 
not  possess  the  properties  needful  for  that  use, 
we  have  to  seek  for  some  other  leading  dis¬ 
tinction  better  adapted  to  the  purpose.  Such  a 
distinction  would  seem  to  be  indicated  by  the 
considerations  to  which  I  now  proceed. 

If  we  ask  ourselves  on  what  causes  and  con¬ 
ditions  good  government  in  all  its  senses,  from 
the  humblest  to  the  most  exalted,  depends,  we 
find  that  the  principal  of  them,  the  one  which 
transcends  all  others,  is  the  qualities  of  the  hu¬ 
man  beings  composing  the  society  over  which 
the  government  is  exercised. 

We  may  take,  as  a  first  instance,  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  justice;  with  the  more  propriety, 
since  there  is  no  part  of  public  business  in 
which  the  mere  machinery,  the  rules  and  con¬ 
trivances  for  conducting  the  details  of  the 
operation,  are  of  such  vital  consequence.  Yet 
even  these  yield  in  importance  to  the  qualities 
of  the  human  agents  employed.  Of  what  effi¬ 
cacy  are  rules  of  procedure  in  securing  the 
ends  of  justice,  if  the  moral  condition  ol  the 
people  is  such  that  the  witnesses  generally  he, 
and  the  judges  and  their  subordinates  take 
bribes?  Again,  how  can  institutions  provide  a 
good  municipal  administration  if  there  exists 
such  indifference  to  the  subject  that  those  who 
would  administer  honestly  and  capably  cannot 
be  induced  to  serve,  and  the  duties  are  left  to 
those  who  undertake  them  because  they  have 
some  private  interest  to  be  promoted?  Of  what 
avail  is  the  most  broadly  popular  representa¬ 
tive  system  if  the  electors  do  not  care  to  choose 
the  best  member  of  parliament,  but  choose 
him  who  will  spend  most  money  to  be  elected? 
How  can  a  representative  assembly  work  lor 
good  if  its  members  can  be  bought,  or  if  their 
excitability  of  temperament,  uncorrected  by 
public  discipline  or  private  self-control,  makes 
them  incapable  of  calm  deliberation,  and  they 
resort  to  manual  violence  on  the  ffoor  of  die 
Mouse,  or  shoot  at  one  another  with  rifles? 
I  low,  again,  can  gos  eminent,  or  any  joint  con¬ 
cern,  be  carried  on  in  a  tolerable  manner  by 
people  so  envious  that,  if  one  among  them 
seems  likely  to  succeed  in  any  thing,  those  who 
ought  to  cooperate  with  him  form  a  tacit  com¬ 
bination  to  make  him  fail?  Whenever  the  gen- 


THE  CRITERION  OF  A  GOOD  FORM  337 


eral  disposition  of  the  people  is  such  that  each 
individual  regards  those  only  of  his  interests 
which  are  selfish,  and  does  not  dwell  on,  or 
concern  himself  for,  his  share  of  the  general 
interest,  in  such  a  state  of  things  good  govern¬ 
ment  is  impossible.  The  influence  of  defects 
of  intelligence  in  obstructing  all  the  elements 
of  good  government  requires  no  illustration. 
Government  consists  of  acts  done  by  human 
beings;  and  if  the  agents,  or  those  who  choose 
the  agents,  or  those  to  whom  the  agents  are 
responsible,  or  the  lookers-on  whose  opinion 
ought  to  influence  and  check  all  these,  are 
mere  masses  of  ignorance,  stupidity,  and  bale¬ 
ful  prejudice,  every  operation  of  government 
will  go  wrong;  while,  in  proportion  as  the  men 
rise  above  this  standard,  so  will  the  govern¬ 
ment  improve  in  quality;  up  to  the  point  of 
excellence,  attainable  but  nowhere  attained, 
where  the  officers  of  government,  themselves 
persons  of  superior  virtue  and  intellect,  are 
surrounded  by  the  atmosphere  of  a  virtuous 
and  enlightened  public  opinion. 

The  first  element  of  good  government,  there¬ 
fore,  being  the  virtue  and  intelligence  of  the 
human  beings  composing  the  community,  the 
most  important  point  of  excellence  which  any 
form  of  government  can  possess  is  to  promote 
the  virtue  and  intelligence  of  the  people  them¬ 
selves.  The  first  question  in  respect  to  any  polit¬ 
ical  institutions  is,  how  far  they  tend  to  foster 
in  the  members  of  the  community  the  various 
desirable  qualities,  moral  and  intellectual;  or 
rather  (following  Bentham’s  more  complete 
classification)  moral,  intellectual,  and  active. 
The  government  which  does  this  the  best  has 
every  likehood  of  being  the  best  in  all  other 
respects,  since  it  is  on  these  qualities,  so  far  as 
they  exist  in  the  people,  that  all  possibility  of 
goodness  in  the  practical  operations  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment  depends. 

We  may  consider,  then,  as  one  criterion  of 
the  goodness  of  a  government,  the  degree  in 
which  it  tends  to  increase  the  sum  of  good 
qualities  in  the  governed,  collectively  and  in¬ 
dividually;  since,  besides  that  their  well-being 
is  the  sole  object  of  government,  their  good 
qualities  supply  the  moving  force  which  works 
the  machinery.  This  leaves,  as  the  other  con¬ 
stituent  element  of  the  merit  of  a  government, 
the  quality  of  the  machinery  itself;  that  is,  the 
degree  in  which  it  is  adapted  to  take  advan¬ 
tage  of  the  amount  of  good  qualities  which 
may  at  any  time  exist,  and  make  them  in¬ 
strumental  to  the  right  purposes.  Let  us  again 
take  the  subject  of  judicature  as  an  example 


and  illustration.  The  judicial  system  being 
given,  the  goodness  of  the  administration  of 
justice  is  in  the  compound  ratio  of  the  worth 
of  the  men  composing  the  tribunals,  and  the 
worth  of  the  public  opinion  which  influences 
or  controls  them.  But  all  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  a  good  and  a  bad  system  of  judicature 
lies  in  the  contrivances  adopted  for  bringing 
whatever  moral  and  intellectual  worth  exists 
in  the  community  to  bear  upon  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  justice,  and  making  it  duly  operative 
on  the  result.  The  arrangements  for  render¬ 
ing  the  choice  of  the  judges  such  as  to  obtain 
the  highest  average  of  virtue  and  intelli¬ 
gence;  the  salutary  forms  of  procedure;  the 
publicity  which  allows  observation  and  criti¬ 
cism  of  whatever  is  amiss;  the  liberty  of  dis¬ 
cussion  and  censure  through  the  press;  the 
mode  of  taking  evidence,  according  as  it  is 
well  or  ill  adapted  to  elicit  truth;  the  facili¬ 
ties,  whatever  be  their  amount,  for  obtaining 
access  to  the  tribunals;  the  arrangements  for 
detecting  crimes  and  apprehending  offenders; 
—all  these  things  are  not  the  power,  but  the 
machinery  for  bringing  the  power  into  con¬ 
tact  with  the  obstacle:  and  the  machinery  has 
no  action  of  itself,  but  without  it  the  power, 
let  it  be  ever  so  ample,  would  be  wasted  and 
of  no  effect. 

A  similar  distinction  exists  in  regard  to  the 
constitution  of  the  executive  departments  of 
administration.  Their  machinery  is  good,  when 
the  proper  tests  are  prescribed  for  the  qualifi¬ 
cations  of  officers,  the  proper  rules  for  their 
promotion;  when  the  business  is  conveniently 
distributed  among  those  who  are  to  transact  it. 
a  convenient  and  methodical  order  established 
for  its  transaction,  a  correct  and  intelligible 
record  kept  of  it  after  being  transacted;  wrhen 
each  individual  knows  for  what  he  is  respon¬ 
sible,  and  is  known  to  others  as  responsible  for 
it;  when  the  best-contrived  checks  are  provided 
against  negligence,  favouritism,  or  jobbery,  in 
any  of  the  acts  of  the  department.  But  politi¬ 
cal  checks  will  no  more  act  of  themselves  than 
a  bridle  will  direct  a  horse  without  a  rider.  If 
the  checking  functionaries  are  as  corrupt  or  as 
negligent  as  those  whom  they  ought  to  check, 
and  if  the  public,  the  mainspring  of  the  whole 
checking  machinery,  are  too  ignorant,  too  pas¬ 
sive,  or  too  careless  and  inattentive,  to  do  their 
part,  little  benefit  will  be  derived  from  the 
best  administrative  apparatus.  Yet  a  good  ap¬ 
paratus  is  always  preferable  to  a  bad.  It  en¬ 
ables  such  insufficient  moving  or  checking 
power  as  exists  to  act  at  the  greatest  advantage; 


RE  PRES  EX  T  A  T 1  V  E  GOVERN  ME  X  T 


33s 

and  without  it,  no  amount  of  moving  or  check¬ 
ing  power  would  be  sufficient.  Publicity,  for 
instance,  is  no  impediment  to  evil  nor  stimu¬ 
lus  to  good  if  the  public  will  not  look  at  what 
is  done;  but  without  publicity,  how  could  they 
either  check  or  encourage  what  they  were  not 
permitted  to  see?  The  idealb  perfect  consti¬ 
tution  of  a  public  office  is  that  in  which  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  functionary  is  entirely  coincident 
with  his  duty.  Xo  mere  system  will  make  it  so. 
but  still  less  can  it  be  made  so  without  a  system, 
aptly  devised  for  the  purpose. 

What  we  have  said  of  the  arrangements  for 
the  detailed  administration  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  is  still  more  evident!)  true  of  its  general 
constitution.  All  government  which  aims  at 
being  good  is  an  organisation  of  some  part  of 
the  good  qualities  existing  in  the  individual 
members  of  the  community  for  the  conduct  of 
its  collective  affairs.  A  representative  constitu¬ 
tion  is  a  means  of  bringing  the  general  stand¬ 
ard  of  intelligence  and  honesty  existing  in  the 
community,  and  the  individual  intellect  and 
virtue  of  its  wisest  members,  more  directly  to 
bear  upon  the  government,  and  investing  them 
with  greater  influence  in  it,  than  they  would  in 
general  have  under  any  other  mode  of  organ¬ 
isation;  though,  under  any,  such  influence  as 
they  do  have  is  the  source  of  all  good  that  there 
is  in  the  government,  and  the  hindrance  of 
every  evil  that  there  is  not.  The  greater  the 
amount  of  these  good  qualities  which  the  in¬ 
stitutions  of  a  country  succeed  in  organising, 
and  the  better  the  mode  of  organisation,  the 
better  will  be  the  government. 

We  have  now,  therefore,  obtained  a  founda¬ 
tion  for  a  twofold  division  of  the  merit  which 
any  set  of  political  institutions  can  possess.  It 
consists  partly  of  the  degree  in  which  they 
promote  the  general  mental  advancement  of 
the  community,  including  under  that  phrase 
advancement  in  intellect,  in  virtue,  and  in 
practical  activity  and  efficiency;  and  partly  of 
the  degree  of  perfection  with  which  they  or¬ 
ganise  the  moral,  intellectual,  and  active  worth 
already  existing,  so  as  to  operatewith  thegreat- 
est  clfect  on  public  affairs.  A  government  is  to 
be  judged  by  its  action  upon  men,  and  by  its 
action  upon  things;  by  what  it  makes  of  the 
(iti/ens.  and  what  it  does  with  them;  its  tend- 
cnc  y  to  improveordeteriorate  the  people  them¬ 
selves.  and  the  goodness  or  badness  of  the  work 
it  perforins  for  them,  and  by  means  o!  them, 
(fovernment  is  at  once  a  great  influence  acting 
on  the-  human  mind,  and  a  set  of  organised  ar¬ 
rangements  for  public  business:  in  the  first  ra¬ 


pacity  its  beneficial  action  is  chiefly  indirect, 
but  not  therefore  less  vital,  while  its  mischiev¬ 
ous  action  may  be  direct. 

The  difference  between  these  two  functions 
of  a  government  is  not,  like  that  between 
Order  and  Progress,  a  difference  merely  in  de¬ 
gree,  but  in  kind.  We  must  not.  however,  sup¬ 
pose  that  they  have  no  intimate  connection 
with  one  another.  The  institutions  which  en¬ 
sure  the  best  management  of  public  affairs 
practicable  in  the  existing  state  of  cultivation 
tend  by  this  alone  to  the  further  improvement 
of  that  state.  A  people  which  had  the  most 
just  laws,  the  purest  and  most  efficient  judica¬ 
ture,  the  most  enlightened  administration,  the 
most  equitable  and  least  onerous  system  of 
finance,  compatible  with  the  stage  it  had  at¬ 
tained  in  moral  and  intellectual  advancement, 
would  be  in  a  fair  way  to  pass  rapidly  into  a 
higher  stage.  Nor  is  there  any  mode  in  which 
political  institutions  can  contribute  more  ef¬ 
fectually  to  the  improvement  of  the  people 
than  by  doing  their  more  direct  work  well. 
And,  reversely,  if  their  machinery  is  so  badly 
constructed  that  they  do  their  own  particular 
business  ill.  the  effect  is  felt  in  a  thousand  ways 
in  lowering  the  morality  and  deadening  the 
intelligence  and  activity  of  the  people.  But  the 
distinction  is  nevertheless  real,  because  this  is 
only  one  of  the  means  by  which  political  insti¬ 
tutions  improve  or  deteriorate  the  human 
mind,  and  the  causes  and  modes  of  that  bene¬ 
ficial  or  injurious  influence  remain  a  distinct 
and  much  wider  subject  of  study. 

Of  the  two  modes  of  operation  by  which  a 
form  of  government  or  set  of  political  institu¬ 
tions  affects  the  welfare  of  the  community— its 
operation  as  an  agency  of  national  education, 
and  its  arrangements  for  conducting  the  col¬ 
lective  affairs  of  the  community  in  the  state  of 
education  in  which  they  already  are:  the  last 
evidently  varies  much  less,  from  difference  of 
country  and  state  of  civilisation,  than  the  first. 
It  has  also  much  less  to  do  with  the  funda¬ 
mental  constitution  of  the  government.  I  he 
mode  of  conducting  the  practical  business  of 
government,  which  is  best  under  a  free  consti¬ 
tution.  would  gcncrall)  be  best  also  in  an  ab¬ 
solute  monarchy:  only  an  absolute  monarchy 
is  not  so  likely  to  practise  it.  I  ‘he  laws  of  prop¬ 
erty,  for  example;  the  principles  of  evidence 
and  judicial  procedure:  the  system  of  taxation 
and  of  financial  administration,  need  not  nec¬ 
essarily  be  different  in  different  forms  of  gov¬ 
ernment.  Kadi  of  these  matters  has  principles 
and  rides  of  its  own.  which  are  a  subject  of 


THE  CRITERION  OF  A  GOOD  FORM  339 


separate  study.  General  jurisprudence,  civil 
and  penal  legislation,  financial  and  commer¬ 
cial  policy,  are  sciences  in  themselves,  or  rath¬ 
er.  separate  members  of  the  comprehensive 
science  or  art  of  government:  and  the  most 
enlightened  doctrines  on  all  these  subjects, 
though  not  equally  likely  to  be  understood,  or 
acted  on  under  all  forms  of  government,  yet,  if 
understood  and  acted  on,  would  in  general  be 
equally  beneficial  under  them  all.  It  is  true 
that  these  doctrines  could  not  be  applied  with¬ 
out  some  modifications  to  all  states  of  society 
and  of  the  human  mind:  nevertheless,  by  far 
the  greater  number  of  them  would  require 
modifications  solely  of  details,  to  adapt  them 
to  any  state  of  society  sufficiently  advanced  to 
possess  rulers  capable  of  understanding  them. 
A  government  to  which  they  would  be  wholly 
unsuitable  must  be  one  so  bad  in  itself,  or  so 
opposed  to  public  feeling,  as  to  be  unable  to 
maintain  itself  in  existence  by  honest  means. 

It  is  otherwise  with  that  portion  of  the  in¬ 
terests  of  the  community  which  relate  to  the 
better  or  worse  training  of  the  people  them¬ 
selves.  Considered  as  instrumental  to  this,  in¬ 
stitutions  need  to  be  radically  different,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  stage  of  advancement  already 
reached.  The  recognition  of  this  truth,  though 
for  the  most  part  empirically  rather  than  phil¬ 
osophically,  may  be  regarded  as  the  main 
point  of  superiority  in  the  political  theories 
of  the  present  above  those  of  the  last  age;  in 
which  it  was  customary  to  claim  representative 
democracy  for  England  or  France  by  argu¬ 
ments  which  would  equally  have  proved  it  the 
only  fit  form  of  government  for  Bedouins  or 
Malays.  The  state  of  different  communities,  in 
point  of  culture  and  development,  ranges 
downwards  to  a  condition  very  little  above  the 
highest  of  the  beasts.  The  upward  range,  too,  is 
considerable,  and  the  future  possible  exten¬ 
sion  vastly  greater.  A  community  can  only  be 
developed  out  of  one  of  these  states  into  a 
higher  by  a  concourse  of  influences,  among  the 
principal  of  which  is  the  government  to  which 
they  are  subject.  In  all  states  of  human  im¬ 
provement  ever  yet  attained,  the  nature  and 
degree  of  authority  exercised  over  individuals, 
the  distribution  of  power,  and  the  conditions 
of  command  and  obedience,  are  the  most  pow¬ 
erful  of  the  influences,  except  their  religious 
belief,  which  make  them  what  they  are,  and 
enable  them  to  become  what  they  can  be.  They 
may  be  stopped  short  at  any  point  in  their 
progress  by  defective  adaptation  of  their  gov¬ 
ernment  to  that  particular  stage  of  advance¬ 


ment.  And  the  one  indispensable  merit  of  a 
government,  in  favour  of  which  it  may  be  for¬ 
given  almost  any  amount  of  other  demerit 
compatible  with  progress,  is  that  its  operation 
on  the  people  is  favourable,  or  not  unfavour¬ 
able,  to  the  next  step  which  it  is  necessary  for 
them  to  take,  in  order  to  raise  themselves  to  a 
higher  level. 

Thus  (to  repeat  a  former  example),  a  peo¬ 
ple  in  a  state  of  savage  independence,  in  which 
every  one  lives  for  himself,  exempt,  unless  by 
fits,  from  any  external  control,  is  practically 
incapable  of  making  any  progress  in  civilisa¬ 
tion  until  it  has  learnt  to  obey.  The  indis¬ 
pensable  virtue,  therefore,  in  a  government 
which  establishes  itself  over  a  people  of  this 
sort  is,  that  it  make  itself  obeyed.  To  enable 
it  to  do  this,  the  constitution  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  must  be  nearly,  or  quite,  despotic.  A  con¬ 
stitution  in  any  degree  popular,  dependent  on 
the  voluntary  surrender  by  the  different  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  community  of  their  individual  free¬ 
dom  of  action,  would  fail  to  enforce  the  first 
lesson  which  the  pupils,  in  this  stage  of  their 
progress,  require.  Accordingly,  the  civilisation 
of  such  tribes,  when  not  the  result  of  juxtaposi¬ 
tion  with  others  already  civilised,  is  almost 
always  the  work  of  an  absolute  ruler,  deriving 
his  power  either  from  religion  or  military 
prowess;  very  often  from  foreign  arms. 

Again,  uncivilised  races,  and  the  bravest  and 
most  energetic  still  more  than  the  rest,  are 
averse  to  continuous  labour  of  an  unexciting 
kind.  Yet  all  real  civilisation  is  at  this  price; 
without  such  labour,  neither  can  the  mind  be 
disciplined  into  the  habits  required  by  civil¬ 
ised  society,  nor  the  material  world  prepared 
to  receive  it.  There  needs  a  rare  concurrence 
of  circumstances,  and  for  that  reason  often  a 
vast  length  of  time,  to  reconcile  such  a  people 
to  industry,  unless  they  are  for  a  while  com¬ 
pelled  to  it.  Hence  even  personal  slavery,  by 
giving  a  commencement  to  industrial  life,  and 
enforcing  it  as  the  exclusive  occupation  of  the 
most  numerous  portion  of  the  community, 
may  accelerate  the  transition  to  a  better  free¬ 
dom  than  that  of  fighting  and  rapine.  It  is  al¬ 
most  needless  to  say  that  this  excuse  for  slavery 
is  only  available  in  a  very  earlv  state  of  society. 
A  civilised  people  have  far  other  means  of  im¬ 
parting  civilisation  to  those  under  their  in¬ 
fluence;  and  slavery  is,  in  all  its  details,  so  re¬ 
pugnant  to  that  government  of  law,  which  is 
the  foundation  of  all  modern  life,  and  so  cor¬ 
rupting  to  the  master-class  when  they  haveonce 
come  under  civilised  influences,  that  its  adop- 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


340 

tion  under  any  circumstances  whatever  in  mod¬ 
ern  society  is  a  relapse  into  worse  than  barba- 
rism. 

At  some  period,  however,  of  their  history, 
almost  every  people,  now  civilised,  have  con¬ 
sisted,  in  majority,  of  slaves.  A  people  in  that 
condition  require  to  raise  them  out  of  it  a  very 
different  polity  from  a  nation  of  savages.  If 
they  are  energetic  by  nature,  and  especially  if 
there  be  associated  with  them  in  the  same  com¬ 
munity  an  industrious  class  who  are  neither 
slaves  nor  slave-owners  (as  was  the  case  in 
Greece),  they  need,  probably,  no  more  to  en¬ 
sure  their  improvement  than  to  make  them 
free:  when  freed,  they  may  often  be  fit.  like 
Roman  freedmen,  to  be  admitted  at  once  to 
the  full  rights  of  citizenship.  This,  however, 
is  not  the  normal  condition  of  slavery,  and  is 
generally  a  sign  that  it  is  becoming  obsolete. 
A  slave,  properly  so  called,  is  a  being  who  has 
not  learnt  to  help  himself.  He  is,  no  doubt, 
one  step  in  advance  of  a  savage.  He  has  not  the 
first  lesson  of  political  society  still  to  acquire. 
He  has  learnt  to  obey.  But  what  he  obeys  is 
only  a  direct  command.  It  is  the  characteristic 
of  born  slaves  to  be  incapable  of  conform¬ 
ing  their  conduct  to  a  rule,  or  law.  They  can 
only  do  what  they  are  ordered,  and  only  when 
they  are  ordered  to  do  it.  If  a  man  whom  they 
fear  is  standing  over  them  and  threatening 
them  with  punishment,  they  obey;  but  when 
his  back  is  turned,  the  work  remains  undone. 
The  motive  determining  them  must  appeal 
not  to  their  interests,  but  to  their  instincts;  im¬ 
mediate  hope  or  immediate  terror.  A  despot¬ 
ism,  which  may  tame  the  savage,  will,  in  so  far 
as  it  is  a  despotism,  only  confirm  the  slaves  in 
their  incapacities.  Vet  a  government  under 
their  own  control  would  be  entirely  unman¬ 
ageable  by  them.  Their  improvement  cannot 
come  from  themselves,  but  must  be  superin¬ 
duced  from  without.  The  step  which  they  have 
to  take,  and  their  only  path  to  improvement, 
is  to  be  raised  from  a  government  of  will  to 
one  of  law.  I  hey  have  to  be  taught  self-govern¬ 
ment,  and  this,  in  its  initial  stage,  means  the 
capacity  to  at  t  on  general  instructions.  What 
they  require  is  not  a  government  of  force,  but 
one  of  guidance.  Being,  however,  in  too  low 
a  state  to  yield  to  the  guidance  ol  any  but  those 
to  whom  they  look  up  as  the  possessors  of  force, 
the  sort  of  government  fittest  for  them  is  one 
which  possesses  force,  but  seldom  uses  it:  a 
parental  despotism  or  aristocracy,  resembling 
the  St.  Simonian  form  of  Socialism;  maintain¬ 
ing  a  general  superintendence  over  all  the  op¬ 


erations  of  society,  so  as  to  keep  before  each  the 
sense  of  a  present  force  sufficient  to  compel 
his  obedience  to  the  rule  laid  down,  but  which, 
owing  to  the  impossibility  of  descending  to 
regulate  all  the  minutiae  of  industry  and  life, 
necessarily  leaves  and  induces  individuals  to  do 
much  of  themselves.  This,  which  may  be  termed 
the  government  of  leading-strings,  seems  to  be 
the  one  required  to  carry  such  a  people  the 
most  rapidly  through  the  next  necessary  step 
in  social  progress.  Such  appears  to  have  been 
the  idea  of  the  government  of  the  Incas  of 
Peru;  and  such  was  that  of  the  Jesuits  of 
Paraguay.  I  need  scarcely  remark  that  leading- 
strings  are  only  admissible  as  a  means  of  grad¬ 
ually  training  the  people  to  walk  alone. 

It  would  be  out  of  place  to  carry  the  illus¬ 
tration  further.  To  attempt  to  investigate  what 
kind  of  government  is  suited  to  every  known 
state  of  society  would  be  to  compose  a  treatise, 
not  on  representative  government,  but  on  po¬ 
litical  science  at  large.  For  our  more  limited 
purpose  we  borrow  from  political  philosophy 
only  its  general  principles.  To  determine  the 
form  of  government  most  suited  to  any  par¬ 
ticular  people,  we  must  be  able,  among  the  de¬ 
fects  and  shortcomings  which  belong  to  that 
people,  to  distinguish  those  that  are  the  im¬ 
mediate  impediment  to  progress;  to  discover 
what  it  is  which  (as  it  were)  stops  the  way.  The 
best  government  for  them  is  the  one  which 
tends  most  to  give  them  that  for  want  of  which 
they  cannot  advance,  or  advance  only  in  a  lame 
and  lopsided  manner.  We  must  not,  however, 
forget  the  reservation  necessary  in  all  things 
which  have  for  their  object  improvement,  or 
Progress;  namely,  that  in  seeking  the  good 
which  is  needed,  no  damage,  or  as  little  as  pos¬ 
sible,  be  done  to  that  already  possessed.  A 
people  of  savages  should  be  taught  obedience, 
but  not  in  such  a  manner  as  to  convert  them 
into  a  people  of  slaves.  And  (to  give  the  obser¬ 
vation  a  higher  generality)  the  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment  which  is  most  effectual  for  carrying 
a  people  through  the  next  stage  of  progress 
will  still  be  very  improper  for  them  if  it  does 
this  in  such  a  manner  as  to  obstruct,  or  posi¬ 
tively  unfit  them  for,  the  step  next  beyond. 
Such  cases  are  frequent,  and  are  among  the 
most  melancholy  facts  in  history.  The  Egyp¬ 
tian  hierarchy,  the  paternal  despotism  of  China, 
were  very  fit  instruments  for  carrying  those 
nations  up  to  the  point  of  civilisation  whi<h 
they  attained.  But  having  reached  that  point, 
they  were  brought  to  a  permanent  halt  for 
want  of  mental  liberty  and  individuality;  req- 


THE  IDEALLY 

uisites  of  improvement  which  the  institutions 
that  had  carried  them  thus  far  entirely  inca¬ 
pacitated  them  from  acquiring;  and  as  the  in¬ 
stitutions  did  not  break  down  and  give  place 
to  others,  further  improvement  stopped. 

In  contrast  with  these  nations,  let  us  con¬ 
sider  the  example  of  an  opposite  character  af¬ 
forded  by  another  and  a  comparatively  insig¬ 
nificant  Oriental  people— the  Jews.  They,  too, 
had  an  absolute  monarchy  and  a  hierarchy,  and 
their  organised  institutions  were  as  obviously 
of  sacerdotal  origin  as  those  of  the  Hindoos. 
These  did  for  them  what  was  done  for  other 
Oriental  races  by  their  institutions— subdued 
them  to  industry  and  order,  and  gave  them  a 
national  life.  But  neither  their  kings  nor  their 
priests  ever  obtained,  as  in  those  other  coun¬ 
tries,  the  exclusive  moulding  of  their  char¬ 
acter.  Their  religion,  which  enabled  persons 
of  genius  and  a  high  religious  tone  to  be  re¬ 
garded  and  to  regard  themselves  as  inspired 
from  heaven,  gave  existence  to  an  inestimably 
precious  unorganised  institution— the  Order 
(if  it  may  be  so  termed)  of  Prophets.  Under 
the  protection,  generally  though  not  always 
effectual,  of  their  sacred  character,  the  Proph¬ 
ets  were  a  power  in  the  nation,  often  more 
than  a  match  for  kings  and  priests,  and  kept 
up,  in  that  little  corner  of  the  earth,  the  antag¬ 
onism  of  influences  which  is  the  only  real 
security  for  continued  progress.  Religion  con¬ 
sequently  was  not  there  what  it  has  been  in  so 
many  other  places— a  consecration  of  all  that 
was  once  established,  and  a  barrier  against  fur¬ 
ther  improvement.  The  remark  of  a  distin¬ 
guished  Hebrew,  M.  Salvador,  that  the  Proph¬ 
ets  were,  in  Church  and  State,  the  equivalent 
of  the  modern  liberty  of  the  press,  gives  a  just 
but  not  an  adequate  conception  of  the  part 
fulfilled  in  national  and  universal  history  by 
this  great  element  of  Jewish  life;  by  means  of 
which,  the  canon  of  inspiration  never  being 
complete,  the  persons  most  eminent  in  genius 
and  moral  feeling  could  not  only  denounce 
and  reprobate,  with  the  direct  authority  of  the 
Almighty,  whatever  appeared  to  them  deserv¬ 
ing  of  such  treatment,  but  could  give  forth 
better  and  higher  interpretationsof  the  nation¬ 
al  religion,  which  thenceforth  became  part  of 
the  religion.  Accordingly,  whoever  can  divest 
himself  of  the  habit  of  reading  the  Bible  as  if  it 
was  one  book,  which  until  lately  was  equally 
inveterate  in  Christians  and  in  unbelievers, 
sees  with  admiration  the  vast  interval  between 
the  morality  and  religion  of  the  Pentateuch, 
or  even  of  the  historical  books  (the  unmistak- 


BEST  POLITY  341 

able  work  of  Hebrew  Conservatives  of  the 
sacerdotal  order),  and  the  morality  and  reli¬ 
gion  of  the  Prophecies:  a  distance  as  wide  as 
between  these  last  and  the  Gospels.  Conditions 
more  favourable  to  Progress  could  not  easily 
exist:  accordingly,  the  Jews,  instead  of  being 
stationary  like  other  Asiatics,  were,  next  to  the 
Greeks,  the  most  progressive  people  of  antiq¬ 
uity,  and.  jointly  with  them,  have  been  the 
starting-point  and  main  propelling  agency  of 
modern  cultivation. 

It  is,  then,  impossible  to  understand  the 
question  of  the  adaptation  of  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment  to  states  of  society  without  taking  into 
account  not  only  the  next  step,  but  all  the 
steps  which  society  has  yet  to  make:  both  those 
which  can  be  foreseen,  and  the  far  wider  in¬ 
definite  range  which  is  at  present  out  of  sight. 
It  follows,  that  to  judge  of  the  merits  of  forms 
of  government,  an  ideal  must  be  constructed 
of  the  form  of  government  most  eligible  in 
itself,  that  is,  which,  if  the  necessary  conditions 
existed  for  giving  effect  to  its  beneficial  tend¬ 
encies,  would,  more  than  all  others,  favour 
and  promote  not  some  one  improvement,  but 
all  forms  and  degrees  of  it.  This  having  been 
done,  we  must  consider  what  are  the  mental 
conditions  of  all  sorts,  necessary  to  enable  this 
government  to  realise  its  tendencies,  and  what, 
therefore,  are  the  various  defects  by  which  a 
people  is  made  incapable  of  reaping  its  bene¬ 
fits.  It  would  then  be  possible  to  construct  a 
theorem  of  the  circumstances  in  which  that 
form  of  government  may  wisely  be  introduced; 
and  also  to  judge,  in  cases  in  which  it  had 
better  not  be  introduced,  what  inferior  forms 
of  polity  will  best  carry  those  communities 
through  the  intermediate  stages  which  they 
must  traverse  before  they  can  become  fit  for 
the  best  form  of  government. 

Of  these  inquiries,  the  last  does  not  con¬ 
cern  us  here;  but  the  first  is  an  essential  part 
of  our  subject:  for  we  may,  without  rashness 
at  once  enunciate  a  proposition,  the  proofs 
and  illustrations  of  which  will  present  them¬ 
selves  in  the  ensuing  pages;  that  this  ideally 
best  form  of  government  will  be  found  in  some 
one  or  other  variety  of  the  Representative 
System. 

Chapter  j 

That  the  ideally  best  Form  of  Govern¬ 
ment  is  Representative  Government 
It  has  long  (perhaps  throughout  the  entire 
duration  of  British  freedom)  been  a  common 


representative  government 


342 

saying,  that  if  a  good  despot  could  be  ensured, 
despotic  monarchy  would  be  the  best  form  of 
government.  I  look  upon  this  as  a  radical  and 
most  pernicious  misconception  of  what  good 
government  is;  which,  until  it  can  be  got  rid 
of,  will  fatally  vitiate  all  our  speculations  on 
government. 

The  supposition  is,  that  absolute  power,  in 
the  hands  of  an  eminent  individual,  would 
ensure  a  virtuous  and  intelligent  performance 
of  all  the  duties  of  government.  Good  laws 
would  be  established  and  enforced,  bad  laws 
would  be  reformed;  the  best  men  would  be 
placed  in  all  situations  of  trust;  justice  would 
be  as  well  administered,  the  public  burthens 
would  be  as  light  and  as  judiciously  imposed, 
every  branch  of  administration  would  be  as 
purely  and  as  intelligently  conducted,  as  the 
circumstances  of  the  country  and  its  degree  of 
intellectual  and  moral  cultivation  would  ad¬ 
mit.  I  am  willing,  for  the  sake  of  the  argument, 
to  concede  all  this;  but  I  must  point  out  how 
great  the  concession  is;  howr  much  more  is 
needed  to  produce  even  an  approximation  to 
these  results  than  is  conveyed  in  the  simple 
expression,  a  good  despot.  4  heir  realisation 
would  in  fact  imply,  not  merely  a  good  mon¬ 
arch,  but  an  all-seeing  one.  He  must  be  at  all 
times  informed  correctly,  in  considerable  de¬ 
tail,  of  the  conduct  and  working  of  every 
branch  of  administration,  in  every  district  of 
the  country,  and  must  be  able,  in  the  tw’enty- 
four  hours  per  day  which  are  all  that  is  granted 
to  a  king  as  to  the  humblest  labourer,  to  give 
an  effective  share  of  attention  and  superin¬ 
tendence  to  all  parts  of  this  vast  field;  or  he 
must  at  least  be  capable  of  discerning  and 
choosing  out,  from  among  the  mass  of  his  sub¬ 
jects,  not  only  a  large  abundance  of  honest 
and  able  men,  fit  to  conduct  every  branch  of 
public  administration  under  supervision  and 
control,  but  also  the  small  number  of  men  of 
eminent  virtues  and  talents  who  can  be  trusted 
not  only  to  do  without  that  supervision,  but 
to  exercise  it  themselves  over  others.  So  ex¬ 
traordinary  arc  the  faculties  and  energies  re¬ 
quired  for  performing  this  task  in  any  support¬ 
able  manner,  that  the  good  despot  whom  we 
arc  supposing  can  hardly  be  imagined  as  con¬ 
senting  to  undertake  it,  unless  as  a  refuge  from 
intolerable  evils,  and  a  transitional  prepara¬ 
tion  for  something  beyond.  But  the  argument 
can  do  without  even  this  immense  item  in  the 
account.  Suppose  the  cl i Hie u  1  ty  vanquished. 
What  should  we  then  have?  One  man  of  super¬ 
human  mental  activity  managing  the  entire 


affairs  of  a  mentally  passive  people.  Their  pas¬ 
sivity  is  implied  in  the  very  idea  of  absolute 
power.  The  nation  as  a  w’hole,  and  every  in¬ 
dividual  composing  it,  are  without  any  poten¬ 
tial  voice  in  their  own  destiny.  They  exercise 
no  will  in  respect  to  their  collective  interests. 
All  is  decided  for  them  by  a  will  not  their  own, 
which  it  is  legally  a  crime  for  them  to  disobey. 

What  .sort  of  human  beings  can  be  formed 
under  such  a  regimen?  What  development  can 
either  their  thinking  or  their  active  faculties 
attain  under  it?  On  matters  of  pure  theory 
they  might  perhaps  be  allowed  to  speculate, 
so  long  as  their  speculations  either  did  not 
approach  politics,  or  had  not  the  remotest 
connection  with  its  practice.  On  practical  af¬ 
fairs  they  could  at  most  be  only  suffered  to 
suggest;  and  even  under  the  most  moderate  of 
despots,  none  but  persons  of  already  admitted 
or  reputed  superiority  could  hope  that  their 
suggestions  wrould  be  know’n  to,  much  less  re¬ 
garded  by,  those  who  had  the  management  of 
affairs.  A  person  must  have  a  very  unusual 
taste  for  intellectual  exercise  in  and  for  itself, 
who  will  put  himself  to  the  trouble  of  thought 
when  it  is  to  have  no  outward  effect,  or  qualify 
himself  for  functions  which  he  has  no  chance 
of  being  allowed  to  exercise.  The  only  suffi¬ 
cient  incitement  to  mental  exertion,  in  any 
but  a  few'  minds  in  a  generation,  is  the  pros¬ 
pect  of  some  practical  use  to  be  made  of  its 
results.  It  does  not  follow  that  the  nation  will 
be  wholly  destitute  of  intellectual  power.  The 
common  business  of  life,  which  must  neces¬ 
sarily  be  performed  by  each  individual  or 
family  for  themselves,  will  call  forth  some 
amount  of  intelligence  and  practical  ability, 
within  a  certain  narrow  range  of  ideas.  There 
may  be  a  select  (  lass  of  savants ,  who  cultivate 
science  with  a  view  to  its  physical  uses,  or  for 
the  pleasure  of  the  pursuit.  There  will  be  a 
bureaucracy,  and  persons  in  training  for  the 
bureaucracy,  who  will  be  taught  at  least  some 
empirical  maxims  of  government  and  public 
administration.  There  may  be,  and  olten  has 
been,  a  systematic  organisation  of  the  best 
mental  power  in  the  country  in  some  special 
direction  (commonly  military)  to  promote  the 
grandeur  of  the  despot.  But  the  public  at  large 
remain  without  information  and  without  in¬ 
terest  on  all  greater  matters  of  practice;  or, 
if  they  have  any  knowledge  of  them,  it  is  but 
a  dilettante  knowledge,  like  that  which  people 
have  of  the  mechanical  arts  who  have  never 
handled  a  tool. 

Nor  is  it  only  in  their  intelligence  that  they 


THE  IDEALLY 

suffer.  Their  moral  capacities  are  equally  stunt¬ 
ed.  Wherever  the  sphere  of  action  of  human 
beings  is  artificially  circumscribed,  their  senti¬ 
ments  are  narrowed  and  dwarfed  in  the  same 
proportion.  The  food  of  feeling  is  action:  even 
domestic  affection  lives  upon  voluntary  good 
offices.  Let  a  person  have  nothing  to  do  for 
his  country,  and  he  will  not  care  for  it.  It  has 
been  said  of  old,  that  in  a  despotism  there  is 
at  most  but  one  patriot,  the  despot  himself; 
and  the  saying  rests  on  a  just  appreciation  of 
the  effects  of  absolute  subjection,  even  to  a 
good  and  wise  master.  Religion  remains:  and 
here  at  least,  it  may  be  thought,  is  an  agency 
that  may  be  relied  on  for  lifting  men’s  eyes 
and  minds  above  the  dust  at  their  feet.  But 
religion,  even  supposing  it  to  escape  perver¬ 
sion  for  the  purposes  of  despotism,  ceases  in 
these  circumstances  to  be  a  social  concern,  and 
narrows  into  a  personal  affair  between  an  in¬ 
dividual  and  his  Maker,  in  which  the  issue  at 
stake  is  but  his  private  salvation.  Religion  in 
this  shape  is  quite  consistent  with  the  most 
selfish  and  contracted  egoism,  and  identifies 
the  votary  as  little  in  feeling  with  the  rest  of 
his  kind  as  sensuality  itself. 

A  good  despotism  means  a  government  in 
which,  so  far  as  depends  on  the  despot,  there 
is  no  positive  oppression  by  officers  of  state, 
but  in  which  all  the  collective  interests  of  the 
people  are  managed  for  them,  all  the  thinking 
that  has  relation  to  collective  interests  done 
for  them,  and  in  which  their  minds  are  formed 
by,  and  consenting  to,  this  abdication  of  their 
own  energies.  Leaving  things  to  the  Govern¬ 
ment.  like  leaving  them  to  Providence,  is  syn¬ 
onymous  with  caring  nothing  about  them,  and 
accepting  their  results,  when  disagreeable,  as 
visitations  of  Nature.  With  the  exception, 
therefore,  of  a  few  studious  men  who  take  an 
intellectual  interest  in  speculation  for  its  own 
sake,  the  intelligence  and  sentiments  of  the 
whole  people  are  given  up  to  the  material 
interests,  and,  when  these  are  provided  for,  to 
the  amusement  and  ornamentation,  of  private 
life.  But  to  say  this  is  to  say,  if  the  whole  testi¬ 
mony  of  history  is  worth  anything,  that  the  era 
of  national  decline  has  arrived:  that  is,  if  the 
nation  had  ever  attained  anything  to  decline 
from.  If  it  has  never  risen  above  the  condition 
of  an  Oriental  people,  in  that  condition  it 
continues  to  stagnate.  But  if,  like  Greece  or 
Rome,  it  had  realised anythinghigher,  through 
the  energy,  patriotism,  and  enlargement  of 
mind,  which  as  national  qualities  are  the  fruits 
solely  of  freedom,  it  relapses  in  a  few  genera- 


BEST  POLITY  343 

tions  into  the  Oriental  state.  And  that  state 
does  not  mean  stupid  tranquillity,  with  secu¬ 
rity  against  change  for  the  worse;  it  often 
means  being  overrun,  conquered,  and  reduced 
to  domestic  slavery,  either  by  a  stronger  des¬ 
pot,  or  by  the  nearest  barbarous  people  who 
retain  along  with  their  savage  rudeness  the  en¬ 
ergies  of  freedom. 

Such  are  not  merely  the  natural  tendencies, 
but  the  inherent  necessities  of  despotic  gov¬ 
ernment;  from  which  there  is  no  outlet,  unless 
in  so  far  as  the  despotism  consents  not  to  be 
despotism;  in  so  far  as  the  supposed  good  des¬ 
pot  abstains  from  exercising  his  power,  and, 
though  holding  it  in  reserve,  allows  the  gen¬ 
eral  business  of  government  to  go  on  as  if  the 
people  really  governed  themselves.  However 
little  probable  it  may  be,  we  may  imagine 
a  despot  observing  many  of  the  rules  and 
restraints  of  constitutional  government.  He 
might  allow  such  freedom  of  the  press  and  of 
discussion  as  would  enable  a  public  opinion 
to  form  and  express  itself  on  national  affairs. 
He  might  suffer  local  interests  to  be  managed, 
without  the  interference  of  authority,  by  the 
people  themselves.  He  might  even  surround 
himself  with  a  council  or  councils  of  govern¬ 
ment,  freely  chosen  by  the  whole  or  some  por¬ 
tion  of  the  nation;  retaining  in  his  own  hands 
the  power  of  taxation,  and  the  supreme  legis¬ 
lative  as  well  as  executive  authority.  Were  he 
to  act  thus,  and  so  far  abdicate  as  a  despot,  he 
would  do  away  with  a  considerable  part  of  the 
evils  characteristic  of  despotism.  Political  ac¬ 
tivity  and  capacity  for  public  affairs  would  no 
longer  be  prevented  from  growing  up  in  the 
body  of  the  nation;  and  a  public  opinion 
would  form  itself  not  the  mere  echo  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment.  But  such  improvement  would  be  the 
beginning  of  new  difficulties.  Thispublicopiti- 
ion,  independent  of  the  monarch’s  dictation, 
must  be  either  with  him  or  against  him:  if  not 
the  one,  it  will  be  the  other.  All  governments 
must  displease  many  persons,  and  these  hav¬ 
ing  now  regular  organs,  and  being  able  to  ex¬ 
press  their  sentiments,  opinions  adverse  to  the 
measures  of  government  would  often  be  ex¬ 
pressed.  What  is  the  monarch  to  do  when  these 
unfavourable  opinions  happen  to  be  in  the 
majority?  Is  he  to  alter  his  course?  Is  he  to 
defer  to  the  nation?  If  so,  he  is  no  longer  a 
despot,  but  a  constitutional  king;  an  organ  or 
first  minister  of  the  people,  distinguished  only 
by  being  irremovable.  If  not,  he  must  either 
put  down  opposition  by  his  despotic  power, 
or  there  will  arise  a  permanent  antagonism  be- 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERXMER  / 


tween  the  people  and  one  man,  which  can  have 
but  one  possible  ending.  Not  even  a  religious 
principle  of  passive  obedience  and  “right  di¬ 
vine”  would  long  ward  oft  the  natural  con¬ 
sequences  of  such  a  position.  The  monarch 
would  have  to  succumb,  and  conform  to  the 
conditions  of  constitutional  royalty,  or  give 
place  to  some  one  who  would.  1  he  despotism, 
being  thus  chiefly  nominal,  would  possess  few 
of  the  advantages  supposed  to  belong  to  abso¬ 
lute  monarchy;  while  it  would  realise  in  a  very 
imperfect  degree  those  of  a  free  government; 
since  however  great  an  amount  of  liberty  the 
citizens  might  practically  enjoy,  they  could 
never  forget  that  they  held  it  on  sufferance, 
and  by  a  concession  which  under  the  existing 
constitution  of  the  state  might  at  any  moment 
be  resumed;  that  they  were  legally  slaves, 
though  of  a  prudent,  or  indulgent,  master. 

It  is  not  much  to  be  wondered  at  if  impa¬ 
tient  or  disappointed  reformers,  groaning  un¬ 
der  the  impediments  opposed  to  the  most 
salutary  public  improvements  by  the  igno¬ 
rance,  the  indifference,  the  intractableness,  the 
penersc  obstinacy  of  a  people,  and  the  cor¬ 
rupt  combinations  of  selfish  private  interests 
armed  with  the  powerful  weapons  afforded  by 
free  institutions,  should  at  times  sigh  for  a 
strong  hand  to  bear  down  all  these  obstacles, 
and  compel  a  recalcitrant  people  to  be  better 
governed.  Hut  (setting  aside  the  fact  that  for 
one  despot  who  now  and  then  reforms  an 
abuse,  there  are  ninety-nine  who  do  nothing 
but  create  them)  those  who  look  in  any  such 
direction  lor  the  realisation  of  their  hopes 
leave  out  of  the  idea  of  good  government  its 
principal  element,  the  improvement  of  the 
people  themselves.  One  of  the  benefits  of  free¬ 
dom  is  that  under  it  the  ruler  cannot  pass  by 
the  people’s  minds,  and  amend  their  affairs  for 
them  without  amending  them.  If  it  were  possi¬ 
ble  lor  the  people  to  be  well  governed  in 
spite  of  themselves,  their  good  government 
would  last  no  longer  than  the  freedom  of  a 
people  usually  lasts  who  have  been  liberated 
in  foreign  arms  without  their  own  coopera¬ 
tion.  It  is  true,  a  despot  may  educate  the  peo¬ 
ple;  and  to  tlo  so  really,  would  be  the  Inst 
apology  for  his  despotism.  But  any  education 
which  aims  at  making  human  beings  other 
than  machines,  in  the  long  run  makes  them 
claim  to  have  the  control  of  their  own  ac¬ 
tions.  The  leaders  ol  l-rcnch  philosophy  in  the 
eighteenth  century  had  been  educated  by  the 
Jesuits.  K\en  Jesuit  education,  it  seems,  was 
sufficiently  real  to  call  forth  the  appetite  for 


freedom.  Whatever  invigorates  the  faculties, 
in  however  small  a  measure,  creates  an  in¬ 
creased  desire  for  their  more  unimpeded  exer¬ 
cise;  and  a  popular  education  is  a  failure,  if  it 
educates  the  people  for  any  state  but  that 
which  it  will  certainly  induce  them  to  desire, 
and  most  probably  to  demand. 

I  am  far  from  condemning,  in  cases  of  ex¬ 
treme  exigency,  the  assumption  of  absolute 
power  in  the  form  of  a  temporary  dictator¬ 
ship.  Free  nations  have,  in  times  of  old,  con¬ 
ferred  such  power  by  their  own  choice,  as  a 
necessary  medicine  for  diseases  of  the  body 
politic  which  could  not  be  got  rid  of  by  less 
violent  means.  But  its  acceptance,  even  for  a 
time  strictly  limited,  can  only  be  excused,  if. 
like  Solon  or  Pittacus,  the  dictator  employs  the 
whole  power  he  assumes  in  removing  the  ob¬ 
stacles  which  debar  the  nation  from  the  en¬ 
joyment  of  freedom.  A  good  despotism  is  an 
altogether  false  ideal,  which  practically  (ex¬ 
cept  as  a  means  to  some  temporary  purpose) 
becomes  the  most  senseless  and  dangerous  of 
chimeras.  Evil  for  e\il.  a  good  despotism,  in 
a  country  at  all  advanced  in  civilisation,  is 
more  noxious  than  a  bad  one;  for  it  is  far  more 
relaxing  and  enervating  to  the  thoughts,  feel¬ 
ings,  and  energies  of  the  people.  The  despot¬ 
ism  of  Augustus  prepared  the  Romans  for 
Tiberius.  If  the  whole  tone  of  their  character 
had  not  first  been  prostrated  by  nearly  two 
generations  of  that  mild  slavery,  they  would 
probably  have  had  spirit  enough  left  to  rebel 
against  the  more  odious  one. 

There  is  no  difficulty  in  showing  that  the 
ideally  best  form  of  government  is  that  in 
which  the  sovereignty,  or  supreme  controlling 
power  in  the  last  resort,  is  vested  in  the  entire 
aggregate  of  the  community;  every  citizen  not 
only  having  a  voice  in  the  exercise  of  that  ulti¬ 
mate  sovereignty,  but  being,  at  least  occasion¬ 
ally.  called  on  to  take  an  actual  part  in  the 
government,  by  the  personal  discharge  of  some 
public  function,  local  or  genera  1. 

To  test  this  proposition,  it  lias  to  be  exam¬ 
ined  in  reference  to  the  two  branches  into 
which,  as  pointed  out  in  the  last  chapter,  the 
inquiry  into  the  goodness  of  a  government 
conveniently  divides  itself,  namely,  bow  far  it 
promotes  the  good  management  of  the  affairs 
of  society  by  means  of  the  existing  faculties, 
moral,  intellectual,  and  active,  of  its  various 
members,  and  what  is  its  effect  in  iniprcn  ing  or 
deteriorating  those  faculties. 

I  he  ideally  best  form  of  government,  it  is 


THE  IDEALLY 

scarcely  necessary  to  say,  does  not  mean  one 
which  is  practicable  or  eligible  in  all  states  of 
civilisation,  but  the  one  which,  in  the  circum¬ 
stances  in  which  it  is  practicable  and  eligible, 
is  attended  with  the  greatest  amount  of  bene¬ 
ficial  consequences,  immediate  and  prospec¬ 
tive.  A  completely  popular  government  is  the 
only  polity  which  can  make  out  any  claim  to 
this  character.  It  is  pre-eminent  in  both  the 
departments  between  which  the  excellence  of 
a  political  constitution  is  divided.  It  is  both 
more  favourable  to  present  good  government, 
and  promotes  a  better  and  higher  form  of 
national  character,  than  any  other  polity  what¬ 
soever. 

Its  superiority  in  reference  to  present  well¬ 
being  rests  upon  two  principles,  of  as  universal 
truth  and  applicability  as  any  general  proposi 
tions  which  can  be  laid  down  respecting  hu¬ 
man  affairs.  The  first  is,  that  the  rights  and  in¬ 
terests  of  every  or  any  person  are  only  secure 
from  being  disregarded  when  the  person  in¬ 
terested  is  himself  able,  and  habitually  dis¬ 
posed,  to  stand  up  for  them.  The  second  is, 
that  the  general  prosperity  attains  a  greater 
height,  and  is  more  widely  diffused,  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  amount  and  variety  of  the  per¬ 
sonal  energies  enlisted  in  promoting  it. 

Putting  these  two  propositions  into  a  shape 
more  special  to  their  present  application;  hu¬ 
man  beings  are  only  secure  from  evil  at  the 
hands  of  others  in  proportion  as  they  have 
the  power  of  being,  and  are,  self  -protecting; 
and  they  only  achieve  a  high  degree  of  success 
in  their  struggle  with  Nature  in  proportion  as 
they  are  self  -dependent,  relying  on  what  they 
themselves  can  do,  either  separately  or  in  con¬ 
cert,  rather  than  on  what  others  do  for  them. 

The  former  proposition— that  each  is  the 
only  safe  guardian  of  his  own  rights  and  in¬ 
terests— is  one  of  those  elementary  maxims  of 
prudence,  which  every  person,  capable  of  con¬ 
ducting  his  own  affairs,  implicitly  acts  upon, 
wherever  he  himself  is  interested.  Many,  in¬ 
deed,  have  a  great  dislike  to  it  as  a  political 
doctrine,  and  are  fond  of  holding  it  up  to 
obloquy,  as  a  doctrine  of  universal  selfishness. 
To  which  we  may  answer,  that  whenever  it 
ceases  to  be  true  that  mankind,  as  a  rule,  pre¬ 
fer  themselves  to  others,  and  those  nearest  to 
them  to  those  more  remote,  from  that  moment 
Communism  is  not  only  practicable,  but  the 
only  defensible  form  of  society;  and  will,  when 
that  time  arrives,  be  assuredly  carried  into 
effect.  For  my  own  part,  not  believing  in  uni¬ 
versal  selfishness,  1  have  no  difficulty  in  ad- 


BEST  POLITY  345 

mitting  that  Communism  would  even  now  be 
practicable  among  the  elite  of  mankind,  and 
may  become  so  among  the  rest.  But  as  this 
opinion  is  anything  but  popular  with  those 
defenders  of  existing  institutions  who  find 
fault  with  the  doctrine  of  the  general  predomi¬ 
nance  of  self-interest,  I  am  inclined  to  think 
they  do  in  reality  believe  that  most  men  con¬ 
sider  themselves  before  other  people.  It  is  not, 
however,  necessary  to  affirm  even  thus  much 
in  order  to  support  the  claim  of  all  to  partici¬ 
pate  in  the  sovereign  power.  We  need  not  sup¬ 
pose  that  when  power  resides  in  an  exclusive 
class,  that  class  will  knowingly  and  deliberately 
sacrifice  the  other  classes  to  themselves:  it 
suffices  that,  in  the  absence  of  its  natural  de¬ 
fenders,  the  interest  of  the  excluded  is  always 
in  danger  of  being  overlooked;  and,  when 
looked  at,  is  seen  with  very  different  eyes  from 
those  of  the  persons  whom  it  directly  concerns. 

In  this  country,  for  example,  what  are  called 
the  working  classes  may  be  considered  as  ex¬ 
cluded  from  all  direct  participation  in  the  gov¬ 
ernment.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  classes  who 
do  participate  in  it  have  in  general  any  inten¬ 
tion  of  sacrificing  the  working  classes  to  them¬ 
selves.  They  once  had  that  intention;  witness 
the  persevering  attempts  so  long  made  to  keep 
down  wages  by  law.  But  in  the  present  day 
their  ordinary  disposition  is  the  very  opposite: 
they  willingly  make  considerable  sacrifices,  es¬ 
pecially  of  their  pecuniary  interest,  for  the  ben¬ 
efit  of  the  working  classes,  and  err  rather  by 
too  lavish  and  indiscriminating  beneficence; 
nor  do  I  believe  that  any  rulers  in  history  have 
been  actuated  by  a  more  sincere  desire  to  do 
their  duty  towards  the  poorer  portion  of  their 
countrymen.  Yet  does  Parliament,  or  almost 
any  of  the  members  composing  it,  ever  for  an 
instant  look  at  any  question  with  the  eyes  of  a 
working  man?  When  a  subject  arises  in  which 
the  labourers  as  such  have  an  interest,  is  it  re¬ 
garded  from  any  point  of  view  but  that  of  the 
employers  of  labour?  I  do  not  say  that  the  work¬ 
ing  men’s  view  of  these  questions  is  in  general 
nearer  to  the  truth  than  the  other:  but  it  is 
sometimes  quite  as  near;  and  in  any  case  it 
ought  to  be  respectfully  listened  to,  instead 
of  being,  as  it  is,  not  merely  turned  away  from, 
but  ignored.  On  the  question  of  strikes,  for  in¬ 
stance,  it  is  doubtful  if  there  is  so  much  as  one 
among  the  leading  members  of  either  Mouse 
who  is  not  firmly  convinced  that  the  reason  of 
the  matter  is  unqualifiedly  on  the  side  of  the 
masters,  and  that  the  men's  view  of  it  is  simply 
absurd.  Those  who  have  studied  the  question 


3 4 6  REP  RES  E  N  TAT  IV  E 

know  well  how  far  this  is  from  being  the  case; 
and  in  how  different,  and  how  infinitely  less 
superficial  a  manner  the  point  would  have  to 
be  argued,  if  the  classes  who  strike  were  able 
to  make  themselves  heard  in  Parliament. 

It  is  an  adherent  condition  of  human  affairs 
that  no  intention,  however  sincere,  of  protect¬ 
ing  die  interests  of  others  can  make  it  safe  or 
salutary  to  tie  up  their  own  hands.  Still  more 
obviously  true  is  it,  that  by  their  own  hands 
only  can  any  positive  and  durable  improve¬ 
ment  of  their  circumstances  in  life  be  worked 
out.  Through  the  joint  influence  of  these  two 
principles,  all  free  communities  have  both 
been  more  exempt  from  social  injustice  and 
crime,  and  have  attained  more  brilliant  pros¬ 
perity,  than  any  others,  or  than  they  them¬ 
selves  after  they  lost  their  freedom.  Contrast 
the  free  states  of  the  world,  while  their  free¬ 
dom  lasted,  with  the  cotemporary  subjects 
of  monarchical  or  oligarchical  despotism;  the 
Greek  cities  with  the  Persian  satrapies;  the 
Italian  republics  and  the  free  towns  of  Flan¬ 
ders  and  Germany,  with  the  feudal  monarchies 
of  Europe;  Switzerland,  Holland,  and  Eng- 
land,  with  Austria  or  anterevolutionary  France. 
Their  superior  prosperity  was  too  obvious  ever 
to  have  been  gainsaid:  while  their  superiority 
in  good  government  and  social  relations  is 
proved  by  the  prosperity,  and  is  manifest  be¬ 
sides  in  every  page  of  history.  If  we  compare, 
not  one  age  with  another,  but  the  different 
governments  which  co-existed  in  the  same  age, 
no  amount  of  disorder  which  exaggeration  it¬ 
self  (an  pretend  to  have  existed  amidst  the 
publicity  of  the  free  states  can  be  compared  for 
a  moment  with  the  contemptuous  trampling 
upon  the  mass  of  the  people  which  pervaded 
the  whole  life  of  the  monarchical  countries, 
or  die  disgusting  individual  tyranny  which  was 
of  more  than  daily  occurrence  under  the  sys¬ 
tems  of  plunder  which  they  called  fiscal  ar¬ 
rangements,  and  in  the  secrecy  of  their  fright¬ 
ful  courts  of  justice. 

It  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  benefits 
of  freedom,  so  far  as  they  have  hitherto  been 
enjoyed,  were  obtained  by  the  extension  of  its 
privileges  to  a  part  only  of  the  community; 
and  that  a  government  in  which  they  are  ex¬ 
tended  impartially  to  all  is  a  desideratum  still 
unrealised.  Put  though  every  approach  to  this 
has  an  independent  value,  and  in  many  cases 
more  than  an  approac li  could  not.  in  the  exist¬ 
ing  state  of  general  impiovc  ment,  be  made, 
the  participation  ol  all  in  these  benefits  is  the 
ideally  perfect  conception  of  free  government. 


GOVERNMENT 

In  proportion  as  any,  no  matter  who,  are  ex¬ 
cluded  from  it,  the  interests  of  the  excluded 
are  left  without  the  guarantee  accorded  to  the 
rest,  and  they  themselves  have  less  scope  and 
encouragement  than  they  might  otherwise  have 
to  that  exertion  of  their  energies  for  the  good 
of  themselves  and  of  the  community,  to  which 
the  general  prosperity  is  always  proportioned. 

Thus  stands  the  case  as  regards  present  well¬ 
being;  the  good  management  of  the  affairs  of 
the  existing  generation.  If  we  now  pass  to  the 
influence  of  the  form  of  government  upon 
character,  we  shall  find  the  superiority  of  popu¬ 
lar  government  over  every  other  to  be,  if  pos¬ 
sible,  still  more  decided  and  indisputable. 

This  question  really  depends  upon  a  still 
more  fundamental  one,  viz.,  which  of  two  com¬ 
mon  types  of  character,  for  the  general  good  of 
humanity,  it  is  most  desirable  should  predomi¬ 
nate— the  active,  or  the  passive  type;  that  which 
struggles  against  evils,  or  that  which  endures 
them;  that  which  bends  to  circumstances,  or 
that  which  endeavours  to  make  circumstances 
bend  to  itself. 

The  commonplaces  of  moralists,  and  the 
general  sympathies  of  mankind,  are  in  favour 
of  the  passive  type.  Energetic  characters  may 
be  admired,  but  the  acquiescent  and  submis¬ 
sive  arc  those  which  most  men  personally  pre¬ 
fer.  The  passiveness  of  our  neighbours  in¬ 
creases  our  sense  of  security,  and  plays  into  the 
hands  of  our  wilfulness.  Passive  characters,  if 
we  do  not  happen  to  need  their  activity,  seem 
an  obstruction  the  less  in  our  own  path.  A  con¬ 
tented  character  is  not  a  dangerous  rival.  Vet 
nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  improvement 
in  human  affairs  is  wholly  the  work  of  the  un¬ 
contented  characters;  and,  moreover,  that  it 
is  much  easier  for  an  active  mind  to  acquire 
the  virtues  of  patience  than  for  a  passive  one 
to  assume  those  of  energy. 

Of  the  three  varieties  of  mental  excellence, 
intellectual,  practical,  and  moral,  there  never 
could  be  any  doubt  in  regard  to  the  first  two 
which  side  had  the  advantage.  All  intellectual 
superiority  is  the  fruit  of  active  effort.  Enter¬ 
prise,  the  desire  to  keep  moving,  to  be  trying 
and  accomplishing  new  things  lor  our  own 
benefit  or  that  of  others,  is  the  parent  even  of 
speculative,  and  much  more  of  practical,  tal¬ 
ent.  The  intellectual  culture  compatible  with 
the  other  type  is  of  that  leeblc  and  vague  de¬ 
scription  which  belongs  to  a  mind  that  stops 
at  amusement,  or  at  simple  contemplation. 
The  test  of  real  and  vigourous  thinking,  the 
thinking  which  ascertains  truths  instead  of 


THE  IDEALLY 

dreaming  dreams,  is  successful  application  to 
practice.  Where  that  purpose  does  not  exist, 
to  give  definiteness,  precision,  and  an  intelligi¬ 
ble  meaning  to  thought,  it  generates  nothing 
better  than  the  mystical  metaphysics  of  the 
Pythagoreans  or  the  Vedas.  With  respect  to 
practical  improvement,  the  case  is  still  more 
evident.  The  character  which  improves  human 
life  is  that  which  struggles  with  natural  pow¬ 
ers  and  tendencies,  not  that  which  gives  way 
to  them.  The  self-benefiting  qualities  are  all 
on  the  side  of  the  active  and  energetic  char¬ 
acter:  and  the  habits  and  conduct  which  pro¬ 
mote  the  advantage  of  each  individual  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  community  must  be  at  least  a  part 
of  those  which  conduce  most  in  the  end  to  the 
advancement  of  the  community  as  a  whole. 

But  on  the  point  of  moral  preferability, 
there  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  room  for  doubt. 

I  am  not  referring  to  the  religious  feeling 
which  has  so  generally  existed  in  favour  of  the 
inactive  character,  as  being  more  in  harmony 
with  the  submission  due  to  the  divine  will. 
Christianity  as  well  as  other  religions  has  fos¬ 
tered  this  sentiment;  but  it  is  the  prerogative 
of  Christianity,  as  regards  this  and  many  other 
perversions,  that  it  is  able  to  throw  them  off. 
Abstractedly  from  religious  considerations,  a 
passive  character,  which  yields  to  obstacles  in¬ 
stead  of  striving  to  overcome  them,  may  not 
indeed  be  very  useful  to  others,  no  more  than 
to  itself,  but  it  might  be  expected  to  be  at  least 
inoffensive.  Contentment  is  always  counted 
among  the  moral  virtues.  But  it  is  a  complete 
error  to  suppose  that  contentment  is  necessa¬ 
rily  or  naturally  attendant  on  passivity  of  char¬ 
acter;  and  useless  it  is,  the  moral  consequences 
are  mischievous.  Where  there  exists  a  desire  for 
advantages  not  possessed,  the  mind  which  does 
not  potentially  possess  them  by  means  of  its 
own  energies  is  apt  to  look  with  hatred  and 
malice  on  those  who  do.  The  person  bestirring 
himself  with  hopeful  prospects  to  improve  his 
circumstances  is  the  one  who  feels  good-will 
towards  others  engaged  in,  or  who  have  suc¬ 
ceeded  in,  the  same  pursuit.  And  where  the 
majority  are  so  engaged,  those  who  do  not  at¬ 
tain  the  object  have  had  the  tone  given  to  their 
feelings  by  the  general  habit  of  the  country, 
and  ascribe  their  failure  to  want  of  effort  or 
opportunity,  or  to  their  personal  ill  luck.  But 
those  who,  while  desiring  what  others  possess, 
put  no  energy  into  striving  for  it,  are  either  in¬ 
cessantly  grumbling  that  fortune  does  not  do 
for  them  what  they  do  not  attempt  to  do  for 
themselves,  or  overflowing  with  envy  and  ill- 


BEST  POLITY  347 

will  towards  those  who  possess  what  they  would 
like  to  have. 

In  proportion  as  success  in  life  is  seen  or 
believed  to  be  the  fruit  of  fatality  or  accident, 
and  not  of  exertion,  in  that  same  ratio  does 
envy  develop  itself  as  a  point  of  national  char¬ 
acter.  The  most  envious  of  all  mankind  are  the 
Orientals.  In  Oriental  moralists,  in  Oriental 
tales,  the  envious  man  is  remarkably  promi¬ 
nent.  In  real  life,  he  is  the  terror  of  all  who  pos¬ 
sess  anything  desirable,  be  it  a  palace,  a  hand¬ 
some  child,  or  even  good  health  and  spirits: 
the  supposed  effect  of  his  mere  look  consti¬ 
tutes  the  all-pervading  superstition  of  the  evil 
eye.  Next  to  Orientals  in  envy,  as  in  activity, 
are  some  of  the  Southern  Europeans.  The 
Spaniards  pursued  all  their  great  men  with  it, 
embittered  their  lives,  and  generally  succeeded 
in  putting  an  early  stop  to  their  successes.1 
With  the  French,  who  are  essentially  a  south¬ 
ern  people,  the  double  education  of  despotism 
and  Catholicism  has,  in  spite  of  their  impul¬ 
sive  temperament,  made  submission  and  en¬ 
durance  the  common  character  of  the  people, 
and  their  most  received  notion  of  wisdom  and 
excellence:  and  if  envy  of  one  another,  and  of 
all  superiority,  is  not  more  rife  among  them 
than  it  is,  the  circumstance  must  be  ascribed 
to  the  many  valuable  counteracting  elements 
in  the  French  character,  and  most  of  all  to  the 
great  individual  energy  which,  though  less  per¬ 
sistent  and  more  intermittent  than  in  the  self¬ 
helping  and  struggling  Anglo-Saxons,  has  nev¬ 
ertheless  manifested  itself  among  the  French 
in  nearly  every  direction  in  which  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  their  institutions  has  been  favourable 
to  it. 

There  are,  no  doubt,  in  all  countries,  really 
contented  characters,  who  not  merely  do  not 
seek,  but  do  not  desire,  what  they  do  not  al¬ 
ready  possess,  and  these  naturally  bear  no  ill- 
will  towards  such  as  have  apparently  a  more  fa¬ 
voured  lot.  But  the  great  mass  of  seeming  con¬ 
tentment  is  real  discontent,  combined  with 
indolence  or  self-indulgence,  which,  while  tak¬ 
ing  no  legitimate  means  of  raising  itself,  de¬ 
lights  in  bringing  others  down  to  its  own  level. 
And  if  we  look  narrowly  even  at  the  cases  of 

1l  limit  the  expression  to  past  time,  because  I 
would  say  nothing  derogatory  of  a  great,  and  now 
at  last  a  free,  people,  who  are  entering  into  the 
general  movement  of  European  progress  with  a 
vigour  which  bids  fair  to  make  up  rapidly  the 
ground  they  have  lost.  No  one  can  doubt  what 
Spanish  intellect  and  energy  are  capable  of;  and 
their  faults  as  a  people  are  chiefly  those  for  which 
freedom  and  industrial  ardour  are  a  real  specific. 


REP  RESEN  TAT  IV  E  GOVERNMENT 


348 

innocent  contentment,  we  perceive  that  they 
only  win  our  admiration  when  the  indiffer¬ 
ence  is  solely  to  improvement  in  outward  cir¬ 
cumstances,  and  there  is  a  striving  for  perpet¬ 
ual  advancement  in  spiritual  worth,  or  at  least 
a  disinterested  zeal  to  benefit  others.  The  con¬ 
tented  man,  or  the  contented  family,  who  have 
no  ambition  to  make  any  one  else  happier,  to 
promote  the  good  of  their  country  or  their 
neighbourhood,  or  to  improve  themselves  in 
moral  excellence,  excite  in  11s  neither  admira¬ 
tion  nor  approval.  We  rightly  ascribe  this  sort 
of  contentment  to  mere  unmanliness  and  want 
of  spirit.  The  content  which  we  approve  is  an 
ability  to  do  cheerfully  without  what  cannot 
be  had,  a  just  appreciation  of  the  comparative 
value  of  different  objects  of  desire,  and  a  will¬ 
ing  renunciation  of  the  less  when  incompati¬ 
ble  with  the  greater.  These,  however,  are  ex¬ 
cellences  more  natural  to  the  character,  in  pro¬ 
portion  as  it  is  actively  engaged  in  the  attempt 
to  improve  its  own  or  some  other  lot.  He  who 
is  continually  measuring  his  energy  against 
difficulties  learns  what  are  the  difficulties  in¬ 
superable  to  him,  and  what  are  those  which, 
though  he  might  overcome,  the  success  is  not 
worth  the  cost.  He  whose  thoughts  and  activi¬ 
ties  are  all  needed  for,  and  habitually  em¬ 
ployed  in.  practicable  and  useful  enterprises, 
is  the  person  of  all  others  least  likely  to  let  his 
mind  dwell  with  brooding  discontent  upon 
things  either  not  worth  attaining,  or  which 
are  not  so  to  him.  Thus  the  active,  self-helping 
character  is  not  only  intrinsically  the  best,  but 
is  the  likeliest  to  acquire  all  that  is  really  ex¬ 
cellent  or  desirable  in  the  opposite  type. 

The  striving,  go-ahead  character  of  England 
and  the  United  States  is  only  a  fit  subject  of 
disapproving  criticism  on  account  of  the  very 
secondary  objects  on  which  it  commonly  ex¬ 
pends  its  strength.  In  itself  it  is  the  foundation 
of  the  best  hopes  for  the  general  improvement 
of  mankind.  It  has  been  acutely  remarked  that 
whenever  anything  goes  amiss  the  habitual 
impulse  of  French  people  is  to  say,  “11  faut 
de  la  patience”:  and  of  English  people,  “What 
a  shame.”  1  lie  people  who  think  it  a  shame 
when  anything  goes  wrong— who  rush  to  t lie 
conclusion  that  the  evil  could  and  ought  to 
have  been  prevented,  are  those  who,  in  the 
long  run,  do  most  to  make  the  world  better. 
It  the  desires  arc  low  placed,  il  they  extend  to 
little  beyond  physical  comfort,  and  the  show 
of  riches,  the-  immediate  results  of  the  energy 
will  not  be  much  more  than  the  continual  ex¬ 
tension  of  man’s  power  over  material  objects; 


but  even  this  makes  room,  and  prepares  the 
mechanical  appliances,  for  the  greatest  intel¬ 
lectual  and  social  achievements;  and  while 
the  energy  is  there,  some  persons  will  apply 
it,  and  it  will  be  applied  more  and  more,  to 
the  perfecting  not  of  outward  circumstances 
alone,  but  of  man’s  inward  nature.  Inactivity, 
unaspiringness,  absence  of  desire,  are  a  more 
fatal  hindrance  to  improvement  than  any  mis¬ 
direction  of  energy;  and  are  that  through 
which  alone,  when  existing  in  the  mass,  any 
very  formidable  misdirection  by  an  energetic 
few  becomes  possible.  It  is  this,  mainly,  which  re¬ 
tains  in  a  savage  or  semi-savage  state  the  great 
majority  of  the  human  race. 

Now  there  can  be  no  kind  of  doubt  that  the 
passive  type  of  character  is  favoured  by  the 
government  of  one  or  a  few,  and  the  active 
self-helping  type  by  that  of  the  Many.  Irre¬ 
sponsible  rulers  need  the  quiescence  of  the 
ruled  more  than  they  need  any  activity  but 
that  which  they  can  compel.  Submissiveness 
to  the  prescriptions  of  men  as  necessities  of 
nature  is  the  lesson  inculcated  by  all  govern¬ 
ments  upon  those  who  are  wholly  without  par¬ 
ticipation  in  them.  The  trill  of  superiors,  and 
the  law  as  the  will  of  superiors,  must  be  pas¬ 
sively  yielded  to.  But  no  men  are  mere  instru¬ 
ments  or  materials  in  the  hands  of  their  rulers 
who  have  will  or  spirit  or  a  spring  of  internal 
activity  in  the  rest  of  their  proceedings:  and 
any  manifestation  of  these  qualities,  instead 
of  receiving  encouragement  from  despots,  has 
to  get  itself  forgiven  by  them.  Even  when  irre¬ 
sponsible  rulers  are  not  sufficiently  conscious 
of  danger  from  the  mental  activity  of  their 
subjects  to  be  desirous  of  repressing  it,  the  posi¬ 
tion  itself  is  a  repression.  Endeavour  is  even 
more  effectually  restrained  by  the  certainty  of 
its  impotence  than  by  any  positive  discourage¬ 
ment.  Between  subjection  to  the  will  of  others, 
and  the  virtues  of  self-help  and  self-govern¬ 
ment,  there  is  a  natural  incompatibility.  This 
is  more  or  less  complete,  according  as  the  bond¬ 
age  is  strained  or  relaxed.  Rulers  differ  very 
much  in  the  length  to  which  they  carry  the 
control  of  the  free  agency  of  their  subjects,  or 
the  supersession  of  it  by  managing  their  busi¬ 
ness  tor  them.  But  the  difference  is  in  degree, 
not  in  principle;  and  the  best  despots  often  go 
the  greatest  lengths  in  chaining  up  the  free 
agency  of  their  subjects.  \  bad  despot,  when 
h is  own  personal  indulgences  have  been  pro¬ 
vided  for,  111a)  sometimes  be  willing  to  let  the 
people  alone;  but  a  good  despot  insists  011  do¬ 
ing  them  good,  by  making  them  do  their  own 


THE  IDEALLY 

business  in  a  better  way  than  they  themselves 
know  of.  The  regulations  which  restricted  to 
fixed  processes  all  the  leading  branches  of 
French  manufactures  were  the  work  of  the 
great  Colbert. 

Very  different  is  the  state  of  the  human 
faculties  where  a  human  being  feels  himself 
under  no  other  external  restraint  than  the 
necessities  of  nature,  or  mandates  of  society 
which  he  has  his  share  in  imposing,  and  which 
it  is  open  to  him,  if  he  thinks  them  wrong, 
publicly  to  dissent  from,  and  exert  himself  ac¬ 
tively  to  get  altered.  No  doubt,  under  a  gov¬ 
ernment  partially  popular,  this  freedom  may 
be  exercised  even  by  those  who  are  not  par¬ 
takers  in  the  full  privileges  of  citizenship.  But 
it  is  a  great  additional  stimulus  to  any  one’s 
self-help  and  self-reliance  when  he  starts  from 
even  ground,  and  has  not  to  feel  that  his  suc¬ 
cess  depends  on  the  impression  he  can  make 
upon  the  sentiments  and  dispositions  of  a  body 
of  whom  he  is  not  one.  It  is  a  great  discourage¬ 
ment  to  an  individual,  and  a  still  greater  one 
to  a  class,  to  be  left  out  of  the  constitution;  to 
be  reduced  to  plead  from  outside  the  door  to 
the  arbiters  of  their  destiny,  not  taken  into 
consultation  within.  The  maximum  of  the  in¬ 
vigorating  effect  of  freedom  upon  the  char¬ 
acter  is  only  obtained  when  the  person  acted 
on  either  is,  or  is  looking  forward  to  becoming, 
a  citizen  as  fully  privileged  as  any  other. 

What  is  still  more  important  than  even  this 
matter  of  feeling  is  the  practical  discipline 
which  the  character  obtains  from  the  occasion¬ 
al  demand  made  upon  the  citizens  to  exercise, 
for  a  time  and  in  their  turn,  some  social  func¬ 
tion.  It  is  not  sufficiently  considered  how  little 
there  is  in  most  men’s  ordinary  life  to  give  any 
largeness  either  to  their  conceptions  or  to  their 
sentiments.  Their  work  is  a  routine;  not  a 
labour  of  love,  but  of  self-interest  in  the  most 
elementary  form,  the  satisfaction  of  daily 
wants;  neither  the  thing  done,  nor  the  process 
of  doing  it,  introduces  the  mind  to  thoughts 
or  feelings  extending  beyond  individuals;  if 
instructive  books  are  within  their  reach,  there 
is  no  stimulus  to  read  them;  and  in  most  cases 
the  individual  has  no  access  to  any  person  of 
cultivation  much  superior  to  his  own.  Giving 
him  something  to  do  for  the  public,  supplies, 
in  a  measure,  all  these  deficiencies.  If  circum¬ 
stances  allow  the  amount  of  public  duty  as¬ 
signed  him  to  be  considerable,  it  makes  him  an 
educated  man.  Notwithstanding  the  defects  of 
the  social  system  and  moral  ideas  of  antiquity, 
the  practice  of  the  dicastery  and  the  ecclesia 


BEST  POLITY  349 

raised  the  intellectual  standard  of  an  average 
Athenian  citizen  far  beyond  anything  of  which 
there  is  yet  an  example  in  any  other  mass  of 
men,  ancient  or  modern.  The  proofs  of  this  are 
apparent  in  every  page  of  our  great  historian 
of  Greece;  but  we  need  scarcely  look  further 
than  to  the  high  quality  of  the  addresses  which 
their  great  orators  deemed  best  calculated  to 
act  with  effect  on  their  understanding  and  will. 
A  benefit  of  the  same  kind,  though  far  less  in 
degree,  is  produced  on  Englishmen  of  the  low¬ 
er  middle  class  by  their  liability  to  be  placed  on 
juries  and  to  serve  parish  offices;  which,  though 
it  does  not  occur  to  so  many,  nor  is  so  continu¬ 
ous,  nor  introduces  them  to  so  great  a  variety 
of  elevated  considerations,  as  to  admit  of  com¬ 
parison  with  the  public  education  which  every 
citizen  of  Athens  obtained  from  her  demo¬ 
cratic  institutions,  must  make  them  neverthe¬ 
less  very  different  beings,  in  range  of  ideas  and 
development  of  faculties,  from  those  who  have 
done  nothing  in  their  lives  but  drive  a  quill, 
or  sell  goods  over  a  counter. 

Still  more  salutary  is  the  moral  part  of  the 
instruction  afforded  by  the  participation  of  the 
private  citizen,  if  even  rarely,  in  public  func¬ 
tions.  He  is  called  upon,  while  so  engaged,  to 
weigh  interests  not  his  own;  to  be  guided,  in 
case  of  conflicting  claims,  by  another  rule  than 
his  private  partialities;  to  apply,  at  every  turn, 
principles  and  maxims  which  have  for  their 
reason  of  existence  the  common  good:  and  he 
usually  finds  associated  with  him  in  the  same 
work  minds  more  familiarised  than  his  own 
with  these  ideas  and  operations,  whose  study 
it  will  be  to  supply  reasons  to  his  understand¬ 
ing,  and  stimulation  to  his  feeling  for  the 
general  interest.  He  is  made  to  feel  himself 
one  of  the  public,  and  whatever  is  for  their 
benefit  to  be  for  his  benefit.  Where  this  school  of 
public  spirit  does  not  exist,  scarcely  any  sense 
is  entertained  that  private  persons,  in  no  em¬ 
inent  social  situation,  owe  any  duties  to  so¬ 
ciety,  except  to  obey  the  laws  and  submit  to 
the  government.  There  is  no  unselfish  senti¬ 
ment  of  identification  with  the  public.  Every 
thought  or  feeling,  either  of  interest  or  of  duty, 
is  absorbed  in  the  individual  and  in  the  family. 
The  man  never  thinks  of  any  collective  inter¬ 
est,  of  any  objects  to  be  pursued  jointly  with 
others,  but  only  in  competition  with  them, 
and  in  some  measure  at  their  expense.  A  neigh¬ 
bour,  not  being  an  ally  or  an  associate,  since  he 
is  never  engaged  in  any  common  undertaking 
for  joint  benefit,  is  therefore  only  a  rival.  Thus 
even  private  morality  suffers,  while  public  is 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


35° 

actually  extinct.  Were  this  the  universal  and 
only  possible  state  of  things,  the  utmost  aspira¬ 
tions  of  the  lawgiver  or  the  moralist  could 
only  stretch  to  make  the  bulk  of  the  commu¬ 
nity  a  flock  of  sheep  innocently  nibbling  the 
grass  side  by  side. 

From  these  accumulated  considerations  it  is 
evident  that  the  only  government  which  can 
fully  satisfy  all  the  exigencies  of  the  social 
state  is  one  in  which  the  whole  people  partic¬ 
ipate;  that  any  participation,  even  in  the 
smallest  public  function,  is  useful;  that  the 
participation  should  everywhere  be  as  great  as 
the  general  degree  of  improvement  of  the  com¬ 
munity  will  allow;  and  that  nothing  less  can 
be  ultimately  desirable  than  the  admission  of 
all  to  a  share  in  the  sovereign  power  of  the 
state.  But  since  all  cannot,  in  a  community  ex¬ 
ceeding  a  single  small  town,  participate  per¬ 
sonally  in  any  but  some  very  minor  portions 
of  the  public  business,  it  follows  that  the  ideal 
type  of  a  perfect  government  must  be  repre¬ 
sentative. 

Chapter  4 

Under  what  Social  Conditions  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government  is  Inapplicable 
We  have  recognised  in  representative  govern¬ 
ment  the  ideal  type  of  the  most  perfect  polity, 
for  which,  in  consequence,  any  portion  of  man¬ 
kind  are  better  adapted  in  proportion  to  their 
degree  of  general  improvement.  As  they  range 
lower  and  lower  in  development,  that  form  of 
government  will  be,  generally  speaking,  less 
suitable  to  them;  though  this  is  not  true  uni¬ 
versally:  for  the  adaptation  of  a  people  to  rep¬ 
resentative  government  does  not  depend  so 
much  upon  the  place  they  occupy  in  the  gen¬ 
eral  scale  of  humanity  as  upon  the  degree  in 
which  they  possess  certain  special  requisites; 
requisites,  however,  so  closely  connected  with 
their  degree  of  general  advancement,  that  any 
variation  between  the  two  is  rather  the  excep¬ 
tion  than  the  rule.  Let  us  examine  at  what 
point  in  the  descending  series  representative 
government  ceases  altogether  to  be  admissible, 
either  through  its  own  unfitness,  or  the  supe¬ 
rior  funess  of  some  other  regimen. 

First,  then,  representative,  like  any  other 
government,  must  be  unsuitable  in  any  case 
in  which  it  cannot  permanently  subsist —i.e. 
in  which  it  does  not  fulfil  the  three  lundamcn- 
tal  conditions  enumerated  in  the  first  chapter. 
These  were— 1.  That  the  people  should  be  will¬ 
ing  to  receive  it.  2.  That  they  should  be  willing 


and  able  to  do  what  is  necessary  for  its  preser¬ 
vation.  3.  That  they  should  be  willing  and  able 
to  fulfil  the  duties  and  discharge  the  functions 
which  it  imposes  on  them. 

The  willingness  of  the  people  to  accept  rep¬ 
resentative  government  only  becomes  a  prac¬ 
tical  question  when  an  enlightened  ruler,  or  a 
foreign  nation  or  nations  who  have  gained 
power  over  the  country,  are  disposed  to  offer  it 
the  boon.  To  individual  reformers  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  almost  irrelevant,  since,  if  no  other  ob¬ 
jection  can  be  made  to  their  enterprise  than 
that  the  opinion  of  the  nation  is  not  yet  on 
their  side,  they  have  the  ready  and  proper  an¬ 
swer,  that  to  bring  it  over  to  their  side  is  the 
very  end  they  aim  at.  When  opinion  is  really 
adverse,  its  hostility  is  usually  to  the  fact  of 
change,  rather  than  to  representative  govern¬ 
ment  in  itself.  The  contrary  case  is  not  indeed 
unexampled;  there  has  sometimes  been  a  re¬ 
ligious  repugnance  to  any  limitation  of  the 
power  of  a  particular  line  of  rulers;  but,  in 
general,  the  doctrine  of  passive  obedience 
meant  only  submission  to  the  will  of  the  pow¬ 
ers  that  be,  whether  monarchical  or  popular. 
In  any  case  in  which  the  attempt  to  introduce 
representative  government  is  at  all  likely  to 
be  made,  indifference  to  it,  and  inability  to  un¬ 
derstand  its  processes  and  requirements,  rather 
than  positive  opposition,  are  the  obstacles  to 
be  expected.  These,  however,  are  as  fatal,  and 
may  be  as  hard  to  be  got  rid  of,  as  actual  aver¬ 
sion;  it  being  easier,  in  most  cases,  to  change 
the  direction  of  an  active  feeling,  than  to  create 
one  in  a  state  previously  passive.  When  a  people 
have  no  sufficient  value  for,  and  attachment  to, 
a  representative  constitution,  they  have  next  to 
no  chance  of  retaining  it.  In  every  country,  the 
executive  is  the  branch  of  the  government 
which  wields  the  immediate  power,  and  is  in 
direct  contact  with  the  public;  to  it,  principal¬ 
ly,  the  hopes  and  fears  of  individuals  are  di¬ 
rected,  and  by  it  both  the  benefits,  and  the  ter¬ 
rors  and  prestige,  of  government  are  mainly 
represented  to  the  public  eye.  Unless,  there¬ 
fore,  the  authorities  whose  office  it  is  to  check 
the  executive  are  backed  by  an  effective  opin¬ 
ion  and  feeling  in  the  country,  the  executive 
has  always  the  means  of  setting  them  aside,  or 
compelling  them  to  subservience,  and  is  sure  to 
be  well  supported  in  doing  so.  Representative 
institutions  necessarily  depend  for  permanence 
upon  the  readiness  of  the  people  to  fight  for 
them  in  case  of  their  being  endangered.  If  too 
little  valued  for  this,  they  seldom  obtain  a  foot¬ 
ing  at  all,  and  if  they  do,  arc  almost  sure  to  be 


IN  WHAT  CASES 

overthrown,  as  soon  as  the  head  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  or  any  party  leader  who  can  muster  force 
for  a  coup  de  main ,  is  willing  to  run  some  small 
risk  for  absolute  power. 

These  considerations  relate  to  the  first  two 
causes  of  failure  in  a  representative  govern¬ 
ment.  The  third  is,  when  the  people  want 
either  the  will  or  the  capacity  to  fulfil  the  part 
which  belongs  to  them  in  a  representative  con¬ 
stitution.  When  nobody,  or  only  some  small 
fraction,  feels  the  degree  of  interest  in  the 
general  affairs  of  the  State  necessary  to  the  for¬ 
mation  of  a  public  opinion,  the  electors  will 
seldom  make  any  use  of  the  right  of  suffrage 
but  to  s erve  their  private  interest,  or  the  in¬ 
terest  of  their  locality,  or  of  some  one  with 
whom  they  are  connected  as  adherents  or  de¬ 
pendents.  The  small  class  who,  in  this  state  of 
public  feeling,  gain  the  command  of  the  repre¬ 
sentative  body,  for  the  most  part  use  it  solely 
as  a  means  of  seeking  their  fortune.  If  the  ex¬ 
ecutive  is  weak,  the  country  is  distracted  by 
mere  struggles  for  place;  if  strong,  it  makes 
itself  despotic,  at  the  cheap  price  of  appeasing 
the  representatives,  or  such  of  them  as  are  ca¬ 
pable  of  giving  trouble,  by  a  share  of  the  spoil; 
and  the  only  fruit  produced  by  national  repre¬ 
sentation  is,  that  in  addition  to  those  who 
really  govern,  there  is  an  assembly  quartered 
on  the  public,  and  no  abuse  in  which  a  portion 
of  the  assembly  are  interested  is  at  all  likely  to 
be  removed.  When,  however,  the  evil  stops 
here,  the  price  may  be  worth  paying,  for  the 
publicity  and  discussion  which,  though  not  an 
invariable,  are  a  natural  accompaniment  of 
any,  even  nominal,  representation.  In  the  mod¬ 
ern  Kingdom  of  Greece,  for  example,1  it  can 
hardly  be  doubted,  that  the  placehunters  who 
chiefly  compose  the  representative  assembly, 
though  they  contribute  little  or  nothing  direct¬ 
ly  to  good  government,  nor  even  much  tem¬ 
per  the  arbitrary  power  of  the  executive,  yet 
keep  up  the  idea  of  popular  rights,  and  con¬ 
duce  greatly  to  the  real  liberty  of  the  press 
which  exists  in  that  country.  This  benefit,  how¬ 
ever,  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  co-existence 
with  the  popular  body  of  an  hereditary  king. 
If,  instead  of  struggling  for  the  favours  of  the 
chief  ruler,  these  selfish  and  sordid  factions 
struggled  for  the  chief  place  itself,  they  would 

1  Written  before  the  salutary  revolution  of  1862, 
which,  provoked  by  popular  disgust  at  the  system 
of  governing  by  corruption,  and  the  general  de¬ 
moralisation  of  political  men,  has  opened  to  that 
rapidly  improving  people  a  new  and  hopeful  chance 
of  real  constitutional  government. 


INAPPLICABLE  351 

certainly,  as  in  Spanish  America,  keep  the 
country  in  a  state  of  chronic  revolution  and 
civil  war.  A  despotism,  not  even  legal,  but  ol 
illegal  violence,  would  be  alternately  exercised 
by  a  succession  of  political  adventurers,  and 
the  name  and  forms  of  representation  would 
have  no  effect  but  to  prevent  despotism  from 
attaining  the  stability  and  security  by  which 
alone  its  evils  can  be  mitigated,  or  its  few  ad¬ 
vantages  realised. 

The  preceding  are  the  cases  in  which  repre¬ 
sentative  government  cannot  permanently  ex¬ 
ist.  There  are  others  in  which  it  possibly  might 
exist,  but  in  which  some  other  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  would  be  preferable.  These  are  princi¬ 
pally  when  the  people,  in  order  to  advance  in 
civilisation,  have  some  lesson  to  learn,  some 
habit  not  yet  acquired,  to  the  acquisition  of 
which  representative  government  is  likely  to 
be  an  impediment. 

The  most  obvious  of  these  cases  is  the  one 
already  considered,  in  which  the  people  have 
still  to  learn  the  first  lesson  of  civilisation,  that 
of  obedience.  A  race  who  have  been  trained  in 
energy  and  courage  by  struggles  with  Nature 
and  their  neighbours,  but  who  have  not  yet 
settled  down  into  permanent  obedience  to  any 
common  superior,  would  be  little  likely  to  ac¬ 
quire  this  habit  under  the  collective  govern¬ 
ment  of  their  own  body.  A  representative  as¬ 
sembly  drawn  from  among  themselves  would 
simply  reflect  their  own  turbulent  insubordi¬ 
nation.  It  would  refuse  its  authority  to  all  pro¬ 
ceedings  which  would  impose,  on  their  savage 
independence,  any  improving  restraint.  The 
mode  in  which  such  tribes  are  usually  brought 
to  submit  to  the  primary  conditions  of  civilised 
society  is  through  the  necessities  of  warfare, 
and  the  despotic  authority  indispensable  to 
military  command.  A  military  leader  is  the 
only  superior  to  whom  they  will  submit,  ex¬ 
cept  occasionally  some  prophet  supposed  to 
be  inspired  from  above,  or  conjurer  regarded 
as  possessing  miraculous  power.  These  may  ex¬ 
ercise  a  temporary  ascendancy,  but  as  it  is 
merely  personal,  it  rarely  effects  any  change  in 
the  general  habits  of  the  people,  unless  the 
prophet,  like  Mahomet,  is  also  a  military  chief, 
and  goes  forth  the  armed  apostle  of  a  new  re¬ 
ligion;  or  unless  the  military  chiefs  ally  them¬ 
selves  with  his  influence,  and  turn  it  into  a 
prop  for  their  own  government. 

A  people  are  no  less  unfitted  for  representa¬ 
tive  government  by  the  contrary  fault  to  that 
last  specified;  by  extreme  passiveness,  and 
ready  submission  to  tyranny.  If  a  people  thus 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


352 

prostrated  by  character  and  circumstances 
could  obtain  representative  institutions,  they 
would  inevitably  choose  their  tyrants  as  their 
representatives,  and  the  yoke  would  be  made 
heavier  on  them  by  the  contrivance  which 
prima  facie  might  be  expected  to  lighten  it. 
On  the  contrary,  many  a  people  has  gradually 
emerged  from  this  condition  by  the  aid  of  a 
central  authority,  whose  position  has  made  it 
the  rival,  and  has  ended  by  making  it  the  mas¬ 
ter,  of  the  local  despots,  and  which,  above  all, 
has  been  single.  French  history,  from  Hugh 
Capet  to  Richelieu  and  Louis  XIV.,  is  a  con¬ 
tinued  example  of  this  course  of  things.  Even 
when  the  King  was  scarcely  so  powerful  as 
many  of  his  chief  feudatories,  the  great  advan¬ 
tage  which  he  derived  from  being  but  one 
has  been  recognised  by  French  historians.  To 
him  the  eyes  of  all  the  locally  oppressed  were 
turned;  he  was  the  object  of  hope  and  reliance 
throughout  the  kingdom;  while  each  local  po¬ 
tentate  was  only  powerful  within  a  more  or 
less  confined  space.  At  his  hands,  refuge  and 
protection  were  sought  from  every  part  of  the 
country,  against  first  one,  then  another,  of  the 
immediate  oppressors.  His  progress  to  ascend¬ 
ancy  was  slow;  but  it  resulted  from  successively 
taking  advantage  of  opportunities  which  of¬ 
fered  themselves  only  to  him.  It  was,  therefore, 
sure;  and,  in  proportion  as  it  was  accom¬ 
plished,  it  abated,  in  the  oppressed  portion  of 
the  community,  the  habit  of  submitting  to  op¬ 
pression.  The  king's  interest  lay  in  encourag¬ 
ing  all  partial  attempts  on  the  part  of  the  serfs 
to  emancipate  themselves  from  their  masters, 
and  place  themselves  in  immediate  subordina¬ 
tion  to  himself.  Under  his  protection  numer¬ 
ous  communities  were  formed  which  knew  no 
one  above  them  but  the  King.  Obedience  to  a 
distant  monarch  is  liberty  itself  compared  with 
the  dominion  of  the  lord  of  the  neighbouring 
castle:  and  the  monarch  was  long  compelled 
by  necessities  of  position  to  exert  his  authority 
as  the  ally,  rather  than  the  master,  of  the 
classes  whom  he  had  aided  in  alfecting  their 
liberation.  In  this  manner  a  central  power, 
despotic  in  principle  though  generally  much 
restricted  in  practice,  was  mainly  instrumental 
in  carrying  the  people  through  a  necessary 
stage  of  improvement,  which  representative 
government,  if  real,  would  most  likely  have 
prevented  them  from  entering  upon.  Nothing 
short  of  despotic  rule,  or  a  general  massacre, 
could  have  effected  the  emancipation  of  the 
serfs  in  the  Russian  Empire. 

The  same  passages  of  history  forcibly  illus¬ 


trate  another  mode  in  which  unlimited  mon¬ 
archy  overcomes  obstacles  to  the  progress  of 
civilisation  which  representative  government 
would  have  had  a  decided  tendency  to  aggra¬ 
vate.  One  of  the  strongest  hindrances  to  im¬ 
provement.  up  to  a  rather  advanced  stage,  is 
an  inveterate  spirit  of  locality.  Portions  of 
mankind,  in  many  other  respects  capable  of. 
and  prepared  for,  freedom,  may  be  unqualified 
for  amalgamating  into  even  the  smallest  na¬ 
tion.  Not  only  may  jealousies  and  antipathies 
repel  them  from  one  another,  and  bar  all  pos¬ 
sibility  of  voluntary  union,  but  they  may  not 
yet  have  acquired  any  of  the  feelings  or  habits 
which  would  make  the  union  real,  supposing 
it  to  be  nominally  accomplished.  They  may, 
like  the  citizens  of  an  ancient  community,  or 
those  of  an  Asiatic  village,  have  had  consider¬ 
able  practice  in  exercising  their  faculties  on 
village  or  town  interests,  and  have  even  real¬ 
ised  a  tolerably  effective  popular  government 
on  that  restricted  scale,  and  may  yet  have  but 
slender  sympathies  with  anything  beyond,  and 
no  habit  or  capacity  of  dealing  with  interests 
common  to  many  such  communities. 

I  am  not  aware  that  history  furnishes  any 
example  in  which  a  number  of  these  political 
atoms  or  corpuscles  have  coalesced  into  a  body, 
and  learnt  to  feel  themselves  one  people,  ex¬ 
cept  through  previous  subjection  to  a  central 
authority  common  to  all.1  It  is  through  the 
habit  of  deferring  to  that  authority,  entering 
into  its  plans  and  subserving  its  purposes,  that 
a  people  such  as  we  have  supposed  receive  into 
their  minds  the  conception  of  large  interests, 
common  to  a  considerable  geographical  ex¬ 
tent.  Such  interests,  on  the  contrary,  are  neces¬ 
sarily  the  predominant  consideration  in  the 
mind  of  the  central  ruler;  and  through  the  re¬ 
lations,  more  or  less  intimate,  which  he  pro¬ 
gressively  establishes  with  the  localities,  they 
become  familiar  to  the  general  mind.  The 
most  favourable  concurrence  of  circumstances 
under  which  this  step  in  improvement  could 
be  made,  would  be  one  which  should  raise  up 
representative  institutions  without  representa¬ 
tive  government;  a  representative  both,  or 
bodies,  drawn  from  the  localities,  making  it¬ 
self  the  auxiliary  and  instrument  of  the  cen¬ 
tral  power,  but  seldom  attempting  to  thwart  or 

1  Italy,  which  alone  can  he  quoted  as  an  excep¬ 
tion.  is  only  so  in  regard  to  the  final  stage  of  its 
transformation.  The  more  difficult  previous  ad¬ 
vance  from  the  cits  isolation  of  Florence,  Pisa,  or 
Milan,  to  the  provincial  unity  of  'I  nscany  01  I  om- 
bardy,  took  place  in  the  usual  manner. 


IN  IVHAT  CASES 

control  it.  The  people  being  thus  taken,  as  it 
were,  into  council,  though  not  sharing  the 
supreme  power,  the  political  education  given 
by  the  central  authority  is  carried  home,  much 
more  effectually  than  it  could  otherwise  be,  to 
the  local  chiefs  and  to  the  population  general¬ 
ly;  while,  at  the  same  time,  a  tradition  is  kept 
up  of  government  by  general  consent,  or  at 
least,  the  sanction  of  tradition  is  not  given  to 
government  without  it,  which,  when  conse¬ 
crated  by  custom,  has  so  often  put  a  bad  end  to 
a  good  beginning,  and  is  one  of  the  most  fre¬ 
quent  causes  of  the  sad  fatality  which  in  most 
countries  has  stopped  improvement  in  so  early 
a  stage,  because  the  work  of  some  one  period 
has  been  so  done  as  to  bar  the  needful  work  of 
the  ages  following.  Meanwhile,  it  may  be  laid 
down  as  a  political  truth,  that  by  irresponsible 
monarchy  rather  than  by  representative  gov¬ 
ernment  can  a  multitude  of  insignificant  po¬ 
litical  units  be  welded  into  a  people,  with  com¬ 
mon  feelings  of  cohesion,  power  enough  to 
protect  itself  against  conquest  or  foreign  ag¬ 
gression,  and  affairs  sufficiently  various  and 
considerable  of  its  own  to  occupy  worthily  and 
expand  to  fit  proportions  the  social  and  politi¬ 
cal  intelligence  of  the  population. 

For  these  several  reasons,  kingly  government, 
free  from  the  control  (though  perhaps  strength¬ 
ened  by  the  support)  of  representative  institu¬ 
tions,  is  the  most  suitable  form  of  polity  for  the 
earliest  stages  of  any  community,  not  except¬ 
ing  a  city-community  like  those  of  ancient 
Greece:  where,  accordingly,  the  government 
of  kings,  under  some  real  but  no  ostensible  or 
constitutional  control  by  public  opinion,  did 
historically  precede  by  an  unknown  and  prob¬ 
ably  great  duration  all  free  institutions,  and 
gave  place  at  last,  during  a  considerable  lapse 
of  time,  to  oligarchies  of  a  few  families. 

A  hundred  other  infirmities  or  short-com¬ 
ings  in  a  people  might  be  pointed  out,  which 
pro  tanto  disqualify  them  from  making  the 
best  use  of  representative  government;  but  in 
regard  to  these  it  is  not  equally  obvious  that 
the  government  of  One  or  a  Few  would  have 
any  tendency  to  cure  or  alleviate  the  evil. 
Strong  prejudices  of  any  kind;  obstinate  ad¬ 
herence  to  old  habits;  positive  defects  of  na¬ 
tional  character,  or  mere  ignorance,  and  de¬ 
ficiency  of  mental  cultivation,  if  prevalent  in 
a  people,  will  be  in  general  faithfully  reflected 
in  their  representative  assemblies:  and  should 
it  happen  that  the  executive  administration, 
the  direct  management  of  public  affairs,  is  in 
the  hands  of  persons  comparatively  free  from 


INAPPLICABLE  353 

these  defects,  more  good  would  frequently  be 
done  by  them  when  not  hampered  by  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  carrying  with  them  the  voluntary  as¬ 
sent  of  such  bodies.  But  the  mere  position  of 
the  rulers  does  not  in  these,  as  it  does  in  the 
other  cases  which  we  have  examined,  of  itself 
invest  them  with  interests  and  tendencies  op¬ 
erating  in  the  beneficial  direction.  From  the 
general  weaknesses  of  the  people  or  of  the 
state  of  civilisation,  the  One  and  his  counsel¬ 
lors,  or  the  Few,  are  not  likely  to  be  habitually 
exempt;  except  in  the  case  of  their  being  for¬ 
eigners,  belonging  to  a  superior  people  or  a 
more  advanced  state  of  society.  Then,  indeed, 
the  rulers  may  be,  to  almost  any  extent,  supe¬ 
rior  in  civilisation  to  those  over  whom  they 
rule;  and  subjection  to  a  foreign  government 
of  this  description,  notwithstanding  its  in¬ 
evitable  evils,  is  often  of  the  greatest  advantage 
to  a  people,  carrying  them  rapidly  through 
several  stages  of  progress,  and  clearing  away 
obstacles  to  improvement  which  might  have 
lasted  indefinitely  if  the  subject  population 
had  been  left  unassisted  to  its  native  tenden¬ 
cies  and  chances.  In  a  country  not  under  the 
dominion  of  foreigners,  the  only  cause  ade¬ 
quate  to  producing  similar  benefits  is  the  rare 
accident  of  a  monarch  of  extraordinary  genius. 
There  have  been  in  history  a  few  of  these,  who, 
happily  for  humanity,  have  reigned  long  e- 
nough  to  render  some  of  their  improvements 
permanent,  by  leaving  them  under  the  guard¬ 
ianship  of  a  generation  which  had  grown  up 
under  their  influence.  Charlemagne  may  be 
cited  as  one  instance;  Peter  the  Great  is  an¬ 
other.  Such  examples  however  are  so  unfre¬ 
quent  that  they  can  only  be  classed  with  the 
happy  accidents  which  have  so  often  decided 
at  a  critical  moment  whether  some  leading 
portion  of  humanity  should  make  a  sudden 
start,  or  sink  back  towards  barbarism:  chances 
like  the  existence  of  Themistocles  at  the  time 
of  the  Persian  invasion,  or  of  the  first  or  third 
William  of  Orange. 

It  would  be  absurd  to  construct  institutions 
for  the  mere  purpose  of  taking  advantage  of 
such  possibilities;  especially  as  men  of  this 
calibre,  in  any  distinguished  position,  do  not 
require  despotic  power  to  enable  them  to  exert 
great  influence,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  three 
last  mentioned.  The  case  most  requiring  con¬ 
sideration  in  reference  to  institutions  is  the 
not  very  uncommon  one  in  which  a  small  but 
leading  portion  of  the  population,  from  dif¬ 
ference  of  race,  more  civilised  origin,  or  other 
peculiarities  of  circumstance,  are  markedly 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


354 

superior  in  civilisation  and  general  character 
to  the  remainder.  Under  those  conditions,  gov¬ 
ernment  by  the  representatives  of  the  mass 
would  stand  a  chance  of  depriving  them  of 
much  of  the  benefit  they  might  derive  from 
the  greater  civilisation  of  the  superior  ranks; 
while  government  by  the  representatives  of 
those  ranks  would  probably  rivet  the  degrada¬ 
tion  of  the  multitude,  and  leave  them  no  hope 
of  decent  treatment  except  by  ridding  them¬ 
selves  of  one  of  the  most  valuable  elements  of 
future  advancement.  The  best  prospect  of  im¬ 
provement  for  a  people  thus  composed  lies  in 
the  existence  of  a  constitutionally  unlimited, 
or  at  least  a  practically  preponderant,  author¬ 
ity  in  the  chief  ruler  of  the  dominant  class.  He 
alone  has  by  his  position  an  interest  in  raising 
and  improving  the  mass  of  whom  he  is  not 
jealous,  as  a  counterpoise  to  his  associates  of 
whom  he  is.  And  if  fortunate  circumstances 
place  beside  him,  not  as  controllers  but  as  sub¬ 
ordinates,  a  body  representative  of  the  supe¬ 
rior  caste,  which  by  its  objections  and  ques¬ 
tionings,  and  by  its  occasional  outbreaks  of 
spirit,  keeps  alive  habits  of  collective  resist¬ 
ance,  and  may  admit  of  being,  in  time  and  by 
degrees,  expanded  into  a  really  national  repre¬ 
sentation  (which  is  in  substance  the  history  of 
the  English  Parliament),  the  nation  has  then 
the  most  favourable  prospects  of  improvement 
which  can  well  occur  to  a  community  thus  cir¬ 
cumstanced  and  constituted. 

Among  the  tendencies  which,  without  abso¬ 
lutely  rendering  a  people  unfit  for  representa¬ 
tive  government,  seriously  incapacitate  them 
from  reaping  the  full  benefit  of  it,  one  deserves 
particular  notice.  There  are  two  states  of  the 
inclinations,  intrinsically  very  different,  but 
which  have  something  in  common,  by  virtue 
of  which  they  often  coincide  in  the  direction 
they  give  to  the  efforts  of  individuals  and  of 
nations:  one  is,  the  desire  to  exercise  power 
over  others;  the  other  is  disinclination  to  have 
power  exercised  over  themselves. 

The  difference  between  different  portions 
of  mankind  in  the  relative  strength  of  these 
two  dispositions  is  one  of  the  most  important 
elements  in  their  history.  There  are  nations  in 
whom  the  passion  for  governing  others  is  so 
much  stronger  than  the  desire  of  personal  in¬ 
dependence,  that  for  the  mere  shadow  of  the 
one  they  are  found  ready  to  sat  rificc  the  whole 
of  the  other.  Each  one  of  their  number  is  will¬ 
ing,  like  the  private  soldier  in  an  army,  to 
abdicate  his  personal  freedom  of  action  into 
die  hands  of  his  general,  provided  the  army  is 


triumphant  and  victorious,  and  he  is  able  to 
flatter  himself  that  he  is  one  of  a  conquering 
host,  though  the  notion  that  he  has  himself 
any  share  in  the  domination  exercised  over  the 
conquered  is  an  illusion.  A  government  strict¬ 
ly  limited  in  its  powers  and  attributions,  re¬ 
quired  to  hold  its  hands  from  over-meddling, 
and  to  let  most  things  go  on  without  its  assum¬ 
ing  the  part  of  guardian  or  director,  is  not  to 
the  taste  of  such  a  people.  In  their  eyes  the 
possessors  of  authority  can  hardly  take  too 
much  upon  themselves,  provided  the  author¬ 
ity  itself  is  open  to  general  competition.  An 
average  individual  among  them  prefers  the 
chance,  however  distant  or  improbable,  of 
wielding  some  share  of  power  over  his  fellow- 
citizens,  above  the  certainty,  to  himself  and 
others,  of  having  no  unnecessary  power  exer¬ 
cised  over  them.  These  are  the  elements  of  a 
people  of  place-hunters;  in  whom  the  course 
of  politics  is  mainly  determined  by  place-hunt¬ 
ing;  where  equality  alone  is  cared  for,  but  not 
liberty;  where  the  contests  of  political  parties 
are  but  struggles  to  decide  whether  the  power 
of  meddling  in  everything  shall  belong  to  one 
class  or  another,  perhaps  merely  to  one  knot 
of  public  men  or  another;  where  the  idea  en¬ 
tertained  of  democracy  is  merely  that  of  open¬ 
ing  offices  to  the  competition  of  all  instead 
of  a  few;  where,  the  more  popular  the  insti¬ 
tutions,  the  more  innumerable  are  the  places 
created,  and  the  more  monstrous  the  over-gov¬ 
ernment  exercised  by  all  over  each,  and  by  the 
executive  over  all.  It  would  be  as  unjust  as  it 
would  be  ungenerous  to  offer  this,  or  anything 
approaching  to  it,  as  an  unexaggerated  picture 
of  the  French  people;  yet  the  degree  in  which 
they  do  participate  in  this  type  of  character 
has  caused  representative  government  by  a 
limited  class  to  break  down  by  excess  of  cor¬ 
ruption,  and  the  attempt  at  representative 
government  by  the  whole  male  population  to 
end  in  giving  one  man  the  power  of  consign¬ 
ing  any  number  of  the  rest,  without  trial,  to 
Lambessa  or  Cayenne,  provided  lie  allows  all 
of  them  to  think  themselves  not  excluded  from 
the  possibility  of  sharing  his  favours. 

The  point  of  character  which,  beyond  any 
other,  fits  the  people  of  this  country  for  repre¬ 
sentative  government  is  that  they  have  almost 
universally  the  contrary  characteristic.  They 
are  very  jealous  of  any  attempt  to  exercise 
power  over  them  not  sanctioned  by  long  usage 
and  by  their  own  opinion  of  right;  but  they  in 
general  care  very  little  for  the  exercise  of  pow¬ 
er  over  others.  Not  having  the  smallest  sym- 


ITS  PROPER  FUNCTIONS  355 


pathy  with  the  passion  for  governing,  while 
they  are  but  too  well  acquainted  with  the  mo¬ 
tives  of  private  interest  from  which  that  office 
is  sought,  they  prefer  that  it  should  be  per¬ 
formed  by  those  to  whom  it  comes  without 
seeking,  as  a  consequence  of  social  position.  If 
foreigners  understood  this,  it  would  account 
to  them  for  some  of  the  apparent  contradic¬ 
tions  in  the  political  feelings  of  Englishmen, 
their  unhesitating  readiness  to  let  themselves 
be  governed  by  the  higher  classes,  coupled  with 
so  little  personal  subservience  to  them,  that  no 
people  are  so  fond  of  resisting  authority  when 
it  oversteps  certain  prescribed  limits,  or  so 
determined  to  make  their  rulers  always  remem¬ 
ber  that  they  will  only  be  governed  in  the  way 
they  themselves  like  best.  Place-hunting,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  is  a  form  of  ambition  to  which  the 
English,  considered  nationally,  are  almost 
strangers.  If  we  except  the  few  families  or  con¬ 
nections  of  whom  official  employment  lies  di¬ 
rectly  in  the  way,  Englishmen’s  views  of  ad¬ 
vancement  in  life  take  an  altogether  different 
direction— that  of  success  in  business,  or  in  a 
profession.  They  have  the  strongest  distaste 
for  any  mere  struggle  for  office  by  political 
parties  or  individuals:  and  there  are  few  things 
to  which  they  have  a  greater  aversion  than  to 
the  multiplication  of  public  employments:  a 
thing,  on  the  contrary,  always  popular  with 
the  bureaucracy-ridden  nations  of  the  Conti¬ 
nent,  who  would  rather  pay  higher  taxes  than 
diminish  by  the  smallest  fraction  their  indi¬ 
vidual  chances  of  a  place  for  themselves  or 
their  relatives,  and  among  whom  a  cry  for  re¬ 
trenchment  never  means  abolition  of  offices, 
but  the  reduction  of  the  salaries  of  those  which 
are  too  considerable  for  the  ordinary  citizen  to 
have  any  chance  of  being  appointed  to  them. 

Chapter  5 

Of  the  Proper  Functions  of 
Representative  Bodies 
In  treating  of  representative  government,  it 
is  above  all  necessary  to  keep  in  view  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  its  idea  or  essence,  and  the 
particular  forms  in  which  the  idea  has  been 
clothed  by  accidental  historical  developments, 
or  by  the  notions  current  at  some  particular 
period. 

The  meaning  of  representative  government 
is,  that  the  whole  people,  or  some  numerous 
portion  of  them,  exercise  through  deputies  peri¬ 
odically  elected  by  themselves  the  ultimate  con¬ 
trolling  power,  which,  in  every  constitution, 


must  reside  somewhere.  This  ultimate  power 
they  must  possess  in  all  its  completeness.  They 
must  be  masters,  whenever  they  please,  of  all 

the  operationsofgovernment.Thereisno  need 
that  the  constitutional  law  should  itself  give 
them  this  mastery.  It  does  not  in  the  British 
Constitution.  But  what  it  does  give  practically 
amounts  to  this.  The  power  of  final  control 
is  as  essentially  single,  in  a  mixed  and  balanced 
government,  as  in  a  pure  monarchy  or  democ¬ 
racy.  This  is  the  portion  of  truth  in  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  ancients,  revived  by  great  author¬ 
ities  in  our  own  time,  that  a  balanced  consti¬ 
tution  is  impossible.  There  is  almost  always 
a  balance,  but  the  scales  never  hang  exactly 
even.  Which  of  them  preponderates  is  not 
always  apparent  on  the  face  of  the  political  in¬ 
stitutions.  In  the  British  Constitution,  each 
of  the  three  co-ordinate  members  of  the  sov¬ 
ereignty  is  invested  with  powers  which,  if  fully 
exercised,  would  enable  it  to  stop  all  the  ma¬ 
chinery  of  government.  Nominally,  therefore, 
each  is  invested  with  equal  power  of  thwarting 
and  obstructing  the  others:  and  if,  by  exerting 
that  power,  any  of  the  three  could  hope  to 
better  its  position,  the  ordinary  course  of  hu¬ 
man  affairs  forbids  us  to  doubt  that  the  power 
would  be  exercised.  There  can  be  no  question 
that  the  full  powers  of  each  would  be  em¬ 
ployed  defensively  if  it  found  itself  assailed 
by  one  or  both  of  the  others.  What  then  pre¬ 
vents  the  same  powers  from  being  exerted  ag¬ 
gressively?  The  unwritten  maxims  of  the  Con¬ 
stitution— in  other  words,  the  positive  political 
morality  of  the  country:  and  this  positive  polit¬ 
ical  morality  is  what  we  must  look  to,  if  we 
would  know  in  whom  the  really  supreme  power 
in  the  Constitution  resides. 

By  constitutional  law,  the  Crown  can  refuse 
its  assent  to  any  Act  of  Parliament,  and  can 
appoint  to  office  and  maintain  in  it  any  Min¬ 
ister,  in  opposition  to  the  remonstrances  of 
Parliament.  But  the  constitutional  morality 
of  the  country  nullifies  these  powers,  prevent¬ 
ing  them  from  being  ever  used;  and,  by  re¬ 
quiring  that  the  head  of  the  Administration 
should  always  be  virtually  appointed  by  the 
House  of  Commons,  makes  that  body  the  real 
sovereign  of  the  State.  These  unwritten  rules, 
which  limit  the  use  of  lawful  powers,  are,  how¬ 
ever,  only  effectual,  and  maintain  themselves 
in  existence,  on  condition  of  harmonising^  ith 
the  actual  distribution  of  real  political  strength. 
There  is  in  every  constitution  a  strongest  pow¬ 
er-one  which  would  gain  the  victory  if  the 
compromises  by  which  the  Constitution  habit- 


356  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


ually  works  were  suspended  and  there  came  a 
trial  of  strength.  Constitutional  maxims  are 
adhered  to,  and  are  practically  operative,  so 
long  as  they  give  the  predominance  in  the 
Constitution  to  that  one  of  the  powers  which 
has  the  preponderance  of  active  power  out  of 
doors.  This,  in  England,  is  the  popular  power. 
If.  therefore,  the  legal  provisions  of  the  British 
Constitution,  together  with  theunwritten  max¬ 
ims  by  which  the  conduct  of  the  different  po¬ 
litical  authorities  is  in  fact  regulated,  did  not 
give  to  the  popular  element  in  the  Constitu¬ 
tion  that  substantial  supremacy  over  every  de¬ 
partment  of  the  government  which  corre¬ 
sponds  to  its  real  power  in  the  country,  the 
Constitution  would  not  possess  the  stability 
which  characterises  it;  either  the  laws  or  the 
unwritten  maxims  would  soon  have  to  be 
changed.  The  British  government  is  thus  a 
representative  government  in  the  correct  sense 
of  the  term:  and  the  powers  which  it  leaves  in 
hands  not  directly  accountable  to  the  people 
can  only  be  considered  as  precautions  which 
the  ruling  power  is  willing  should  be  taken 
against  its  own  errors.  Such  precautions  have 
existed  in  all  well-constructed  democracies. 
The  Athenian  Constitution  had  many  such  pro¬ 
visions;  and  so  has  that  of  the  United  States. 

But  while  it  is  essential  to  representative 
government  that  the  practical  supremacy  in 
the  state  should  reside  in  the  representatives 
of  the  people,  it  is  an  open  question  what  ac¬ 
tual  functions,  what  precise  part  in  the  ma¬ 
chinery  of  government,  shall  be  directly  and 
personally  discharged  by  the  representative 
body.  Great  varieties  in  this  respect  are  com¬ 
patible  with  the  essence  of  representative  gov¬ 
ernment,  provided  the  functions  are  such  as 
secure  to  the  representative  body  the  control 
of  everything  in  the  last  resort. 

There  is  a  radical  distinction  between  con¬ 
trolling  the  business  of  government  and  ac¬ 
tually  doing  it.  The  same  person  or  body  may 
be  able  to  control  everything,  but  cannot  pos¬ 
sibly  do  everything;  and  in  many  cases  its  con¬ 
trol  over  everything  will  be  more  perfect  the 
less  it  personal!)  attempts  to  do.  The  com¬ 
mander  of  an  army  could  not  direct  its  move¬ 
ments  effectually  if  he  himself  fought  in  the 
ranks,  or  led  an  assault.  It  is  the  same  with 
bodies  of  men.  Some  things  cannot  be  clone 
except  by  bodies;  other  things  cannot  be  well 
clone  by  them.  It  is  one  question,  therefore, 
what  a  popular  assembly  should  control,  an¬ 
other  what  it  should  itself  do.  It  should,  as  we 
have  already  seen,  control  all  the  operations  of 


government.  But  in  order  to  determine  through 
what  channel  this  general  control  may  most 
expediently  be  exercised,  and  what  portion  of 
the  business  of  government  the  representative 
assembly  should  hold  in  its  own  hands,  it  is 
necessary  to  consider  what  kinds  of  business  a 
numerous  body  is  competent  to  perform  prop¬ 
erly.  That  alone  which  it  can  do  well  it  ought 
to  take  personally  upon  itself.  With  regard  to 
the  rest,  its  proper  province  is  not  to  do  it.  but 
to  take  means  for  having  it  well  done  by  others. 

For  example,  the  duty  which  is  considered  as 
belonging  more  peculiarly  than  any  other  to 
an  assembly  representative  of  the  people,  is 
that  of  voting  the  taxes.  Nevertheless,  in  no 
country  does  the  representative  body  under¬ 
take,  by  itself  or  its  delegated  officers,  to  pre¬ 
pare  the  estimates.  Though  the  supplies  can 
only  be  N  oted  by  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
though  the  sanction  of  the  House  is  also  re¬ 
quired  for  the  appropriation  of  the  revenues 
to  the  different  items  of  the  public  expend¬ 
iture,  it  is  the  maxim  and  the  uniform  practice 
of  the  Constitution  that  money  can  be  granted 
only  on  the  proposition  of  the  Crown.  It  has, 
no  doubt,  been  felt,  that  moderation  as  to  the 
amount,  and  care  and  judgment  in  the  detail 
of  its  application,  can  only  be  expected  when 
the  executive  government,  through  whose 
hands  it  is  to  pass,  is  made  responsible  for  the 
plans  and  calculations  on  which  the  disburse¬ 
ments  are  grounded.  Parliament,  accordingly, 
is  not  expected,  nor  even  permitted,  to  origi¬ 
nate  directly  either  taxation  or  expenditure. 
All  it  is  asked  for  is  its  consent,  and  the  sole 
power  it  possesses  is  that  of  refusal. 

The  principles  which  are  involved  and  rec¬ 
ognised  in  this  constitutional  doctrine,  if  fol¬ 
lowed  as  far  as  they  will  go,  are  a  guide  to  the 
limitation  and  definition  of  the  general  func¬ 
tions  of  representative  assemblies.  In  the  first 
place,  it  is  admitted  in  all  countries  in  which 
the  representative  system  is  practically  under¬ 
stood,  that  numerous  representative  bodies 
ought  not  to  administer.  The  maxim  isground- 
ed  not  only  on  the  most  essential  principles  of 
good  government,  but  on  those  of  the  success¬ 
ful  conduct  of  business  of  any  description.  No 
body  of  men,  unless  organised  and  under  com¬ 
mand,  is  fit  for  action,  in  the  proper  sense. 
Even  a  select  board,  composed  of  few  mem¬ 
bers,  and  these  specially  conversant  with  the 
business  to  be  done,  is  always  an  inferior  in¬ 
strument  to  some  one  individual  who  could  be 
found  among  them,  and  would  be  improved  in 
character  if  that  one  person  were  made  the 


ITS  PROPER 

chief,  and  all  the  others  reduced  to  subordi¬ 
nates.  What  can  be  done  better  by  a  body  than 
by  any  individual  is  deliberation.  When  it  is 
necessary  or  important  to  secure  hearing  and 
consideration  to  many  conflicting  opinions,  a 
deliberative  body  is  indispensable.  Those  bod¬ 
ies,  therefore,  are  frequently  useful,  even  for 
administrative  business,  but  in  general  only 
as  advisers;  such  business  being,  as  a  rule,  bet¬ 
ter  conducted  under  the  responsibility  of  one. 
Even  a  joint-stock  company  has  always  in  prac¬ 
tice,  if  not  in  theory,  a  managing  director;  its 
good  or  bad  management  depends  essentially 
on  some  one  person’s  qualifications,  and  the 
remaining  directors,  when  of  any  use,  are  so 
by  their  suggestions  to  him,  or  by  the  power 
they  possess  of  watching  him,  and  restraining 
or  removing  him  in  case  of  misconduct.  That 
they  are  ostensibly  equal  shares  with  him  in 
the  management  is  no  advantage,  but  a  con¬ 
siderable  set-off  against  any  good  which  they 
are  capable  of  doing;  it  weakens  gieatly  the 
sense  in  his  own  mind,  and  in  those  of  other 
people,  of  that  individual  responsibility  in 
which  he  should  stand  forth  personally  and 
undividedly. 

But  a  popular  assembly  is  still  less  fitted  to 
administer,  or  to  dictate  in  detail  to  those  who 
have  the  charge  of  administration.  Even  when 
honestly  meant,  the  interference  is  almost  al¬ 
ways  injurious.  Every  branch  of  public  ad¬ 
ministration  is  a  skilled  business,  which  has 
its  own  peculiar  principles  and  traditional 
rules,  many  of  them  not  even  known,  in  any 
effectual  way,  except  to  those  who  have  at  some 
time  had  a  hand  in  carrying  on  the  business, 
and  none  of  them  likely  to  be  duly  appreci¬ 
ated  by  persons  not  practically  acquainted 
with  the  department.  I  do  not  mean  that  the 
transaction  of  public  business  has  esoteric  mys¬ 
teries,  only  to  be  understood  by  the  initiated. 
Its  principles  are  all  intelligible  to  any  per¬ 
son  of  good  sense,  who  has  in  his  mind  a  true 
picture  of  the  circumstances  and  conditions  to 
be  dealt  with:  but  to  have  this  he  must  know 
those  circumstances  and  conditions;  and  the 
knowledge  does  not  come  by  intuition.  There 
are  many  rules  of  the  greatest  importance  in 
every  branch  of  public  business  (as  there  are 
in  every  private  occupation),  of  which  a  per¬ 
son  fresh  to  the  subject  neither  knows  the  rea¬ 
son  or  even  suspects  the  existence,  because  they 
are  intended  to  meet  dangers  or  provide  against 
inconveniences  which  never  entered  into  his 
thoughts.  I  have  known  public  men.  ministers, 
of  more  than  ordinary  natural  capacity,  who 


F  UN C  T IONS  357 

on  their  first  introduction  to  a  department  of 
business  new  to  them,  have  excited  the  mirth 
of  their  inferiors  by  the  air  with  which  they  an¬ 
nounced  as  a  truth  hitherto  set  at  nought,  and 
brought  to  light  by  themselves,  something 
which  was  probably  the  first  thought  of  every¬ 
body  who  ever  looked  at  the  subject,  given  up 
as  soon  as  he  had  got  on  to  a  second.  It  is  true 
that  a  great  statesman  is  he  who  knows  when 
to  depart  from  traditions,  as  well  as  when  to 
adhere  to  them.  But  it  is  a  great  mistake  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  he  will  do  this  better  for  being  ig¬ 
norant  of  the  traditions.  No  one  who  does  not 
thoroughly  know  the  modes  of  action  which 
common  experience  has  sanctioned  is  capable 
of  judging  of  the  circumstances  which  require 
a  departure  from  those  ordinary  modes  of  ac¬ 
tion.  The  interests  dependent  on  the  acts  done 
by  a  public  department,  the  consequences  lia¬ 
ble  to  follow  from  any  particular  mode  of  con¬ 
ducting  it,  require  for  weighing  and  estimat¬ 
ing  them  a  kind  of  knowledge,  and  of  specially 
exercised  judgment,  almost  as  rarely  found  in 
those  not  bred  to  it,  as  the  capacity  to  reform 
the  law  in  those  who  have  not  professionally 
studied  it. 

All  these  difficulties  are  sure  to  be  ignored 
by  a  representative  assembly  which  attempts 
to  decide  on  special  acts  of  administration.  At 
its  best,  it  is  inexperience  sitting  in  judgment 
on  experience,  ignorance  on  knowledge:  ig¬ 
norance  which  never  suspecting  the  existence 
of  what  it  does  not  know,  is  equally  careless 
and  supercilious,  making  light  of,  if  not  re¬ 
senting,  all  pretensions  to  have  a  judgment 
better  worth  attending  to  than  its  own.  Thus 
it  is  when  no  interested  motives  intervene: 
but  when  they  do,  the  result  is  jobbery  more 
unblushing  and  audacious  than  the  worst  cor¬ 
ruption  which  can  well  take  place  in  a  public 
office  under  a  government  of  publicity.  It  is 
not  necessary  that  the  interested  bias  should 
extend  to  the  majority  of  the  assembly.  In  any 
particular  case  it  is  often  enough  that  it  affects 
two  or  three  of  their  number.  Those  two  or 
three  will  have  a  greater  interest  in  mislead¬ 
ing  the  body,  than  any  other  of  its  members 
are  likely  to  have  in  putting  it  right.  The  bulk 
of  the  assembly  may  keep  their  hands  clean, 
but  they  cannot  keep  their  minds  vigilant  or 
their  judgments  discerning  in  matters  they 
know  nothing  about;  and  an  indolent  major¬ 
ity.  like  an  indolent  individual,  belongs  to  the 
person  who  takes  most  pains  with  it.  The  bad 
measures  or  bad  appointments  of  a  minister 
may  be  checked  by  Parliament;  and  the  in- 


358  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


terest  of  ministers  in  defending,  and  of  rival 
partisans  in  attacking,  secures  a  tolerably  equal 
discussion:  but  quis  custodiet  custodes?  who 
shall  check  the  Parliament?  A  minister,  a  head 
of  an  office,  feels  himself  under  some  responsi¬ 
bility.  An  assembly  in  such  cases  feels  under 
no  responsibility  at  all:  for  when  did  any  mem¬ 
ber  of  Parliament  lose  his  seat  for  the  vote  he 
gave  on  any  detail  of  administration?  To  a 
minister,  or  the  head  of  an  office,  it  is  of  more 
importance  what  will  be  thought  of  his  pro¬ 
ceedings  some  time  hence  than  what  is  thought 
of  them  at  the  instant:  but  an  assembly,  if  the 
cry  of  the  moment  goes  with  it.  however  hastily 
raised  or  artificially  stirred  up,  thinks  itself 
and  is  thought  by  everybody  to  be  completely 
exculpated  however  disastrous  may  be  the  con¬ 
sequences.  Besides,  an  assembly  never  person¬ 
ally  experiences  the  inconveniences  of  its  bad 
measures  until  they  have  reached  the  dimen¬ 
sions  of  national  evils.  Ministers  and  adminis¬ 
trators  sec  them  approaching,  and  have  to  bear 
all  the  annoyance  and  trouble  of  attempting 
to  ward  them  off. 

The  proper  duty  of  a  representative  assem¬ 
bly  in  regard  to  matters  of  administration  is 
not  to  decide  them  by  its  own  vote,  but  to  take 
care  that  the  persons  who  have  to  decide  them 
shall  be  the  proper  persons.  Even  this  they  can¬ 
not  advantageously  do  by  nominating  the  in¬ 
dividuals.  There  is  no  act  which  more  impera¬ 
tively  requires  to  be  performed  under  a  strong 
sense  of  individual  responsibility  than  the 
nomination  to  employments.  The  experience 
of  every  person  conversant  with  public  affairs 
bears  out  the  assertion,  that  there  is  scarcely 
any  act  respecting  which  the  conscience  of  an 
average  man  is  less  sensitive;  scarcely  any  case 
in  which  less  consideration  is  paid  to  qualifi¬ 
cations,  partly  because  men  do  not  know,  and 
partly  because  they  do  not  care  for,  the  dif¬ 
ference  in  qualifications  between  one  person 
and  another.  When  a  minister  makes  what  is 
meant  to  be  an  honest  appointment,  that  is 
when  he  does  not  actually  job  it  for  his  per¬ 
sonal  connections  or  his  party,  an  ignorant 
person  might  suppose  that  he  would  try  to 
give  it  to  the  person  best  qualified.  No  such 
tiling.  An  ordinary  minister  thinks  himself  a 
miracle  of  virtue  it  he  gives  it  to  a  person  of 
inci  it,  or  who  has  a  claim  on  the  public  on  any 
account,  though  the  claim  or  the  merit  may 
be  of  the  most  opposite  description  to  that  re¬ 
quired.  //  fallait  uti  call ulatrur,  cc  jut  un 
danseur  qui  Vobtint,  is  hardly  more  of  a  cari¬ 
cature  than  in  the  days  of  Figaro;  and  the  min¬ 


ister  doubtless  thinks  himself  not  only  blame¬ 
less  but  meritorious  if  the  man  dances  well. 
Besides,  the  qualifications  which  fit  special  in¬ 
dividuals  for  special  duties  can  only  be  recog¬ 
nised  by  those  who  know  the  individuals,  or 
who  make  it  their  business  to  examine  and 
judge  of  persons  from  what  they  have  clone,  or 
from  the  evidence  of  those  who  are  in  a  posi¬ 
tion  to  judge.  When  these  conscientious  obli¬ 
gations  are  so  little  regarded  by  great  public 
officers  who  can  tie  made  responsible  for  their 
appointments,  how  must  it  be  with  assemblies 
who  cannot?  Even  now,  the  worst  appoint¬ 
ments  are  those  which  are  made  for  the  sake 
of  gaining  support  or  disarming  opposition 
in  the  representative  body:  what  might  we  ex¬ 
pect  if  they  were  made  bv  the  body  itself? 
Numerous  bodies  never  regard  special  qualifi¬ 
cations  at  all.  Unless  a  man  is  fit  for  the  gal¬ 
lows,  he  is  thought  to  be  about  as  fit  as  other 
people  lor  almost  anything  for  which  he  can 
offer  himself  as  a  candidate.  When  appoint¬ 
ments  made  by  a  public  body  are  not  decided, 
as  they  almost  always  are,  by  party  connection 
or  private  jobbing,  a  man  is  appointed  either 
because  he  has  a  reputation,  often  quite  unde¬ 
served,  for  general  ability,  or  frequently  for  no 
better  reason  than  that  he  is  personally  popular. 

It  has  never  been  thought  desirable  that 
Parliament  should  itself  nominate  even  the 
members  of  a  Cabinet.  It  is  enough  that  it  vir¬ 
tually  decides  who  shall  be  prime  minister,  or 
who  shall  be  the  two  or  three  individuals  from 
whom  the  prime  minister  shall  be  chosen.  In 
doing  this  it  merely  recognises  the  fact  that  a 
certain  person  is  the  candidate  of  the  party 
whose  general  policy  commands  its  support. 
In  reality,  the  only  thing  which  Parliament  de¬ 
cides  is,  which  of  two,  or  at  most  three,  parties 
or  bodies  of  men,  shall  furnish  the  executive 
government:  the  opinion  of  the  party  itself  de¬ 
cides  which  of  its  members  is  fittest  to  be  placed 
at  tlie  head.  According  to  the  existing  prac¬ 
tice  of  the  British  Constitution,  these  things 
seem  to  lie  on  as  good  a  footing  as  they  can  be. 
Parliament  does  not  nominate  any  minister, 
but  the  Crown  appoints  the  head  of  the  ad¬ 
ministration  in  conformity  to  thegeneral  wish¬ 
es  and  inclinations  manifested  by  Parliament, 
and  (he  other  ministers  on  the  recommenda¬ 
tion  of  the  chief;  while  every  minister  has  the 
undivided  moral  responsibility  of  appointing 
fit  persons  to  the  other  offices  of  administration 
which  are  not  permanent.  In  a  republic,  some 
other  arrangement  would  be  necessary:  but 
the  nearer  it  approached  in  practice  to  that 


ITS  PROPER  FUNCTIONS  359 


which  has  long  existed  in  England,  the  more 
likely  it  would  be  to  work  well.  Either,  as  in 
the  American  republic,  the  head  of  the  Execu¬ 
tive  must  be  elected  by  some  agency  entirely 
independent  of  the  representative  body;  or  the 
body  must  content  itself  with  naming  the 
prime  minister,  and  making  him  responsible 
for  the  choice  of  his  associates  and  subordi¬ 
nates.  To  all  these  considerations,  at  least 
theoretically,  I  fully  anticipate  a  general  as¬ 
sent:  though. practically,  the  tendency  is  strong 
in  representative  bodies  to  interfere  more  and 
more  in  the  details  of  administration,  by  vir¬ 
tue  of  the  general  law,  that  whoever  has  the 
strongest  power  is  more  and  more  tempted  to 
make  an  excessive  use  of  it;  and  this  is  one  of 
the  practical  dangers  to  which  the  futurity  of 
representative  governments  will  be  exposed. 

But  it  is  equally  true,  though  only  of  late 
and  slowly  beginning  to  be  acknowledged,  that 
a  numerous  assembly  is  as  little  fitted  for  the  di¬ 
rect  business  of  legislation  as  for  that  of  admin¬ 
istration.  There  is  hardly  any  kind  of  intel¬ 
lectual  work  which  so  much  needs  to  be  done, 
not  only  by  experienced  and  exercised  minds, 
but  by  minds  trained  to  the  task  through  long 
and  laborious  study,  as  the  business  of  mak¬ 
ing  laws.  This  is  a  sufficient  reason,  were  there 
no  other,  why  they  can  never  be  well  made  but 
by  a  committee  of  very  few  persons.  A  reason 
no  less  conclusive  is,  that  every  provision  of  a 
law  requires  to  be  framed  with  the  most  ac¬ 
curate  and  long-sighted  perception  of  its  effect 
on  all  the  other  provisions;  and  the  law  when 
made  should  be  capable  of  fitting  into  a  con¬ 
sistent  whole  with  the  previously  existing  laws. 
It  is  impossible  that  these  conditions  should 
be  in  any  degree  fulfilled  when  laws  are  voted 
clause  by  clause  in  a  miscellaneous  assembly. 
The  incongruity  of  such  a  mode  of  legislating 
would  strike  all  minds,  were  it  not  that  our 
laws  are  already,  as  to  form  and  construction, 
such  a  chaos,  that  the  confusion  and  contra¬ 
diction  seem  incapable  of  being  made  greater 
by  any  addition  to  the  mass. 

Yet  even  now,  the  utter  unfitness  of  our  leg¬ 
islative  machinery  for  its  purpose  is  making 
itself  practically  felt  every  year  more  and 
more.  The  mere  time  necessarily  occupied  in 
getting  through  Bills  renders  Parliament  more 
and  more  incapable  of  passing  any,  except  on 
detached  and  narrow  points.  If  a  Bill  is  pre¬ 
pared  which  even  attempts  to  deal  with  the 
whole  of  any  subject  (and  it  is  impossible  to 
legislate  properly  on  any  part  without  having 
the  whole  present  to  the  mind),  it  hangs  over 


from  session  to  session  through  sheer  impossi¬ 
bility  of  finding  time  to  dispose  of  it.  It  mat¬ 
ters  not  though  the  Bill  may  have  been  delib¬ 
erately  drawn  up  by  the  authority  deemed  the 
best  qualified,  with  all  appliances  and  means 
to  boot;  or  by  a  select  commission,  chosen  for 
their  conversancy  with  the  subject,  and  hav¬ 
ing  employed  years  in  considering  and  digest¬ 
ing  the  particular  measure:  it  cannotbe  passed, 
because  the  House  of  Commons  will  not  forego 
the  precious  privilege  of  tinkering  it  with  their 
clumsy  hands.  The  custom  has  of  late  been  to 
some  extent  introduced,  when  the  principle  of 
a  Bill  has  been  affirmed  on  the  second  reading, 
of  referring  it  for  consideration  in  detail  to  a 
Select  Committee:  but  it  has  not  been  found 
that  this  practice  causes  much  less  time  to  be 
lost  afterwards  in  carrying  it  through  the  Com¬ 
mittee  of  the  whole  House:  the  opinions  or 
private  crotchets  which  have  been  overruled 
by  knowledge  always  insist  on  giving  them¬ 
selves  a  second  chance  before  the  tribunal  of 
ignorance.  Indeed,  the  practice  itself  has  been 
adopted  principally  by  the  House  of  Lords, 
the  members  of  which  are  less  busy  and  fond  of 
meddling,  and  less  jealous  of  the  importance 
of  their  individual  voices,  than  those  of  the 
elective  House.  And  when  a  Bill  of  many 
clauses  does  succeed  in  getting  itself  discussed 
in  detail,  what  can  depict  the  state  in  which  it 
comes  out  of  Committee!  Clauses  omitted 
which  are  essential  to  the  working  of  the  rest; 
incongruous  ones  inserted  to  conciliate  some 
private  interest,  or  some  crotchety  member 
who  threatens  to  delay  the  Bill;  articles  foisted 
in  on  the  motion  of  some  sciolist  with  a  mere 
smattering  of  the  subject,  leading  to  conse¬ 
quences  which  the  member  who  introduced  or 
those  who  supported  the  Bill  did  not  at  the 
moment  foresee,  and  which  need  an  amend¬ 
ing  Act  in  the  next  session  to  correct  their  mis¬ 
chiefs. 

It  is  one  of  the  evils  of  the  present  mode  of 
managing  these  things  that  the  explaining  and 
defending  of  a  Bill,  and  of  its  various  provi¬ 
sions,  is  scarcely  ever  performed  by  the  person 
from  whose  mind  they  emanated,  who  prob¬ 
ably  has  not  a  seat  in  the  House.  Their  de¬ 
fence  rests  upon  some  minister  or  member  of 
Parliament  who  did  not  frame  them,  who  is 
dependent  on  cramming  for  all  his  arguments 
but  those  which  are  perfectly  obvious,  who 
does  not  know  the  full  strength  of  his  case,  nor 
the  best  reasons  by  which  to  support  it,  and  is 
wholly  incapable  of  meeting  unforeseen  ob¬ 
jections.  This  evil,  as  far  as  Government  bills 


360  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


are  concerned,  admits  of  remedy,  and  has  been 
remedied  in  somerepresentativeconstitutions, 
by  allowing  the  Government  to  be  represented 
in  either  House  by  persons  in  its  confidence, 
having  a  right  to  speak,  though  not  to  vote. 

If  that,  as  yet  considerable,  majority  of  the 
House  of  Commons  who  never  desire  to  move 
an  amendment  or  make  a  speech  would  no 
longer  leave  the  whole  regulation  of  business 
to  those  who  do;  if  they  would  bethink  them¬ 
selves  that  better  qualifications  for  legislation 
exist,  and  may  be  found  if  sought  for,  than  a 
fluent  tongue  and  the  faculty  of  getting  elected 
by  a  constituency;  it  would  soon  be  recognised 
that,  in  legislation  as  well  as  administration, 
the  only  task  to  which  a  representative  assem¬ 
bly  can  possibly  be  competent  is  not  that  of 
doing  the  work,  but  of  causing  it  to  be  done; 
of  determining  to  whom  or  to  what  sort  of  peo¬ 
ple  it  shall  be  confided,  and  giving  or  with¬ 
holding  the  national  sanction  to  it  when  per¬ 
formed.  Any  government  fit  for  a  high  state  of 
civilisation  would  have  as  one  of  its  funda¬ 
mental  elements  a  small  body,  not  exceeding 
in  number  the  members  of  a  Cabinet,  who 
should  act  as  a  Commission  of  legislation,  hav¬ 
ing  for  its  appointed  office  to  make  the  laws. 
If  the  laws  of  this  country  were,  as  surely  they 
will  soon  be,  revised  and  put  into  a  connected 
form,  the  Commission  of  Codification  by  which 
this  is  effected  should  remain  as  a  permanent 
institution,  to  watch  over  the  work,  protect  it 
from  deterioration,  and  make  further  im¬ 
provements  as  often  as  required.  No  one  would 
wish  that  this  body  should  of  itself  have  any 
power  of  enacting  laws:  the  Commission  would 
only  embody  the  element  of  intelligence  in 
their  construction;  Parliament  would  repre¬ 
sent  that  of  will.  No  measure  would  become  a 
law  until  expressly  sanctioned  by  Parliament: 
and  Parliament,  or  either  House,  would  have 
the  power  not  only  of  rejecting  but  of  sending 
back  a  Bill  to  the  Commission  for  reconsidera¬ 
tion  or  improvement.  Either  House  might  also 
exercise  its  initiative,  by  referring  any  subject 
to  the  Commission,  with  directions  to  prepare 
a  law.  The  Commission,  of  course,  would  have 
no  power  of  refusing  its  instrumentality  to  any 
legislation  which  the  country  desired.  Instruc¬ 
tions,  concurred  in  by  both  Houses,  to  draw  up 
a  Bill  which  should  effect  a  particular  purpose, 
would  be  imperative  on  the  Commissioners,  un¬ 
less  they  preferred  to  resign  their  office.  Once 
framed,  however,  Parliament  should  have  no 
power  to  alter  the  measure,  but  solely  to  pass 
or  reject  it;  or,  if  partially  disapproved  of,  re¬ 


mit  it  to  the  Commission  for  reconsideration. 
The  Commissioners  should  be  appointed  by 
the  Crown,  but  should  hold  their  offices  for  a 
time  certain,  say  five  years,  unless  removed  on 
an  address  from  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament, 
grounded  either  on  personal  misconduct  (as 
in  the  case  of  judges),  or  on  refusal  to  draw  up 
a  Bill  in  obedience  to  the  demands  of  Parlia¬ 
ment.  At  the  expiration  of  the  five  years  a 
member  should  cease  to  hold  office  unless  re¬ 
appointed,  in  order  to  provide  a  convenient 
mode  of  getting  rid  of  those  who  had  not  been 
found  equal  to  their  duties,  and  of  infusing 
new  and  younger  blood  into  the  body. 

The  necessity  of  some  provision  correspond¬ 
ing  to  this  was  felt  even  in  the  Athenian  De¬ 
mocracy,  where,  in  the  time  of  its  most  com¬ 
plete  ascendancy,  the  popular  Ecclesia  could 
pass  Psephisms  (mostly  decrees  on  single  mat¬ 
ters  of  policy),  but  laws,  so  called,  could  onlv 
be  made  or  altered  by  a  different  and  less  nu¬ 
merous  body,  renewed  annually,  called  the  No- 
mothette,  whose  duty  it  also  was  to  revise  the 
whole  of  the  laws,  and  keep  them  consistent 
with  one  another.  In  the  English  Constitution 
there  is  great  difficulty  in  introducing  any  ar¬ 
rangement  which  is  new  both  in  form  and  in 
substance,  but  comparatively  little  repugnance 
is  felt  to  the  attainment  of  new  purposes  by  an 
adaptation  of  existing  forms  and  traditions. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  means  might  be 
devised  of  enriching  the  Constitution  with  this 
great  improvement  through  the  machinery  of 
the  House  of  Lords.  A  Commission  for  pre¬ 
paring  Bills  would  in  itself  be  no  more  an  in¬ 
novation  on  the  Constitution  than  the  Board 
for  the  administration  of  the  Poor  Laws,  or 
the  lnclosure  Commission.  If,  in  consideration 
of  the  great  importance  and  dignity  of  the 
trust,  it  were  made  a  rule  that  every  person 
appointed  a  member  of  the  Legislative  Com¬ 
mission,  unless  removed  from  office  on  an  ad¬ 
dress  from  Parliament,  should  be  a  Peer  for 
life,  it  is  probable  that  the  same  good  sense  and 
taste  which  leave  the  judicial  functions  of  the 
Peerage  practically  to  the  exclusive  care  of  the 
law  lords,  would  lea\c  the  business  of  legisla¬ 
tion,  except  on  questions  involving  political 
principles  and  interests,  to  the  professional 
legislators;  that  Bills  originating  in  the  Upper 
House  would  always  be  drawn  up  by  them; 
that  the  Government  would  devolve  on  them 
the  framing  of  all  its  Bills;  and  that  private 
members  of  the  House  of  Commons  would 
gradually  find  it  convenient,  and  likely  to 
facilitate  the  passing  of  their  measures  through 


ITS  PROPER 

the  two  Houses,  if  instead  of  bringing  in  a  Bill 
and  submitting  it  directly  to  the  House,  they 
obtained  leave  to  introduce  it  and  have  it  re¬ 
ferred  to  the  Legislative  Commission.  For  it 
would,  of  course,  be  open  to  the  House  to  re¬ 
fer  for  the  consideration  of  that  body  not  a 
subject  merely,  but  any  specific  proposal,  or  a 
Draft  of  a  Bill  in  extenso ,  when  any  member 
thought  himself  capable  of  preparing  one  such 
as  ought  to  pass;  and  the  House  would  doubt¬ 
less  refer  every  such  draft  to  the  Commission, 
if  only  as  materials,  and  for  the  benefit  of  the 
suggestions  it  might  contain:  as  they  would,  in 
like  manner,  refer  every  amendment  or  objec¬ 
tion  which  might  be  proposed  in  writing  by 
any  member  of  the  House  after  a  measure  had 
left  the  Commissioners’  hands.  The  alteration 
of  Bills  by  a  Committee  of  the  whole  House 
would  cease,  not  by  formal  abolition,  but  by 
desuetude;  the  right  not  being  abandoned,  but 
laid  up  in  the  same  armoury  with  the  royal  veto, 
the  right  of  withholding  the  supplies,  and  other 
ancient  instruments  of  political  warfare,  which 
no  one  desires  to  see  used,  but  no  one  likes  to 
part  with,  lest  they  should  at  any  time  be  found 
to  be  still  needed  in  an  extraordinary  emer¬ 
gency.  By  such  arrangements  as  these,  legisla¬ 
tion  would  assume  its  proper  place  as  a  work 
of  skilled  labour  and  special  study  and  expe¬ 
rience;  while  the  most  important  liberty  of  the 
nation,  that  of  being  governed  only  by  laws 
assented  to  by  its  elected  representatives,  would 
be  fully  preserved,  and  made  more  valuable 
by  being  detached  from  the  serious,  but  by  no 
means  unavoidable,  drawbacks  which  now  ac¬ 
company  it  in  the  form  of  ignorant  and  ill- 
considered  legislation. 

Instead  of  the  function  of  governing,  for 
which  it  is  radically  unfit,  the  proper  office  of 
a  representative  assembly  is  to  watch  and  con¬ 
trol  the  government:  to  throw  the  light  of 
publicity  on  its  acts:  to  compel  a  full  exposi¬ 
tion  and  justification  of  all  of  them  which  any 
one  considers  questionable;  to  censure  them  if 
found  condemnable,  and,  if  the  men  who  com¬ 
pose  the  government  abuse  their  trust,  or  ful¬ 
fil  it  in  a  manner  which  conflicts  with  the  de¬ 
liberate  sense  of  the  nation,  to  expel  them 
from  office,  and  either  expressly  or  virtually 
appoint  their  successors.  This  is  surely  ample 
power,  and  security  enough  for  the  liberty  of 
the  nation.  In  addition  to  this,  the  Parliament 
has  an  office,  not  inferior  even  to  this  in  im¬ 
portance;  to  be  at  once  the  nation  s  Commit¬ 
tee  of  Grievances,  and  its  Congress  of  Opin¬ 
ions;  an  arena  in  which  not  only  the  general 


FUNCTIONS  361 

opinion  of  the  nation,  but  that  of  every  sec¬ 
tion  of  it,  and  as  far  as  possible  of  every  emi¬ 
nent  individual  whom  it  contains,  can  produce 
itself  in  full  light  and  challenge  discussion: 
where  every  person  in  the  country  may  count 
upon  finding  somebody  who  speaks  his  mind, 
as  well  or  better  than  he  could  speak  it  him¬ 
self— not  to  friends  and  partisans  exclusively, 
but  in  the  face  of  opponents,  to  be  tested  by 
adverse  controversy;  where  those  whose  opin¬ 
ion  is  overruled,  feel  satisfied  that  it  is  heard, 
and  set  aside  not  by  a  mere  act  of  will,  but  for 
what  are  thought  superior  reasons,  and  com¬ 
mend  themselves  as  such  to  the  representa¬ 
tives  of  the  majority  of  the  nation;  where  every 
party  or  opinion  in  the  country  can  muster  its 
strength,  and  be  cured  of  any  illusion  concern¬ 
ing  the  number  or  power  of  its  adherents; 
where  the  opinion  which  prevails  in  the  na¬ 
tion  makes  itself  manifest  as  prevailing,  and 
marshals  its  hosts  in  the  presence  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  which  is  thus  enabled  and  compelled 
to  give  way  to  it  on  the  mere  manifestation, 
without  the  actual  employment,  of  its  strength; 
where  statesmen  can  assure  themselves,  far 
more  certainly  than  by  any  other  signs,  what 
elements  of  opinion  and  power  are  growing, 
and  what  declining,  and  are  enabled  to  shape 
their  measures  with  some  regard  not  solely  to 
present  exigencies,  but  to  tendencies  in  prog¬ 
ress. 

Representative  assemblies  are  often  taunted 
by  their  enemies  with  being  places  of  mere 
talk  and  bavardage.  There  has  seldom  been 
more  misplaced  derision.  I  know  not  how  a 
representative  assembly  can  more  usefully  em¬ 
ploy  itself  than  in  talk,  when  the  subject  of 
talk  is  the  great  public  interests  of  the  coun¬ 
try,  and  every  sentence  of  it  represents  the 
opinion  either  of  some  important  body  of  per¬ 
sons  in  the  nation,  or  of  an  individual  in  whom 
some  such  body  have  reposed  their  confidence. 
A  place  where  every  interest  and  shade  of 
opinion  in  the  country  can  have  its  cause  even 
passionately  pleaded,  in  the  face  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment  and  of  all  other  interests  and  opin¬ 
ions,  can  compel  them  to  listen,  and  either 
comply,  or  state  clearly  why  they  do  not,  is  in 
itself,  if  it  answered  no  other  purpose,  one  of 
the  most  important  political  institutions  that 
can  exist  anywhere,  and  one  of  the  foremost 
benefits  of  free  government.  Such  “talking" 
would  never  be  looked  upon  with  disparage¬ 
ment  if  it  were  not  allowed  to  stop  “doing  ; 
which  it  never  would,  if  assemblies  knew  and 
acknowledged  that  talking  and  discussion  are 


362  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


their  proper  business,  while  doing ,  as  the  re¬ 
sult  of  discussion,  is  the  task  not  of  a  miscel¬ 
laneous  body,  but  of  individuals  specially 
trained  to  it:  that  the  fit  office  of  an  assembly  is 
to  see  that  those  individuals  are  honestly  and 
intelligently  chosen,  and  to  interfere  no  further 
with  them,  except  by  unlimited  latitude  of 
suggestion  and  criticism,  and  by  applying  or 
withholding  the  final  seal  of  national  assent. 
It  is  for  want  of  this  judicious  reserve  that 
popular  assemblies  attempt  to  do  what  they 
cannot  do  well— to  govern  and  legislate— and 
provide  no  machinery  but  their  own  for  much 
of  it,  when  of  course  every  hour  spent  in  talk 
is  an  hour  withdrawn  from  actual  business. 

But  the  very  fact  which  most  unfits  such 
bodies  for  a  Council  of  Legislation  qualifies 
them  the  more  for  their  other  office— namely, 
that  they  are  not  a  selection  of  the  greatest 
political  minds  in  the  country,  from  whose 
opinions  little  could  with  certainty  be  inferred 
concerning  those  of  the  nation,  but  are,  when 
properly  constituted,  a  fair  sample  of  every 
grade  of  intellect  among  the  people  which  is 
at  all  entitled  to  a  voice  in  public  affairs.  Their 
part  is  to  indicate  wants,  to  be  an  organ  for 
popular  demands,  and  a  place  of  adverse  dis¬ 
cussion  for  all  opinions  relating  to  public  mat¬ 
ters,  both  great  and  small;  and,  along  with  this, 
to  check  by  criticism,  and  eventually  by  with¬ 
drawing  their  support,  those  high  public  offi¬ 
cers  who  really  conduct  the  public  business,  or 
who  appoint  those  by  whom  it  is  conducted. 
Nothing  but  the  restriction  of  the  function  of 
representative  bodies  within  these  rational  lim¬ 
its  will  enable  the  benefits  of  popular  control 
to  be  enjoyed  in  conjunction  with  the  no  less 
important  requisites  (growing  ever  more  im¬ 
portant  as  human  affairs  increase  in  scale  and 
in  complexity)  of  skilled  legislation  and  ad¬ 
ministration.  There  are  no  means  of  combin¬ 
ing  these  benefits  except  by  separating  the 
functions  which  guarantee  the  one  from  those 
which  essentially  require  the  other;  by  dis¬ 
joining  the  office  of  control  and  criticism  from 
the  actual  conduct  of  affairs,  and  devolving 
the  former  on  the  representatives  of  the  Many, 
while  securing  for  the  latter,  under  strict  re¬ 
sponsibility  to  the  nation,  the  acquired  knowl¬ 
edge  and  practised  intelligence  of  a  specially 
trained  and  experienced  Few. 

The  preceding  discussion  of  the  functions 
which  ought  to  devolve  on  the  sovereign  repre¬ 
sentative  assembly  of  the  nation  would  require 
to  be  followed  by  an  inquiry  into  those  prop¬ 
erly  vested  in  the  minor  representative  bodies, 


which  ought  to  exist  for  purposes  that  regard 
only  localities.  And  such  an  inquiry  forms  an 
essential  part  of  the  present  treatise;  but  many 
reasons  require  its  postponement,  until  we 
have  considered  the  most  proper  composition 
of  the  great  representative  body,  destined  to 
control  as  sovereign  the  enactment  of  laws  and 
the  administration  of  the  general  affairs  of  the 
nation. 

Chapter  6 

Of  the  Infirmities  and  Dangers  to 
which  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment  is  Liable 

The  defects  of  any  form  of  government  may 
be  either  negative  or  positive.  It  is  negatively 
defective  if  it  does  not  concentrate  in  the 
hands  of  the  authorities  power  sufficient  to 
fulfil  the  necessary  offices  of  a  government;  or 
if  it  does  not  sufficiently  develop  by  exercise 
the  active  capacities  and  social  feelings  of  the 
individual  citizens.  On  neither  of  these  points 
is  it  necessary  that  much  should  be  said  at  this 
stage  of  our  inquiry. 

The  want  of  an  amount  of  power  in  the  gov¬ 
ernment,  adequate  to  preserve  order  and  al¬ 
low  of  progress  in  the  people,  is  incident  rather 
to  a  wild  and  rude  state  of  society  generally, 
than  to  any  particular  form  of  political  union. 
When  the  people  are  too  much  attached  to  sav¬ 
age  independence  to  be  tolerant  of  the  amount 
of  power  to  which  it  is  for  their  good  that  the) 
should  be  subject,  the  state  of  society  (as  al¬ 
ready  observed)  is  not  yet  ripe  for  representa¬ 
tive  government.  When  the  time  for  that  gov¬ 
ernment  has  arrived,  sufficient  power  for  all 
needful  purposes  is  sure  to  reside  in  the  sov¬ 
ereign  assembly;  and  if  enough  of  it  is  not  en¬ 
trusted  to  the  executive,  this  can  only  arise 
from  a  jealous  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  assem¬ 
bly  towards  the  administration,  never  likely 
to  exist  but  where  the  constitutional  power  of 
the  assembly  to  turn  them  out  of  office  has  not 
yet  sufficiently  established  itself.  Wherever  that 
constitutional  right  is  admitted  in  principle, 
and  fully  operative  in  practice,  there  is  no  fear 
that  the  assembly  will  not  be  willing  to  trust 
its  own  ministers  with  any  amount  of  power 
really  desirable;  the  danger  is,  on  the  contrary, 
lest  they  should  grant  it  too  ungrudgingly, 
and  too  indefinite  in  extent,  since  the  power 
of  the  minister  is  the  power  of  the  body  who 
make  and  who  keep  him  so.  It  is,  however,  very 
likely,  and  is  one  of  the  dangers  of  a  control¬ 
ling  assembly,  that  it  may  be  lavish  of  powers, 


INFIRMITIES 

but  afterwards  interfere  with  their  exercise; 
may  give  power  by  wholesale,  and  take  it  back 
in  detail,  by  multiplied  single  acts  of  interfer¬ 
ence  in  the  business  of  administration.  The 
evils  arising  from  this  assumption  of  the  actual 
function  of  governing,  in  lieu  of  that  of  criti¬ 
cising  and  checking  those  who  govern,  have 
been  sufficiently  dwelt  upon  in  the  preceding 
chapter.  No  safeguard  can  in  the  nature  of 
things  be  provided  against  this  improper  med¬ 
dling,  except  a  strong  and  general  conviction 
of  its  injurious  character. 

The  other  negative  defect  which  may  reside 
in  a  government,  that  of  not  bringing  into  suf¬ 
ficient  exercise  the  individual  faculties,  moral, 
intellectual,  and  active,  of  the  people,  has  been 
exhibited  generally  in  setting  forth  the  distinc¬ 
tive  mischiefs  of  despotism.  As  between  one 
form  of  popular  government  and  another,  the 
advantage  in  this  respect  lies  with  that  which 
most  widely  diffuses  the  exercise  of  public 
functions;  on  the  one  hand,  by  excluding  few¬ 
est  from  the  suffrage;  on  the  other,  by  opening 
to  all  classes  of  private  citizens,  so  far  as  is 
consistent  with  other  equally  important  ob¬ 
jects,  the  widest  participation  in  the  details  of 
judicial  and  administrative  business;  as  by 
jury  trial,  admission  to  municipal  offices,  and 
above  all  by  the  utmost  possible  publicity  and 
liberty  of  discussion,  whereby  not  merely  a  few 
individuals  in  succession,  but  the  whole  pub¬ 
lic,  are  made,  to  a  certain  extent,  participants 
in  the  government,  and  sharers  in  the  instruc¬ 
tion  and  mental  exercise  derivable  from  it. 
The  further  illustration  of  these  benefits,  as 
well  as  of  the  limitations  under  which  they 
must  be  aimed  at,  will  be  better  deferred  until 
we  come  to  speak  of  the  details  of  administra¬ 
tion. 

The  positive  evils  and  dangers  of  the  repre¬ 
sentative,  as  of  every  other  form  of  govern¬ 
ment,  may  be  reduced  to  two  heads:  first,  gen¬ 
eral  ignorance  and  incapacity,  or,  to  speak 
more  moderately,  insufficient  mental  qualifica¬ 
tions,  in  the  controlling  body;  secondly,  the 
danger  of  its  being  under  the  influence  of  in¬ 
terests  not  identical  with  the  general  welfare 
of  the  community. 

The  former  of  these  evils,  deficiency  in  high 
mental  qualifications,  is  one  to  which  it  is  gen¬ 
erally  supposed  that  popular  government  is 
liable  in  a  greater  degree  than  any  other.  The 
energy  of  a  monarch,  the  steadiness  and  pru¬ 
dence  of  an  aristocracy,  are  thought  to  contrast 
most  favourably  with  the  vacillation  and  short¬ 
sightedness  of  even  a  qualified  democracy. 


AND  DANGERS  363 

These  propositions,  however,  are  not  by  any 
means  so  well  founded  as  they  at  first  sight  ap¬ 
pear. 

Compared  with  simple  monarchy,  represent¬ 
ative  government  is  in  these  respects  at  no  dis¬ 
advantage.  Except  in  a  rude  age,  hereditary 
monarchy,  when  it  is  really  such,  and  not  aris¬ 
tocracy  in  disguise,  far  surpasses  democracy  in 
all  the  forms  of  incapacity  supposed  to  be 
characteristic  of  the  last.  I  say,  except  in  a 
rude  age,  because  in  a  really  rude  state  of  so¬ 
ciety  there  is  a  considerable  guarantee  for  the 
intellectual  and  active  capacities  of  the  sov¬ 
ereign.  His  personal  will  is  constantly  encoun¬ 
tering  obstacles  from  the  wilfulness  of  his  sub¬ 
jects,  and  of  powerful  individuals  among  their 
number.  The  circumstances  of  society  do  not 
afford  him  much  temptation  to  mere  luxurious 
self-indulgence;  mental  and  bodily  activity,  es¬ 
pecially  political  and  military,  are  his  princi¬ 
pal  excitements;  and  among  turbulent  chiefs 
and  lawless  followers  he  has  little  authority, 
and  is  seldom  long  secure  even  of  his  throne, 
unless  he  possesses  a  considerable  amount  of 
personal  daring,  dexterity,  and  energy.  The 
reason  why  the  average  of  talent  is  so  high 
among  the  Henries  and  Edwards  of  our  history 
may  be  read  in  the  tragical  fate  of  the  second 
Edward  and  the  second  Richard,  and  the  civil 
wars  and  disturbances  of  the  reigns  of  John 
and  his  incapable  successor.  The  troubled  pe¬ 
riod  of  the  Reformation  also  produced  sev¬ 
eral  eminent  hereditary  monarchs,  Elizabeth, 
Henri  Quatre,  Gustavus  Adolphus;  but  they 
were  mostly  bred  up  in  adversity,  succeeded  to 
the  throne  by  the  unexpected  failure  of  nearer 
heirs,  or  had  to  contend  with  great  difficulties 
in  the  commencement  of  their  reign.  Since 
European  life  assumed  a  settled  aspect,  any¬ 
thing  above  mediocrity  in  an  hereditary  king 
has  become  extremely  rare,  while  the  general 
average  has  been  even  below  mediocrity,  both 
in  talent  and  in  vigour  of  character.  A  mon¬ 
archy  constitutionally  absolute  now  only  main¬ 
tains  itself  in  existence  (except  temporarily 
in  the  hands  of  some  active-minded  usurper) 
through  the  mental  qualifications  of  a  perma¬ 
nent  bureaucracy.  The  Russian  and  Austrian 
Governments,  and  even  the  French  Govern¬ 
ment  in  its  normal  condition,  are  oligarchies 
of  officials,  of  whom  the  head  of  the  State  does 
little  more  than  select  the  chiefs.  I  am  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  regular  course  of  their  administra¬ 
tion;  for  the  will  of  the  master  of  course  de¬ 
termines  many  of  their  particular  acts. 

The  governments  which  have  been  remark- 


REPRESENTATIVE  GO  VERNMENT 


364 

able  in  history  for  sustained  mental  ability  and 
vigour  in  the  conduct  of  affairs  have  generally 
been  aristocracies.  But  they  have  been,  with¬ 
out  any  exception,  aristocracies  of  public  func¬ 
tionaries.  The  ruling  bodies  have  been  so  nar¬ 
row,  that  each  member,  or  at  least  each  in¬ 
fluential  member,  of  the  body,  was  able  to 
make,  and  did  make,  public  business  an  ac¬ 
tive  profession,  and  the  principal  occupation 
of  his  life.  The  only  aristocracies  which  have 
manifested  high  governing  capacities,  and  act¬ 
ed  on  steady  maxims  of  policy,  through  many 
trenerations,  are  those  of  Rome  and  Venice. 
But.  at  Venice,  though  the  privileged  order 
was  numerous,  the  actual  management  of  af¬ 
fairs  was  rigidly  concentrated  in  a  small  oli¬ 
garchy  within  the  oligarchy,  whose  whole  lives 
were  devoted  to  the  study  and  conduct  of  the 
affairs  of  the  state.  The  Roman  government 
partook  more  of  the  character  of  an  open  aris¬ 
tocracy  like  our  own.  But  the  really  governing 
body,  the  Senate,  was  in  general  exclusively 
composed  of  persons  who  had  exercised  pub¬ 
lic  functions,  and  had  either  already  filled  or 
were  looking  forward  to  fill  the  higher  offices 
of  the  state,  at  the  peril  of  a  severe  responsibil¬ 
ity  in  case  of  incapacity  and  failure.  When  once 
members  of  the  Senate,  their  lives  were  pledged 
to  the  conduct  of  public  affairs;  they  were  not 
permitted  even  to  leave  Italy  except  in  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  some  public  trust;  and  unless  turned 
out  of  the  Senate  by  the  censors  for  character 
or  conduct  deemed  disgraceful,  they  retained 
their  powers  and  responsibilities  to  the  end 
of  life.  In  an  aristocracy  thus  constituted,  every 
member  felt  his  personal  importance  entirely 
bound  up  with  the  dignity  and  estimation  of 
thecommonwealth  which  he  administered,  and 
with  the  part  he  was  able  to  play  in  its  councils. 
This  dignity  and  estimation  were  quite  dif¬ 
ferent  things  from  the  prosperity  or  happiness 
of  the  general  body  of  the  citizens,  and  were 
often  wholly  incompatible  with  it.  But  they 
were  closely  linked  with  the  external  success 
and  aggrandisement  of  the  State:  and  it  was, 
consequently,  in  the  pursuit  of  that  object  al¬ 
most  exclusively  that  either  the  Roman  or  the 
Venetian  aristocracies  manifested  the  system¬ 
atically  wise  collective  policy,  and  the  great  in¬ 
dividual  capacities  for  government,  for  which 
history  has  deservedly  given  them  credit. 

It  thus  appears  that  the  only  governments, 
not  representative,  in  which  high  political  skill 
and  ability  have  been  other  than  exceptional, 
whether  under  monarchical  or  aristocratic 
forms,  have  been  essentially  hurcauc  rat  ios. The 


work  of  government  has  been  in  the  hands  of 
governors  by  profession:  which  is  the  essence 
and  meaning  of  bureaucracy.  Whether  the 
work  is  done  by  them  because  they  have  been 
trained  to  it.  or  they  are  trained  to  it  because 
it  is  to  be  done  by  them,  makes  a  great  dif¬ 
ference  in  many  respects,  but  none  at  all  as  to 
the  essential  character  of  the  rule.  Aristocra¬ 
cies,  on  the  other  hand,  like  that  of  England,  in 
which  the  class  who  possessed  the  power  de¬ 
rived  it  merely  from  their  social  position,  with¬ 
out  being  specially  trained  or  devoting  them¬ 
selves  exclusively  to  it  (and  in  which,  there¬ 
fore,  the  power  was  not  exercised  directly,  but 
through  representative  institutions  oligarchi- 
cally  constituted)  have  been,  in  respect  to  in¬ 
tellectual  endowments,  much  on  a  par  with 
democracies;  that  is,  they  have  manifested  such 
qualities  in  any  considerable  degree  only  dur¬ 
ing  the  temporary  ascendancy  which  great  and 
popular  talents,  united  with  a  distinguished 
position,  have  given  to  some  one  man.  The- 
mistocles  and  Pericles,  Washington  and  Jeffer¬ 
son,  were  not  more  completely  exceptions  in 
their  several  democracies,  and  were  assuredly 
much  more  splendid  exceptions,  than  the 
Chathams  and  Peels  of  the  representative  aris¬ 
tocracy  of  Great  Britain,  or  even  the  Sullys  and 
Colberts  of  the  aristocratic  monarchy  of  France. 
A  great  minister,  in  the  aristocratic  govern¬ 
ments  of  modern  Europe,  is  almost  as  rare  a 
phenomenon  as  a  great  king. 

The  comparison,  therefore,  as  to  the  intel¬ 
lectual  attributes  of  a  government,  has  to  be 
made  between  a  representative  democracy  and 
a  bureaucracy;  all  other  governments  may  be 
left  out  of  the  account.  And  here  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  a  bureaucratic  government 
has,  in  some  important  respects,  greatly  the  ad¬ 
vantage.  It  accumulates  experience,  acquires 
well-tried  and  wcll-considercd  traditional  max¬ 
ims,  and  makes  provision  for  appropriate  prac¬ 
tical  knowledge  in  those  who  have  the  actual 
conduct  of  affairs.  But  it  is  not  equally  favour¬ 
able  to  individual  energy  of  mind.  The  disease 
which  alllicts  bureaucratic  governments,  and 
which  they  usually  die  of,  is  routine.  They  per¬ 
ish  by  the  immutability  of  their  maxims;  and, 
still  more,  by  the  universal  law  that  whatever 
becomes  a  routine  loses  its  vital  principle,  and 
having  no  longer  a  mind  acting  within  it,  goes 
on  revolving  mechanically  though  the  work 
it  is  intended  to  do  remains  undone.  A  bureau¬ 
cracy  always  tends  to  become  a  pcdantocracy. 
When  the  bureaucracy  is  the  real  government, 
the  spirit  of  the  corps  (as  with  the  Jesuits) 


INFIRMITIES  AND  DANGERS  365 


bears  down  the  individuality  of  its  more  dis¬ 
tinguished  members.  In  the  profession  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  as  in  other  professions,  the  sole  idea 
of  the  majority  is  to  do  what  they  have  been 
taught;  and  it  requires  a  popular  government 
to  enable  the  conceptions  of  the  man  of  origi¬ 
nal  genius  among  them  to  prevail  over  the  ob¬ 
structive  spirit  of  trained  mediocrity.  Only  in 
a  popular  government  (setting  apart  the  ac¬ 
cident  of  a  highly  intelligent  despot)  could  Sir 
Rowland  Hill  have  been  victorious  over  the 
Post  Office.  A  popular  government  installed 
him  in  the  Post  Office,  and  made  the  body,  in 
spite  of  itself,  obey  the  impulse  given  by  the 
man  who  united  special  knowledge  with  indi¬ 
vidual  vigour  and  originality.  That  the  Rom¬ 
an  aristocracy  escaped  this  characteristic  dis¬ 
ease  of  a  bureaucracy  was  evidently  owing  to 
its  popular  element.  All  special  offices,  both 
those  which  gave  a  seat  in  the  Senate  and  those 
which  were  sought  by  senators,  were  conferred 
by  popular  election.  The  Russian  government 
is  a  characteristic  exemplification  of  both  the 
good  and  bad  side  of  bureaucracy;  its  fixed 
maxims,  directed  with  Roman  perseverance  to 
the  same  unflinchingly-pursued  ends  from  age 
to  age;  the  remarkable  skill  with  which  those 
ends  are  generally  pursued;  the  frightful  in¬ 
ternal  corruption,  and  the  permanent  organ¬ 
ised  hostility  to  improvements  from  without, 
which  even  the  autocratic  power  of  a  vigor¬ 
ous-minded  Emperor  is  seldom  or  never  suffi¬ 
cient  to  overcome;  the  patient  obstructiveness 
of  the  body  being  in  the  long  run  more  than  a 
match  for  the  fitful  energy  of  one  man.  The 
Chinese  Government,  a  bureaucracy  of  Man¬ 
darins,  is,  as  far  as  known  to  us,  another  appar¬ 
ent  example  of  the  same  qualities  and  defects. 

In  all  human  affairs  conflicting  influences 
are  required  to  keep  one  another  alive  and 
efficient  even  for  their  own  proper  uses;  and 
the  exclusive  pursuit  of  one  good  object,  apart 
from  some  other  which  should  accompany  it, 
ends  not  in  excess  of  one  and  defect  of  the 
other,  but  in  the  decay  and  loss  even  of  that 
which  has  been  exclusively  cared  for.  Gov¬ 
ernment  by  trained  officials  cannot  do,  for  a 
country,  the  things  which  can  be  done  by  a 
free  government;  but  it  might  be  supposed 
capable  of  doing  some  things  which  free  gov¬ 
ernment,  of  itself,  cannot  do.  We  find,  how¬ 
ever,  that  an  outside  element  of  freedom  is 
necessary  to  enable  it  to  do  effectually  or  per¬ 
manently  even  its  own  business.  And  so,  also, 
freedom  cannot  produce  its  best  effects,  and 
often  breaks  down  altogether,  unless  means 


can  be  found  of  combining  it  with  trained  and 
skilled  administration.  There  could  not  be  a 
moment’s  hesitation  between  representative 
government,  among  a  people  in  any  degree 
ripe  for  it,  and  the  most  perfect  imaginable 
bureaucracy.  But  it  is,  at  the  same  time,  one 
of  the  most  important  ends  of  political  insti¬ 
tutions,  to  attain  as  many  of  the  qualities  of 
the  one  as  are  consistent  with  the  other;  to 
secure,  as  far  as  they  can  be  made  compatible, 
the  great  advantage  of  the  conduct  of  affairs  by 
skilled  persons,  bred  to  it  as  an  intellectual 
profession,  along  with  that  of  a  general  con¬ 
trol  vested  in,  and  seriously  exercised  by,  bod¬ 
ies  representative  of  the  entire  people.  Much 
would  be  done  towards  this  end  by  recognising 
the  line  of  separation,  discussed  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  chapter,  between  the  work  of  govern¬ 
ment  properly  so  called,  which  can  only  be 
well  performed  after  special  cultivation,  and 
that  of  selecting,  watching,  and,  when  needful, 
controlling  the  governors,  which  in  this  case, 
as  in  others,  properly  devolves,  not  on  those 
who  do  the  work,  but  on  those  for  whose  bene¬ 
fit  it  ought  to  be  done.  No  progress  at  all  can 
be  made  towards  obtaining  a  skilled  democ¬ 
racy  unless  the  democracy  are  willing  that  the 
work  which  requires  skill  should  be  done  b\ 
those  who  possess  it.  A  democracy  has  enough 
to  do  in  providing  itself  with  an  amount  ol 
mental  competency  sufficient  for  its  own  prop¬ 
er  work,  that  of  superintendence  and  check. 

How  to  obtain  and  secure  this  amount  is 
one  of  the  questions  tobe  taken  into  considera¬ 
tion  in  judging  of  the  proper  constitution  of  a 
representative  body.  In  proportion  as  its  com¬ 
position  fails  to  secure  this  amount,  the  as¬ 
sembly  will  encroach,  by  special  acts,  on  the 
province  of  the  executive;  it  will  expel  a  good, 
or  elevate  and  uphold  a  bad,  ministry;  it  will 
connive  at,  or  overlook  in  them,  abuses  of 
trust,  will  be  deluded  by  their  false  pretences, 
or  will  withhold  support  from  those  who  en¬ 
deavour  to  fulfil  their  trust  conscientiously;  it 
will  countenance,  or  impose,  a  selfish,  a  capri¬ 
cious  and  impulsive,  a  short-sighted,  ignorant, 
and  prejudiced  general  policy,  foreign  and 
domestic;  it  will  abrogate  good  laws,  or  enact 
bad  ones,  let  in  new  evils,  or  cling  with  per¬ 
verse  obstinacy  to  old;  it  will  even,  perhaps, 
under  misleading  impulses,  momentary  or  per¬ 
manent,  emanating  from  itself  or  from  its  con¬ 
stituents,  tolerate  or  connive  at  proceedings 
which  set  law  aside  altogether,  in  cases  where 
equal  justice  would  not  be  agreeable  to  popu¬ 
lar  feeling.  Such  are  among  the  dangers  of  rep- 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


366 

resentative  government,  arising  from  a  consti¬ 
tution  of  the  representation  which  does  not  se¬ 
cure  an  adequate  amount  of  intelligence  and 
knowledge  in  the  representative  assembly. 

We  next  proceed  to  the  evils  arising  from 
the  prevalence  of  modes  of  action  in  the  repre¬ 
sentative  body,  dictated  by  sinister  interests 
(to  employ  the  useful  phrase  introduced  by 
Bentham),  that  is,  interests  conflicting  more  or 
less  with  the  general  good  of  the  community. 

It  is  universally  admitted  that,  of  the  evils 
incident  to  monarchical  and  aristocratic  gov¬ 
ernments,  a  large  proportion  arise  from  this 
cause.  The  interest  of  the  monarch,  or  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  aristocracy,  either  collective  or 
that  of  its  individual  members,  is  promoted, 
or  they  themselves  think  that  it  will  be  pro¬ 
moted,  by  conduct  opposed  to  that  which  the 
general  interest  of  the  community  requires. 
The  interest,  for  example,  of  the  government 
is  to  tax  heavily:  that  of  the  community  is  to 
be  as  little  taxed  as  the  necessary  expenses  of 
good  government  permit.  The  interest  of  the 
king,  and  of  the  governing  aristocracy,  is  to 
possess,  and  exercise,  unlimited  power  over  the 
people;  to  enforce,  on  their  part,  complete 
conformity  to  the  will  and  preferences  of  the 
rulers.  The  interest  of  the  people  is  to  have 
as  little  control  exercised  over  them  in  any  re¬ 
spect  as  is  consistent  with  attaining  the  legiti¬ 
mate  ends  of  government.  The  interest,  or  ap¬ 
parent  and  supposed  interest,  of  the  king  or 
aristocracy  is  to  permit  no  censure  of  them¬ 
selves,  at  least  in  any  form  which  they  may  con¬ 
sider  either  to  threaten  their  power,  or  serious¬ 
ly  to  interfere  with  their  free  agency.  The  in¬ 
terest  of  the  people  is  that  there  should  be  full 
liberty  of  censure  on  every  public  ollicer,  and 
on  every  public  act  or  measure.  The  interest  of 
a  ruling  class,  whether  in  an  aristocracy  or  an 
aristocratic  monarchy,  is  to  assume  to  them¬ 
selves  an  endless  variety  of  unjust  privileges, 
sometimes  benefiting  their  pockets  at  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  the  people,  sometimes  merely  tending 
to  exalt  them  above  others,  or,  what  is  the  same 
thing  in  dilferent  words,  to  degrade  others 
below  themselves.  If  the  people  arc  disaffected, 
which  under  such  a  government  they  are  very 
likely  to  be,  it  is  the  interest  of  the  king  or 
aristocracy  to  keep  them  at  a  low  level  of  in¬ 
telligence  and  education,  foment  dissensions 
among  them,  and  even  prevent  them  from 
being  loo  well  off,  lest  they  should  wax  fat, 
and  kick”;  agreeably  to  the  maxim  of  Cardinal 
Richelieu  in  his  celebrated  Testament  Politi¬ 


que.  All  these  things  are  for  the  interest  of  a 
king  or  aristocracy,  in  a  purely  selfish  point  of 
view,  unless  a  sufficiently  strong  counter-in¬ 
terest  is  created  by  the  fear  of  provoking  re¬ 
sistance.  All  these  evils  have  been,  and  many 
of  them  still  are,  produced  by  the  sinister  in¬ 
terests  of  kings  and  aristocracies,  where  their 
power  is  sufficient  to  raise  them  above  the 
opinion  of  the  rest  of  the  community;  nor  is 
it  rational  to  expect,  as  a  consequence  of  such 
a  position,  any  other  conduct. 

These  things  are  superabundantly  evident 
in  the  case  of  a  monarchy  or  an  aristocracy; 
but  it  is  sometimes  rather  gratuitously  assumed 
that  the  same  kind  of  injurious  influences  do 
not  operate  in  a  democracy.  Looking  at  de¬ 
mocracy  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  commonly 
conceived,  as  the  rule  of  the  numerical  ma¬ 
jority,  it  is  surely  possible  that  the  ruling  power 
may  be  under  the  dominion  of  sectional  or 
class  interests,  pointing  to  conduct  different 
from  that  which  would  be  dictated  by  impar¬ 
tial  regard  for  the  interest  of  all.  Suppose  the 
majority  to  be  whites,  the  minority  negroes,  or 
vice  versa:  is  it  likely  that  the  majority  would 
allow  equal  justice  to  the  minority?  Suppose 
the  majority  Catholics,  the  minority  Protes¬ 
tants,  or  the  reverse;  will  there  not  be  the  same 
danger?  Or  let  the  majority  be  English,  the  mi¬ 
nority  Irish, or  the  contrary:  is  there  not  a  great 
probability  of  similar  evil?  In  all  countries 
there  is  a  majority  of  poor,  a  minority  who, 
in  contradistinction,  may  be  called  rich.  Be¬ 
tween  these  two  classes,  on  many  questions, 
there  is  complete  opposition  of  apparent  in¬ 
terest.  We  will  suppose  the  majority  sufficient¬ 
ly  intelligent  to  be  aware  that  it  is  not  for 
their  advantage  to  weaken  the  security  of  prop¬ 
erty,  and  that  it  would  be  weakened  by  any 
act  of  arbitrary  spoliation.  But  is  there  not  a 
considerable  danger  lest  they  should  throw 
upon  the  possessors  of  what  is  called  realised 
property,  and  upon  the  larger  incomes,  an 
unfair  share,  or  even  the  whole,  of  the  bur¬ 
den  of  taxation;  and  having  done  so,  add  to 
the  amount  without  scruple,  expending  the 
proceeds  in  modes  supposed  to  conduce  to  the 
profit  and  advantage  of  the  labouring  class? 
Suppose,  again,  a  minority  of  skilled  labour¬ 
ers,  a  majority  of  unskilled:  the  experience  of 
many  trade  unions,  unless  they  are  greatly 
calumniated,  justifies  the  apprehension  that 
equality  of  earnings  might  be  imposed  as  an 
obligation,  and  that  piecework,  payment  by 
the  hour,  and  all  practices  which  enable  supe¬ 
rior  industry  or  abilities  to  gain  a  superior 


INFIRMITIES  AND  DANGERS  367 


reward  might  be  put  down.  Legislative  at¬ 
tempts  to  raise  wages,  limitation  of  competi¬ 
tion  in  the  labour  market,  taxes  or  restric¬ 
tions  on  machinery,  and  on  improvements  of 
all  kinds  tending  to  dispense  with  any  of  the 
existing  labour— even,  perhaps,  protection  of 
the  home  producer  against  foreign  industry- 
are  very  natural  (I  do  not  venture  to  say 
whether  probable)  results  of  a  feeling  of  class 
interest  in  a  governing  majority  of  manual 
labourers. 

It  will  be  said  that  none  of  these  things  are 
for  the  real  interest  of  the  most  numerous 
class:  to  which  I  answer,  that  if  the  conduct 
of  human  beings  was  determined  by  no  other 
interested  considerations  than  those  which  con¬ 
stitute  their  “real”  interest,  neither  monarchy 
nor  oligarchy  would  be  such  bad  governments 
as  they  are;  for  assuredly  very  strong  argu¬ 
ments  may  be,  and  often  have  been,  adduced 
to  show  that  either  a  king  or  a  governing  sen¬ 
ate  are  in  much  the  most  enviable  position, 
when  ruling  justly  and  vigilantly  over  an  ac¬ 
tive,  wealthy,  enlightened,  and  high-minded 
people.  But  a  king  only  now  and  then,  and  an 
oligarchy  in  no  known  instance,  have  taken  this 
exalted  view  of  their  self-interest:  and  why 
should  we  expect  a  loftier  mode  of  thinking 
from  the  labouring  classes?  It  is  not  what  their 
interest  is,  but  what  they  suppose  it  to  be,  that 
is  the  important  consideration  with  respect 
to  their  conduct:  and  it  is  quite  conclusive 
against  any  theory  of  government  that  it  as¬ 
sumes  the  numerical  majority  to  do  habitually 
what  is  ne\er  done,  nor  expected  to  be  done, 
save  in  very  exceptional  cases,  by  any  other 
depositaries  of  power— namely,  to  direct  their 
conduct  by  their  real  ultimate  interest,  in  op¬ 
position  to  their  immediate  and  apparent  in¬ 
terest.  No  one,  surely,  can  doubt  that  many 
of  the  pernicious  measures  above  enumerated, 
and  many  others  as  bad,  would  be  for  the  im¬ 
mediate  interest  of  the  general  body  of  un¬ 
skilled  labourers.  It  is  quite  possible  that  they 
would  be  for  the  selfish  interest  of  the  whole 
existing  generation  of  the  class.  I  he  relaxation 
of  industry  and  activity,  and  diminished  en¬ 
couragement  to  saving  which  would  be  their 
ultimate  consequence,  might  perhaps  be  little 
felt  by  the  class  of  unskilled  labourers  in  the 
space  of  a  single  lifetime. 

Some  of  the  most  fatal  changes  in  human 
affairs  have  been,  as  to  their  more  manifest 
immediate  effects,  beneficial.  The  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  despotism  of  the  Caesars  was  a  great 
benefit  to  the  entire  generation  in  which  it 


took  place.  It  put  a  stop  to  civil  war,  abated 
a  vast  amount  of  malversation  and  tyranny  by 
praetors  and  proconsuls;  it  fostered  many  of 
the  graces  of  life,  and  intellectual  cultivation 
in  all  departments  not  political;  it  produced 
monuments  of  literary  genius  dazzling  to  the 
imaginations  of  shallow  readers  of  history,  who 
do  not  reflect  that  the  men  to  whom  the  des¬ 
potism  of  Augustus  (as  well  as  of  Lorenzo  de’ 
Medici  and  of  Louis  XIV.)  owes  its  brilliancy, 
were  all  formed  in  the  generation  preceding. 
The  accumulated  riches,  and  the  mental  en¬ 
ergy  and  activity,  produced  by  centuries  of 
freedom,  remained  for  the  benefit  of  the  first 
generation  of  slaves.  \  et  this  was  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  a  regime  by  whose  gradual  op¬ 
eration  all  the  civilisation  which  had  been 
gained  insensibly  faded  away,  until  the  Em¬ 
pire,  which  had  conquered  and  embraced  the 
world  in  its  grasp,  so  completely  lost  even  its 
military  efficiency,  that  invaders  whom  three 
or  four  legions  had  always  sufficed  to  coerce 
were  able  to  overrun  and  occupy  nearly  the 
whole  of  its  vast  territory.  The  fresh  impulse 
given  by  Christianity  came  but  just  in  time  to 
save  arts  and  letters  from  perishing,  and  the 
human  race  from  sinking  back  into  perhaps 
endless  night. 

When  we  talk  of  the  interest  of  a  body  of 
men,  or  even  of  an  individual  man,  as  a  prin¬ 
ciple  determining  their  actions,  the  question 
what  would  be  considered  their  interest  by  an 
unprejudiced  observer  is  one  of  the  least  im¬ 
portant  parts  of  the  whole  matter.  As  Cole¬ 
ridge  observes,  the  man  makes  the  motive,  not 
the  motive  the  man.  What  it  is  the  man  s  in¬ 
terest  to  do  or  refrain  from  depends  less  on 
any  outward  circumstances  than  upon  what 
sort  of  man  he  is.  If  you  wish  to  know  what 
is  practically  a  man’s  interest,  you  must  know 
the  cast  of  his  habitual  feelings  and  thoughts. 
Everybodv  has  two  kinds  of  interests,  interests 
which  he  cares  for,  and  interests  which  he  does 
not  care  for.  Everybody  has  selfish  and  unsel¬ 
fish  interests,  and  a  selfish  man  has  cultivated 
the  habit  of  caring  for  the  former,  and  not 
caring  for  the  latter.  Every  one  has  present 
and  distant  interests,  and  the  improvident  man 
is  he  who  cares  for  the  present  interests  and 
does  not  care  for  the  distant.  It  matters  little 
that  on  any  correct  calculation  the  latter  may 
be  the  more  considerable,  if  the  habits  of  his 
mind  lead  him  to  fix  his  thoughts  and  wishes 
solely  on  the  former.  It  would  be  vain  to  at¬ 
tempt  to  persuade  a  man  who  beats  his  wife 
and  illtreats  his  children  that  he  would  be 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


368 

happier  if  lie  lived  in  love  and  kindness  with 
them.  He  would  be  happier  if  he  were  the  kind 
of  person  who  could  so  live;  but  he  is  not, 
and  it  is  probably  too  late  for  him  to  become, 
that  kind  of  person.  Being  what  he  is,  the  grati¬ 
fication  of  his  love  of  domineering,  and  the 
indulgence  of  his  ferocious  temper,  are  to  his 
perceptions  a  greater  good  to  himself  than  he 
would  be  capable  of  deriving  from  the  pleas¬ 
ure  and  affection  of  those  dependent  on  him. 
He  has  no  pleasure  in  their  pleasure,  and  does 
not  care  for  their  affection.  His  neighbour, 
who  does,  is  probably  a  happier  man  than  he; 
but  could  he  be  persuaded  of  this,  the  persua¬ 
sion  would,  most  likely,  only  still  further  ex¬ 
asperate  his  malignity  or  his  irritability.  On 
the  average,  a  person  who  cares  for  other  peo¬ 
ple,  for  his  country,  or  for  mankind,  is  a  hap¬ 
pier  man  than  one  who  does  not;  but  of 
what  use  is  it  to  preach  this  doctrine  to  a  man 
who  cares  for  nothing  but  his  own  ease,  or  his 
own  pocket?  He  cannot  care  for  other  people 
if  he  would.  It  is  like  preaching  to  the  worm 
who  crawls  on  the  ground  how  much  better  it 
would  be  for  him  if  he  were  an  eagle. 

Xow  it  is  a  universally  observed  fact  that 
the  two  evil  dispositions  in  question,  the  dis¬ 
position  to  prefer  a  man’s  selfish  interests  to 
those  which  he  shares  with  other  people,  and 
his  immediate  and  direct  interests  to  those 
which  are  indirect  and  remote,  are  character¬ 
istics  most  especially  called  forth  and  fostered 
by  the  possession  of  power.  The  moment  a 
man,  or  a  class  of  men,  find  themselves  with 
power  in  their  hands,  the  man’s  individual  in¬ 
terest,  or  the  class’s  separate  interest,  acquires 
an  entirely  new  degree  of  importance  in  their 
c>es.  Finding  themselves  worshipped  by  others, 
they  become  worshippers  of  themselves,  and 
think  themselves  entitled  to  be  counted  at  a 
hundred  times  the  value  of  other  people;  while 
the  facility  they  acquire  of  doing  as  they 
like  without  regard  to  consequences  insensibly 
weakens  the  habits  which  make  men  look  for¬ 
ward  even  to  such  consequent  es  asalfect  them¬ 
selves.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  universal 
tradition,  grounded  on  universal  experience, 
of  men’s  being  corrupted  by  power.  Every  one 
knows  how  absurd  it  would  be  to  infer  Irom 
what  a  man  is  or  does  when  in  a  private  sta¬ 
tion,  that  he  will  be  and  do  exactly  the  like 
when  a  despot  on  a  throne;  where  the  bad 
parts  of  his  human  nature,  instead  of  being 
restrained  and  kept  in  suboi dination  by  every 
circumstance  ol  his  life  and  by  every  person 
surrounding  him,  are  courted  by  all  persons, 


and  ministered  to  by  all  circumstances.  It  would 
be  quite  as  absurd  to  entertain  a  similar  ex¬ 
pectation  in  regard  to  a  class  of  men;  the 
Demos,  or  any  other.  Let  them  be  ever  so  mod¬ 
est  and  amenable  to  reason  while  there  is  a 
power  over  them  stronger  than  they,  we  ought 
to  expect  a  total  change  in  this  respect  when 
they  themselves  become  the  strongest  power. 

Governments  must  be  made  for  human  be¬ 
ings  as  they  are,  or  as  they  are  capable  of  speed¬ 
ily  becoming:  and  in  any  state  of  cultivation 
which  mankind,  or  any  class  among  them,  have 
yet  attained,  or  are  likely  soon  to  attain,  the 
interests  bv  which  they  will  be  led,  when  they 
are  thinking  only  of  self-interest,  will  be  al¬ 
most  exclusively  those  which  are  obvious  at 
first  sight,  and  which  operate  on  their  pres¬ 
ent  condition.  It  is  only  a  disinterested  regard 
for  others,  and  especially  for  what  comes  after 
them,  for  the  idea  of  posterity,  of  their  coun¬ 
try,  or  of  mankind,  whether  grounded  on  sym¬ 
pathy  or  on  a  conscientious  tceling,  which  ever 
directs  the  minds  and  purposes  of  classes  or 
bodies  of  men  towards  distant  or  unobvious 
interests.  And  it  cannot  be  maintained  that 
any  form  of  government  would  be  rational 
which  required  as  a  condition  that  these  ex¬ 
alted  principles  of  action  should  be  the  guid¬ 
ing  and  master  motives  in  the  conduct  of  aver¬ 
age  human  beings.  A  certain  amount  of  con¬ 
science,  and  of  disinterested  public  spirit, 
may  fairly  be  calculated  on  in  the  citizens  of 
any  community  ripe  for  representative  govern¬ 
ment.  But  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  expect 
such  a  degree  of  it,  combined  w’ith  such  intel¬ 
lectual  discernment,  as  would  be  proof  against 
any  plausible  fallacy  tending  to  make  that 
which  was  for  their  class  interest  appear  the 
dictate  of  justice  and  of  the  general  good. 

We  all  know  what  specious  fallacies  may  be 
urged  in  defence  of  every  act  of  injustice  yet 
proposed  for  the  imaginary  benefit  of  the  mass. 
\VC  knowf  how  many,  not  otherwise  fools  or 
bad  men,  have  thought  it  justifiable  to  repu¬ 
diate  the  national  debt.  We  know  how  many, 
not  destitute  of  ability,  and  of  considerable 
popular  influence,  think  it  fair  to  throw  the 
whole  burthen  of  taxation  upon  savings,  un¬ 
der  the  name  of  realised  property,  allowing 
those  whose  progenitors  and  themselves  have 
always  spent  all  they  received  to  remain,  as  a 
reward  for  such  exemplary  conduct,  wholh 
untaxed.  We  know-  what  powerful  arguments, 
the  more  dangerous  because  there  is  a  pot 
t ion  of  truth  in  them,  may  be  brought  against 
all  inheritance,  against  the  power  of  bequest, 


INFIRMITIES  , 

against  every  advantage  which  one  person 
seems  to  have  over  another.  We  know  how 
easily  the  uselessness  of  almost  every  branch  of 
knowledge  may  be  proved,  to  the  complete 
satisfaction  of  those  who  do  not  possess  it.  How 
many,  not  altogether  stupid  men,  think  the 
scientific  study  of  languages  useless,  think 
ancient  literature  useless,  all  erudition  useless, 
logic  and  metaphysics  useless,  poetry  and  the 
fine  arts  idle  and  frivolous,  political  economy 
purely  mischievous?  Even  history  has  been  pro¬ 
nounced  useless  and  mischievous  by  able  men. 
Nothing  but  that  acquaintance  with  external 
nature,  empirically  acquired,  which  serves  di¬ 
rectly  for  the  production  of  objects  necessary 
to  existence  or  agreeable  to  the  senses,  would 
get  its  utility  recognised  if  people  had  the  least 
encouragement  to  disbelieve  it.  Is  it  reason¬ 
able  to  think  that  even  much  more  cultivated 
minds  than  those  of  the  numerical  majority 
can  be  expected  to  be  will  have  so  delicate  a 
conscience,  and  so  just  an  appreciation  of  what 
is  against  their  own  apparent  interest,  that 
they  will  reject  these  and  the  innumerable 
other  fallacies  which  will  press  in  upon  them 
from  all  quarters  as  soon  as  they  come  into 
power,  to  induce  them  to  follow  their  own 
selfish  inclinations  and  short-sighted  notions 
of  their  own  good,  in  opposition  to  justice,  at 
the  expense  of  all  other  classes  and  of  poster* 
ity? 

One  of  the  greatest  dangers,  therefore,  of 
democracy,  as  of  all  other  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment,  lies  in  the  sinister  interest  of  the  holders 
of  power:  it  is  the  danger  of  class  legislation; 
of  government  intended  for  (whether  really 
effecting  it  or  not)  the  immediate  benefit  of  the 
dominant  class,  to  the  lasting  detriment  of  the 
whole.  And  one  of  the  most  important  ques¬ 
tions  demandingconsideration,  in  determining 
the  best  constitution  of  a  representative  gov¬ 
ernment,  is  how  to  provide  efficacious  securi¬ 
ties  against  this  evil. 

If  we  consider  as  a  class,  politically  speaking, 
any  number  of  persons  who  have  the  same  sin¬ 
ister  interest— that  is,  whose  direct  and  appar¬ 
ent  interest  points  towards  the  same  descrip¬ 
tion  of  bad  measures;  the  desirable  object 
would  be  that  no  class,  and  no  combination  of 
classes  likely  to  combine,  should  be  able  to 
exercise  a  preponderant  influence  in  the  gov¬ 
ernment.  A  modern  community,  not  divided 
within  itself  by  strong  antipathies  of  race, 
language,  or  nationality,  may  be  considered 
as  in  the  main  divisible  into  two  sections, 
which,  inspite  of  partial  variations,  corre- 


ND  DANGERS  369 

spond  on  the  whole  with  two  divergent  direc¬ 
tions  of  apparent  interest.  Let  us  call  them 
(in  brief  general  terms)  labourers  on  the  one 
hand,  employers  of  labour  on  the  other:  in¬ 
cluding  however  along  with  employers  of  la¬ 
bour,  not  only  retired  capitalists,  and  the  pos¬ 
sessors  of  inherited  wealth,  but  all  that  highly 
paid  description  of  labourers  (such  as  the  pro¬ 
fessions)  whose  education  and  way  of  life  as¬ 
similate  them  with  the  rich,  and  whose  pros¬ 
pect  and  ambition  it  is  to  raise  themselves  in¬ 
to  that  class.  With  the  labourers,  on  the  other 
hand,  may  be  ranked  those  smaller  employers 
of  labour,  who  by  interests,  habits,  and  educa¬ 
tional  impressions  are  assimilated  in  wishes, 
tastes,  and  objects  to  the  labouring  classes; 
comprehending  a  large  proportion  of  petty 
tradesmen.  In  a  state  of  society  thus  composed, 
if  the  representative  system  could  be  made 
ideally  perfect,  and  if  it  were  possible  to  main¬ 
tain  it  in  that  state,  its  organisation  must  be 
such  that  these  two  classes,  manual  labourers 
and  their  affinities  on  one  side,  employers  of 
labour  and  their  affinities  on  the  other,  should 
be,  in  the  arrangement  of  the  representative 
system,  equally  balanced,  each  influencing 
about  an  equal  number  of  votes  in  Parliament: 
since,  assuming  that  the  majority  of  each  class, 
in  any  difference  between  them,  would  be 
mainly  governed  by  their  class  interests,  there 
would  be  a  minority  of  each  in  whom  that  con¬ 
sideration  would  be  subordinate  to  reason, 
justice,  and  the  good  of  the  whole;  and  this 
minority  of  either,  joining  with  the  whole  of 
the  other,  would  turn  the  scale  against  any  de¬ 
mands  of  their  own  majority  which  were  not 
such  as  ought  to  prevail. 

The  reason  why,  in  any  tolerable  constituted 
society,  justice  and  the  general  interest  mostly 
in  the  end  carry  their  point,  is  that  the  separate 
and  selfish  interests  of  mankind  are  almost 
always  divided;  some  are  interested  in  what 
is  wrong,  but  some,  also,  have  their  private 
interest  on  the  side  of  what  is  right:  and  those 
who  are  governed  by  higher  considerations, 
though  too  few  and  weak  to  prevail  against  the 
whole  of  the  others,  usually  after  sufficient 
discussion  and  agitation  become  strong  enough 
to  turn  the  balance  in  favour  of  the  body  of 
private  interests  which  is  on  the  same  side  with 
them.  The  representative  system  ought  to  be 
so  constituted  as  to  maintain  this  state  of 
things:  it  ought  not  to  allow  any  of  the  various 
sectional  interests  to  be  so  powerful  as  to  be 
capable  of  prevailing  against  truth  and  justice 
and  the  other  sectional  interests  combined. 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


37° 

There  ought  always  to  be  such  a  balance  pre¬ 
served  among  personal  interests  as  may  render 
any  one  of  them  dependent  for  its  successes  on 
carrying  with  it  at  least  a  large  proportion 
of  those  who  act  on  higher  motives  and  more 
comprehensive  and  distant  views. 

Chapter  j 

Of  Trite  and  False  Democracy;  Repre¬ 
sentation  of  All,  and  Representation 
of  the  Majority  only 
It  has  been  seen  that  the  dangers  incident  to 
a  representative  democracy  are  of  two  kinds: 
danger  of  a  low  grade  of  intelligence  in  the 
representative  body,  and  in  the  popular  opin¬ 
ion  which  controls  it;  and  danger  oE  class  leg¬ 
islation  on  the  part  of  the  numerical  majority, 
these  being  all  composed  of  the  same  class.  We 
have  next  to  consider  how  far  it  is  possible  so 
to  organise  the  democracy  as,  without  inter¬ 
fering  materially  with  the  characteristic  bene¬ 
fits  of  democratic  government,  to  do  away  with 
these  two  great  evils,  or  at  least  to  abate  them, 
in  the  utmost  degree  attainable  by  human  con¬ 
trivance. 

The  common  mode  of  attempting  this  is  by 
limiting  the  democratic  character  of  the  repre¬ 
sentation,  through  a  more  or  less  restricted 
suffrage.  But  there  is  a  previous  consideration 
which,  duly  kept  in  view,  considerably  modi¬ 
fies  the  circumstances  which  are  supposed  to 
render  such  a  restriction  necessary.  A  com¬ 
pletely  equal  democracy,  in  a  nation  in  which 
a  single  class  composes  the  numerical  majority, 
cannot  be  divested  of  certain  evils;  but  those 
evils  are  greatly  aggravated  by  the  fact  that 
the  democracies  which  at  present  exist  are  not 
equal,  but  systematically  unequal  in  favour  of 
the  predominant  class.  1  wo  very  different 
ideas  are  usually  confounded  under  the  name 
democracy.  The  pure  idea  of  democracy,  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  definition,  is  the  government  of 
the  whole  people  by  the  whole  people,  equally 
represented.  Democracy  as  commonly  con¬ 
ceived  and  hitherto  practised  is  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  whole  people  by  a  mere  majority 
of  the  people,  exclusively  represented.  Flic 
former  is  synonymous  with  the  equality  of  all 
citizens;  the  latter,  strangely  confounded  with 
it,  is  a  government  of  privilege,  in  favour  of 
the  numerical  majority,  who  alone  possess 
practically  any  voice  in  the  State.  I  his  is  the 
inevitable  consequent eof  themanner  in  which 
the  votes  are  now  taken,  to  the  complete  dis¬ 
franchisement  of  minorities. 


The  confusion  of  ideas  here  is  great,  but  it 
is  so  easily  cleared  up  that  one  would  suppose 
the  slightest  indication  would  be  sufficient  to 
place  the  matter  in  its  true  light  before  any 
mind  of  average  intelligence.  It  would  be  so, 
but  for  the  power  of  habit:  owing  to  which 
the  simplest  idea,  if  unfamiliar,  has  as  great 
difficulty  in  making  its  way  to  the  mind  as  a 
far  more  complicated  one.  That  the  minority 
must  yield  to  the  majority,  the  smaller  number 
to  the  greater,  is  a  familiar  idea;  and  accord¬ 
ingly  men  think  there  is  no  necessity  for  using 
their  minds  any  further,  and  it  does  not  occur 
to  them  that  there  is  any  medium  between  al¬ 
lowing  the  smaller  number  to  be  equally  power¬ 
ful  with  thegreater,  andblotting out  the  small¬ 
er  number  altogether.  In  a  representative  body 
actually  deliberating,  the  minority  must  of 
course  be  overruled;  and  in  an  equal  democ¬ 
racy  (since  the  opinions  of  the  constituents, 
when  they  insist  on  them,  determine  those  of 
the  representative  body)  the  majority  of  the 
people,  through  their  representatives,  will  out¬ 
vote  and  prevail  over  the  minority  and  their 
representatives.  But  does  it  follow  that  the 
minority  should  have  no  representatives  at  all? 
Because  the  majority  ought  to  prevail  over  the 
minority,  must  the  majority  have  all  the  votes, 
the  minority  none?  Is  it  necessary  that  the 
minority  should  not  even  be  heard?  Nothing 
but  habit  and  old  association  can  reconcile 
any  reasonable  being  to  the  needless  injustice. 
In  a  really  equal  democracy,  every  or  any  sec¬ 
tion  would  be  represented,  not  disproportion¬ 
ately,  but  proportionately.  A  majority  of  the 
electors  would  always  have  a  majority  of  the 
representatives;  but  a  minority  of  the  electors 
would  always  have  a  minority  of  the  represent¬ 
atives.  Man  for  man  they  would  be  as  fully 
represented  as  the  majority.  Unless  they  are, 
there  is  not  ccpial  government,  but  a  govern¬ 
ment  of  inequality  and  privilege:  one  part  of 
the  people  rule  over  the  rest:  there  is  a  pait 
whose  fair  and  equal  share  of  influence  in  the 
representation  is  withheld  from  them;  contraiy 
to  all  just  government,  but,  above  all.  contrary 
to  the  principle  of  democracy,  which  professes 
equality  as  its  very  root  and  foundation. 

The  injustice  and  violation  of  principle  are 
not  less  flagrant  because  those  who  stiller  by 
them  are  a  minority;  lor  there  is  not  equal 
suffrage  where  every  single  individual  docs  not 
count  for  as  much  as  any  other  single  individ¬ 
ual  in  the  community.  But  it  is  not  only  a  mi¬ 
nority  who  stiller.  Democracy,  thus  constitut¬ 
ed,  does  not  even  attain  its  ostensible  object. 


REPRESENTATION 

that  of  giving  the  powers  of  government  in  all 
cases  to  the  numerical  majority.  It  does  some¬ 
thing  very  different:  it  gives  them  to  a  major¬ 
ity  of  the  majority;  who  may  be,  and  often  are, 
but  a  minority  of  the  whole.  All  principles  are 
most  effectually  tested  by  extreme  cases.  Sup¬ 
pose  then,  that,  in  a  country  governed  by 
equal  and  universal  suffrage,  there  is  a  contest¬ 
ed  election  in  every  constituency,  and  every 
election  is  carried  by  a  small  majority.  The 
Parliament  thus  brought  together  represents 
little  more  than  a  bare  majority  of  the  people. 
This  Parliament  proceeds  to  legislate,  and 
adopts  important  measures  by  a  bare  majority 
of  itself.  What  guarantee  is  there  that  these 
measures  accord  with  the  wishes  of  a  majority 
of  the  people?  Nearly  half  the  electors,  having 
been  outvoted  at  the  hustings,  have  had  no 
influence  at  all  in  the  decision:  and  the  whole 
of  these  may  be,  a  majority  of  them  probably 
are,  hostile  to  the  measures,  having  voted 
against  those  by  whom  they  have  been  carried. 
Of  the  remaining  electors,  nearly  half  have 
chosen  representatives  who,  by  supposition, 
have  voted  against  the  measures.  It  is  possi¬ 
ble,  therefore,  and  not  at  all  improbable,  that 
the  opinion  which  has  prevailed  was  agreeable 
only  to  a  minority  of  the  nation,  though  a  ma¬ 
jority  of  that  portion  of  it  whom  the  institu¬ 
tions  of  the  country  have  erected  into  a  ruling 
class.  If  democracy  means  the  certain  ascend¬ 
ancy  of  the  majority,  there  are  no  means  of 
insuring  that  but  by  allowing  every  individual 
figure  to  tell  equally  in  the  summing  up.  Any 
minority  left  out,  either  purposely  or  by  the 
play  of  the  machinery,  gives  the  power  not  to 
the  majority,  but  to  a  minority  in  some  other 
part  of  the  scale. 

The  only  answer  which  can  possibly  be  made 
to  this  reasoning  is,  that  as  different  opinions 
predominate  in  different  localities,  the  opin¬ 
ion  which  is  in  a  minority  in  some  places  has 
a  majority  in  others,  and  on  the  whole  every 
opinion  which  exists  in  the  constituencies  ob¬ 
tains  its  fair  share  of  voices  in  the  representa¬ 
tion.  And  this  is  roughly  true  in  the  present 
state  of  the  constituency;  if  it  were  not,  the 
discordance  of  the  House  with  the  general 
sentiment  of  the  country  would  soon  become 
evident.  But  it  would  be  no  longer  true  if  the 
present  constituency  were  much  enlarged;  still 
less,  if  made  co-extensive  with  the  whole  popu¬ 
lation;  for  in  that  case  the  majority  in  every 
locality  would  consist  of  manual  labourers; 
and  when  there  was  any  question  pending,  on 
which  these  classes  were  at  issue  with  the  rest 


OF  MINORITIES  371 

of  the  community,  no  other  class  could  suc¬ 
ceed  in  getting  represented  anywhere.  Even 
now,  is  it  not  a  great  grievance  that  in  every 
Parliament  a  very  numerous  portion  of  the 
electors,  willing  and  anxious  to  be  represent¬ 
ed,  have  no  member  in  the  House  for  whom 
they  have  voted?  Is  it  just  that  every  elector  of 
Marylebone  is  obliged  to  be  represented  by 
two  nominees  of  the  vestries,  every  elector  of 
Finsbury  or  Lambeth  by  those  (as  is  generally 
believed)  of  the  publicans?  The  constituencies 
to  which  most  of  the  highly  educated  and  pub¬ 
lic  spirited  persons  in  the  country  belong,  those 
of  the  large  towns,  are  now,  in  great  part,  either 
unrepresented  or  misrepresented.  The  electors 
who  are  on  a  different  side  in  party  politics 
from  the  local  majority  are  unrepresented.  Of 
those  who  are  on  the  same  side,  a  large  propor¬ 
tion  are  misrepresented;  having  been  obliged 
to  accept  the  man  who  had  the  greatest  num¬ 
ber  of  supporters  in  their  political  party, 
though  his  opinions  may  differ  from  theirs  on 
every  other  point.  The  state  of  things  is,  in 
some  respects,  even  worse  than  if  the  minority 
were  not  allowed  to  >016  at  all;  for  then,  at 
least,  the  majority  might  have  a  member  who 
would  represent  their  own  best  mind:  while 
now,  the  necessity  of  not  dividing  the  party,  for 
fear  of  letting  in  its  opponents,  induces  all  to 
vote  either  for  the  first  person  who  presents 
himself  wearing  their  colours,  or  for  the  one 
brought  forward  by  their  local  leaders;  and 
these,  if  we  pay  them  the  compliment,  which 
they  very  seldom  deserve,  of  supposing  their 
choice  to  be  unbiassed  by  their  personal  inter¬ 
ests,  are  compelled,  that  they  may  be  sure  of 
mustering  their  whole  strength,  to  bring  for¬ 
ward  a  candidate  whom  none  of  the  party  will 
strongly  object  to— that  is,  a  man  without  any 
distinctive  peculiarity,  any  known  opinions 
except  the  shibboleth  of  the  party. 

This  is  strikingly  exemplified  in  the  United 
States;  where,  at  the  election  of  President,  the 
strongest  party  never  dares  put  forward  any  of 
its  strongest  men,  because  every  one  of  these, 
from  the  mere  fact  that  he  has  been  long  in 
the  public  eye,  has  made  himself  objectionable 
to  some  portion  or  other  of  the  party,  and  is 
therefore  not  so  sure  a  card  for  rallying  all 
their  votes  as  a  person  who  has  never  been 
heard  of  by  the  public  at  all  until  he  is  pro¬ 
duced  as  the  candidate.  Thus,  the  man  who  is 
chosen,  even  by  the  strongest  party,  represents 
perhaps  the  real  wishes  only  of  the  narrow 
margin  by  which  that  party  outnumbers  the 
other.  Any  section  whose  support  is  necessary 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


I 

to  success  possesses  a  veto  on  the  candidate. 
Any  section  which  holds  out  more  obstinately 
than  the  rest  can  compel  all  the  others  to  adopt 
its  nominee;  and  this  superior  pertinacity  is 
unhappily  more  likely  to  be  found  among 
those  who  are  holding  out  for  their  own  in¬ 
terest  than  for  that  of  the  public.  The  choice 
of  the  majority  is  therefore  very  likely  to  be 
determined  by  that  portion  of  the  body  who 
are  the  most  timid,  the  most  narrow-minded 
and  prejudiced,  or  who  cling  most  tenaciously 
to  the  exclusive  class-interest;  in  which  case 
the  electoral  rights  of  the  minority,  while  use¬ 
less  for  the  purposes  for  which  votes  are  given, 
serve  only  for  compelling  the  majority  to  ac¬ 
cept  the  candidate  of  the  weakest  or  worst  por¬ 
tion  of  themselves. 

That,  while  recognising  these  evils,  many 
should  consider  them  as  the  necessary  price 
paid  for  a  free  government  is  in  no  way  sur¬ 
prising:  it  was  the  opinion  of  all  the  friends  of 
freedom  up  to  a  recent  period.  But  the  habit 
of  passing  them  over  as  irremediable  has  be¬ 
come  so  inveterate  that  many  persons  seem 
to  have  lost  the  capacity  of  looking  at  them  as 
things  which  they  would  be  glad  to  remedy  if 
they  could.  From  despairing  of  a  cure,  there 
is  too  often  but  one  step  to  denying  the  dis¬ 
ease;  and  from  this  follows  dislike  to  having  a 
remedy  proposed,  as  if  the  proposer  were  creat¬ 
ing  a  mischief  instead  of  offering  relief  from 
one.  People  are  so  inured  to  the  evils  that  they 
feel  as  if  it  were  unreasonable,  if  not  wrong,  to 
complain  of  them.  Yet,  avoidable  or  not,  he 
must  be  a  purblind  lover  of  liberty  on  whose 
mind  they  do  not  weigh;  who  would  not  re¬ 
joice  at  the  discovery  that  they  could  be  dis¬ 
pensed  with.  Now,  nothing  is  more  certain 
than  that  the  virtual  blotting-out  of  the  minor¬ 
ity  is  no  necessary  or  natural  consequence  of 
freedom;  that,  far  from  having  any  connection 
with  democracy,  it  is  diametrically  opposed 
to  the  first  principle  of  democracy,  representa¬ 
tion  in  proportion  to  numbers.  It  is  an  essen¬ 
tial  part  of  democracy  that  minorities  should 
be  adequately  represented.  No  real  democracy, 
nothing  but  a  false  show  of  democracy,  is  pos¬ 
sible  without  it. 

I  hosc  who  have  seen  and  lelt,  in  some  de¬ 
gree,  the  force  of  these  considerations,  have 
proposed  various  expedients  by  which  the  evil 
may  be,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  mitigated. 
Lord  John  Russell,  in  one  of  his  Reform  Bills, 
introduced  a  provision,  that  certain  constitu¬ 
encies  should  return  three  members,  and  that 
in  these  each  elector  should  be  allowed  to  vote 


only  for  two;  and  Mr.  Disraeli,  in  the  recent 
debates,  revived  the  memory  of  the  fact  by  re¬ 
proaching  him  for  it;  being  of  opinion,  ap¬ 
parently,  that  it  befits  a  Conservative  states¬ 
man  to  regard  only  means,  and  to  disown 
scornfully  all  fellow-feeling  with  any  one  who 
is  betrayed,  even  once,  into  thinking  of  ends.1 
Others  have  proposed  that  each  elector  should 
be  allowed  to  vote  only  for  one.  By  either  of 
these  plans,  a  minority  ecpi ailing  or  exceeding 
a  third  of  the  local  constituency,  would  be 
able,  if  it  attempted  no  more,  to  return  one 
out  of  three  members.  The  same  result  might 
be  attained  in  a  still  better  way  if,  as  proposed 
in  an  able  pamphlet  by  Mr.  James  Garth 
Marshall,  the  elector  retained  his  three  votes, 
but  was  at  liberty  to  bestow  them  all  upon  the 
same  candidate.  These  schemes,  though  in¬ 
finitely  better  than  none  at  all,  are  yet  but 
makeshifts,  and  attain  the  end  in  a  very  im¬ 
perfect  manner;  since  all  local  minorities  of 
less  than  a  third,  and  all  minorities,  however 
numerous,  which  are  made  up  from  several 
constituencies,  would  remain  unrepresented. 
It  is  much  to  be  lamented,  however,  that  none 
of  these  plans  have  been  carried  into  effect,  as 
any  of  them  would  have  recognised  the  right 
principle,  and  prepared  the  way  for  its  more 
complete  application.  But  real  equality  of  rep¬ 
resentation  is  not  obtained  unless  any  set  of 
electors  amounting  to  the  average  number  oi 
a  constituency,  wherever  in  the  country  they 
happen  to  reside,  have  the  power  of  combin¬ 
ing  with  one  another  to  return  a  representa- 

1This  blunder  of  Mi .  Disraeli  (from  which, great¬ 
ly  to  his  credit,  Sir  John  Pakingion  took  an  op¬ 
portunity  soon  after,  of  separating  himself)  is  a 
speaking  instance  among  many,  how  little  the  Con¬ 
servative  leaders  understand  Conservative  piinci- 
plcs.  Without  presuming  to  require  from  political 
parties  such  an  amount  of  virtue  and  discernment 
as  that  thev  should  comprehend,  and  know  when 
to  appb,  the  principles  of  their  opponents,  we 
nuiv  vet  sav  that  it  would  he  a  great  improvement 
if  each  party  understood  and  acted  upon  its  own. 
Well  would  it  be  for  England  if  Consei va lives 
voted  consistently  for  everything  conservative,  and 
Liberals  for  cvcr\ thing  liberal.  We  should  not 
then  have  to  wait  long  for  things  which,  like  the 
present  and  many  other  great  measures,  are  emi¬ 
nently  both  the  one  and  the  other.  1  he  Conserva¬ 
tives,  as  being  b)  the  law  of  theii  existence  the 
stupidest  party,  have  much  the  gieatest  sins  of 
this  description  to  answer  for:  and  it  is  a  melan¬ 
choly  truth,  that  if  an\  measure  were  proposed, 
on  am  subject,  truly,  largely,  and  far-sightedly 
conservative,  even  if  Liberals  wete  willing  to  vote 
for  it.  the  great  hulk  of  the  Conservative  part) 
would  rush  blindly  in  and  prevent  it  from  being 
carried. 


REPRESENTATION 

tive.  This  degree  of  perfection  in  representa¬ 
tion  appeared  impracticable  until  a  man  of 
great  capacity,  fitted  alike  for  large  general 
views  and  for  the  contrivance  of  practical  de- 
tails-Mr.  Thomas  Hare-had  proved  its  possi¬ 
bility  by  drawing  up  a  scheme  for  its  accom¬ 
plishment,  embodied  in  a  Draft  of  an  Act  of 
Parliament:  a  scheme  which  has  the  almost  un¬ 
paralleled  merit  of  carrying  out  a  great  princi¬ 
ple  of  government  in  a  manner  approaching  to 
ideal  perfection  as  regards  the  special  object 
in  view,  while  it  attains  incidentally  several 
other  ends  of  scarcely  inferior  importance. 

According  to  this  plan,  the  unit  of  represen¬ 
tation,  the  quota  of  electors  who  would  be  en¬ 
titled  to  have  a  member  to  themselves,  would 
be  ascertained  by  the  ordinary  process  of  tak¬ 
ing  averages,  the  number  of  voters  being  di¬ 
vided  by  the  number  of  seats  in  the  House: 
and  every  candidate  who  obtained  that  quota 
would  be  returned,  from  however  great  a  num¬ 
ber  of  local  constituencies  it  might  be  gath¬ 
ered.  The  votes  would,  as  at  present,  be  given 
locally;  but  any  elector  would  be  at  liberty  to 
vote  for  any  candidate  in  whatever  part  of  the 
country  he  might  offer  himself.  Those  electors, 
therefore,  who  did  not  wish  to  be  represented 
by  any  of  the  local  candidates,  might  aid  by  their 
vote  in  the  return  of  the  person  they  liked  best 
among  all  those  throughout  the  country  who 
had  expressed  a  willingness  to  be  chosen.  This 
would,  so  far,  give  reality  to  the  electoral  rights 
of  the  otherwise  virtually  disfranchised  minor¬ 
ity.  But  it  is  important  that  not  those  alone 
who  refuse  to  vote  for  any  of  the  local  candi¬ 
dates,  but  those  also  who  vote  for  one  of  them 
and  are  defeated,  should  be  enabled  to  find 
elsewhere  the  representation  which  they  have 
not  succeeded  in  obtaining  in  their  own  dis¬ 
trict.  It  is  therefore  provided  that  an  elector  may 
deliver  a  voting  paper,  containing  other  names 
in  addition  to  the  one  which  stands  foremost 
in  his  preference.  His  vote  would  only  be 
counted  for  one  candidate;  but  if  the  object 
of  his  first  choice  failed  to  be  returned,  from 
not  having  obtained  the  quota,  his  second  per¬ 
haps  might  be  more  fortunate.  He  may  extend 
his  list  to  a  greater  number,  in  the  order  of 
his  preference,  so  that  if  the  names  which  stand 
near  the  top  of  the  list  either  cannot  make  up 
the  quota,  or  are  able  to  make  it  up  without 
his  vote,  the  vote  may  still  be  used  for  some 
one  whom  it  may  assist  in  returning.  To  ob¬ 
tain  the  full  number  of  members  required  to 
complete  the  House,  as  well  as  to  prevent  very 
popular  candidates  from  engrossing  nearly  all 


OF  MINORITIES  373 

the  suffrages,  it  is  necessary,  however  many 
votes  a  candidate  may  obtain,  that  no  more  of 
them  than  the  quota  should  be  counted  for  his 
return:  the  remainder  of  those  who  voted  for 
him  would  have  their  votes  counted  for  the 
next  person  on  their  respective  lists  who  need¬ 
ed  them,  and  could  by  their  aid  complete  the 
quota.  To  determine  which  of  a  candidate’s 
votes  should  be  used  for  his  return,  and  which 
set  free  for  others,  several  methods  are  pro¬ 
posed,  into  which  we  shall  not  here  enter.  He 
would  of  course  retain  the  votes  of  all  those 
who  would  not  otherwise  be  represented;  and 
for  the  remainder,  drawing  lots,  in  default  of 
better,  would  be  an  unobjectionable  expe¬ 
dient.  The  voting  papers  would  be  conveyed 
to  a  central  office,  where  the  votes  would  be 
counted,  the  number  of  first,  second,  third, 
and  other  votes  given  for  each  candidate  as¬ 
certained,  and  the  quota  would  be  allotted  to 
every  one  who  could  make  it  up,  until  the 
number  of  the  House  was  complete:  first  votes 
being  preferred  to  second,  second  to  third, 
and  so  forth.  The  voting  papers,  and  all  the 
elements  of  the  calculation,  would  be  placed 
in  public  repositories,  accessible  to  all  whom 
they  concerned;  and  if  any  one  who  had  ob¬ 
tained  the  quota  was  not  duly  returned  it 
would  be  in  his  power  easily  to  prove  it. 

These  are  the  main  provisions  of  the  scheme. 
For  a  more  minute  knowledge  of  its  very  sim¬ 
ple  machinery,  I  must  refer  to  Mr.  Hare's 
Treatise  on  the  Election  of  Representatives 
(a  small  volume  published  in  1859),1  and  to  a 
pamphlet  by  Mr.  Henry  Fawcett  (now  Pro¬ 
fessor  of  Political  Economy  in  the  University 
of  Cambridge),  published  in  i860,  and  entitled 
Mr.  Hare's  Reform  Bill  simplified  and  ex - 
plained.  This  last  is  a  very  clear  and  concise 
exposition  of  the  plan,  reduced  to  its  simplest 
elements,  by  the  omission  of  some  of  Mr. 
Hare’s  original  provisions,  which,  though  in 
themselves  beneficial,  were  thought  to  take 
more  from  the  simplicity  of  the  scheme  than 
they  added  to  its  practical  usefulness.  The 
more  these  works  are  studied  the  stronger,  I 
venture  to  predict,  will  be  the  impression  of 
the  perfect  feasibility  of  the  scheme,  and  its 
transcendant  advantages.  Such  and  so  numer¬ 
ous  are  these,  that,  in  my  conviction,  they 
place  Mr.  Hare’s  plan  among  the  very  great¬ 
est  improvements  yet  made  in  the  theory  and 
practice  of  government. 

1In  a  second  edition,  published  recently,  Mr. 
Hare  has  made  important  improvements  in  some 
of  the  detailed  provisions. 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


374 

In  the  first  place,  it  secures  a  representation, 
in  proportion  to  numbers,  of  every  division 
of  the  electoral  body:  not  two  great  parties 
alone,  with  perhaps  a  few  large  sectional  mi¬ 
norities  in  particular  places,  but  every  minor¬ 
ity  in  the  whole  nation,  consisting  of  a  suffi¬ 
ciently  large  number  to  be,  on  principles  of 
equal  justice,  entitled  to  a  representative. 
Secondly,  no  elector  would,  as  at  present,  be 
nominally  represented  by  some  one  whom  he 
had  not  chosen.  Every  member  of  the  House 
would  be  the  representative  of  a  unanimous 
constituency.  He  would  represent  a  thousand 
electors,  or  two  thousand,  or  five  thousand,  or 
ten  thousand,  as  the  quota  might  be.  every  one 
of  whom  would  have  not  only  voted  for  him, 
but  selected  him  from  the  whole  country;  not 
merely  from  the  assortment  of  two  or  three 
perhaps  rotten  oranges,  which  may  be  the  only 
choice  offered  to  him  in  his  local  market.  Un¬ 
der  this  relation  the  tie  between  the  elector 
and  the  representative  would  be  of  a  strength, 
and  a  value,  of  which  at  present  we  have  no 
experience.  Every  one  of  the  electors  would 
lie  personally  identified  with  his  representa¬ 
tive,  and  the  representative  with  his  constit¬ 
uents.  Every  elector  who  voted  for  him  would 
have  done  so  cither  because,  among  all  the 
candidates  for  Parliament  who  are  favourably 
known  to  a  certain  number  of  electors,  he  is 
the  one  who  best  expresses  the  voter’s  own 
opinions,  or  because  he  is  one  of  those  whose 
abilities  and  character  the  voter  most  respects, 
and  whom  he  most  willingly  trusts  to  think 
for  him.  The  member  would  represent  per¬ 
sons,  not  the  mere  bricks  and  mortar  of  the 
town— the  voters  themselves,  not  a  few  vestry¬ 
men  or  parish  notabilities  merely.  All,  how¬ 
ever,  that  is  worth  preserving  in  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  places  would  be  preserved.  Though 
the  Pat  liament  of  the  nation  ought  to  have 
as  little  as  possible  to  do  with  purely  local 
affairs,  yet,  while  it  has  to  do  with  them,  there 
ought  to  be  members  specially  commissioned 
to  look  after  the  interests  of  every  important 
locality:  and  these  there  would  still  be.  In 
every  locality  which  tould  make  up  the  quota 
within  itself,  the  majority  would  generally 
prefer  to  be  represented  by  one  of  themselves; 
bv  a  person  of  local  knowledge,  and  residing  in 
the  locality,  if  there  is  any  such  person  to  be 
found  among  the  candidates,  who  is  otherwise 
well  qualified  to  be  their  representative.  It 
would  be  the  minorities  chielly,  who  being  un¬ 
able  to  return  the  local  member,  would  look 
out  elsewhere  for  a  candidate  likely  to  obtain 


other  votes  in  addition  to  their  own. 

Of  all  modes  in  which  a  national  represen¬ 
tation  can  possibly  be  constituted,  this  one 
affords  the  best  security  for  the  intellectual 
qualifications  desirable  in  the  representatives. 
At  present,  by  universal  admission,  it  is  becom¬ 
ing  more  and  more  difficult  for  any  one  who 
has  only  talents  and  character  to  gain  admis¬ 
sion  into  the  House  of  Commons.  The  only 
persons  who  can  get  elected  are  those  who  pos¬ 
sess  local  influence,  or  make  their  way  by  lav¬ 
ish  expenditure,  or  who,  on  the  invitation  of 
three  or  four  tradesmen  or  attorneys,  are  sent 
down  by  one  of  the  two  great  parties  from  their 
London  clubs,  as  men  whose  votes  the  party 
can  depend  on  under  all  circumstances.  On 
Mr.  Hare’s  system,  those  who  did  not  like  the 
local  candidates,  or  who  could  not  succeed  in 
carrying  the  local  candidate  they  preferred, 
would  have  the  power  to  fill  up  their  voting 
papers  by  a  selection  from  all  the  persons  of 
national  reputation,  on  the  list  of  candidates, 
with  whose  general  political  principles  they 
were  in  sympathy.  Almost  every  person,  there¬ 
fore,  who  had  made  himself  in  any  way  hon¬ 
ourably  distinguished,  though  devoid  of  local 
influence,  and  having  sworn  allegiance  to  no 
political  party,  would  have  a  fair  chance  of 
making  up  the  quota;  and  with  this  encourage¬ 
ment  such  persons  might  be  expected  to  offer 
themselves,  in  numbers  hitherto  undreamt  of. 
Hundreds  of  ablemenof  independent  thought, 
who  would  have  no  chance  whatever  of  being 
chosen  by  the  majority  of  any  existing  con¬ 
stituency,  have  by  their  writings,  or  their  ex¬ 
ertions  in  some  field  of  public  usefulness, 
made  themselves  known  and  approved  by  a 
few  persons  in  almost  every  district  of  the 
kingdom;  and  if  every  vote  that  would  be 
given  for  them  in  every  place  could  be  counted 
for  their  election,  they  might  be  able  to  com¬ 
plete  the  number  of  the  quota.  In  no  other 
way  which  it  seems  possible  to  suggest  would 
Parliament  be  so  certain  of  containing  the 
very  elite  of  the  country. 

And  it  is  not  solely  through  the  votes  of 
minorities  that  this  system  of  election  would 
raise  the  intellectual  standard  of  the  House 
of  Commons.  Majorities  would  be  compelled 
to  look  out  for  members  of  a  much  higher  call- 
bre.  When  the  individuals  composing  the  ma¬ 
jority  would  no  longer  be  reduced  to  Hobson’s 
choice,  of  either  voting  for  the  person  brought 
forward  by  their  local  leaders  or  not  voting 
at  all;  when  the  nominee  of  the  leaders  would 
have  to  encounter  the  competition  not  solely 


REPRESENTATION 

of  the  candidate  of  the  minority,  but  of  all  the 
men  of  established  reputation  in  the  country 
who  were  willing  to  serve;  it  would  be  impos¬ 
sible  any  longer  to  foist  upon  the  electors  the 
first  person  who  presents  himself  with  the 
catchwords  of  the  party  in  his  mouth  and  three 
or  four  thousand  pounds  in  his  pocket.  The 
majority  would  insist  on  having  a  candidate 
worthy  of  their  choice,  or  they  would  carry 
their  votes  somewhere  else,  and  the  minority 
would  prevail.  The  slavery  of  the  majority  to 
the  least  estimable  portion  of  their  number 
would  be  at  an  end:  the  very  best  and  most 
capable  of  the  local  notabilities  would  be  put 
forward  by  preference;  if  possible,  such  aswere 
known  in  some  advantageous  way  beyond  the 
locality,  that  their  local  strength  might  have  a 
chance  of  being  fortified  by  stray  votes  from 
elsewhere.  Constituencies  would  become  com¬ 
petitors  for  the  best  candidates,  and  would  vie 
with  one  another  in  selecting  from  among  the 
men  of  local  knowledge  and  connections  those 
who  were  most  distinguished  in  every  other 
respect. 

The  natural  tendency  of  representative  gov¬ 
ernment,  as  of  modern  civilisation,  is  towards 
collective  mediocrity:  and  this  tendency  is  in¬ 
creased  by  all  reductions  and  extensions  of  the 
franchise,  their  effect  being  to  place  the  princi¬ 
pal  power  in  the  hands  of  classes  more  and 
more  below  the  highest  level  of  instruction  in 
the  community.  But  though  the  superior  intel¬ 
lects  and  characters  will  necessarily  be  out¬ 
numbered,  it  makes  a  great  difference  whether 
or  not  they  are  heard.  In  the  false  democracy 
which,  instead  of  giving  representation  to  all 
gives  it  only  to  the  local  majorities,  the  voice 
of  the  instructed  minority  may  have  no  organs 
at  all  in  the  representative  body.  It  is  an  ad¬ 
mitted  fact  that  in  the  American  democracy, 
which  is  constructed  on  this  faulty  model,  the 
highly-cultivated  members  of  the  community, 
except  such  of  them  as  are  willing  to  sacrifice 
their  own  opinions  and  modes  of  judgment, 
and  become  the  servile  mouthpieces  of  their 
inferiors  in  knowledge,  seldom  even  offer  them¬ 
selves  for  Congress  or  the  State  Legislatures, 
so  little  likelihood  have  they  of  beingreturned. 

Had  a  plan  like  Mr.  Hare’s  by  good  fortune 
suggested  itself  to  the  enlightened  and  patri¬ 
otic  founders  of  the  American  Republic,  the 
Federal  and  State  Assemblies  would  have  con¬ 
tained  many  of  these  distinguished  men,  and 
democracy  would  have  been  spared  its  great¬ 
est  reproach  and  one  of  its  most  formidable 
evils.  Against  this  evil  the  system  of  personal 


OF  MINORITIES  375 

representation,  proposed  by  Mr.  Hare,  is  al¬ 
most  a  specific.  The  minority  of  instructed 
minds  scattered  through  the  local  constitu¬ 
encies  would  unite  to  return  a  number,  pro¬ 
portioned  to  their  own  numbers,  of  the  very 
ablest  men  the  country  contains.  They  would 
be  under  the  strongest  inducement  to  choose 
such  men,  since  in  no  other  mode  could  they 
make  their  small  numerical  strength  tell  for 
anything  considerable.  The  representatives  of 
the  majority,  besides  that  they  would  them¬ 
selves  be  improved  in  quality  by  the  operation 
of  the  system,  would  no  longer  have  the  whole 
field  to  themselves.  They  would  indeed  out¬ 
number  the  others,  as  much  as  the  one  class  of 
electors  outnumbers  the  other  in  the  country: 
they  could  always  outvote  them,  but  they  would 
speak  and  vote  in  their  presence,  and  subject 
to  their  criticism.  When  any  difference  arose, 
they  would  have  to  meet  the  arguments  of  the 
instructed  few  by  reasons,  at  least  apparently, 
as  cogent;  and  since  they  could  not,  as  those 
do  who  are  speaking  to  persons  already  unani¬ 
mous,  simply  assume  that  they  are  in  the  right, 
it  would  occasionally  happen  to  them  to  be¬ 
come  convinced  that  they  were  in  the  wrong. 
As  they  would  in  general  be  well-meaning  (for 
thus  much  may  reasonably  be  expected  from  a 
fairly-chosen  national  representation),  their 
own  minds  would  be  insensibly  raised  by  the 
influence  of  the  minds  with  which  they  were  in 
contact,  or  even  in  conflict.  The  champions  of 
unpopular  doctrines  would  not  put  forth  their 
arguments  merely  in  books  and  periodicals, 
read  only  by  their  own  side;  the  opposing 
ranks  would  meet  face  to  face  and  hand  to 
hand,  and  there  would  be  a  fair  comparison 
of  their  intellectual  strength  in  the  presence 
of  the  country.  It  would  then  be  found  out 
whether  the  opinion  which  prevailed  by  count¬ 
ing  votes  would  also  prevail  if  the  votes  were 
weighed  as  well  as  counted. 

The  multitude  have  often  a  true  instinct  for 
distinguishing  an  able  man,  when  he  has  the 
means  of  displaying  his  ability  in  a  fair  field 
before  them.  If  such  a  man  fails  to  obtain  at 
least  some  portion  of  his  just  weight,  it  is 
through  institutions  or  usages  which  keep  him 
out  of  sight.  In  the  old  democracies  there  were 
no  means  of  keeping  out  of  sight  any  able  man: 
the  bema  was  open  to  him;  he  needed  nobody’s 
consent  to  become  a  public  adviser.  It  is  not 
so  in  a  representative  government;  and  the 
best  friends  of  representative  democracy  can 
hardly  be  without  misgivings  that  the  Themis- 
tocles  or  Demosthenes,  whose  counsels  would 


REP  RESEX  TA  TIVE  G  O  VERXM  EX  T 


have  saved  the  nation,  might  be  unable  during 
his  whole  life  ever  to  obtain  a  seat.  But  if  the 
presence  in  the  representative  assembly  can  be 
insured  of  even  a  few  of  the  first  minds  in  the 
country,  though  the  remainder  consist  only  of 
average  minds,  the  influence  of  these  leading 
spirits  is  sure  to  make  itself  sensibly  felt  in  the 
general  deliberations,  even  though  they  be 
known  to  be,  in  many  respects,  opposed  to  the 
tone  of  popular  opinion  and  feeling.  I  am  un¬ 
able  to  conceive  any  mode  by  which  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  such  minds  can  be  so  positively  in¬ 
sured  as  by  that  proposed  by  Mr.  Hare. 

This  portion  of  the  Assembly  would  also  be 
the  appropriate  organ  of  a  great  social  func¬ 
tion,  for  which  there  is  no  provision  in  any 
existing  democracy,  but  which  in  no  govern¬ 
ment  can  remain  permanently  unfulfilled  with¬ 
out  condemning  that  government  to  infallible 
degeneracy  and  decay.  This  may  be  called  the 
function  of  Antagonism.  In  every  govern¬ 
ment  there  is  some  power  stronger  than  all  the 
rest;  and  the  power  which  is  strongest  tends 
perpetually  to  become  the  sole  power.  Partly 
by  intention,  and  partly  unconsciously,  it  is 
ever  striving  to  make  all  other  things  bend  to 
itself;  and  is  not  content  while  there  is  any¬ 
thing  which  makes  permanent  head  against  it, 
any  influence  not  in  agreement  with  its  spirit. 
Vet  if  it  succeeds  in  suppressing  all  rival  in¬ 
fluences,  and  moulding  everything  after  its 
own  model,  improvement,  in  that  country,  is 
at  an  end,  and  decline  commences.  Human  im¬ 
provement  is  a  product  of  many  factors,  and 
no  power  ever  yet  constituted  among  man¬ 
kind  includes  them  all:  even  the  most  benefi¬ 
cent  power  only  contains  in  itself  some  of 
the  requisites  of  good,  and  the  remainder,  if 
progress  is  to  continue,  must  be  derived  from 
>onie  other  source.  No  community  has  ever 
long  continued  progressive,  but  while  a  con- 
flit  t  was  going  on  between  the  strongest  power 
in  the  community  and  some  rival  power;  be¬ 
tween  the  spiritual  and  temporal  authorities; 
the  inilitan  or  territorial  and  the  industrious 
classo:  the  king  and  the  people;  the  orthodox 
and  religious  reformers.  When  the  u’etory  on 
either  side  was  so  complete  as  to  put  an  end  to 
the  strife,  and  no  other  conflict  took  its  place, 
first  stagnation  followed,  and  then  decay.  The 
ascendancy  of  the  numerical  majority  is  less 
unjust,  and  on  the  whole  less  mischievous,  than 
many  others,  but  it  is  attended  with  the  very 
same  kind  of  dangers,  and  even  more  certain- 
lv;  for  when  the  government  is  in  the  hands  of 
One  or  a  Few,  the  Main  arc  always  existent  as 


a  rival  power,  which  may  not  be  strong  enough 
ever  to  control  the  other,  but  whose  opinion 
and  sentiment  are  a  moral,  and  even  a  social, 
support  to  all  who.  either  from  conviction  or 
contrariety  of  interest,  are  opposed  to  any  of 
the  tendencies  of  the  ruling  authority.  But 
when  the  Democracy  is  supreme,  there  is  no 
One  or  Few  strong  enough  for  dissentient 
opinions  and  injured  or  menaced  interests  to 
lean  upon.  The  great  difficulty  of  democratic 
government  has  hitherto  seemed  to  be,  how  to 
provide,  in  a  democratic  society,  what  cir¬ 
cumstances  have  provided  hitherto  in  all  the 
societies  which  have  maintained  themselves 
ahead  of  others-a  social  support,  a  point 
cVappui ,  for  individual  resistance  to  the  tend¬ 
encies  of  the  ruling  power;  a  protection,  a 
rallying  point, foropinionsand  interests  which 
the  ascendant  public  opinion  views  with  dis¬ 
favour.  For  want  of  such  a  point  d'appm,  the 
older  societies,  and  all  but  a  few  modern  ones, 
either  fell  into  dissolution  or  became  station¬ 
ary  (which  means  slow  deterioration)  through 
the  exclusive  predominance  of  a  part  only  of 
the  conditions  of  social  and  mental  well-being. 

Now,  this  great  want  the  system  of  Personal 
Representation  is  fitted  to  supply  in  the  most 
perfect  manner  which  the  circumstances  of 
modern  society  admit  of.  The  only  quarter  in 
which  to  look  for  a  supplement,  or  completing 
corrective,  to  the  instincts  of  a  democratic 
majority,  is  the  instructed  minority:  but,  in 
the  ordinary  mode  of  constituting  democracy, 
this  minority  has  no  organ:  Mr.  Hare’s  system 
provides  one.  The  representatives  who  would 
be  returned  to  Parliament  by  the  aggregate 
of  minorities  would  afford  that  organ  in  its 
greatest  perfection.  A  separate  organisation 
of  the  instructed  classes,  even  if  practicable, 
would  be  invidious,  and  could  only  escape 
from  being  offensive  by  being  totally  without 
influence.  But  if  the  elite  of  these  classes  formed 
part  of  the  Parliament,  by  the  same  title  as 
any  other  of  its  members-by  representing  the 
same  number  of  citizens,  the  same  numerical 
fraction  of  the  national  will— their  presence 
could  give  umbrage  to  nobody,  while  they 
would  be  in  the  position  of  highest  vantage, 
both  for  making  their  opinions  and  counsels 
heard  on  all  important  subjects,  and  for  tak¬ 
ing  an  active  part  in  public  business.  I  heir 
abilities  would  probably  draw  to  them  more 
than  their  numerical  share  of  the  actual  ad¬ 
ministration  of  government;  as  the  Athenians 
did  not  confide  responsible  public  functions 
to  Cleon  or  Hyper Bolus  (the  employment  of 


representation 

Cleon  at  Pylos  and  Amphipolis  was  purely  ex¬ 
ceptional),  but  Nicias,  and  Tlieramenes,  and 
Alcibiades,  were  in  constant  employment  both 
at  home  and  abroad,  though  known  to  sym¬ 
pathise  more  with  oligarchy  than  with  democ¬ 
racy.  The  instructed  minority  would,  in  the 
actual  voting,  count  only  for  their  numbers, 
but  as  a  moral  power  they  would  count  for 
much  more,  in  virtue  of  their  knowledge,  and 
of  the  influence  it  would  give  them  over  the 
rest.  An  arrangement  better  adapted  to  keep 
popular  opinion  within  reason  and  justice, 
and  to  guard  it  from  the  various  deteriorating 
influences  which  assail  the  weak  side  of  democ¬ 
racy,  could  scarcely  by  human  ingenuity  be  de¬ 
vised.  A  democratic  people  would  in  this  way 
be  provided  with  what  in  any  other  way  it 
would  almost  certainly  miss-leaders  of  a  high¬ 
er  grade  of  intellect  and  character  than  itself. 
Modern  democracy  would  have  its  occasional 
Pericles,  and  its  habitual  group  of  superior 
and  guiding  minds. 

With  all  this  array  of  reasons,  of  the  most 
fundamental  character,  on  the  affirmative  side 
of  the  question,  what  is  there  on  the  negative? 
Nothing  that  will  sustain  examination,  when 
people  can  once  be  induced  to  bestow  any  real 
examination  upon  a  new  thing.  Those  indeed, 
if  any  such  there  be,  who,  under  pretence  of 
equal  justice,  aim  only  at  substitutingthe  class 
ascendancy  of  the  poor  for  that  of  the  rich,  will 
of  course  be  unfavourable  to  a  scheme  which 
places  both  on  a  level.  But  I  do  not  believe 
that  any  such  wish  exists  at  present  among  the 
working  classes  of  this  country,  though  I  would 
not  answer  for  the  effect  which  opportunity 
and  demagogic  artifices  may  hereafter  have  in 
exciting  it.  In  the  United  States,  where  the 
numerical  majority  have  long  been  in  full  pos¬ 
session  of  collective  despotism,  they  would 
probably  be  as  unwilling  to  part  with  it  as  a 
single  despot  or  an  aristocracy.  But  I  believe 
that  the  English  democracy  would  as  yet  be 
content  with  protection  against  the  class  legis¬ 
lation  of  others,  without  claiming  the  power 
to  exercise  it  in  their  turn. 

Among  the  ostensible  objectors  to  Mr.  Hare’s 
scheme,  some  profess  to  think  the  plan  un¬ 
workable;  but  these,  it  will  be  found,  are  gen¬ 
erally  people  who  have  barely  heard  of  it,  or 
have  given  it  a  very  slight  and  cursory  exam¬ 
ination.  Others  are  unable  to  reconcile  them¬ 
selves  to  the  loss  of  what  they  term  the  local 
character  of  the  representation.  A  nation  does 
not  seem  to  them  to  consist  of  persons,  but  of 
artificial  units,  the  creation  of  geography  and 


OF  MINORITIES  377 

statistics.  Parliament  must  represent  townsand 
counties,  not  human  beings.  But  no  one  seeks 
to  annihilate  towns  and  counties.  Towns  and 
counties,  it  may  be  presumed,  are  represented, 
when  the  human  beings  who  inhabit  them  are 
represented.  Local  feelings  cannot  exist  with¬ 
out  somebody  who  feels  them;  nor  local  in¬ 
terests  without  somebody  interested  in  them. 

If  the  human  beings  whose  feelings  and  in¬ 
terests  these  are  have  their  proper  share  of  rep- 
presentation,  these  feelings  and  interests  are 
represented  in  common  with  all  other  feelings 
and  interests  of  those  persons.  But  I  cannot 
see  why  the  feelings  and  interests  which  ar¬ 
range  mankind  according  to  localities  should 
be  the  only  one  thought  worthy  of  being  repre¬ 
sented;  or  why  people  who  have  other  feelings 
and  interests,  which  they  value  more  than  they 
do  their  geographical  ones,  should  be  re¬ 
stricted  to  these  as  the  sole  principle  of  their 
political  classification.  The  notion  that  York¬ 
shire  and  Middlesex  have  rights  apart  from 
those  of  their  inhabitants,  or  that  Liverpool 
and  Exeter  are  the  proper  objects  of  the  legis¬ 
lator’s  care,  in  contradistinction  to  the  popu¬ 
lation  of  those  places,  is  a  curious  specimen  of 
delusion  produced  by  words. 

In  general,  however,  objectors  cutthematter 
short  by  affirming  that  the  people  of  England 
will  never  consent  to  such  a  system.  What  the 
people  of  England  are  likely  to  think  of  those 
who  pass  such  a  summary  sentence  on  their 

capacity  of  understandingand  judgment,  deem¬ 
ing  it  superfluous  to  consider  whether  a  thing 
is  right  or  wrong  before  affirming  that  they  are 
certain  to  reject  it,  I  will  not  undertake  to  say. 
For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  think  that  the 
people  of  England  have  deserved  to  be,  with¬ 
out  trial,  stigmatised  as  insurmountably  prej¬ 
udiced  against  anything  which  can  be  proved 
to  be  good  either  for  themselves  or  for  others. 
It  also  appears  to  me  that  when  prejudices  per¬ 
sist  obstinately,  it  is  the  fault  of  nobody  so 
much  as  of  those  who  make  a  point  of  pro¬ 
claiming  them  insuperable,  as  an  excuse  to 
themselves  for  never  joining  in  an  attempt  to 
remove  them.  Any  prejudice  whatever  will  be 
insurmountable  if  those  who  do  not  share  it 
themselves  truckle  to  it,  and  flatter  it,  and  ac¬ 
cept  it  as  a  law  of  nature.  I  believe,  however, 
that  in  this  case  there  is  in  general,  among 
those  who  have  yet  heard  of  the  proposition, 
no  other  hostility  to  it  than  the  natural  and 
healthy  distrust  attaching  to  all  novelties  which 
have  not  been  sufficiently  canvassed  to  make 
generally  manifest  all  the  pros  and  cons  of  the 


378 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


question.  The  only  serious  obstacle  is  the  un¬ 
familiarity:  this  indeed  is  a  formidable  one, 
for  the  imagination  much  more  easily  recon¬ 
ciles  itself  to  a  great  alteration  in  substance, 
than  to  a  very  small  one  in  names  and  forms. 
But  unfamiliarity  is  a  disadvantage  which, 
when  there  is  any  real  value  in  an  idea,  it  only 
requires  time  to  remove.  And  in  these  days  of 
discussion,  and  generally  awakened  interest 
in  improvement,  what  formerly  was  the  work 
of  centuries,  often  requires  only  years. 


Since  the  first  publication  of  this  Treatise, 
several  adverse  criticisms  have  been  made  on 
Mr.  Hare's  plan,  which  indicate  at  least  a  care¬ 
ful  examination  of  it.  and  a  more  intelligent 
consideration  than  had  previously  been  given 
to  its  pretensions.  This  is  the  natural  progress 
of  the  discussion  of  great  improvements.  They 
are  at  first  met  by  a  blind  prejudice,  and  by 
arguments  to  which  only  blind  prejudice  could 
attach  any  value.  As  the  prejudice  weakens, 
the  arguments  it  employs  for  some  time  increase 
in  strength;  since,  the  plan  being  better  under¬ 
stood,  its  inevitable  inconveniences,  and  the 
circumstances  which  militate  against  its  at  once 
producing  all  the  benefits  it  is  intrinsically  ca¬ 
pable  of,  come  to  light  along  with  its  merits. 
But,  of  all  the  objections,  having  any  semblance 
of  reason,  which  have  come  under  my  notice, 
there  is  not  one  which  had  not  been  foreseen, 
considered,  and  canvassed  by  the  supporters 
of  the  plan,  and  found  either  unreal  or  easily 
surmountable. 

The  most  serious,  in  appearance,  of  the  ob¬ 
jections  may  be  the  most  briefly  answered; 
the  assumed  impossibility  of  guarding  against 
fraud,  or  suspicion  of  fraud,  in  the  operations 
of  the  Central  Office.  Publicity,  and  complete 
liberty  of  inspecting  the  voting  papers  after 
the  election,  were  the  securities  provided;  but 
these,  it  is  maintained,  would  be  unavailing; 
because,  to  check  the  returns,  a  voter  would 
have  to  go  over  all  the  work  that  had  been 
done  by  the  staff  of  clerks.  This  would  be  a 
very  weighty  objection,  if  there  were  any  neces¬ 
sity  that  the  returns  should  be  verified  indi¬ 
vidually  by  every  voter.  All  that  a  simple  voter 
could  be  expected  to  do  in  the  way  ol  verifica¬ 
tion  would  be  to  check  the  use  made  of  his 
own  voting  paper;  for  which  purpose  every 
paper  would  be  returned,  after  a  proper  in¬ 
terval,  to  the  place  from  whence  it  came.  But 
what  he  could  not  do  would  be  done  for  him 
by  the  unsuccessful  candidatesand  theiragents. 
Those  among  the  defeated  who  thought  that 


they  ought  to  have  been  returned  would,  sing¬ 
ly  or  a  number  together,  employ  an  agency  for 
verifying  the  entire  process  of  the  election;  and 
if  they  detected  material  error,  the  documents 
would  be  referred  to  a  Committeeof  the  House 
of  Commons,  by  whom  the  entire  electoral 
operations  of  the  nation  would  be  examined 
and  verified,  at  a  tenth  part  the  expense  of 
time  and  money  necessary  for  the  scrutiny  of 
a  single  return  before  an  Election  Committee 
under  the  system  now  in  force. 

Assuming  the  plan  to  be  workable,  two 
modes  have  been  alleged  in  which  its  bene¬ 
fits  might  be  frustrated,  and  injurious  conse¬ 
quences  produced  in  lieu  of  them.  First,  it  is 
said  that  undue  power  would  be  given  to 
knots  or  cliques;  sectarian  combinations;  asso¬ 
ciations  for  special  objects,  such  as  the  Maine 
Law’  League,  the  Ballot  or  Liberation  Society; 
or  bodies  united  by  class  interests  or  commu¬ 
nity  of  religious  persuasion.  It  is  in  the  second 
place  objected  that  the  system  would  admit  of 
being  worked  for  party  purposes.  A  central 
organ  of  each  political  party  wTould  send  its  list 
of  658  candidates  all  through  the  country,  to 
be  voted  for  by  the  whole  of  its  supporters  m 
every  constituency.  Their  votes  would  far  out¬ 
number  those  which  could  ever  be  obtained  by 
any  independent  candidate.  The  ‘'ticket"  sys¬ 
tem.  it  is  contended,  would,  as  it  does  in 
America,  operate  solely  in  favour  of  the  great 
organised  parties,  whose  tickets  would  be  ac¬ 
cepted  blindly,  and  voted  for  in  their  integrity; 
and  would  hardly  ever  be  outvoted,  except 
occasionally,  by  the  sectarian  groups,  or  knots 
of  men  bound  together  by  a  common  crotchet, 
who  have  been  already  spoken  of. 

The  answer  to  this  appears  to  be  conclusive. 
No  one  pretends  that  under  Mr.  Hare  s  or  any 
other  plan  organisation  would  cease  to  be  an 
advantage.  Scattered  elements  are  always  at 
a  disadvantage  compared  with  organised  bod¬ 
ies.  As  Mr.  Hare's  plan  cannot  alter  the  nature 
of  things,  we  must  expect  that  all  parties  or 
sections,  great  or  small,  which  possess  organisa¬ 
tion,  would  avail  themselves  of  it  to  the  utmost 
to  strengthen  their  inlluence.  But  under  the 
existing  system  those  inlluences  are  everything. 
The  scattered  elements  are  absolutely  nothing. 
The  voters  who  are  neither  bound  to  the  great 
political  nor  to  any  of  the  little  sectarian  divi¬ 
sions  have  no  means  of  making  their  votes 
available.  Mr.  Hare’s  plan  gives  them  the 
means.  1  hey  might  be  more,  or  less,  dexterous 
in  using  it.  They  might  obtain  their  share  of 
inlluence,  or  much  less  than  their  share.  But 


REPRESENTATION  OF  MINORITIES  379 


whatever  they  did  acquire  would  be  clear  gain. 
And  when  it  is  assumed  that  every  petty  inter¬ 
est,  or  combination  for  a  petty  object,  would 
give  itself  an  organisation,  why  should  we 
suppose  that  the  great  interest  of  national  in¬ 
tellect  and  character  would  alone  remain  un¬ 
organised?  If  there  would  be  Temperance 
tickets,  and  Ragged  School  tickets,  and  the 
like,  would  not  one  public-spirited  person  in  a 
constituency  be  sufficient  to  put  forth  a  “per¬ 
sonal  merit”  ticket,  and  circulate  it  through 
a  whole  neighbourhood?  And  might  not  a  few 
such  persons,  meeting  in  London,  select  from 
the  list  of  candidates  the  most  distinguished 
names,  without  regard  to  technical  divisions 
of  opinion,  and  publish  them  at  a  trifling  ex¬ 
pense  through  all  the  constituencies?  It  must 
be  remembered  that  the  influence  of  the  two 
great  parties,  under  the  present  mode  of  elec¬ 
tion,  is  unlimited:  in  Mr.  Hare's  scheme  it 
would  be  great,  but  confined  within  bounds. 
Neither  they,  nor  any  of  the  smaller  knots, 
would  be  able  to  elect  more  members  than  in 
proportion  to  the  relative  number  of  their  ad¬ 
herents.  The  ticket  system  in  America  operates 
under  conditions  the  reverse  of  this.  In  Amer¬ 
ica  electors  vote  for  the  party  ticket,  because 
the  election  goes  by  a  mere  majority,  and  a 
vote  for  any  one  who  is  certain  not  to  obtain 
the  majority  is  thrown  away.  But,  on  Mr. 
Hare’s  system,  a  vote  given  to  a  person  of 
known  worth  has  almost  as  much  chance  of 
obtaining  its  object  as  one  given  to  a  party 
candidate.  It  might  be  hoped,  therefore,  that 
every  Liberal  or  Conservative,  who  was  any¬ 
thing  besides  a  Liberal  or  a  Conservative— who 
had  any  preferences  of  his  own  in  addition  to 
those  of  his  party— would  scratch  through  the 
names  of  the  more  obscure  and  insignificant 
party  candidates,  and  inscribe  in  their  stead 
some  of  the  men  who  are  an  honour  to  the 
nation.  And  the  probability  of  this  fact  would 
operate  as  a  strong  inducement  with  those 
who  drew  up  the  party  lists  not  to  confine 
themselves  to  pledged  party  men,  but  to  in¬ 
clude  along  with  these,  in  their  respective  tick¬ 
ets,  such  of  the  national  notabilities  as  were 
more  in  sympathy  with  their  side  than  with  the 
opposite. 

The  real  difficulty,  for  it  is  not  to  be  dis¬ 
sembled  that  there  is  a  difficulty,  is  that  the  in¬ 
dependent  voters,  those  who  are  desirous  of  vot¬ 
ing  for  unpatronised  persons  of  merit,  would 
be  apt  to  put  down  the  names  of  a  few  such 
persons,  and  to  fill  up  the  remainder  of  their 
list  with  mere  party  candidates,  thus  helping 


to  swell  the  numbers  against  those  by  whom 
they  would  prefer  to  be  represented.  There 
would  be  an  easy  remedy  for  this,  should  it  be 
necessary  to  resort  to  it,  namely,  to  impose  a 
limit  to  the  number  of  secondary  or  contin¬ 
gent  votes.  No  voter  is  likely  to  have  an  inde¬ 
pendent  preference,  grounded  on  knowledge, 
for  658,  or  even  for  100  candidates.  There 
would  be  little  objection  to  his  being  limited 
to  twenty,  fifty,  or  whatever  might  be  the  num¬ 
ber  in  the  selection  of  whom  there  was  some 
probability  that  his  own  choice  would  be  ex¬ 
ercised— that  he  would  vote  as  an  individual, 
and  not  as  one  of  the  mere  rank  and  file  of  a 
party.  But  even  without  this  restriction,  the 
evil  would  be  likely  to  cure  itself  as  soon  as 
the  system  came  to  be  well  understood.  To 
counteract  it  would  become  a  paramount  ob¬ 
ject  with  all  the  knots  and  cliques  whose  in¬ 
fluence  is  so  much  deprecated.  From  these, 
each  in  itself  a  small  minority,  the  word  would 
go  forth,  “Vote  for  your  special  candidates 
only;  or  at  least  put  their  names  foremost,  so 
as  to  give  them  the  full  chance  which  your 
numerical  strength  warrants,  of  obtaining  the 
quota  by  means  of  first  votes,  or  without  de¬ 
scending  low  in  the  scale.”  And  those  voters 
who  did  not  belong  to  any  clique  would  profit 
by  the  lesson. 

The  minor  groups  would  have  precisely  the 
amount  of  power  which  they  ought  to  have. 
The  influence  they  could  exercise  would  be 
exactly  that  which  their  number  of  voters 
entitled  them  to;  not  a  particle  more;  while, 
to  ensure  even  that,  they  would  have  a  motive 
to  put  up,  as  representatives  of  their  special 
objects,  candidates  whose  other  recommenda¬ 
tions  would  enable  them  to  obtain  the  suffrages 
of  voters  not  of  the  sect  or  clique.  It  is  curious 
to  observe  how  the  popular  line  of  argument 
in  defence  of  existing  systems  veers  round,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  nature  of  the  attack  made  upon 
them.  Not  many  years  ago  it  was  the  favourite 
argument  in  support  of  the  then  existing 
system  of  representation,  that  under  it  all  “in¬ 
terests”  or  “classes”  were  represented.  And  cer¬ 
tainly,  all  interests  or  classes  of  any  importance 
ought  to  be  represented,  that  is,  ought  to  have 
spokesmen,  or  advocates,  in  Parliament.  But 
from  thence  it  was  argued  that  a  system  ought 
to  be  supported  which  gave  to  the  partial  in¬ 
terests  not  advocates  merely,  but  the  tribunal 
itself.  Now  behold  the  change.  Mr.  Hare’s  sys¬ 
tem  makes  it  impossible  for  partial  interests  to 
have  the  command  of  the  tribunal,  but  it  en¬ 
sures  them  advocates,  and  for  doing  even  this 


38o  REPRESENTATIVE 

it  is  reproached.  Because  it  unites  the  good 
points  of  class  representation  and  the  good 
points  of  numerical  representation,  it  is  at¬ 
tacked  from  both  sides  at  once. 

But  it  is  not  such  objections  as  these  that  are 
the  real  difficulty  in  getting  the  system  ac¬ 
cepted;  it  is  the  exaggerated  notion  entertain¬ 
ed  of  its  complexity,  and  the  consequent  doubt 
whether  it  is  capable  of  being  carried  into 
effect.  The  only  complete  answer  to  this  objec¬ 
tion  would  be  actual  trial.  When  the  merits 
of  the  plan  shall  have  become  more  generally 
known,  and  shall  have  gained  for  it  a  wider 
support  among  impartial  thinkers,  an  effort 
should  be  made  to  obtain  its  introduction  ex¬ 
perimentally  in  some  limited  field,  such  as  the 
municipal  election  of  some  great  town.  An 
opportunity  was  lost  when  the  decision  was 
taken  to  divide  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire 
for  the  purpose  of  giving  it  four  members;  in¬ 
stead  of  trying  the  new  principle,  by  leaving 
the  constituency  undivided,  and  allowing  a 
candidate  to  be  returned  on  obtaining  either 
in  first  or  secondary  votes  a  fourth  part  of  the 
whole  number  of  votes  given.  Such  experi¬ 
ments  would  be  a  very  imperfect  test  of  the 
worth  of  the  plan:  but  they  would  be  an  ex¬ 
emplification  of  its  mode  of  working;  they 
would  enable  people  to  convince  themselves 
that  it  is  not  impracticable;  would  familiarise 
them  with  its  machinery,  and  afford  some 
materials  for  judging  whether  the  difficulties 
which  are  thought  to  be  so  formidable  are  real 
or  only  imaginary.  The  day  when  such  a  par¬ 
tial  trial  shall  be  sanctioned  by  Parliament 
will,  I  believe,  inaugurate  a  new  era  of  Parlia¬ 
mentary  Reform;  destined  to  give  to  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government  a  shape  fitted  to  its  ma¬ 
ture  and  triumphant  period,  when  it  shall  have 
passed  through  the  militant  stage  in  which 
alone  the  world  has  yet  seen  it.1 

Mn  the  interval  between  the  last  and  present 
editions  of  this  treatise,  it  has  become  known  that 
the  experiment  here  suggested  has  actually  been 
made  on  a  larger  than  any  municipal  or  provincial 
scale,  and  has  been  in  course  of  trial  for  several 
\ cars.  In  the  Danish  Constitution  (not  that  of 
Denmark  proper,  but  the  Constitution  framed  for 
the  entire  Danish  kingdom)  the  equal  representa¬ 
tion  of  minorities  was  provided  for  on  a  plan  so 
nearh  identical  with  Mr.  Hare's,  as  to  add  an¬ 
other  to  the  mam  examples  how  the  ideas  which 
lesolvc  difficulties  arising  out  of  a  general  situa¬ 
tion  of  the  human  mind  or  of  society,  present 
themselves,  without  communication,  to  several  su¬ 
perior  minds  at  once.  This  feature  of  the  Danish 
electoral  law  has  been  brought  fully  and  clearly 
before  the  British  public  in  an  able  paper  by  Mr. 
Robert  I  Alton,  forming  one  of  the  valuable  rc- 


GOVERNMENT 

Chapter  8 

Of  the  Extension  of  the  Suffrage 
Such  a  representative  democracy  as  has  now 
been  sketched,  representative  of  all,  and  not 
solelv  of  the  majority— in  which  the  interests, 
the  opinions,  the  grades  of  intellect  which  are 
outnumbered  would  nevertheless  be  heard,  and 
would  have  a  chance  of  obtaining  by  weight 
of  character  and  strength  of  argument  an  influ¬ 
ence  which  would  not  belong  to  their  nu¬ 
merical  force— this  democracy,  which  is  alone 
equal,  alone  impartial,  alone  the  government 
of  all  by  all,  the  only  true  type  of  democracy— 
would  be  free  from  the  greatest  evils  of  the 
falsely-called  democracies  which  now  prevail, 
and  from  which  the  current  idea  of  democ¬ 
racy  is  exclusively  derived.  But  even  in  this 
democracy,  absolute  power,  if  they  chose  to 

ports  by  Secretaries  of  Legation,  printed  by  order 
of  the  House  of  Commons  in  1864.  Mr.  Hare's 
plan,  which  may  now  be  also  called  M.  Andras’s, 
has  thus  advanced  from  the  position  of  a  simple 
project  to  that  of  a  realised  political  fact. 

Though  Denmark  is  as  yet  the  only  country  in 
which  Personal  Representation  has  become  an  in¬ 
stitution,  the  progress  of  the  idea  among  thinking 
minds  has  been  very  rapid.  In  almost  all  the  coun¬ 
tries  in  which  universal  suffrage  is  now  regarded 
as  a  necessity,  the  scheme  is  rapidly  making  its 
way:  with  the  friends  of  democracy,  as  a  logical 
consequence  of  their  principle;  with  those  who 
rather  accept  than  prefer  democratic  government, 
as  an  indispensable  corrective  of  its  inconveniences. 
The  political  thinkers  of  Switzerland  led  the  way. 
Those  of  France  followed.  To  mention  no  others, 
within  a  very  recent  period  two  of  the  most  influ¬ 
ential  and  authoritative  political  writers  in  France, 
one  belonging  to  the  moderate  liberal  and  the  oth¬ 
er  to  the  extreme  democratic  school,  have  given  in 
a  public  adhesion  to  the  plan.  Among  its  German 
supporters  is  numbered  one  of  the  most  eminent 
political  thinkers  in  Germany,  who  is  also  a  dis¬ 
tinguished  mcmbei  of  the  liberal  Cabinet  of  the 
Grand  Duke  of  Baden.  This  subject,  among  oth¬ 
ers,  has  its  share  in  the  important  awakening  of 
thought  in  the  American  republic,  which  is  al¬ 
ready  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  great  pending  con¬ 
test  for  human  freedom.  In  the  two  principal  of 
our  Australian  colonies  Mr.  Hare’s  plan  has  been 
brought  under  the  consideration  of  their  respec¬ 
tive  legislatures,  and  though  not  vet  adopted,  has 
alrcadv  a  strong  party  in  its  favour;  while  the 
clear  and  complete  understanding  of  its  principles, 
shown  by  the  majority  of  the  speakers  both  on  the 
Conservative  and  on  the  Radical  side  of  general 
politics,  shows  how  unfounded  is  the  notion  of  its 
being  too  complicated  to  be  capable  of  being  gen¬ 
erally  comprehended  and  acted  on.  Nothing  is  ic- 
cniired  to  make  both  the  plan  and  its  advantages 
perfectly  intelligible  to  all.  except  that  the  time 
should  have  come  when  they  will  think  it  worth 
their  while  to  take  the  trouble  of  really  attending 
to  it. 


EXTENSION  OF 

exercise  it,  would  rest  with  the  numerical  ma¬ 
jority;  and  these  would  be  composed  exclusive¬ 
ly  of  a  single  class,  alike  in  biasses,  preposses¬ 
sions,  and  general  modes  of  thinking,  and  a 
class,  to  say  no  more,  not  the  most  highly  culti¬ 
vated.  The  constitution  would  therefore  still 
be  liable  to  the  characteristic  evils  of  class  gov¬ 
ernment:  in  a  far  less  degree,  assuredly,  than 
that  exclusive  government  by  a  class,  which 
new  usurps  the  name  of  democracy;  but  still, 
under  no  effective  restraint,  except  what  might 
be  found  in  the  good  sense,  moderation,  and 
forbearance  of  the  class  itself.  If  checks  of  this 
description  are  sufficient,  the  philosophy  of 
constitutional  government  is  but  solemn  tri¬ 
fling.  All  trust  in  constitutions  is  grounded  on 
the  assurance  they  may  afford,  not  that  the 
depositaries  of  power  will  not,  but  that  they 
cannot,  misemploy  it.  Democracy  is  not  the 
ideally  best  form  of  government  unless  this 
weak  side  of  it  can  be  strengthened;  unless  it 
can  be  so  organised  that  no  class,  not  even  the 
most  numerous,  shall  be  able  to  reduce  all  but 
itself  to  political  insignificance,  and  direct 
the  course  of  legislation  and  administration 
by  its  exclusive  class  interest.  The  problem  is, 
to  find  the  means  of  preventing  this  abuse, 
without  sacrificing  the  characteristic  advan¬ 
tages  of  popular  government. 

These  twofold  requisites  are  not  fulfilled  by 
the  expedient  of  a  limitation  of  the  suffrage, 
involving  the  compulsory  exclusion  of  any 
portion  of  the  citizens  from  a  voice  in  the  rep¬ 
resentation.  Among  the  foremost  benefits  of 
free  government  is  that  education  of  the  intel¬ 
ligence  and  of  the  sentiments  which  is  carried 
down  to  the  very  lowest  ranks  of  the  people 
when  they  are  called  to  take  a  part  in  acts  which 
directly  affect  the  great  interests  of  their  coun¬ 
try  On  this  topic  I  have  already  dwelt  so 
emphatically  that  I  only  return  to  it  because 
there  are  few  who  seem  to  attach  to  this  effect 
of  popular  institutions  all  the  importance  to 
which  it  is  entitled.  People  think  it  fanciful  to 
expect  so  much  from  what  seems  so  slight  a 
cause— to  recognise  a  potent  instrument  of 
mental  improvement  in  the  exercise  of  politi¬ 
cal  franchises  by  manual  labourers.  Yet  unless 
substantial  mental  cultivation  in  the  mass  of 
mankind  is  to  be  a  mere  vision,  this  is  the  road 
by  which  it  must  come.  If  any  one  supposes 
that  this  road  will  not  bring  it,  I  call  to  witness 
the  entire  contents  of  M.deTocqueville’s  great 
work;  and  especially  his  estimate  of  the  Amer¬ 
icans.  Almost  all  travellers  are  struck  by  the 
fact  that  every  American  is  in  some  sense  both 


THE  SUFFRAGE  381 

a  patriot,  and  a  person  of  cultivated  intelli¬ 
gence;  and  M.  de  Tocqueville  has  shown  how 
close  the  connection  is  between  these  qualities 
and  their  democratic  institutions.  No  such 
wide  diffusion  of  the  ideas,  tastes,  and  senti¬ 
ments  of  educated  minds  has  ever  been  seen 
elsewhere,  or  even  conceived  as  attainable.1 

Yet  this  is  nothing  to  what  we  might  look  for 
in  a  government  equally  democratic  in  its  un¬ 
exclusiveness,  but  better  organised  in  other  im¬ 
portant  points.  For  political  life  is  indeed  in 
America  a  most  valuable  school,  but  it  is  a 
school  from  which  the  ablest  teachers  are  ex¬ 
cluded;  the  first  minds  in  the  country  being  as 
effectually  shut  out  from  the  national  repre¬ 
sentation,  and  from  public  functions  general¬ 
ly,  as  if  they  were  under  a  formal  disqualifica¬ 
tion.  The  Demos,  too,  being  in  America  the 
one  source  of  power,  all  the  selfish  ambition  of 
the  country  gravitates  towards  it,  as  it  does  in 
despotic  countries  towards  the  monarch:  the 
people,  like  the  despot,  is  pursued  with  adula¬ 
tion  and  sycophancy,  and  the  corrupting  effects 
of  power  fully  keep  pace  with  its  improving 
and  ennobling  influences.  If,  even  with  this  al¬ 
loy,  democratic  institutions  produce  so  marked 
a  superiority  of  mental  development  in  the 
lowest  class  of  Americans,  compared  with  the 
corresponding  classes  in  England  and  else¬ 
where,  what  would  it  be  if  the  good  portion  of 
the  influence  could  be  retained  without  the 
bad?  And  this,  to  a  certain  extent,  may  be 
done;  but  not  by  excluding  that  portion  of 
the  people  who  have  fewest  intellectual  stim¬ 
uli  of  other  kinds  from  so  inestimable  an  in- 

1The  following  “extract  from  the  Report  of  the 
English  Commissioner  to  the  New  York  Exhibi¬ 
tion,”  which  I  quote  from  Mr.  Carey’s  Principles 
of  Social  Science  bears  striking  testimony  to  one 
part,  at  least,  of  the  assertion  in  the  text:— 

“We  have  a  few  great  engineers  and  mechanics, 
and  a  large  body  of  clever  workmen;  but  the  Amer¬ 
icans  seem  likely  to  become  a  whole  nation  of  such 
people.  Already,  their  rivers  swarm  with  steam¬ 
boats;  their  valleys  are  becoming  crowded  with  fac¬ 
tories;  their  towns,  surpassing  those  of  every  state 
of  Europe,  except  Belgium,  Holland, and  England, 
are  the  abodes  of  all  the  skill  which  now  distin¬ 
guishes  a  town  population;  and  there  is  scarcely 
an  art  in  Europe  not  carried  on  in  America  with 
equal  or  greater  skill  than  in  Europe,  though  it 
has  been  here  cultivated  and  improved  through 
acres.  A  whole  nation  of  Franklins,  Stephensons, 
and  Watts  in  prospect,  is  something  wonderful  for 
other  nations  to  contemplate.  In  contrast  with  the 
comparative  inertness  and  ignorance  of  the  bulk 
of  the  people  of  Europe,  whatever  may  be  the  su- 
perioritv  of  a  few  well-instructed  and  gifted  per¬ 
sons,  the  great  intelligence  of  the  whole  people 
of  America  is  the  circumstance  most  worthy  of 
public  attention.” 


REPRESENTATIVE  GO  VERNMENT 


382 

troduction  to  large,  distant,  and  complicated 
interests  as  is  afforded  by  the  attention  they 
may  be  induced  to  bestow  on  political  affairs. 
It  is  by  political  discussion  that  the  manual 
labourer,  whose  employment  is  a  routine,  and 
whose  way  of  life  brings  him  in  contact  with 
no  variety  of  impressions,  circumstances,  or 
ideas,  is  taught  that  remote  causes,  and  events 
which  take  place  far  off.  have  a  most  sensible 
effect  even  on  his  personal  interests;  and  it  is 
from  political  discussion,  and  collective  politi¬ 
cal  action,  that  one  whose  daily  occupations 
concentrate  his  interests  in  a  small  circle  round 
himself,  learns  to  feel  for  and  with  his  fellow- 
citizens,  and  becomes  consciously  a  member 
of  a  great  community.  But  political  discussions 
fly  over  the  heads  of  those  who  have  no  votes, 
and  are  not  endeavouring  to  acquire  them. 
Their  position,  in  comparison  with  the  elec¬ 
tors,  is  that  of  the  audience  in  a  court  of  jus¬ 
tice,  compared  with  the  twelve  men  in  the 
jury-box.  It  is  not  their  suffrages  that  are  asked, 
it  is  not  their  opinion  that  is  sought  to  be  in¬ 
fluenced;  the  appeals  are  made,  the  arguments 
addressed,  to  others  than  them;  nothing  de¬ 
pends  on  the  decision  they  may  arrive  at,  and 
there  is  no  necessity  and  very  little  induce¬ 
ment  to  them  to  come  to  any.  Whoever,  in  an 
otherwise  popular  government,  has  no  vote, 
and  no  prospect  of  obtaining  it,  will  either  be 
a  permanent  malcontent,  or  will  feel  as  one 
whom  the  general  affairs  of  society  do  not  con¬ 
cern;  for  whom  they  are  to  be  managed  by 
others;  who  “has  no  business  with  the  laws 
except  to  obey  them.’'  nor  with  public  inter¬ 
ests  and  concerns  except  as  a  looker-on.  What 
he  will  know  or  care  about  them  from  this 
position  may  partly  be  measured  by  what  an 
average  woman  of  the  middle  class  knows  and 
cares  about  politics,  compared  with  her  hus¬ 
band  or  brothers. 

Independently  of  all  these  considerations, 
it  is  a  personal  injustice  to  withhold  from  any 
one,  unless  for  the  prevention  of  greater  evils, 
the  ordinary  privilege  of  hav  ing  his  voice  reck¬ 
oned  in  the  disposal  of  allairs  in  which  he  has 
the  same  interest  as  other  people.  11  he  is  com¬ 
pelled  to  pay,  if  he  may  be  compelled  to  fight, 
if  he  is  required  implicitly  to  obey,  lie  should 
be  legally  entitled  to  be  told  what  lor;  to  have 
his  consent  asked,  and  his  opinion  counted  at 
its  worth,  though  not  at  more  than  its  worth. 
(  here*  ought  to  be  no  pariahs  in  a  full-grown 
and  civilised  nation;  no  persons  disqualified, 
except  through  their  own  default.  Kvcry  one 
is  degraded,  whether  aware  of  it  or  not,  when 


other  people,  without  consulting  him,  take 
upon  themselves  unlimited  power  to  regulate 
his  destiny.  And  even  in  a  much  more  im¬ 
proved  state  than  the  human  mind  has  ever  yet 
reached,  it  is  not  in  nature  that  they  who  are 
thus  disposed  of  should  meet  with  as  fair  play 
as  those  who  have  a  voice.  Rulers  and  ruling 
classes  are  under  a  necessity  of  considering  the 
interests  and  wishes  of  those  who  have  the  suf¬ 
frage;  but  of  those  who  are  excluded,  it  is  in 
their  option  whether  they  will  do  so  or  not, 
and,  however  honestly  disposed,  they  are  in 
general  too  fully  occupied  with  things  which 
they  must  attend  to,  to  have  much  room  in 
their  thoughts  for  anything  which  they  can 
with  impunity  disregard.  No  arrangement  of 
the  suffrage,  therefore,  can  be  permanently 
satisfactory  in  which  any  person  or  class  is  per¬ 
emptorily  excluded;  in  which  the  electoral 
privilege  is  not  open  to  all  persons  of  full  age 
who  desire  to  obtain  it. 

There  are,  however,  certain  exclusions,  re¬ 
quired  by  positive  reasons,  which  do  not  con- 
llict  with  this  principle,  and  which,  though  an 
evil  in  themselves,  are  only  to  be  got  rid  of  by 
the  cessation  of  the  state  of  things  which  re¬ 
quires  them.  I  regard  it  as  wholly  inadmissible 
that  any  person  should  participate  in  the  suf¬ 
frage  without  being  able  to  read,  write,  and,  I 
will  add,  perform  the  common  operations  of 
arithmetic,  Justice  demands,  even  when  the 
suffrage  does  not  depend  on  it,  that  the  means 
of  attaining  these  elementary  acquirements 
should  be  within  the  reach  of  every  person, 
either  giatuitouslv,  or  at  an  expense  not  ex¬ 
ceeding  what  the  poorest  who  earn  their  own 
living  can  afford.  II  this  were  really  the  case, 
people  would  no  more  think  of  giving  the  suf¬ 
frage  to  a  man  who  could  not  read,  than  of  giv¬ 
ing  it  to  a  child  who  could  not  speak;  and  it 
would  not  be  society  that  would  exclude  him, 
but  his  own  laziness.  When  society  has  not  per¬ 
formed  its  duty,  by  rendering  this  amount  of 
instrut  tion  accessible  to  all,  there  is  some  hard¬ 
ship  in  the  case,  but  it  is  a  hardship  that  ought 
to  be  borne.  If  society  has  neglected  to  dis¬ 
charge  two  solemn  obligations,  the  more  im¬ 
portant  and  more  fundamental  of  the  two 
must  be  fulfilled  first:  universal  teaching  must 
precede  universal  enfranchisement.  No  one 
but  those  in  whom  an  a  priori  theory  lias  si¬ 
lenced  common  sense  will  maintain  that  power 
over  others,  over  the  whole  community,  should 
be  imparted  to  people  who  have  not  acquired 
the  commonest  and  most  essential  requisites 
for  taking  care  of  themselves;  for  pursuing  in- 


EXTENSION  OF 

telligently  their  own  interests,  and  those  of  the 
persons  most  nearly  allied  to  them.  I  his  argu- 
ment,  doubtless,  might  be  pressed  further,  and 
made  to  prove  much  more.  It  would  be  emi¬ 
nently  desirable  that  other  things  besides  read¬ 
ing,  writing,  and  arithmetic  could  be  made 
necessary  to  the  suffrage;  that  some  knowledge 
of  the  conformation  of  the  earth,  its  natural 
and  political  divisions,  the  elements  of  general 
history,  and  of  the  history  and  institutions  of 
their  own  country,  could  be  required  from  all 
electors.  But  these  kinds  of  knowledge,  how¬ 
ever  indispensable  to  an  intelligent  use  of  the 
suffrage,  are  not,  in  this  country,  nor  probably 
anywhere  save  in  the  Northern  United  States, 
accessible  to  the  whole  people;  nor  does  there 
exist  any  trustworthy  machinery  for  ascertain¬ 
ing  whether  they  have  been  acquired  or  not. 
The  attempt,  at  present,  would  lead  to  partial¬ 
ity,  chicanery,  and  every  kind  of  fraud.  It  is 
better  that  the  suffrage  should  be  conferred 
indiscriminately,  or  even  withheld  indiscrimi¬ 
nately,  than  that  it  should  be  given  to  one  and 
withheld  from  another  at  the  discretion  of  a 
public  officer.  In  regard,  however,  to  reading, 
writing,  and  calculating,  there  need  be  no  dif¬ 
ficulty.  It  would  be  easy  to  require  from  every 
one  who  presented  himself  for  registry  that  he 
should,  in  the  presence  of  the  registrar,  copy 
a  sentence  from  an  English  book,  and  perform 
a  sum  in  the  rule  of  three:  and  to  secure,  by 
fixed  rules  and  complete  publicity,  the  honest 
application  of  so  very  simple  a  test.  This  con¬ 
dition,  therefore,  should  in  all  cases  accom¬ 
pany  universal  suffrage;  and  it  would,  after 
a  few  years,  exclude  none  but  those  who  cared 
so  little  for  the  privilege,  that  their  vote,  if 
given,  would  not  in  general  be  an  indication 
of  any  real  political  opinion. 

It  is  also  important,  that  the  assembly  which 
votes  the  taxes,  either  general  or  local,  should 
be  elected  exclusively  by  those  who  pay  some¬ 
thing  towards  the  taxes  imposed.  Those  who 
pay  no  taxes,  disposing  by  their  votes  of  other 
people’s  money,  have  every  motive  to  be  lavish 
and  none  to  economise.  As  for  as  money  mat¬ 
ters  are  concerned,  any  power  of  voting  pos¬ 
sessed  by  them  is  a  violation  of  the  funda¬ 
mental  principle  of  free  government;  a  sever¬ 
ance  of  the  power  of  control  from  the  interest 
in  its  beneficial  exercise.  It  amounts  to  allow¬ 
ing  them  to  put  their  hands  into  other  people’s 
pockets  for  any  purpose  which  they  think  fit  to 
call  a  public  one;  which  in  some  of  the  great 
towns  of  the  United  States  is  known  to  have 
produced  a  scale  of  local  taxation  onerous  be- 


THE  SUFFRAGE  383 

yond  example,  and  wholly  borne  by  the  wealth¬ 
ier  classes.  That  representation  should  be  co¬ 
extensive  with  taxation,  not  stopping  short  of 
it,  but  also  not  going  beyond  it,  is  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  theory  of  British  institutions. 
But  to  reconcile  this,  as  a  condition  annexed 
to  the  representation,  with  universality,  it  is 
essential,  as  it  is  on  many  other  accounts  de¬ 
sirable,  that  taxation,  in  a  visible  shape,  should 
descend  to  the  poorest  class.  In  this  country, 
and  in  most  others,  there  is  probably  no  la 
bouring  family  which  does  not  contribute  to 
the  indirect  taxes,  by  the  purchase  of  tea,  cof¬ 
fee,  sugar,  not  to  mention  narcotics  or  stimu¬ 
lants.  But  this  mode  of  defraying  a  share  of  the 
public  expenses  is  hardly  felt:  the  payer,  un¬ 
less  a  person  of  education  and  reflection,  does 
not  identify  his  interest  with  a  low  scale  of 
public  expenditure  as  closely  as  when  money 
for  its  support  is  demanded  directly  from  him¬ 
self;  and  even  supposing  him  to  do  so,  he 
would  doubtless  take  care  that,  however  lavish 
an  expenditure  he  might,  by  his  vote,  assist  in 
imposing  upon  the  government,  it  should  not 
be  defrayed  by  any  additional  taxes  on  the 
articles  which  he  himself  consumes.  It  would 
be  better  that  a  direct  tax,  in  the  simple  form 
of  a  capitation,  should  be  levied  on  every 
grown  person  in  the  community;  or  that  every 
such  person  should  be  admitted  an  elector  on 
allowing  himself  to  be  rated  extra  ordinem  to 
the  assessed  taxes;  or  that  a  small  annual  pay¬ 
ment,  rising  and  falling  with  the  gross  expend¬ 
iture  of  the  country,  should  be  required  from 
every  registered  elector;  that  so  everyone  might 
feel  that  the  money  which  he  assisted  in  voting 
was  partly  his  own,  and  that  he  was  interested 
in  keeping  down  its  amount. 

However  this  may  be,  I  regard  it  as  required 
by  first  principles,  that  the  receipt  of  parish  re¬ 
lief  should  be  a  peremptory  disqualification 
for  the  franchise.  He  who  cannot  by  his  labour 
suffice  for  his  own  support  has  no  claim  to  the 
privilege  of  helping  himself  to  the  money  of 
others.  By  becoming  dependent  on  the  remain¬ 
ing  members  of  the  community  for  actual  sub¬ 
sistence,  he  abdicates  his  claim  to  equal  rights 
with  them  in  other  respects.  Those  to  whom 
he  is  indebted  for  the  continuance  of  his  very 
existence  may  justly  claim  the  exclusive  man¬ 
agement  of  those  common  concerns,  to  which 
he  now  brings  nothing,  or  less  than  he  takes 
away.  As  a  condition  of  the  franchise,  a  term 
should  be  fixed,  say  five  years  previous  to  the 
registry,  during  which  the  applicant  s  name 
has  not  been  on  the  parish  books  as  a  recipient 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


384 

of  relief.  To  be  an  uncertified  bankrupt,  or  to 
have  taken  the  benefit  of  the  Insolvent  Act, 
should  disqualify  for  the  franchise  until  the 
person  has  paid  his  debts,  or  at  least  proved 
that  he  is  not  now,  and  has  not  for  some  long 
period  been,  dependent  on  eleemosynary  sup¬ 
port.  Non-payment  of  taxes,  when  so  long  per¬ 
sisted  in  that  it  cannot  have  arisen  from  inad¬ 
vertence,  should  disqualify  while  it  lasts.  These 
exclusions  are  not  in  their  nature  permanent. 
They  exact  such  conditions  only  as  all  are  able, 
or  ought  to  be  able,  to  fulfil  if  they  choose. 
They  leave  the  suffrage  accessible  to  all  who 
are  in  the  normal  condition  of  a  human  being: 
and  if  any  one  has  to  forego  it,  he  either  does 
not  care  sufficiently  for  it  to  do  for  its  sake 
what  he  is  already  bound  to  do,  or  he  is  in  a 
general  condition  of  depression  and  degrada¬ 
tion  in  which  this  slight  addition,  necessary  for 
the  security  of  others,  would  be  unfelt,  and  on 
emerging  from  which,  this  mark  of  inferiority 
would  disappear  with  the  rest. 

In  the  long  run,  therefore  (supposing  no  re¬ 
strictions  to  exist  but  those  of  which  we  have 
now  treated),  we  might  expect  that  all,  except 
that  (it  is  to  be  hoped)  progressively  diminish¬ 
ing  class,  the  recipients  of  parish  relief,  would 
be  in  possession  of  votes,  so  that  the  suffrage 
would  be,  with  that  slight  abatement,  uni¬ 
versal.  That  it  should  be  thus  widely  expanded 
is,  as  we  have  seen,  absolutely  necessary  to  an 
enlarged  and  elevated  conception  of  good  gov¬ 
ernment.  Vet  in  this  state  of  things,  the  great 
majority  of  voters,  in  most  countries,  and  em¬ 
phatically  in  this,  would  be  manual  labourers; 
and  the  twofold  danger,  that  of  too  low  a 
standard  of  political  intelligence,  and  that  of 
class  legislation,  would  still  exist  in  a  very 
perilous  degree.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether 
any  means  exist  by  which  these  evils  can  be 
ob\  iated. 

They  are  capable  of  being  obviated,  if  men 
,  sincerely  wish  it;  not  by  any  artificial  contriv¬ 
ance,  but  by  carrying  out  the  natural  order  of 
human  life,  which  recommends  itself  to  every 
one  in  things  in  which  he  has  no  interest  or 
traditional  opinion  running  counter  to  it.  In 
all  human  affairs,  every  person  directly  inter¬ 
ested,  and  not  under  positive  tutelage,  has  an 
admitted  claim  to  a  voice,  and  when  his  ex¬ 
ercise  of  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  safety 
of  the  whole,  cannot  justly  be  excluded  from 
it.  Hut  though  every  one  ought  to  have  a  voice 
—that  every  one  should  have  an  equal  voice  is 
a  totally  different  proposition.  When  two  per¬ 
sons  who  have  a  joint  interest  in  any  business 


differ  in  opinion,  does  justice  require  that  both 
opinions  should  be  held  of  exactly  equal  val¬ 
ue?  If,  with  equal  virtue,  one  is  superior  to  the 
other  in  knowledge  and  intelligence— or  if, 
with  equal  intelligence,  one  excels  the  other  in 
virtue— the  opinion,  the  judgment,  of  the  high¬ 
er  moral  or  intellectual  being  is  worth  more 
than  that  of  the  inferior:  and  if  the  institu¬ 
tions  of  the  country  virtually  assert  that  they 
are  of  the  same  value,  they  assert  a  thing  which 
is  not.  One  of  the  two.  as  the  wiser  or  better 
man,  has  a  claim  to  superior  weight:  the  dif¬ 
ficulty  is  in  ascertaining  which  of  the  two  it  is; 
a  tiling  impossible  as  between  individuals,  but, 
taking  men  in  bodies  and  in  numbers,  it  can 
be  done  with  a  certain  approach  to  accuracy. 
There  would  be  no  pretence  for  applying  this 
doctrine  to  any  case  which  could  with  reason 
be  considered  as  one  of  individual  and  private 
right.  In  an  affair  which  concerns  only  one  of 
two  persons,  that  one  is  entitled  to  follow  his 
own  opinion,  however  much  wiser  the  other 
may  be  than  himself.  But  we  are  speaking  of 
things  which  equally  concern  them  both;  where, 
if  the  more  ignorant  does  not  yield  his  share 
of  the  matter  to  the  guidance  of  the  wiser  man, 
the  wiser  man  must  resign  his  to  that  of  the 
more  ignorant.  Which  of  these  modes  of  get¬ 
ting  over  the  difficulty  is  most  for  the  interest 
of  both,  and  most  conformable  to  the  general 
fitness  of  things?  If  it  be  deemed  unjust  that 
either  should  have  to  give  way,  which  injustice 
is  greatest?  that  the  better  judgment  should 
give  way  to  the  worse,  or  the  worse  to  the  bet¬ 
ter? 

Now,  national  affairs  are  exactly  such  a  joint 
concern,  with  the  difference,  that  no  one  needs 
ever  be  called  upon  for  a  complete  sacrifice  of 
his  own  opinion.  It  can  always  be  taken  into 
the  calculation,  and  counted  at  a  certain  fig¬ 
ure,  a  higher  figure  being  assigned  to  the  suf¬ 
frages  of  those  whose  opinion  is  entitled  to 
greater  weight.  There  is  not,  in  this  arrange¬ 
ment,  anything  necessarily  invidious  to  those 
to  whom  it  assigns  the  lower  degrees  of  influ¬ 
ence.  Entire  exclusion  from  a  voice  in  the  com¬ 
mon  concerns  is  one  thing:  the  concession  to 
others  of  a  more  potential  voice,  on  the  ground 
of  greater  capacity  for  the  management  of  the 
joint  interests,  is  another.  The  two  things  are 
not  merely  different,  they  arc  incommensu¬ 
rable.  Every  one  has  a  right  to  feel  insulted  by 
being  made  a  nobody,  and  stamped  as  of  no 
account  at  all.  No  one  but  a  fool,  and  only  a 
fool  of  a  peculiar  description,  feels  offended 
by  the  acknowledgment  that  there  are  others 


EXTENSION  OF 

whose  opinion,  and  even  whose  wish,  is  en¬ 
titled  to  a  greater  amount  of  consideration 
than  his.  To  have  no  voice  in  what  are  partly 
his  own  concerns  is  a  thing  which  nobody  will¬ 
ingly  submits  to;  but  when  what  is  partly  his 
concern  is  also  partly  another  s,  and  he  feels 
the  other  to  understand  the  subject  better  than 
himself,  that  the  other’s  opinion  should  be 
counted  for  more  than  his  own  accords  with 
his  expectations,  and  with  the  course  of  things 
which  in  all  other  affairs  of  life  he  is  accustom¬ 
ed  to  acquiese  in.  It  is  only  necessary  that  this  su¬ 
perior  influence  should  be  assigned  on  grounds 
which  he  can  comprehend,  and  of  which  he  is 
able  to  perceive  the  justice. 

1  hasten  to  say  that  1  consider  it  entirely  in¬ 
admissible,  unless  as  a  temporary  makeshift, 
that  the  superiority  of  influence  should  be  con¬ 
ferred  in  consideration  of  property.  I  do  not 
deny  that  property  is  a  kind  of  test;  education 
in  most  countries,  though  anything  but  pro¬ 
portional  to  riches,  is  on  the  average  better  in 
the  richer  half  of  society  than  in  the  poorer. 
But  the  criterion  is  so  imperfect;  accident  has 
so  much  more  to  do  than  merit  with  enabling 
men  to  rise  in  the  world;  and  it  is  so  impossible 
for  any  one,  by  acquiring  any  amount  of  in¬ 
struction,  to  make  sure  of  the  corresponding 
rise  in  station,  that  this  foundation  of  electoral 
privilege  is  always,  and  will  continue  to  be, 
supremely  odious.  To  connect  plurality  of  votes 
with  any  pecuniary  qualification  would  be  not 
only  objectionable  in  itself,  but  a  sure  mode 
of  discrediting  the  principle,  and  making  its 
permanent  maintenance  impracticable.  The 
Democracy,  at  least  of  this  country,  are  not  at 
present  jealous  of  personal  superiority,  but 
they  are  naturally  and  must  justly  so  of  that 
which  is  grounded  on  mere  pecuniary  circum¬ 
stances.  The  only  thing  which  can  justify  reck¬ 
oning  one  person’s  opinion  as  equivalent  to 
more  than  one  is  individual  mental  superior¬ 
ity;  and  what  is  wanted  is  some  approximate 
means  of  ascertaining  that.  If  there  existed 
such  a  thing  as  a  really  national  education  or  a 
trustworthy  system  of  general  examination, 
education  might  be  tested  directly.  In  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  these,  the  nature  of  a  person’s  occupa¬ 
tion  is  some  test.  An  employer  of  labour  is  on 
the  average  more  intelligent  than  a  labourer, 
for  he  must  labour  with  his  head,  and  not 
solely  with  his  hands.  A  foreman  is  generally 
more  intelligent  than  an  ordinary  labourer, 
and  a  labourer  in  the  skilled  trades  than  in  the 
unskilled.  A  banker,  merchant,  or  manufac¬ 
turer  is  likely  to  be  more  intelligent  than  a 


THE  SUFFRAGE  385 

tradesman,  because  he  has  larger  and  more 
complicated  interests  to  manage. 

In  all  these  cases  it  is  not  the  having  merely 
undertaken  the  superior  function,  but  the  suc¬ 
cessful  performance  of  it,  that  tests  the  quali¬ 
fications;  for  which  reason,  as  well  as  to  pre¬ 
vent  persons  from  engaging  nominally  in  an 
occupation  for  the  sake  of  the  vote,  it  would  be 
proper  to  require  that  the  occupation  should 
have  been  persevered  in  for  some  length  of 
time  (say  three  years).  Subject  to  some  such 
condition,  two  or  more  votes  might  be  allowed 
to  every  person  who  exercises  any  of  these  su¬ 
perior  functions.  The  liberal  professions,  when 
really  and  not  nominally  practised,  imply,  of 
course,  a  still  higher  degree  of  instruction;  and 
wherever  a  sufficient  examination,  or  any  seri¬ 
ous  conditions  of  education,  are  required  be¬ 
fore  entering  on  a  profession,  its  members 
could  be  admitted  at  once  to  a  plurality  of 
votes.  The  same  rule  might  be  applied  to 
graduates  of  universities;  and  even  to  those 
who  bring  satisfactory  certificates  of  having 
passed  through  the  course  of  study  required  by 
any  school  at  which  the  higher  branches  of 
knowledge  are  taught,  under  proper  securities 
that  the  teaching  is  real,  and  not  a  mere  pre¬ 
tence.  The  “local”  or  “middle  class”  examina¬ 
tion  for  the  degree  of  Associate,  so  laudably 
and  public-spiritedly  established  by  the  Uni¬ 
versities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  and  any 
similar  ones  which  may  be  instituted  by  other 
competent  bodies  (provided  they  are  fairly 
open  to  all  comers),  afford  a  ground  on  which 
plurality  of  votes  might  with  great  advantage 
be  accorded  to  those  who  have  passed  the  test. 
All  these  suggestions  are  open  to  much  discus¬ 
sion  in  the  detail,  and  to  objections  which  it 
is  of  no  use  to  anticipate.  The  time  is  not 
come  for  giving  to  such  plans  a  practical  shape, 
nor  should  1  wish  to  be  bound  by  the  particular 
proposals  which  1  have  made.  But  it  is  to  me 
evident,  that  in  this  direction  lies  the  true 
ideal  of  representative  government;  and  that 
to  work  towards  it,  by  the  best  practical  con¬ 
trivances  which  can  be  found,  is  the  path  of 
real  political  improvement. 

If  it  be  asked  to  what  length  the  principle 
admits  of  being  carried,  or  how  many  votes 
might  be  accorded  to  an  individual  on  the 
ground  of  superior  qualifications,  1  answer, 
that  this  is  not  in  itself  very  material,  provided 
the  distinctions  and  gradations  are  not  made 
arbitrarily,  but  are  such  as  can  be  understood 
and  accepted  by  the  general  conscience  and 
understanding.  But  it  is  an  absolute  condition 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


386 

not  to  overpass  the  limit  prescribed  by  the 
fundamental  principle  laid  down  in  a  former 
chapter  as  the  condition  of  excellence  in  the 
constitution  of  a  representative  system.  The 
plurality  of  votes  must  on  no  account  be  car¬ 
ried  so  far  that  those  who  are  privileged  by  it, 
or  the  class  (if  any)  to  which  they  mainly  be¬ 
long,  shall  outweigh  by  means  of  it  all  the  rest 
of  the  community.  The  distinction  in  favour 
of  education,  right  in  itself,  is  further  and 
strongly  recommended  by  its  preserving  the 
educated  from  the  class  legislation  of  the  un¬ 
educated;  but  it  must  stop  short  of  enabling 
them  to  practise  class  legislation  on  their  own 
account.  Let  me  add,  that  I  consider  it  an  ab¬ 
solutely  necessary  part  of  the  plurality  scheme 
that  it  be  open  to  the  poorest  individual  in  the 
community  to  claim  its  privileges,  if  he  can 
prove  that,  in  spite  of  all  difficulties  and  ob¬ 
stacles,  he  is,  in  point  of  intelligence,  entitled 
to  them.  There  ought  to  be  voluntary  exami¬ 
nations  at  which  any  person  whatever  might 
present  himself,  might  prove  that  he  came  up 
to  the  standard  of  knowledge  and  ability  laid 
down  as  sufficient,  and  be  admitted,  in  conse¬ 
quence,  to  the  plurality  of  votes.  A  privilege 
which  is  not  refused  to  any  one  who  can  show 
that  he  has  realised  the  conditions  on  which  in 
theory  and  principle  it  is  dependent  would 
not  necessarily  be  repugnant  to  any  one’s  senti¬ 
ment  of  justice:  but  it  would  certainly  be  so, 
if,  while  conferred  on  general  presumptions 
not  always  infallible,  it  were  denied  to  direct 
proof. 

Plural  voting,  though  practised  in  vestry 
elections  and  those  of  poor-law  guardians,  is 
so  unfamiliar  in  elections  to  Parliament  that 
it  is  not  likely  to  be  soon  or  willingly  adopted: 
but  as  the  time  will  certainly  arrive  when  the 
only  choice  will  be  between  this  and  equal 
universal  suffrage,  whoever  does  not  desire  the 
last,  cannot  too  soon  begin  to  reconcile  himself 
to  the  former.  In  the  meantime,  though  the 
suggestion,  for  the  present,  may  not  be  a  prac¬ 
tical  one,  it  will  serve  to  mark  what  is  best  in 
principle,  and  enable  us  to  judge  of  the  eligi¬ 
bility  of  any  indirect  means,  either  existing  or 
capable  of  being  adopted,  which  may  promote 
in  a  less  perfect  manner  the  same  end.  A  per¬ 
son  may  have  a  double  vote  by  other  means 
than  that  of  tendering  two  votes  at  the  same 
hustings;  he  may  have  a  vote  in  each  of  two 
different  constituencies:  and  though  this  ex¬ 
ceptional  privilege  at  present  belongs  rather 
to  superiority  of  means  than  of  intelligence,  I 
would  not  abolish  it  where  it  exists,  since  until 


a  truer  test  of  education  is  adopted  it  would  be 
unwise  to  dispense  with  even  so  imperfect  a 
one  as  is  afforded  by  pecuniary  circumstances. 
Means  might  be  found  of  giving  a  further  ex¬ 
tension  to  the  privilege,  which  would  connect 
it  in  a  more  direct  manner  with  superior  edu¬ 
cation.  In  any  future  Reform  Bill  which  lowers 
greatly  the  pecuniary  conditions  of  the  suf¬ 
frage,  it  might  be  a  wise  provision  to  allow  all 
graduates  of  universities,  all  persons  who  have 
passed  creditably  through  the  higher  schools, 
all  members  of  the  liberal  professions,  and  per¬ 
haps  some  others,  to  be  registered  specifically 
in  those  characters,  and  to  give  their  votes  as 
such  in  any  constituency  in  which  they  choose 
to  register;  retaining,  in  addition,  their  votes 
as  simple  citizens  in  the  localities  in  which 
they  reside. 

Until  there  shall  have  been  devised,  and  un¬ 
til  opinion  is  willing  to  accept,  some  mode  of 
plural  voting  which  may  assign  to  education, 
as  such,  the  degree  of  superior  influence  due 
to  it,  and  sufficient  as  a  counterpoise  to  the 
numerical  weight  of  the  least  educated  class; 
for  so  long  the  benefits  of  completely  universal 
suffrage  cannot  be  obtained  without  bringing 
with  them,  as  it  appears  to  me,  a  chance  of 
more  than  equivalent  evils.  It  is  possible,  in¬ 
deed  (and  this  is  perhaps  one  of  the  transitions 
through  which  we  may  have  to  pass  in  our 
progress  to  a  really  good  representative  sys¬ 
tem),  that  the  barriers  which  restrict  the  suf¬ 
frage  might  be  entirely  levelled  in  some  par¬ 
ticular  constituencies,  whose  members,  conse¬ 
quently,  would  be  returned  principally  by 
manual  labourers;  the  existing  electoral  quali¬ 
fication  being  maintained  elsewhere,  or  any 
alteration  in  it  being  accompanied  by  such  a 
grouping  of  the  constituencies  as  to  prevent 
the  labouring  class  from  becoming  preponder¬ 
ant  in  Parliament.  By  such  a  compromise,  the 
anomalies  in  the  representation  would  not 
only  be  retained,  but  augmented:  thishowever 
is  not  a  conclusive  objection;  for  if  the  coun¬ 
try  does  not  choose  to  pursue  the  right  ends 
by  a  regular  system  directly  leading  to  them, 
it  must  be  content  with  an  irregular  makeshift, 
as  being  greatly  preferable  to  a  system  free 
from  irregularities,  but  regularly  adapted  to 
wrong  ends,  or  in  which  some  ends  equally 
necessary  with  the  others  have  been  left  out. 
It  is  a  far  graver  objection,  that  this  adjust¬ 
ment  is  incompatible  with  the  intercommu¬ 
nity  of  local  constituencies  which  Mr.  Hare’s 
plan  requires;  that  under  it  every  voter  would 
remain  imprisoned  within  the  one  or  more 


E  XT  EN  SI  O  N  OF  THE  SUFFRAGE 


constituencies  in  which  his  name  is  registered, 
and  unless  willing  to  be  represented  by  one  of 
the  candidates  for  those  localities,  would  not 
be  represented  at  all. 

So  much  importance  do  I  attach  to  the  eman¬ 
cipation  of  those  who  already  have  votes,  but 
whose  votes  are  useless,  because  always  out¬ 
numbered;  so  much  should  I  hope  from  the 
natural  influence  of  truth  and  reason,  if  only 
secured  a  hearing  and  a  competent  advocacy— 
that  I  should  not  despair  of  the  operation  even 
of  equal  and  universal  suffrage,  if  made  real 
by  the  proportional  representation  of  all  mi¬ 
norities,  on  Mr.  Hare’s  principle.  But  if  the 
best  hopes  which  can  be  formed  on  this  sub¬ 
ject  were  certainties,  I  should  still  contend  for 
the  principle  of  plural  voting.  I  do  not  pro¬ 
pose  the  plurality  as  a  thing  in  itself  undesir¬ 
able,  which,  like  the  exclusion  of  part  of  the 
community  from  the  suffrage,  may  be  tempo¬ 
rarily  tolerated  while  necessary  to  prevent 
greater  evils.  I  do  not  look  upon  equal  voting 
as  among  the  things  which  are  good  in  them¬ 
selves,  provided  they  can  be  guarded  against 
inconveniences.  1  look  upon  it  as  only  rela¬ 
tively  good;  less  objectionable  than  inequality 
of  privilege  grounded  on  irrelevant  or  adven¬ 
titious  circumstances,  but  in  principle  wrong, 
because  recognising  a  wrong  standard,  and  ex¬ 
ercising  a  bad  influence  on  the  voters  rnind. 
It  is  not  useful,  but  hurtful,  that  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  country  should  declare  ignorance 
to  be  entitled  to  as  much  political  power  as 
knowledge.  The  national  institutions  should 
place  all  things  that  they  are  concerned  with 
before  the  mind  of  the  citizen  in  the  light  in 
which  it  is  for  his  good  that  he  should  regard 
them:  and  as  it  is  for  his  good  that  he  should 
think  that  every  one  is  entitled  to  some  in¬ 
fluence,  but  the  better  and  wiser  to  more  than 
others,  it  is  important  that  this  conviction 
should  be  professed  by  the  State,  and  embodied 
in  the  national  institutions.  Such  things  con¬ 
stitute  the  spirit  of  the  institutions  of  a  coun¬ 
try:  that  portion  of  their  influence  which  is 
least  regarded  by  common,  and  especially  by 
English,  thinkers;  though  the  institutions  of 
every  country,  not  under  great  positive  oppres¬ 
sion,  produce  more  effect  by  their  spirit  than 
by  any  of  their  direct  provisions,  since  by  it 
they  shape  the  national  character.  The  Amer¬ 
ican  institutions  have  imprinted  strongly  on 
the  American  mind  that  any  one  man  (with  a 
white  skin)  is  as  good  as  any  other;  and  it  is 
felt  that  this  false  creed  is  nearly  connected 
with  some  of  the  more  unfavourable  points  in 


387 

American  character.  It  is  not  a  small  mischief 
that  the  constitution  of  any  country  should 
sanction  this  creed;  for  the  belief  in  it,  whether 
express  or  tacit,  is  almost  as  detrimental  to 
moral  and  intellectual  excellence  as  any  effect 
which  most  forms  of  government  can  pro¬ 
duce. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  said,  that  a  constitution 
which  gives  equal  influence,  man  for  man,  to 
the  most  and  to  the  least  instructed,  is  never- 
theless  conducive  to  progress,  because  the  ap¬ 
peals  constantly  made  to  the  less  instructed 
classes,  the  exercise  given  to  their  mental  pow¬ 
ers,  and  the  exertions  which  the  more  instruct¬ 
ed  are  obliged  to  make  for  enlightening  their 
judgment  and  ridding  them  of  errors  and 
prejudices,  are  powerful  stimulants  to  their 
advance  in  intelligence.  That  this  most  de¬ 
sirable  effect  really  attends  the  admission  of 
the  less  educated  classes  to  some,  and  even  to 
a  large  share  of  power,  I  admit,  and  have  al¬ 
ready  strenuously  maintained.  But  theory  and 
experience  alike  prove  that  a  counter  current 
sets  in  when  they  are  made  the  possessors  of 
all  power.  Those  who  are  supreme  over  every¬ 
thing,  whether  they  be  One,  or  Few,  or  Many, 
have  no  longer  need  of  the  arms  of  reason: 
they  can  make  their  mere  will  prevail:  and 
those  who  cannot  be  resisted  are  usually  far 
too  well  satisfied  with  their  own  opinions  to  be 
willing  to  change  them,  or  listen  without  im¬ 
patience  to  any  one  who  tells  them  that  they 
are  in  the  wrong.  The  position  which  gives  the 
strongest  stimulus  to  the  growth  of  intelligence 
is  that  of  rising  into  power,  not  that  of  having 
achieved  it;  and  of  all  resting-points,  tempo¬ 
rary  or  permanent,  in  the  way  to  ascendanc), 
the  one  which  develops  the  best  and  highest 
qualities  is  the  position  of  those  who  are  strong 
enough  to  make  reason  prevail,  but  not  strong 
enough  to  prevail  against  reason.  This  is  the 
position  in  which,  according  to  the  principles 
we  have  laid  down,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the 
much  and  the  little  educated,  and  all  the  other 
classes  and  denominations  which  divide  society 
between  them,  ought  as  far  as  practicable  to 
be  placed.  And  by  combining  this  principle 
with  the  otherwise  just  one  of  allowing  supe¬ 
riority  of  weight  to  superiority  of  mental  quali¬ 
ties,  a  political  constitution  would  realise  that 
kind  of  relative  perfection  which  is  alone  com¬ 
patible  with  the  complicated  nature  of  human 
affairs. 

In  the  preceding  argument  for  universal,  but 

graduated  suffrage,  I  have  taken  no  account  of 


*88  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


difference  of  sex.  I  consider  it  to  be  as  entirely 
irrelevant  to  political  rights  as  difference  in 
height  or  in  the  colour  of  the  hair.  All  human 
beings  have  the  same  interest  in  good  govern¬ 
ment:  the  welfare  of  all  is  alike  affected  by  it, 
and  they  have  equal  need  of  a  voice  in  it  to 
secure  their  share  of  its  benefits.  It  there  be  any 
difference,  women  require  it  more  than  men, 
since,  being  physically  weaker,  they  are  more 
dependent  on  law  and  society  for  protection. 
Mankind  have  long  since  abandoned  the  only 
premises  which  will  support  the  conclusion 
that  women  ought  not  to  have  votes.  No  one 
now  holds  that  women  should  be  in  personal 
servitude;  that  they  should  have  no  thought, 
wish,  or  occupation,  but  to  be  the  domestic 
drudges  of  husbands,  fathers,  or  brothers.  It  is 
allowed  to  unmarried,  and  wants  but  little  of 
being  conceded  to  married  women,  to  hold 
property,  and  have  pecuniary  and  business  in¬ 
terests,  in  the  same  manner  as  men.  It  is  con¬ 
sidered  suitable  and  proper  that  women  should 
think,  and  write,  and  be  teachers.  As  soon  as 
these  things  are  admitted,  the  political  dis¬ 
qualification  has  no  principle  to  rest  on.  The 
whole  mode  of  thought  of  the  modern  world  is 
with  increasing  emphasis  pronouncing  against 
the  claim  of  society  to  decide  for  individuals 
what  they  are  and  are  not  fit  for,  and  what  they 
shall  and  shall  not  be  allowed  to  attempt.  If 
the  principles  of  modern  politics  and  political 
economy  are  good  for  anything,  it  is  for  prov¬ 
ing  that  these  points  can  only  be  rightly  judged 
of  by  the  individuals  themselves:  and  that,  un¬ 
der  complete  freedom  of  choice,  wherever  there 
are  real  diversities  of  aptitude,  the  great  num¬ 
ber  will  apply  themselves  to  the  things  for 
which  they  are  on  the  average  fittest,  and  the 
exceptional  course  will  only  be  taken  by  the 
exceptions.  Either  the  whole  tendency  of 
modern  social  improvements  has  been  wrong, 
or  it  ought  to  be  carried  out  to  the  total  aboli¬ 
tion  of  all  exclusions  and  disabilities  which 
close  any  honest  employment  to  a  human 
being. 

But  it  is  not  even  necessary  to  maintain  so 
much  in  order  to  prove  that  women  should 
have  the  suffrage.  Were  it  as  right,  as  it  is 
wrong,  that  they  should  be  a  subordinate  class, 
confined  to  domestic  occupations  and  subject 
to  domestic  authority,  they  would  not  the  less 
require  the  protection  of  the  suffrage  to  se¬ 
cure  them  from  the  abuse  of  that  authority. 
Men,  as  well  as  women,  do  not  need  political 
rights  in  order  that  they  ma\  govern,  but  in 
order  that  they  may  not  be  misgoverned.  The 


majority  of  the  male  sex  are,  and  will  be  all 
their  lives,  nothing  else  than  labourers  in  corn¬ 
fields  or  manufactories;  but  this  does  not  ren¬ 
der  the  suffrage  less  desirable  for  them,  nor 
their  claim  to  it  less  irresistible,  when  not 
likely  to  make  a  bad  use  of  it.  Nobody  pre¬ 
tends  to  think  that  woman  would  make  a  bad 
use  of  the  suffrage.  The  worst  that  is  said  is 
that  they  would  vote  as  mere  dependents,  at 
the  bidding  of  their  male  relations.  If  it  be  so, 
so  let  it  be.  If  they  think  for  themselves,  great 
good  will  be  done,  and  if  they  do  not,  no  harm. 
It  is  a  benefit  to  human  beings  to  take  off  their 
fetters,  even  if  they  do  not  desire  to  walk.  It 
would  already  be  a  great  improvement  in  the 
moral  position  of  women  to  be  no  longer  de¬ 
clared  by  law  incapable  of  an  opinion,  and  not 
entitled  to  a  preference,  respecting  the  most 
important  concerns  of  humanity.  There  would 
be  some  benefit  to  them  individually  in  having 
something  to  bestow  which  their  male  relatives 
cannot  exact,  and  are  yet  desirous  to  have.  It 
would  also  be  no  small  benefit  that  the  hus¬ 
band  would  necessarily  discuss  the  matter  with 
his  wife,  and  that  the  vote  would  not  be  his 
exclusive  affair,  but  a  joint  concern.  People 
do  not  sufficiently  consider  how  markedly  the 
fact  that  she  is  able  to  have  some  action  on  the 
outward  world  independent  of  him  raises 
her  dignity  and  value  in  a  vulgar  man’s  eyes, 
and  makes  her  the  object  of  a  respect  which 
no  personal  qualities  would  ever  obtain  for 
one  whose  social  existence  he  can  entirely  ap¬ 
propriate. 

The  \ote  itself,  too,  would  be  improved  in 
quality.  The  man  would  often  be  obliged  to 
find  honest  reasons  for  his  vote,  such  as  might 
induce  a  more  upright  and  impartial  character 
to  serve  with  him  under  the  same  banner.  The 
wife’s  influence  would  often  keep  him  true  to 
his  own  sincere  opinion.  Often,  indeed,  it 
would  be  used,  not  on  the  side  of  public  prin 
ciple.  but  of  the  personal  interest  or  world!) 
vanity  of  the  family.  But  wherever  this  would 
be  the  tendency  of  the  wife's  influence,  it  is 
exerted  to  the  full  alread\  in  that  bad  direc 
tion;  and  with  the  more  certainty,  since  under 
the  present  law  and  custom  she  is  generally 
too  utter  a  stranger  to  politics  in  any  sense  in 
which  they  involve  principle  to  be  able  to 
realise  to  herself  that  there  is  a  point  of  hon¬ 
our  in  them,  and  most  people  have  as  little 
sympathy  in  the  point  of  honour  of  others, 
when  their  own  is  not  plat  ed  in  thesame  thing, 
as  they  have  in  the  religious  feelings  of  those 
whose  religion  differs  from  theirs.  Give  the 


389 


TWO  STAGES 

woman  a  vote,  and  she  comes  under  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  the  political  point  of  honour.  She 
learns  to  look  on  politics  as  a  thing  on  which 
she  is  allowed  to  have  an  opinion,  and  in 
which  if  one  has  an  opinion  it  ought  to  be  act¬ 
ed  upon;  she  acquires  a  sense  of  personal  ac¬ 
countability  in  the  matter,  and  will  no  longer 
feel,  as  she  does  at  present,  that  whatever 
amount  of  bad  influence  she  may  exercise,  if 
the  man  can  but  be  persuaded,  all  is  right,  and 
his  responsibility  covers  all.  It  is  only  by  being 
herself  encouraged  to  form  an  opinion,  and 
obtain  an  intelligent  comprehension  of  the 
reasons  which  ought  to  prevail  with  the  con¬ 
science  against  the  temptations  of  personal  or 
family  interest,  that  she  can  ever  cease  to  act 
as  a  disturbing  force  on  the  political  con¬ 
science  of  the  man.  Her  indirect  agency  can 
only  be  prevented  from  being  politically  mis¬ 
chievous  by  being  exchanged  for  direct. 

I  have  supposed  the  right  of  suffrage  to  de¬ 
pend,  as  in  a  good  state  of  things  it  would,  on 
personal  conditions.  Where  it  depends,  as  in 
this  and  most  other  countries,  on  conditions  of 
property,  the  contradiction  is  even  more  fla¬ 
grant.  There  is  something  more  than  ordinarily 
irrational  in  the  fact  that  when  a  woman  can 
give  all  the  guarantees  required  from  a  male 
elector,  independent  circumstances,  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  a  householder  and  head  of  a  family, 
payment  of  taxes,  or  whatever  may  be  the  con¬ 
ditions  imposed,  the  very  principle  and  system 
of  a  representation  based  on  property  is  set 
aside,  and  an  exceptionally  personal  disquali¬ 
fication  is  created  for  the  mere  purpose  of  ex¬ 
cluding  her.  When  it  is  added  that  in  the  coun¬ 
try  where  this  is  done  a  woman  now  reigns, 
and  that  the  most  glorious  ruler  whom  that 
country  ever  had  was  a  woman,  the  picture  of 
unreason,  and  scarcely  disguised  injustice,  is 
complete.  Let  us  hope  that  as  the  work  pro¬ 
ceeds  of  pulling  down,  one  after  another,  the 
remains  of  the  mouldering  fabric  of  monopoly 
and  tyranny,  this  one  will  not  be  the  last  to  dis¬ 
appear;  that  the  opinion  of  Bentham,  of  Mr. 
Samuel  Bailey,  of  Mr.  Hare,  and  many  other 
of  the  most  powerful  political  thinkers  of  this 
age  and  country  (not  to  speak  of  others),  will 
make  its  way  to  all  minds  not  rendered  obdu¬ 
rate  by  selfishness  or  inveterate  prejudice; 
and  that,  before  the  lapse  of  another  genera¬ 
tion,  the  accident  of  sex,  no  more  than  the 
accident  of  skin,  will  be  deemed  a  sufficient 
justification  for  depriving  its  possessor  of  the 
equal  protection  and  just  privileges  of  a 
citizen. 


OF  ELECTION 

Chapter  9 

Should  there  be  Two  Stages  of 
Election? 

In  some  representative  constitutions  the  plan 
has  been  adopted  of  choosing  the  members  of 
the  representative  body  by  a  double  process, 
the  primary  electors  only  choosing  other  elec¬ 
tors,  and  these  electing  the  member  of  parlia¬ 
ment.  This  contrivance  was  probably  intended 
as  a  slight  impediment  to  the  full  sweep  of 
popular  feeling;  giving  the  suffrage,  and  with 
it  the  complete  ultimate  power,  to  the  Many, 
but  compelling  them  to  exercise  it  through  the 
agency  of  a  comparatively  few,  who,  it  was 
supposed,  would  be  less  moved  than  the  Demos 
by  the  gusts  of  popular  passion;  and  as  the 
electors,  being  already  a  select  body,  might  be 
expected  to  exceed  in  intellect  and  character 
the  common  level  of  their  constituents,  the 
choice  made  by  them  was  thought  likely  to  be 
more  careful  and  enlightened,  and  would  in 
any  case  be  made  under  a  greater  feeling  of 
responsibility,  than  election  by  the  masses 
themselves.  This  plan  of  filtering,  as  it  were, 
the  popular  suffrage  through  an  intermediate 
body  admits  of  a  very  plausible  defence;  since 
it  may  be  said,  with  great  appearance  of  rea¬ 
son,  that  less  intellect  and  instruction  are  re¬ 
quired  for  judging  who  among  our  neigh¬ 
bours  can  be  most  safely  trusted  to  choose  a 
member  of  parliament,  than  who  is  himself 
fittest  to  be  one. 

In  the  first  place,  however,  if  the  dangers 
incident  to  popular  power  may  be  thought  to 
be  in  some  degree  lessened  by  this  indirect  ar¬ 
rangement,  so  also  are  its  benefits;  and  the  lat¬ 
ter  effect  is  much  more  certain  than  the  former. 
To  enable  the  system  to  work  as  desired,  it 
must  be  carried  into  effect  in  the  spirit  in 
which  it  is  planned;  the  electors  must  use  the 
suffrage  in  the  manner  supposed  by  the  theory, 
that  is,  each  of  them  must  not  ask  himself  who 
the  member  of  parliament  should  be,  but  only 
whom  he  would  best  like  to  choose  one  for 
him.  It  is  evident  that  the  advantages  which 
indirect  is  supposed  to  have  over  direct  elec¬ 
tion  require  this  disposition  of  mind  in  the 
voter,  and  will  only  be  realised  by  his  taking 
the  doctrine  011  sevieux,  that  his  sole  business 
is  to  choose  the  choosers,  not  the  member  him¬ 
self.  The  supposition  must  be,  that  he  will  not 
occupy  his  thoughts  with  political  opinions 
and  measures,  or  political  men,  but  will  be 
guided  by  his  personal  respect  for  some  private 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


39° 

individual,  to  whom  he  will  give  a  general 
power  of  attorney  to  act  for  him.  Now  if  the 
primary  electors  adopt  this  view  of  their  posi¬ 
tion,  one  of  the  principal  uses  of  giving  them  a 
vote  at  all  is  defeated:  the  political  function 
to  which  they  are  called  fails  of  developing 
public  spirit  and  political  intelligence:  of  mak¬ 
ing  public  affairs  an  object  of  interest  to  their 
feelings  and  of  exercise  to  their  faculties.  The 
supposition,  moreover,  involves  inconsistent 
conditions;  for  if  the  voter  feels  no  interest  in 
the  final  result,  how  or  why  can  he  be  expected 
to  feel  any  in  the  process  which  leads  to  it? 
To  wish  to  have  a  particular  individual  for  his 
representative  in  parliament  is  possible  to  a 
person  of  a  very  moderate  degree  of  virtue  and 
intelligence;  and  to  wish  to  choose  an  elector 
who  will  elect  that  individual  is  a  natural  con¬ 
sequence:  but  for  a  person  who  does  not  care 
who  is  elected,  or  feels  bound  to  put  that  con¬ 
sideration  in  abeyance,  to  take  any  interest 
whatever  in  merely  naming  the  worthiest  per¬ 
son  to  elect  another  according  to  his  own  judg¬ 
ment,  implies  a  zeal  for  what  is  right  in  the 
abstract,  an  habitual  principle  of  duty  for  the 
sake  of  duty,  which  is  possible  only  to  persons 
of  a  rather  high  grade  of  cultivation,  who,  by 
the  very  possession  of  it.  show  that  they  may 
be,  and  deserve  to  be,  trusted  with  political 
power  in  a  more  direct  shape.  Of  all  public 
functions  which  it  is  possible  to  confer  on  the 
poorer  members  of  the  community  this  surely 
is  the  least  calculated  to  kindle  their  feelings, 
and  holds  out  least  natural  inducement  to  care 
for  it,  other  than  a  virtuous  determination  to 
discharge  conscientiously  whatever  duty  one 
has  to  perform:  and  if  the  mass  of  electors 
cared  enough  about  political  affairs  to  set  any 
value  on  so  limited  a  participation  in  them, 
they  would  not  be  likely  to  be  satisfied  without 
one  much  more  extensive. 

In  the  next  place,  admitting  that  a  person 
who,  from  his  narrow  range  of  cultivation, 
cannot  judge  well  of  the  qualifications  of  a 
candidate  for  parliament  may  be  a  sulhcient 
judge  of  the  honesty  and  general  capacity  of 
somebody  whom  he  may  depute  to  choose  a 
member  of  Parliament  for  him:  I  may  remark, 
that  if  the  voter  acquiesces  in  this  estimate  of 
his  capabilities,  and  really  wishes  to  have  the 
choice  made  for  him  by  a  person  in  whom  he 
places  reliance,  there  is  no  need  of  any  consti¬ 
tutional  provision  for  the  purpose;  lie  has  only 
to  ask  this  confidential  person  privately  what 
candidate  he  had  better  vote  for.  In  that  case 
the  two  modes  of  election  coincide  in  their 


result,  and  every  advantage  of  indirect  elec¬ 
tion  is  obtained  under  direct.  The  systems  only 
diverge  in  their  operation,  if  we  suppose  that 
the  voter  would  prefer  to  use  his  own  judg¬ 
ment  in  the  choice  of  a  representative,  and 
only  lets  another  choose  for  him  because  the 
law  does  not  allow  him  a  more  direct  mode 
of  action.  But  if  this  be  his  state  of  mind;  if 
his  will  does  not  go  along  with  the  limitation 
which  the  law  imposes,  and  he  desires  to  make 
a  direct  choice,  he  can  do  so  notwithstanding 
the  law.  Me  has  only  to  choose  as  elector  a 
known  partisan  of  the  candidate  he  prefers, 
or  some  one  who  will  pledge  himself  to  vote 
for  that  candidate.  And  this  is  so  much  the 
natural  working  of  election  by  two  stages  that, 
except  in  a  condition  of  complete  political  in¬ 
difference,  it  can  scarcely  be  expected  to  act 
otherwise.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  election  of 
the  President  of  the  United  States  practically 
takes  place.  Nominally,  the  election  is  indirect: 
the  population  at  large  does  not  vote  for  the 
President;  it  votes  for  electors  who  choose  the 
President.  But  the  electors  are  always  chosen 
under  an  express  engagement  to  vote  for  a 
particular  candidate:  nor  does  a  citizen  ever 
vote  for  an  elector  because  of  any  preference 
for  the  man;  he  votes  for  the  Lincoln  ticket, 
or  the  Breckenridge  ticket.  It  must  be  remem¬ 
bered  that  the  electors  are  not  chosen  in  order 
that  they  may  search  the  country  and  find  the 
fittest  person  in  it  to  be  President,  or  to  be  a 
member  of  Parliament.  There  would  be  some¬ 
thing  to  be  said  for  the  practice  if  this  were 
so:  but  it  is  not  so;  nor  ever  will  be  until 
mankind  in  general  are  of  opinion,  with  Plato, 
that  the  proper  person  to  be  entrusted  with 
power  is  the  person  most  unwilling  to  accept 
it.  The  electors  are  to  make  choice  of  one  of 
those  who  have  offered  themselves  as  candi¬ 
dates:  and  those  who  choose  the  electors  al¬ 
ready  know  who  these  are.  If  there  is  any 
political  activity  in  the  country,  all  electors, 
who  care  to  vote  at  all.  have  made  up  their 
minds  which  of  these  candidates  they  would 
like  to  have:  and  will  make  that  the  sole  con¬ 
sideration  in  giving  their  vote.  The  partisans 
of  each  candidate  will  have  their  list  of  elec¬ 
tors  ready,  all  pledged  to  vote  for  that  indi¬ 
vidual;  and  the  only  question  practically  asked 
of  the  primary  elector  will  be  which  of  these 
lists  he  will  support. 

The  ease  in  which  election  by  two  stages  an¬ 
swers  well  in  practice  is  when  the  electors  are 
not  chosen  solely  as  electors,  but  have  other  im¬ 
portant  functions  to  discharge,  which  pre- 


TWO  STAGES 

eludes  their  being  selected  solely  as  delegates 
to  give  a  particular  vote.  This  combination  of 
circumstances  exemplifies  itself  in  another 
American  institution,  the  Senate  of  the  U  nited 
States.  That  assembly,  the  Upper  House,  as  it 
were,  of  Congress,  is  considered  to  represent 
not  the  people  directly,  but  the  States  as  such, 
and  to  be  the  guardian  of  that  portion  of  their 
sovereign  rights  which  they  have  not  alienat¬ 
ed.  As  the  internal  sovereignty  of  each  State  is, 
by  the  nature  of  an  equal  federation,  equally 
sacred  whatever  be  the  size  or  importance  of 
the  State,  each  returns  to  the  Senate  the  same 
number  of  members  (two),  whether  it  be  little 
Delaware  or  the  “Empire  State”  of  New  York. 
These  members  are  not  chosen  by  the  popula¬ 
tion,  but  by  the  State  Legislatures,  themselves 
elected  by  the  people  of  each  State;  but  as  the 
whole  ordinary  business  of  a  legislative  assem¬ 
bly,  internal  legislation  and  the  control  of  the 
executive,  devolves  upon  these  bodies,  they  are 
elected  with  a  view  to  those  objects  more  than 
to  the  other;  and  in  naming  two  persons  to 
represent  the  State  in  the  Federal  Senate  they 
for  the  most  part  exercise  their  own  judgment, 
with  only  that  general  reference  to  publicopin- 
ion  necessary  in  all  acts  of  the  government  of 
a  democracy.  The  elections,  thus  made,  have 
proved  eminently  successful,  and  are  conspicu¬ 
ously  the  best  of  all  the  elections  in  the  United 
States,  the  Senate  invariably  consisting  of  the 
most  distinguished  men  among  those  who  have 
made  themselves  sufficiently  known  in  public 
life. 

After  such  an  example,  it  cannot  be  said 
that  indirect  popular  election  is  never  ad¬ 
vantageous.  Under  certain  conditions  it  is  the 
very  best  system  that  can  be  adopted.  But  those 
conditions  are  hardly  to  be  obtained  in  prac¬ 
tice,  except  in  a  federal  government  like  that 
of  the  United  States,  where  the  election  can 
be  entrusted  to  local  bodies  whose  other  func¬ 
tions  extend  to  the  most  important  concerns 
of  the  nation.  The  only  bodies  in  any  analo¬ 
gous  position  which  exist,  or  are  likely  to  exist, 
in  this  country  are  the  municipalities,  or  any 
other  boards  which  have  been  or  may  be  cre¬ 
ated  for  similar  local  purposes.  Few  persons, 
however,  would  think  it  any  improvement  in 
our  parliamentary  constitution  if  the  members 
for  the  City  of  London  were  chosen  by  the 
Aldermen  and  Common  Council,  and  those 
for  the  borough  of  Marylebone  avowedly,  as 
they  already  are  virtually,  by  the  vestries  of 
the  component  parishes.  Even  if  those  bodies, 
considered  merely  as  local  boards,  were  far  less 


OF  ELECTION  391 

objectionable  than  they  are,  the  qualities  that 
would  fit  them  for  the  limited  and  peculiar 
duties  of  municipal  or  parochial  aedileship  are 
no  guarantee  of  any  special  fitness  to  judge  of 
the  comparative  qualifications  of  candidates 
for  a  seat  in  Parliament.  They  probably  would 
not  fulfil  this  duty  any  better  than  it  is  ful¬ 
filled  by  the  inhabitants  voting  directly;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  if  fitness  for  electing  mem¬ 
bers  of  Parliament  had  to  be  taken  into  con¬ 
sideration  in  selecting  persons  for  the  office  of 
vestrymen  or  town  councillors,  many  of  those 
who  are  fittest  for  that  more  limited  duty 
would  inevitably  be  excluded  from  it,  if  only 
by  the  necessity  there  wrould  be  of  choosing 
persons  wffiose  sentiments  in  general  politics 
agreed  with  those  of  the  voters  who  elected 
them.  The  mere  indirect  political  influence  of 
town-councils  has  already  led  to  a  considerable 
perversion  of  municipal  elections  from  their  in¬ 
tended  purpose,  by  making  them  a  matter  of 
party  politics.  If  it  were  part  of  the  duty  of  a 
man’s  book-keeper  or  steward  to  choose  his 
physician,  he  would  not  be  likely  to  have  a 
better  medical  attendant  than  if  he  chose  one 
for  himself,  while  he  wTould  be  restricted  in  his 
choice  of  a  steward  or  book-keeper  to  such  as 
might  without  too  great  danger  to  his  health 
be  entrusted  wTith  the  other  office. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  every  benefit  of 
indirect  election  which  is  attainable  at  all  is 
attainable  under  direct;  that  such  of  the  bene¬ 
fits  expected  from  it,  as  would  not  be  obtained 
under  direct  election,  will  just  as  much  fail 
to  be  obtained  under  indirect;  while  the  latter 
has  considerable  disadvantages  peculiar  to  it¬ 
self.  The  mere  fact  that  it  is  an  additional  and 
superfluous  wheel  in  the  machinery  is  no  tri¬ 
fling  objection.  Its  decided  inferiority  as  a 
means  of  cultivating  public  spirit  and  political 
intelligence  has  already  been  dwelt  upon:  and 
if  it  had  any  effective  operation  at  all— that  is, 
if  the  primary  electors  did  to  any  extent  leave 
to  their  nominees  the  selection  of  their  parlia¬ 
mentary  representative— the  voter  would  be 
prevented  from  identifying  himself  with  his 
member  of  Parliament,  and  the  member  would 
feel  a  much  less  active  sense  of  responsibility 
to  his  constituents.  In  addition  to  all  this,  the 
comparatively  small  number  of  persons  in 
whose  hands,  at  last,  the  election  of  a  member 
of  Parliament  would  reside,  could  not  but  af¬ 
ford  great  additional  facilities  to  intrigue,  and 
to  every  form  of  corruption  compatible  with 
the  station  in  life  of  the  electors.  The  constitu¬ 
encies  would  universally  be  reduced,  in  point 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


392 

of  conveniences  for  bribery,  to  the  condition 
of  the  small  boroughs  at  present.  It  would  be 
sufficient  to  gain  over  a  small  number  of  per¬ 
sons  to  be  certain  of  being  returned.  If  it  be 
said  that  the  electors  would  be  responsible  to 
those  who  elected  them,  the  answer  is  obvious, 
that,  holding  no  permanent  office,  or  position 
in  the  public  eye,  they  would  risk  nothing  by 
a  conupt  vote  except  what  they  would  care 
little  for,  not  to  be  appointed  electors  again: 
and  the  main  reliance  must  still  be  on  the 
penalties  for  bribery,  the  insufficiency  of  which 
reliance,  in  small  constituencies,  experience 
has  made  notorious  to  all  the  world.  The  evil 
would  be  exactly  proportional  to  the  amount 
of  discretion  left  to  the  chosen  electors.  The 
only  case  in  which  they  would  probably  be 
afraid  to  employ  their  vote  for  the  promotion 
of  their  personal  interest  would  be  when  they 
were  elected  under  an  express  pledge,  as  mere 
delegates,  to  carry,  as  it  were,  the  votes  of  their 
constituents  to  the  hustings.  The  moment  the 
double  stage  of  election  began  to  have  any  ef¬ 
fect,  it  would  begin  to  have  a  bad  effect.  And 
this  we  shall  find  true  of  the  principle  of  indi¬ 
rect  election  however  applied,  except  in  cir¬ 
cumstances  similar  to  those  of  the  election  of 
Senators  in  the  United  States. 

The  best  which  could  be  said  for  this  politi¬ 
cal  contrivance  is  that  in  some  states  of  opinion 
it  might  be  a  more  practicable  expedient  than 
that  of  plural  voting  for  giving  to  every  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  community  a  vote  of  some  sort,  with¬ 
out  rendering  the  mere  numerical  majority 
predominant  in  Parliament:  as,  for  instance, 
if  the  present  constituency  of  this  country 
were  increased  by  the  addition  of  a  numerous 
and  select  portion  of  the  labouring  classes, 
elected  by  the  remainder.  Circumstances  might 
render  such  a  scheme  a  convenient  mode  of 
temporary  compromise,  but  it  does  not  carry 
out  any  principle  sufficiently  thoroughly  to  be 
likely  to  recommend  itself  to  any  class  of  think¬ 
ers  as  a  permanent  arrangement. 

Chapter  to 

Of  the  Mode  of  Voting 
The  question  of  greatest  moment  in  regard  to 
modes  of  voting  is  that  of  secrecy  or  publicity; 
and  to  this  we  will  at  once  address  ourselves. 

It  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  make  the  dis¬ 
cussion  turn  on  sentimentalities  about  skulk 
ingor  cowardice.  Secrecy  is  justifiable  in  many 
cases,  imperative  in  some,  and  it  is  not  coward¬ 
ice  to  seek  protection  against  evils  which  arc 


honestly  avoidable.  Nor  can  it  be  reasonably 
maintained  that  no  cases  are  conceivable  in 
which  secret  voting  is  preferable  to  public.  But 
1  must  contend  that  these  cases,  in  affairs  of  a 
political  character,  are  the  exception,  not  the 
rule. 

The  present  is  one  of  the  many  instances 
in  which,  as  I  have  already  had  occasion  to 
remark,  the  spirit  of  an  institution,  the  impres¬ 
sion  it  makes  on  the  mind  of  the  citizen,  is  one 
of  the  most  important  parts  of  its  operation. 
The  spirit  of  vote  by  ballot— the  interpretation 
likely  to  be  put  on  it  in  the  mind  of  an  elector 
—is  that  the  suffrage  is  given  to  him  for  him¬ 
self;  for  his  particular  use  and  benefit,  and  not 
as  a  trust  for  the  public.  For  if  it  is  indeed  a 
trust,  if  the  public  are  entitled  to  his  vote,  are 
not  they  entitled  to  know  his  vote?  This  false 
and  pernicious  impression  may  well  be  made 
on  the  generality,  since  it  has  been  made  on 
most  of  those  who  of  late  years  have  been  con¬ 
spicuous  advocates  of  the  ballot.  The  doctrine 
was  not  so  understood  by  its  earlier  promoters: 
but  the  effect  of  a  doctrine  on  the  mind  is  best 
shown,  not  in  those  who  form  it,  but  in  those 
who  are  formed  by  it.  Mr.  Bright  and  his 
school  of  democrats  think  themselves  greatly 
concerned  in  maintaining  that  the  franchise  is 
what  they  term  a  right,  not  a  trust.  Now  this 
one  idea,  taking  root  in  the  general  mind,  does 
a  moral  mischief  outweighing  all  the  good  that 
the  ballot  could  do,  at  the  highest  possible  esti¬ 
mate  of  it.  In  whatever  way  we  define  or  un¬ 
derstand  the  idea  of  a  right,  no  person  can 
have  a  right  (except  in  the  purely  legal  sense) 
to  power  over  others:  every  such  power,  which 
he  is  allowed  to  possess,  is  morally,  in  the  full¬ 
est  force  of  the  term,  a  trust.  But  the  exercise 
of  any  political  function,  either  as  an  elector 
or  as  a  representative,  is  power  over  others. 

Those  who  say  that  the  suffrage  is  not  a 
trust  but  a  right  will  scarcely  accept  the  con¬ 
clusions  to  which  their  doctrine  leads.  If  it  is  a 
right,  if  it  belongs  to  the  voter  for  his  own 
sake;  on  what  ground  can  we  blame  him  for 
selling  it,  or  using  it  to  recommend  himself 
to  any  one  whom  it  is  his  interest  to  please?  A 
person  is  not  expected  to  consult  exclusively 
the  public  benefit  in  the  use  he  makes  of  his 
house,  or  his  three  per  cent,  stock,  or  anything 
else  to  which  he  really  has  a  right.  The  suf¬ 
frage  is  indeed  due  to  him.  among  other  rea¬ 
sons,  as  a  means  to  his  own  protection,  but 
only  against  treatment  from  which  he  is  equal¬ 
ly  bound,  so  far  as  depends  on  his  vote,  to  pro¬ 
tect  every  one  of  his  fellow-citizens.  His  vote 


MODE  OF 

is  not  a  thing  in  which  he  has  an  option;  it  has 
no  more  to  do  with  his  personal  wishes  than 
the  verdict  of  a  juryman.  It  is  strictly  a  matter 
of  duty;  he  is  bound  to  give  it  according  to  his 
best  and  most  conscientious  opinion  of  the 
public  good.  Whoever  has  any  other  idea  of 
it  is  unfit  to  have  the  suffrage;  its  effect  on  him 
is  to  pervert,  not  to  elevate  his  mind.  Instead 
of  opening  his  heart  to  an  exalted  patriotism 
and  the  obligation  of  public  duty,  it  awakens 
and  nourishes  in  him  the  disposition  to  use  a 
public  function  for  his  own  interest,  pleasure, 
or  caprice;  the  same  feelings  and  purposes,  on 
a  humbler  scale,  which  actuate  a  despot  and 
oppressor.  Now  an  ordinary  citizen  in  any 
public  position,  or  on  whom  there  devolves 
any  social  function,  is  certain  to  think  and  feel, 
respecting  the  obligations  it  imposes  on  him, 
exactly  what  society  appears  to  think  and  feel 
in  conferring  it.  What  seems  to  be  expected 
from  him  by  society  forms  a  standard  which  he 
may  fall  below,  but  which  he  will  seldom  rise 
above.  And  the  interpretation  which  he  is  al¬ 
most  sure  to  put  upon  secret  voting  is  that  he  is 
not  bound  to  give  his  vote  with  any  reference 
to  those  who  are  not  allowed  to  know  how  he 
gives  it;  but  may  bestow  it  simply  as  he  feels 
inclined. 

This  is  the  decisive  reason  why  the  argument 
does  not  hold,  from  the  use  of  the  ballot  in 
clubs  and  private  societies,  to  its  adoption  in 
parliamentary  elections.  A  member  of  a  club 
is  really,  what  the  elector  falsely  believes  him¬ 
self  to  be,  under  no  obligation  to  consider  the 
wishes  or  interests  of  any  one  else.  He  declares 
nothing  by  his  vote  but  that  he  is  or  is  not  will¬ 
ing  to  associate,  in  a  manner  more  or  less  close, 
with  a  particular  person.  This  is  a  matter  on 
which,  by  universal  admission,  his  own  pleas¬ 
ure  or  inclination  is  entitled  to  decide:  and 
that  he  should  be  able  so  to  decide  it  without 
risking  a  quarrel  is  best  for  everybody,  the  re¬ 
jected  person  included.  An  additional  reason 
rendering  the  ballot  unobjectionable  in  these 
cases  is  that  it  does  not  necessarily  or  naturally 
lead  to  lying.  The  persons  concerned  are  of 
the  same  class  or  rank,  and  it  would  be  con¬ 
sidered  improper  in  one  of  them  to  press  an¬ 
other  with  questions  as  to  how  he  had  voted.  It 
is  far  otherwise  in  parliamentary  elections,  and 
is  likely  to  remain  so,  as  long  as  the  social  rela¬ 
tions  exist  which  produce  the  demand  for  the 
ballot;  as  long  as  one  person  is  sufficiently  the 
superior  of  another  to  think  himself  entitled 
to  dictate  his  vote.  And  while  this  is  the  case, 
silence  or  an  evasive  answer  is  certain  to  be 


VOTING  393 

construed  as  proof  that  the  vote  given  has  not 
been  that  which  was  desired. 

In  any  political  election,  even  by  universal 
suffrage  (and  still  more  obviously  in  the  case 
of  a  restricted  suffrage),  the  voter  is  under  an 
absolute  moral  obligation  to  consider  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  public,  not  his  private  advantage, 
and  give  his  vote,  to  the  best  of  his  judgment, 
exactlv  as  he  would  be  bound  to  do  il  he  were 
the  sole  voter,  and  the  election  depended  upon 
him  alone.  This  being  admitted,  it  is  at  least 
a  prirna  facie  consequence  that  the  duty  of 
voting,  like  any  other  public  duty,  should  be 
performed  under  the  eye  and  criticism  of  the 
public;  every  one  of  whom  has  not  only  an  in 
terest  in  its  performance,  but  a  good  title  to 
consider  himself  wronged  if  it  is  performed 
otherwise  than  honestly  and  carefully.  Un¬ 
doubtedly  neither  this  nor  any  other  maxim 
of  political  morality  is  absolutely  inviolable;  it 
may  be  overruled  by  still  more  cogent  con¬ 
siderations.  But  its  weight  is  such  that  the  cases 
which  admit  of  a  departure  from  it  must  be  of 
a  strikingly  exceptional  character. 

It  may.  unquestionably,  be  the  fact  that  if 
we  attempt,  by  publicity,  to  make  the  voter 
responsible  to  the  public  for  his  vote,  he  will 
practically  be  made  responsible  for  it  to  some 
powerful  individual,  whose  interest  is  more 
opposed  to  the  general  interest  of  the  commu¬ 
nity  than  that  of  the  voter  himself  would  be  if. 
by  the  shield  of  secrecy,  he  were  released  from 
responsibility  altogether.  When  this  is  the  con¬ 
dition,  in  a  high  degree,  of  a  large  proportion 
of  the  voters,  the  ballot  may  be  the  smaller 
evil.  When  the  voters  are  slaves,  anything  may 
be  tolerated  which  enables  them  to  throw  off 
the  yoke.  The  strongest  case  for  the  ballot  is 
when  the  mischievous  power  of  the  Few  over 
the  Many  is  increasing.  In  the  decline  of  the 
Roman  republic  the  reasons  for  the  ballot 
were  irresistible.  The  oligarchy  was  yearly  be¬ 
coming  richer  and  more  tyrannical,  the  people 
poorer  and  more  dependent,  and  it  was  neces¬ 
sary  to  erect  stronger  and  stronger  barriers 
against  such  abuse  of  the  franchise  as  rendered 
it  but  an  instrument  the  more  in  the  hands  of 
unprincipled  persons  of  consequence.  As  little 
can  it  be  doubted  that  the  ballot,  so  far  as 
it  existed,  had  a  beneficial  operation  in  the 
Athenian  constitution.  Even  in  the  least  un¬ 
stable  of  the  Grecian  commonwealths  freedom 
might  be  for  the  time  destroyed  by  a  single  un¬ 
fairly  obtained  popular  vote:  and  though  the 
Athenian  voter  was  not  sufficiently  dependent 
to  be  habitually  coerced,  he  might  have  been 


394  REPRESENTATIVE 

bribed,  or  intimidated  by  the  lawless  outrages 
of  some  knot  of  individuals,  such  as  were  not 
uncommon  even  at  Athens  among  the  youth 
of  rank  and  fortune.  The  ballot  was  in  these 
cases  a  valuable  instrument  of  order,  and  con¬ 
duced  to  the  Eunomiaby  which  Athens  was  dis¬ 
tinguished  among  theancient  commonwealths. 

But  in  the  more  advanced  states  of  modern 
Europe,  and  especially  in  this  country,  the 
power  of  coercing  voters  has  declined  and  is 
declining:  and  bad  voting  is  now  less  to  be 
apprehended  from  the  influences  to  which  the 
voter  is  subject  at  the  hands  of  others  than 
from  the  sinister  interests  and  discreditable 
feelings  which  belong  tohimself,  either  individ¬ 
ually  or  as  a  member  of  a  class.  To  secure  him 
against  the  first,  at  the  cost  of  removing  all 
restraint  from  the  last,  would  be  to  exchange 
a  smaller  and  a  diminishing  evil  for  a  greater 
and  increasing  one.  On  this  topic,  and  on  the 
question  generally,  as  applicable  to  England 
at  the  present  date,  I  have,  in  a  pamphlet  on 
Parliamentary  Reform,  expressed  myself  in 
terms  which,  as  I  do  not  leel  that  1  can  improve 
upon,  I  will  venture  here  to  transcribe. 

“Thirty  years  ago  it  was  still  true  that  in  the 
election  of  members  of  Parliament  the  main 
evil  to  be  guarded  against  was  that  which  the 
ballot  would  exclude— coercion  by  landlords, 
employers,  and  customers.  At  present,  I  con¬ 
ceive,  a  much  greater  source  of  evil  is  the  sel¬ 
fishness,  or  the  selfish  partialities,  of  the  voter 
himself.  A  base  and  mischievous  vote  is  now.  I 
am  convinced,  much  oftener  given  from  the 
voter’s  personal  interest,  or  class  interest,  or 
some  mean  feeling  in  his  own  mind,  than 
from  any  fear  of  consequences  at  the  hands  of 
others:  and  to  these  influences  the  ballot  would 
enable  him  to  yield  himself  up,  free  from  all 
sense  of  shame  or  responsibility. 

“In  times  not  long  gone  by,  the  higher  and 
richer  classes  were  in  complete  possession  of 
the  government.  Their  power  was  the  master 
grievance  of  the  country.  The  habit  of  voting 
at  the  bidding  of  an  employer,  or  of  a  land¬ 
lord,  was  so  firmly  established,  that  hardly  any¬ 
thing  was  capable  of  shaking  it  but  a  strong 
popular  enthusiasm,  seldom  known  to  exist 
but  in  a  good  cause.  A  vote  given  in  opposition 
to  those  influences  was  therefore,  in  general, 
an  honest,  a  public-spirited  vote:  but  in  any 
case,  and  by  whatever  motive  dictated,  it  was 
almost  sure  to  be  a  good  vote,  for  it  was  a  vote 
against  the  monster  evil,  the  over-ruling  in¬ 
fluence  of  oligarchy.  Could  the  voter  at  that 
time  have  been  enabled,  with  safety  to  him¬ 


GOVERNMENT 

self,  to  exercise  his  privilege  freely,  even 
though  neither  honestly  nor  intelligently,  it 
would  have  been  a  great  gain  to  reform;  for 
it  would  have  broken  the  yoke  of  the  then 
ruling  power  in  the  country— the  power  which 
had  created  and  which  maintained  all  that  was 
bad  in  the  institutions  and  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  the  State— the  power  of  landlords  and 
boroughmongers. 

“The  ballot  was  not  adopted;  but  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  circumstances  has  done  and  is  doing 
more  and  more,  in  this  respect,  the  work  of  the 
ballot.  Both  the  political  and  the  social  state 
of  the  country,  as  they  affect  this  question, 
have  greatly  changed,  and  are  changing  every 
day.  The  higher  classes  are  not  now  masters  of 
the  country.  A  person  must  be  blind  to  all 
the  signs  of  the  times  who  could  think  that  the 
middle  classes  are  as  subservient  to  the  higher, 
or  the  working  classes  as  dependent  on  the 
higher  and  middle,  as  they  were  a  quarter  of  a 
century  ago.  The  events  of  that  quarter  of  a 
century  have  not  only  taught  each  class  to 
know  its  own  collective  strength,  but  have  put 
the  individuals  of  a  lower  class  in  a  condition 
to  show  a  much  bolder  front  to  those  of  a 
higher.  In  a  majority  of  cases,  the  vote  of  the 
electors,  whether  in  opposition  to  or  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  wishes  of  their  superiors,  is  not 
now  the  effect  of  coercion,  which  there  are  no 
longer  the  same  means  of  applying,  but  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  their  own  personal  or  political  par¬ 
tialities.  The  very  vices  of  the  present  electoral 
system  are  a  proof  of  this.  The  growth  of  brib¬ 
ery,  so  loudly  complained  of,  and  the  spread 
of  the  contagion  to  places  formerly  free  from 
it,  are  evidence  that  the  local  influences  arc 
no  longer  paramount;  that  the  electors  now 
vote  to  please  themselves,  and  not  other  peo¬ 
ple.  There  is,  no  doubt,  in  counties,  and  in  the 
smaller  boroughs,  a  large  amount  of  servile 
dependence  still  mnaining;  but  the  temper 
of  the  times  is  adverse  to  it,  and  the  force  of 
events  is  constantly  tending  to  diminish  it.  A 
good  tenant  can  now  feel  that  he  is  as  valuable 
to  his  landlord  as  his  landord  is  to  him;  a  pros¬ 
perous  tradesman  can  afford  to  feel  independ¬ 
ent  of  any  particular  customer.  At  every  elec¬ 
tion  the  votes  are  more  and  more  the  voter’s 
own.  It  is  their  minds,  far  more  than  their 
personal  circumstances,  that  now  require  to  be 
emancipated.  They  are  no  longer  passive  in¬ 
struments  ol  other  mens  will — mete  organs 
for  putting  power  into  the  hands  of  a  control 
ling  oligarchy.  The  electors  themselves  arc  be¬ 
coming  the  oligarchy. 


MODE  OF 

“Exactly  in  proportion  as  the  vote  of  the 
elector  is  determined  by  his  own  will,  and  not 
by  that  of  somebody  who  is  his  master,  his  posi¬ 
tion  is  similar  to  that  of  a  member  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  and  publicity  is  indispensable.  So  long 
as  any  portion  of  the  community  are  unrepre¬ 
sented,  the  argument  of  the  Chartists  against 
ballot  in  conjunction  with  a  restricted  suffrage 
is  unassailable.  The  present  electors,  and  the 
bulk  of  those  whom  any  probable  Reform 
Bill  would  add  to  the  number,  are  the  middle 
class;  and  have  as  much  a  class  interest,  dis¬ 
tinct  from  the  working  classes,  as  landlords  or 
greatinanufacturers.  Were  the  suffrage  extend¬ 
ed  to  all  skilled  labourers,  even  these  would, 
or  might,  still  have  a  class  interest  distinct 
from  the  unskilled.  Suppose  it  extended  to  all 
men— suppose  that  what  was  formerly  called 
by  the  misapplied  name  of  universal  suffrage, 
and  now  by  the  silly  title  of  manhood  suffrage, 
became  the  law;  the  voters  would  still  have  a 
class  interest,  as  distinguished  from  women. 
Suppose  that  there  were  a  question  before 
the  Legislature  specially  affecting  women;  as 
whether  women  should  be  allowed  to  graduate 
at  Universities;  whether  the  mild  penalties  in¬ 
flicted  on  ruffians  who  beat  their  wives  daily 
almost  to  death's  door  should  be  exchanged  for 
something  more  effectual;  or  suppose  that  any 
one  should  propose  in  the  British  Parliament, 
what  one  State  after  another  in  America  is  en¬ 
acting,  not  by  a  mere  law,  but  by  a  provision 
of  their  revised  Constitutions-that  married 
women  should  have  a  right  to  their  own  prop¬ 
erty.  Are  not  a  man’s  wife  and  daughters  en¬ 
titled  to  know  whether  he  votes  for  or  against 
a  candidate  who  will  support  these  proposi¬ 
tions? 

“It  will  of  course  be  objected  that  these 
arguments  derive  all  their  weight  from  the  sup¬ 
position  of  an  unjust  state  of  the  suffrage: 
That  if  the  opinion  of  the  non-electors  is  like¬ 
ly  to  make  the  elector  vote  more  honestly,  or 
more  beneficially,  than  he  would  vote  if  left 
to  himself,  they  are  more  fit  to  be  electors  than 
he  is,  and  ought  to  have  the  franchise:  That 
whoever  is  fit  to  influence  electors  is  fit  to  be 
an  elector:  That  those  to  whom  voters  ought 
to  be  responsible  should  be  themselves  voters; 
and  being  such,  should  have  the  safeguard  of 
the  ballot  to  shield  them  from  the  undue  in¬ 
fluence  of  powerful  individuals  or  classes  to 
whom  they  ought  not  to  be  responsible. 

“This  argument  is  specious,  and  I  once 
thought  it  conclusive.  It  now  appears  to  me 
fallacious.  All  who  are  fit  to  influence  electors 


VOTING  395 

are  not,  for  that  reason,  fit  to  be  themselves 
electors.  This  last  is  a  much  greater  power 
than  the  former,  and  those  may  be  ripe  for  the 
minor  political  function  who  could  not  as  yet 
be  safely  trusted  with  the  superior.  The  opin¬ 
ions  and  wishes  of  the  poorest  and  rudest  class 
of  labourers  may  be  very  useful  as  one  influ¬ 
ence  among  others  on  the  minds  of  the  voters, 
as  well  as  on  those  of  the  Legislature;  and  yet 
it  might  be  highly  mischievous  to  give  them 
the  preponderant  influence  by  admitting  them, 
in  their  present  state  of  morals  and  intelli¬ 
gence,  to  the  full  exercise  of  the  suffrage.  It 
is  precisely  this  indirect  influence  of  those 
who  have  not  the  suffrage  over  those  who 
have  which,  by  its  progressive  growth,  softens 
the  transition  to  every  fresh  extension  of  the 
franchise,  and  is  the  means  by  which,  when  the 
time  is  ripe,  the  extension  is  peacefully  brought 
about.  But  there  is  another  and  a  still  deeper 
consideration,  which  should  never  be  left  out 
of  the  account  in  political  speculations.  The 
notion  is  itself  unfounded,  that  publicity,  and 
the  sense  of  being  answerable  to  the  public,  are 
of  no  use  unless  the  public  are  qualified  to 
form  a  sound  judgment.  It  is  a  very  super¬ 
ficial  view  of  the  utility  of  public  opinion  to 
suppose  that  it  does  good  only  when  it  succeeds 
in  enforcing  a  servile  conformity  to  itself.  To 
be  under  the  eyes  of  others— to  have  to  defend 
oneself  to  others— is  never  more  important 
than  to  those  who  act  in  opposition  to  the 
opinion  of  others,  for  it  obliges  them  to  have 
sure  ground  of  their  own.  Nothing  has  so 
steadying  an  influence  as  working  against  pres¬ 
sure.  Unless  when  under  the  temporary  sway 
of  passionate  excitement,  no  one  will  do  that 
which  he  expects  to  be  greatly  blamed  for,  un¬ 
less  from  a  preconceived  and  fixed  purpose  of 
his  own;  which  is  always  evidence  of  a  thought¬ 
ful  and  deliberate  character,  and,  except  in 
radically  bad  men,  generally  proceeds  from 
sincere  and  strong  personal  convictions.  Even 
the  bare  fact  of  having  to  give  an  account  of 
their  conduct  is  a  powerful  inducement  to  ad¬ 
here  to  conduct  of  which  at  least  some  decent 
account  can  be  given.  If  any  one  thinks  that 
the  mere  obligation  of  preserving  decency  is 
not  a  very  considerable  check  on  the  abuse  of 
power,  he  has  never  had  his  attention  called 
to  the  conduct  of  those  who  do  not  feel  under 
the  necessity  of  observing  that  restraint.  Public¬ 
ity  is  inappreciable,  even  when  it  does  no  more 
than  prevent  that  which  can  by  no  possibility 
be  plausibly  defended— than  compel  delibera¬ 
tion,  and  force  every  one  to  determine,  before 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


396 

he  acts,  what  he  shall  say  if  called  to  account 
for  his  actions. 

“Hut,  if  not  now  (it  maybe  said),  at  least  here¬ 
after,  when  all  are  fit  to  have  votes,  and  when 
all  men  and  women  are  admitted  to  vote  in 
virtue  of  their  fitness;  then  there  can  no  longer 
be  danger  of  class  legislation;  then  the  electors, 
being  the  nation,  can  have  no  interest  apart 
from  the  general  interest:  even  if  individuals 
still  vote  according  to  private  or  class  induce¬ 
ments.  the  majority  will  have  no  such  induce¬ 
ment;  and  as  there  will  then  be  no  non-electors 
to  whom  they  ought  to  be  responsible,  the 
effect  of  the  ballot,  excluding  none  but  the 
sinister  influences,  will  be  wholly  beneficial. 

“Even  in  this  I  do  not  agree.  I  cannot  think 
that  even  if  the  people  were  fit  for,  and  had 
obtained,  universal  suffrage,  the  ballot  would 
be  desirable.  First,  because  it  could  not,  in 
such  circumstances,  be  supposed  to  be  needful. 
Let  us  only  conceive  the  state  of  things  which 
the  hypothesis  implies;  a  people  universally 
educated,  and  every  grown-up  human  being 
possessed  of  a  vote.  If,  even  when  only  a  small 
proportion  arc  electors,  and  the  majority  of  the 
population  almost  uneducated,  public  opin¬ 
ion  is  already,  as  every  one  now  sees  that  it  is, 
the  ruling  power  in  the  last  resort;  it  is  a 
chimera  to  suppose  that  over  a  community 
who  all  read,  and  who  all  have  votes,  any  pow¬ 
er  could  be  exercised  by  landlords  and  rich 
people  against  their  own  inclination  which  it 
would  be  at  all  difficult  for  them  to  throw  off. 
But  though  the  protection  of  secrecy  would 
then  be  needless,  the  control  of  publicity  would 
be  as  needful  as  ever.  The  universal  observa¬ 
tion  of  mankind  has  been  very  fallacious  if  the 
mere  fact  of  being  one  of  the  community,  and 
not  being  in  a  position  of  pronounced  con¬ 
trariety  of  interest  to  the  public  at  large,  is 
enough  to  ensure  the  performance  of  a  public 
dutv,  without  either  the  stimulus  or  the  re¬ 
straint  derived  from  the  opinion  of  our  fellow 
creatures.  A  man's  own  particular  share  of  the 
public  interest,  even  though  he  may  have  no 
private  interest  drawing  him  in  the  opposite 
direction,  is  not,  as  a  general  rule,  found  suffi¬ 
cient  to  make  him  do  his  duty  to  the  public 
without  other  external  inducements.  Neither 
can  it  be  admitted  that  even  if  all  had  votes 
they  would  give  their  votes  as  honestly  in 
secret  as  in  public. 

“The  proposition  that  theclec  tors  when  they 
compose  the  whole  of  the  community  cannot 
have  an  interest  in  voting  against  the  interest 
of  the  community  will  be  found  on  examina¬ 


tion  to  have  more  sound  than  meaning  in  it. 
Though  the  community  as  a  whole  can  have 
(as  the  terms  imply)  no  other  interest  than  its 
collective  interest,  any  or  every  individual  in 
it  may.  A  man’s  interest  consists  of  whatever  he 
takes  an  interest  in.  Everybody  has  as  many 
different  interests  as  he  has  feelings;  likings  or 
dislikings,  either  of  a  selfish  or  of  a  better  kind. 
It  cannot  be  said  that  any  of  these,  taken  by 
itself,  constitutes  'his  interest’;  he  is  a  good 
man  or  a  bad  according  as  he  prefers  one  class 
of  his  interests  or  another.  A  man  who  is  a  ty¬ 
rant  at  home  will  be  apt  to  sympathise  with 
tyranny  (when  not  exercised  over  himself): 
he  will  be  almost  certain  not  to  sympathise 
with  resistance  to  tyranny.  An  envious  man 
will  vote  against  Aristides  because  he  is  called 
the  Just.  A  selfish  man  will  prefer  even  a  tri¬ 
lling  individual  benefit  to  his  share  of  the  ad¬ 
vantage  which  his  country  would  derive  from 
a  good  law;  because  interests  peculiar  to  him¬ 
self  are  those  which  the  habits  of  his  mind  both 
dispose  him  to  dwell  on,  and  make  him  best 
able  to  estimate.  A  great  number  of  the  elec¬ 
tors  will  have  two  sets  of  preferences— those  on 
private  and  those  on  public  grounds.  The  last 
are  the  only  ones  which  the  elector  would  like 
to  avow.  The  best  side  of  their  character  is 
that  which  people  are  anxious  to  show,  even 
to  those  who  are  no  better  than  themselves. 
People  will  give  dishonest  or  mean  votes  from 
lucre,  from  malice,  from  picpie,  from  personal 
rivalry,  even  from  the  interests  or  prejudices 
of  class  or  sect,  more  readily  in  secret  than  in 
public.  And  cases  exist— they  may  come  to  be 
more  frequent— in  which  almost  the  only  re¬ 
straint  upon  a  majority  of  knaves  consists  in 
their  involuntary  respect  for  the  opinion  of 
an  honest  minority.  In  such  a  case  as  that  of 
the  repudiating  States  of  North  America,  is 
there  not  some  check  to  the  unprincipled  voter 
in  the  shame  of  looking  an  honest  man  in  the 
face?  Since  all  this  good  would  be  sacrificed  by 
the  ballot,  even  in  the  circumstances  most  fa¬ 
vourable  to  it.  a  much  stronger  case  is  requisite 
than  can  now  be  made  out  for  its  necessity 
(and  the  case  is  continually  becoming  still 
weaker)  to  make  its  adoption  desirable."  1 

On  the  other  dcbateable  points  connected 
with  the  mode  of  voting  it  is  not  necessary  to 
expend  so  many  words.  The  system  of  personal 
representation,  as  organised  by  Mr.  Marc, 
renders  necessary  the  employment  of  voting 
papers.  But  it  appears  to  me  indispensable 

1 Thoughts  on  Parliamentary  Reform,  lend  cd. 
pp.  32-311. 


MODE  OF 

that  the  signature  of  the  elector  should  be 
affixed  to  the  paper  at  a  public  polling  place, 
or  if  there  be  no  such  place  conveniently  ac¬ 
cessible,  at  some  office  open  to  all  the  world, 
and  in  the  presence  of  a  responsible  public 
officer.  The  proposal  which  has  been  thrown 
out  of  allowing  the  voting  papers  to  be  filled 
up  at  the  voter’s  own  residence,  and  sent  by 
the  post,  or  called  for  by  a  public  officer,  I 
should  regard  as  fatal.  The  act  would  be  done 
in  the  absence  of  the  salutary  and  the  presence 
of  all  the  pernicious  influences.  The  briber 
might,  in  the  shelter  of  privacy,  behold  with 
his  own  eyes  his  bargain  fulfilled,  and  the  in- 
timidator  could  see  the  extorted  obedience 
rendered  irrevocably  on  the  spot;  while  the 
beneficent  counter-influence  of  the  presence  ol 
those  who  knew  the  voter’s  real  sentiments,  and 
the  inspiring  effect  of  the  sympathy  of  those 
of  his  own  party  or  opinion,  would  be  shut 
out.1 

1  “This  expedient  has  been  recommended,  both 
on  the  score  of  saving  expense,  and  on  that  of  ob¬ 
taining  the  votes  of  many  electors  who  otherwise 
would  not  vote,  and  who  are  regarded  by  the  ad¬ 
vocates  of  the  plan  as  a  particularly  desirable  class 
of  voters.  The  scheme  has  been  carried  into  prac¬ 
tice  in  the  election  of  poor-law  guardians,  and  its 
success  in  that  instance  is  appealed  to  in  favour  of 
adopting  it  in  the  more  important  case  of  voting 
for  a  member  of  the  Legislature.  But  the  two  cases 
appear  to  me  to  differ  in  the  point  on  which  the 
benefits  of  the  expedient  depend.  In  a  local  elec¬ 
tion  for  a  special  kind  of  administrative  business, 
which  consists  mainly  in  the  dispensation  of  a 
public  fund,  it  is  an  object  to  prevent  the  choice 
from  being  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  those  who 
actively  concern  themselves  about  it;  for  the  pub¬ 
lic  interest  which  attaches  to  the  election  being  of 
a  limited  kind,  and  in  most  cases  not  very  great 
in  degree,  the  disposition  to  make  themselves  busy 
in  the  matter  is  apt  to  be  in  a  great  measure  con 
fined  to  persons  who  hope  to  turn  their  activity 
to  their  own  private  advantage;  and  it  may  be  very 
desirable  to  render  the  intervention  of  other  peo¬ 
ple  as  little  onerous  to  them  as  possible,  if  only 
for  the  purpose  of  swamping  these  private  inter¬ 
ests.  But  when  the  matter  in  hand  is  the  great 
husiness  of  national  government,  in  which  every 
one  must  take  an  interest  who  cares  for  anything 
out  of  himself,  or  who  cares  even  for  himself  in¬ 
telligently,  it  is  much  rather  an  object  to  prevent 
those  from  voting  who  are  indifferent  to  the  sub¬ 
ject,  than  to  induce  them  to  vote  by  any  other 
means  than  that  of  awakening  their  dormant  minds. 
The  voter  who  does  not  care  enough  about  the 
election  to  go  to  the  poll,  is  the  very  man  who,  if 
he  can  vote  without  that  small  trouble,  will  give 
his  vote  to  the  first  person  who  asks  for  it,  or  on 
the  most  trifling  or  frivolous  inducement.  A  man 
who  does  not  care  whether  he  votes,  is  not  likely 
to  care  much  which  way  he  votes;  and  he  who  is 
in  that  state  of  mind  has  no  moral  right  to  vote  at 
all;  since,  if  he  does  so,  a  vote  which  is  not  the  ex- 


VOTING  397 

The  polling  places  should  be  so  numerous 
as  to  be  within  easy  reach  of  every  voter;  and 
no  expenses  of  conveyance,  at  the  cost  of  the 
candidate,  should  be  tolerated  under  any  pre¬ 
text.  The  infirm,  and  they  only  on  medical 
certificate,  should  have  the  right  of  claiming 
suitable  carriage  conveyance,  at  the  cost  of  the 
State,  or  of  the  locality.  Hustings,  poll  clerks, 
and  all  the  necessary  machinery  of  elections, 
should  be  at  the  public  charge.  Not  only 
the  candidate  should  not  be  required,  he 
should  not  be  permitted,  to  incur  any  but  a 
limited  and  trifling  expense  for  his  election. 
Mr.  Hare  thinks  it  desirable  that  a  sum  of  £50 
should  be  required  from  every  one  who  places 
his  name  on  the  list  of  candidates,  to  prevent 
persons  who  have  no  chance  of  success,  and  no 
real  intention  of  attempting  it.  from  becoming 
candidates  in  wantonness  or  from  mere  love 
of  notoriety,  and  perhaps  carrying  off  a  few 
votes  which  are  needed  for  the  return  of  more 
serious  aspirants.  There  is  one  expense  which 
a  candidate  or  his  supporters  cannot  help  incur¬ 
ring,  and  which  it  can  hardly  be  expected  that 
the  public  should  defray  for  every  one  who 
may  choose  to  demand  it;  that  of  making  his 
claims  known  to  the  electors,  by  advertise¬ 
ments,  placards,  and  circulars.  For  all  necessary 
expenses  of  this  kind  the  £50  proposed  by 
Mr.  Hare,  if  allowed  to  be  drawn  upon  for 
these  purposes  (it  might  be  made  £100  if  req¬ 
uisite),  ought  to  be  sufficient.  If  the  friends 
of  the  candidate  choose  to  go  to  expense  for 
committees  and  canvassing  there  are  no  means 
of  preventing  them;  but  such  expenses  out  of 
the  candidates’s  own  pocket,  or  any  expenses 
whatever  beyond  the  deposit  of  £50  (or  £100), 
should  be  illegal  and  punishable.  If  there  ap¬ 
peared  any  likelihood  that  opinion  would  re¬ 
fuse  to  connive  at  falsehood,  a  declaration  on 
oath  or  honour  should  be  required  from  every 
member  on  taking  his  seat  that  he  had  not  ex¬ 
pended,  nor  would  expend,  money  or  money’s 
worth  beyond  the  £50,  directly  or  indirectly, 
for  the  purposes  of  his  election;  and  if  the 
assertion  were  proved  to  be  false  or  the  pledge 
to  have  been  broken,  he  should  be  liable  to  the 
penalties  of  perjury. 

It  is  probable  that  those  penalties,  by  show¬ 
ing  that  the  Legislature  was  in  earnest,  would 
turn  the  course  of  opinion  in  the  same  direc¬ 
tion,  and  would  hinder  it  from  regarding,  as 

pression  of  a  conviction,  counts  for  as  much,  and 
goes  as  far  in  determining  the  result,  as  one  which 
represents  the  thoughts  and  purposes  of  a  life.”— 
Thoughts ,  etc.,  p.  39. 


398 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


it  has  hitherto  done,  this  most  serious  crime 
against  society  as  a  venial  peccadillo.  When 
once  this  effect  has  been  produced,  there  need 
be  no  doubt  that  the  declaration  on  oath  or 
honour  would  be  considered  binding.1  Opin¬ 
ion  tolerates  a  false  disclaimer,  only  when  it 
already  tolerates  the  thing  disclaimed/’  This 
is  notoriously  the  case  with  regard  to  electoral 
corruption.  There  has  never  yet  been,  among 
political  men,  any  real  and  serious  attempt  to 

1  Several  of  the  witnesses  before  the  Coinmiitee 
of  (he  House  of  Commons  in  i860.  011  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  the  Corrupt  Practices  Prevention  Act,  some 
of  them  of  great  practical  experience  in  election 
matters,  were  favourable  (either  absolutely  or  as 
a  last  resort)  to  the  principle  of  requiring  a  decla¬ 
ration  from  members  of  Parliament:  and  were  of 
opinion  that,  if  supported  by  penalties,  it  would 
he,  to  a  great  degree,  effectual.  ( Evidence ,  pp.  46, 
54-7.  67,  123,  198-202,  208.)  The  Chief  Commis¬ 
sioner  of  the  Wakefield  Inquiry  said  (in  reference 
certainly  to  a  dilferent  proposal),  “If  they  see  that 
the  Legislature  is  earnest  upon  the  subject,  the 
machinery  will  work.  ...  I  am  quite  sure  that  if 
some  personal  stigma  were  applied  upon  convic¬ 
tion  of  bribery,  it  would  change  the  current  of 
public  opinion”  (pp.  26  and  32).  A  distinguished 
member  of  the  Committee  (and  of  the  present 
Cabinet)  seemed  to  think  it  very  objectionable  to 
attach  the  penalties  of  perjury  to  a  merely  prom¬ 
issory  as  distinguished  from  an  assertory  oath;  but 
he  was  reminded,  that  the  oath  taken  by  a  witness 
in  a  court  of  justice  is  a  promissory  oath:  and  the 
rejoinder  (that  the  witness’s  promise  relates  to  an 
act  to  be  done  at  once,  while  the  member’s  would 
he  a  promise  for  all  future  time)  would  only  he 
to  the  purpose,  if  it  could  be  supposed  that  the 
swearer  might  forget  the  obligation  he  had  entered 
into,  or  could  possibly  violate  it  unawares:  con¬ 
tingencies  which,  in  a  case  like  the  present,  are 
out  of  the  question. 

A  more  substantial  difficulty  is  that  one  of  the 
forms  most  frequently  assumed  by  election  expend¬ 
iture  is  that  of  subscriptions  to  local  charities,  or 
other  local  objects;  and  it  would  be  a  strong  meas¬ 
ure  to  enact  that  money  should  not  be  given  in 
charity,  within  a  place,  by  the  member  for  it. 
When  such  subscriptions  aie  bona  fide ,  the  popu¬ 
larity  which  may  be  derived  from  them  is  an  ad¬ 
vantage  which  it  seems  hardly  possible  to  den)  to 
superior  riches,  but  the  greatest  part  of  the  mis¬ 
chief  consists  in  the  fact  that  money  so  contrib¬ 
uted  is  employed  in  bribery,  under  the  euphemis¬ 
tic  name  of  keeping  up  the  member’s  interest.  '1  o 
guard  against  this,  it  should  be  part  of  the  mem¬ 
ber's  promissory  declaiaiion,  that  all  sums  ex¬ 
pended  by  him  in  the  place,  or  for  any  purpose 
connected  with  it  or  with  any  of  its  inhabitants 
(with  the  exception  perhaps  of  his  own  hotel  ex¬ 
penses),  should  pass  through  tin*  hands  of  the  elec¬ 
tion  auditor,  and  be  by  him  (and  not  by  the  mem¬ 
ber  himself  or  his  friends)  applied  to  its  declared 
purpose. 

Hie  principle  of  making  all  lawlul  expenses  of 
elections  a  charge  not  upon  the  candidate,  but 
upon  the  locality,  was  upheld  by  two  of  the  best 
witnesses  (pp.  20,  65-70,  277). 


prevent  bribery,  because  there  has  been  no 
real  desire  that  elections  should  not  be  costly. 
Their  costliness  is  an  advantage  to  those  who 
can  afford  the  expense,  by  excluding  a  multi¬ 
tude  of  competitors;  and  anything,  however 
noxious,  is  cherished  as  having  a  conservative 
tendency  if  it  limits  the  access  to  Parliament 
to  rich  men.  This  is  a  rooted  feeling  among  our 
legislators  of  both  political  parties,  and  is  al¬ 
most  the  only  point  on  which  I  believe  them 
to  be  really  ill-intentioned.  They  care  compara¬ 
tively  little  who  votes,  as  long  as  they  feel  as¬ 
sured  that  none  but  persons  of  their  own  class 
can  be  voted  for.  They  know  that  they  can  rely 
on  the  fellow-feeling  of  one  of  their  class  with 
another,  while  the  subservience  of  nouveau x 
enrichis,  who  are  knocking  at  the  door  of  the 
class,  is  a  still  surer  reliance:  and  that  nothing 
very  hostile  to  the  class  interests  or  feelings  of 
the  rich  need  be  apprehended  under  the 
most  democratic  suffrage  as  long  as  demo¬ 
cratic  persons  can  be  prevented  from  being 
elected  to  Parliament.  But,  even  from  their 
own  point  of  view,  this  balancing  of  evil  by 
evil,  instead  of  combining  good  with  good,  is 
a  wretched  policy.  The  object  should  be  to 
bring  together  the  best  members  of  both  class¬ 
es,  under  such  a  tenure  as  shall  induce  them  to 
lay  aside  their  class  preferences,  and  pursue 
jointly  the  path  traced  by  the  common  inter¬ 
est:  instead  of  allowing  the  class  feelings  of  the 
Many  to  have  full  swing  in  the  constituencies, 
subject  to  die  impediment  of  having  to  act 
through  persons  imbued  with  the  class  feelings 
of  the  Few. 

There  is  scarcely  any  mode  in  which  politi¬ 
cal  institutions  are  more  morally  mischievous 
—work  greater  evil  through  their  spirit— than 
by  representing  political  functions  as  a  favour 
to  be  conferred,  a  thing  which  the  depositary 
is  to  ask  for  as  desiring  it  for  himself,  and  even 
pay  for  as  if  it  were  designed  for  his  pecuniary 
benefit.  Men  are  not  fond  of  paying  large  sums 
for  leave  to  perform  a  laborious  duty.  Plato 
had  a  much  juster  view  of  the  conditions  of 
good  government  when  lie  asserted  that  the 
persons  who  should  lie  sought  out  to  be  invest¬ 
ed  with  political  power  are  those  who  are  per¬ 
sonally  most  averse  to  it.  and  that  the  only 
motive  which  can  be  relied  on  for  inducing 
the  fittest  men  to  take  upon  themselves  the 
toils  of  government  is  the  fear  of  being  gov¬ 
erned  by  worse  men.  What  must  an  elector 
think,  when  he  sees  three  or  four  gentlemen, 
none  of  them  previously  observed  to  be  lavish 
of  their  money  on  projects  of  disinterested 


MODE  OF 

beneficence,  vying  with  one  another  in  the 
sums  they  expend  to  be  enabled  to  write  M.P. 
after  their  names?  Is  it  likely  he  will  suppose 
that  it  is  for  h is  interest  they  incur  all  this  cost? 
And  if  he  forms  an  uncomplimentary  opinion 
of  their  part  in  the  affair,  what  moral  obliga¬ 
tion  is  he  likely  to  feel  as  to  his  own?  Politi¬ 
cians  are  fond  of  treating  it  as  the  dream  of 
enthusiasts  that  the  electoral  body  will  ever 
be  uncorrupt:  truly  enough,  until  they  are 
willing  to  become  so  themselves:  for  the  elec¬ 
tors,  assuredly,  will  take  their  moral  tone  from 
the  candidates.  So  long  as  the  elected  member, 
in  any  shape  or  manner,  pays  for  his  seat,  all 
endeavours  will  fail  to  make  the  business  of 
election  anything  but  a  selfish  bargain  on  all 
sides.  “So  long  as  the  candidate  himself,  and 
the  customs  of  the  world,  seem  to  regard  the 
function  of  a  member  of  Parliament  less  as  a 
duty  to  be  discharged  than  a  personal  favour 
to  be  solicited,  no  effort  will  avail  to  implant 
in  an  ordinary  voter  the  feeling  that  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  a  member  of  Parliament  is  also  a  matter 
of  duty,  and  that  he  is  not  at  liberty  to  bestow 
his  vote  on  any  other  consideration  than  that 
of  personal  fitness.” 

The  same  principle  which  demands  that  no 
pavmentof  money  for  election  purposes  should 
be  either  required  or  tolerated  on  the  part  of 
the  person  elected  dictates  another  conclusion, 
apparently  of  contrary  tendency,  but  really 
directed  to  the  same  object.  It  negatives  what 
has  often  been  proposed  as  a  means  of  render¬ 
ing  Parliament  accessible  to  persons  of  all 
ranks  and  circumstances;  the  payment  of  mem¬ 
bers  of  Parliament.  If.  as  in  some  of  our  colon¬ 
ies,  there  are  scarcely  any  fit  persons  who  can 
afford  to  attend  to  an  unpaid  occupation,  the 
payment  should  be  an  indemnity  for  loss  of 
time  or  money,  not  a  salary.  The  greater  lati¬ 
tude  of  choice  which  a  salary  would  give  is  an 
illusory  advantage.  No  remuneration  which 
any  one  would  think  of  attaching  to  the  post 
would  attract  to  it  those  who  were  seriously 
engaged  in  other  lucrative  professions  with  a 
prospect  of  succeeding  in  them.  The  business 
of  a  member  of  Parliament  would  therefore 
become  an  occupation  in  itself;  carried  on, 
like  other  professions,  with  a  view  chiefly  to 
its  pecuniary  returns,  and  under  the  demoralis¬ 
ing  influences  of  an  occupation  essentially  pre¬ 
carious.  It  would  become  an  object  of  desire 
to  adventurers  of  a  low  class;  and  658  persons 
in  possession,  with  ten  or  twenty  times  as  many 
in  expectancy,  would  be  incessantly  bidding 


VOTING  399 

to  attract  or  retain  the  suffrages  of  the  electors, 
by  promising  all  things,  honest  or  dishonest, 
possible  or  impossible,  and  rivalling  each  other 
in  pandering  to  the  meanest  feelings  and  most 
ignorant  prejudices  of  the  vulgarest  part  ol 
the  crowd.  The  auction  between  Cleon  and  the 
sausage-seller  in  Aristophanes  is  a  fair  carica¬ 
ture  of  what  would  be  always  going  on.  Such 
an  institution  would  be  a  perpetual  blister 
applied  to  the  most  peccant  parts  of  human 
nature.  It  amounts  to  offering  658  prizes  for 
the  most  successful  flatterer,  the  most  adroit 
misleader,  of  a  body  of  his  fellow-countrymen. 
Under  no  despotism  has  there  been  such  an 
organised  system  of  tillage  for  raising  a  rich 
crop  of  vicious  courtiership.1  When,  by  reason 
of  pre-eminent  qualifications  (as  may  at  any 
time  happen  to  be  the  case),  it  is  desirable  that 
a  person  entirely  without  independent  means, 
either  derived  from  property  or  from  a  trade  or 
profession,  should  be  brought  into  Parliament 
to  render  services  which  no  other  person  accessi¬ 
ble  can  render  as  well,  there  is  the  resource  of 
a  public  subscription;  he  may  be  supported 
while  in  Parliament,  like  Andrew  Marvell,  by 
the  contributions  of  his  constituents.  1  his 
mode  is  unobjectionable  for  such  an  honour 
will  never  be  paid  to  mere  subserviency:  bodies 
of  men  do  not  care  so  much  for  the  difference 
between  one  sycophant  and  another  as  to  go 
to  the  expense  of  his  maintenance  in  order  to 
be  flattered  by  that  particular  individual.  Such 
a  support  will  only  be  given  in  consideration 
of  striking  and  impressive  personal  qualities, 
which,  though  no  absolute  proof  of  fitness  to  be 
a  national  representative,  are  some  presump¬ 
tion  of  it,  and,  at  all  events,  some  guarantee 
for  the  possession  of  an  independent  opinion 
and  will. 

14*As  Mr.  Lorimer  remarks,  by  creating  a  pecu¬ 
niary  inducement  to  persons  of  the  lowest  class  to 
devote  themselves  to  public  a  Hairs,  the  calling  of 
the  demagogue  would  be  formally  inaugurated. 
Nothing  is  more  to  be  deprecated  than  making  it 
the  private  interest  of  a  number  of  active  persons 
to  urge  the  form  of  government  in  the  direction 
of  its  natural  perversion.  The  indications  which 
either  a  multitude  or  an  individual  can  give,  when 
merely  left  to  their  own  weaknesses,  afford  but  a 
faint  idea  of  what  those  weaknesses  would  become 
when  played  upon  by  a  thousand  flatterers.  If 
there  were  658  places  of  certain,  however  moder¬ 
ate,  emolument,  to  be  gained  by  persuading  the 
multitude  that  ignorance  is  as  good  as  knowledge, 
and  better,  it  is  terrible  odds  that  they  would  be¬ 
lieve  and  act  upon  the  lesson.”— (Article  in  bra- 
ser’s Magazine ior April  1859, headed  Recent  Writ 
ers  on  Reform.”) 


400 


REPRESEX  TA  TI  VE  GO  VERXMEX  T 

Chapter  u 


Of  the  Duration  of  Parliaments 
After  how  long  a  term  should  members  of 
Parliament  be  subject  to  re-election?  The  prin¬ 
ciples  involved  are  here  very  obvious;  the  diffi¬ 
culty  lies  in  their  application.  On  the  one 
hand,  the  member  ought  not  to  have  so  long  a 
tenure  of  his  seat  as  to  make  him  forget  his 
responsibility,  take  his  duties  easily,  conduct 
them  with  a  view  to  his  own  personal  advan¬ 
tage,  or  neglect  those  free  and  public  confer¬ 
ences  with  his  constituents  which,  whether  he 
agrees  or  differs  with  them,  are  one  of  the 
benefits  of  representative  government.  On  the 
other  hand,  he  should  have  such  a  term  of 
office  to  look  forward  to  as  will  enable  him  to 
be  judged,  not  by  a  single  act,  but  by  his  course 
of  action.  It  is  important  that  he  should  have 
the  greatest  latitude  of  individual  opinion  and 
discretion  compatible  with  the  popular  con¬ 
trol  essential  to  free  government;  and  for  this 
purpose  it  is  necessary  that  the  control  should 
be  exercised,  as  in  any  case  it  is  best  exercised, 
after  sufficient  time  has  been  given  him  to  show 
all  the  qualities  he  possesses,  and  to  prove  that 
there  is  some  other  way  than  that  of  a  mere 
obedient  voter  and  advocate  of  their  opinions, 
bv  which  he  can  render  himself  in  the  eyes  of 
his  constituents  a  desirable  and  creditable  rep¬ 
resentative. 

It  is  impossible  to  fix,  by  any  universal  rule, 
the  boundary  between  these  principles.  Where 
the  democratic  power  in  the  constitution  is 
weak  or  over-passive,  and  requires  stimula¬ 
tion;  where  the  representative,  on  leaving  his 
constituents,  enters  at  once  into  a  courtly  or 
aristocratic  atmosphere,  whose  influences  all 
tend  to  deflect  his  course  into  a  dillerent  direc¬ 
tion  from  the  popular  one,  to  tone  down  any 
democratic  feelings  which  he  may  have  brought 
with  him,  and  make  him  forget  the  wishes  and 
grow  cool  to  the  interests  of  those  who  chose 
him-the  obligation  of  a  frequent  return  to 
them  for  a  renewal  of  his  commission  is  in¬ 
dispensable  to  keeping  his  temper  and  char¬ 
acter  up  to  the  riglit  mark.  Even  three  years, 
in  such  circumstances,  are  almost  too  long  a 
period;  and  any  longer  term  is  absolutely  in¬ 
admissible.  Where,  on  the  contrary,  democracy 
is  the  ascendant  power,  and  still  tends  to  in¬ 
crease,  requiring  rather  to  be  moderated  in  its 
exercise  than  encouraged  to  any  abnormal  ac¬ 
tivity;  where  unbounded  publicity,  and  an 
ever  present  newspaper  press,  give  the  repre¬ 
sentative  assurance  that  his  ever)  act  will  be 


immediate!)  known,  discussed,  and  judged  by 
his  constituents,  and  that  he  is  always  either 
gaining  or  losing  ground  in  their  estimation; 
while  by  the  same  means  the  influence  of  their 
sentiments,  and  all  other  democratic  influ¬ 
ences,  are  kept  constantly  alive  and  active  in 
his  own  mind— less  than  five  years  would  hard¬ 
ly  be  a  sufficient  period  to  prevent  timid  sub¬ 
serviency.  The  change  which  has  taken  place 
in  English  politics  as  to  all  these  features  ex¬ 
plains  why  annual  Parliaments,  which  forty 
years  ago  stood  prominently  in  front  of  the 
creed  of  the  more  advanced  reformers,  are  so 
little  cared  for  and  so  seldom  heard  of  at  pres¬ 
ent.  It  deserves  consideration  that,  whether  the 
term  is  short  or  long,  during  the  last  year  of  it 
the  members  are  in  position  in  which  they 
would  always  be  if  Parliaments  were  annual: 
so  that  if  the  term  were  very  brief,  there  would 
virtually  be  annual  Parliaments  during  a  great 
proportion  of  all  time.  As  things  now  are,  the 
period  of  seven  years,  though  of  unnecessary 
length,  is  hardly  worth  altering  for  any  benefit 
likely  to  be  produced;  especially  since  the  pos¬ 
sibility,  always  impending,  of  an  earlier  dis¬ 
solution  keeps  the  motives  for  standing  well 
with  constituents  always  before  the  member’s 
eyes. 

Whatever  may  be  the  term  most  eligible  for 
the  duration  of  the  mandate,  it  might  seem 
natural  that  the  indhidual  member  should  va¬ 
cate  his  seat  at  the  expiration  of  that  term  from 
the  day  of  his  election,  and  that  there  should 
be  no  general  renewal  of  the  whole  House.  A 
great  deal  might  be  said  for  this  system  if  there 
were  any  practical  object  in  recommending  it. 
but  it  is  condemned  by  much  stronger  reasons 
than  can  be  alleged  in  its  support.  One  is,  that 
there  would  be  no  means  of  promptly  getting 
rid  of  a  majority  which  had  pursued  a  course 
offensive  to  the  nation.  The  certainty  of  a  gen¬ 
eral  election  after  a  limited,  which  would  often 
be  a  nearly  expired,  period,  and  the  possibility 
of  it  at  any  time  when  the  minister  either  de¬ 
sires  it  lor  li is  own  sake,  or  thinks  that  it  would 
make  him  popular  with  the  country,  tend  to 
prevent  that  wide  divergence  between  the  feel¬ 
ings  of  the  assembly  and  those  of  the  constitu¬ 
ency,  which  might  subsist  indefinitely  if  the 
majority  of  the  1  louse  had  always  several  years 
of  their  term  still  to  run— if  it  received  new 
infusions  drop  by  drop,  which  would  be  more 
likely  to  assume  than  to  modif)  the  qualities 
of  the  mass  they  were  joined  to.  It  is  as  essen¬ 
tial  that  the  general  sense  of  the  House  should 
accord  in  the  main  with  that  of  the  nation  as 


PLEDGES  401 


it  is  that  distinguished  individuals  should  be 
able,  without  forfeiting  their  seats,  to  give 
free  utterance  to  the  most  unpopular  senti¬ 
ments.  There  is  another  reason,  of  much  weight, 
against  the  gradual  and  partial  renewal  of  a 
representative  assembly.  It  is  useful  that  there 
should  be  a  periodical  general  muster  of  oppos¬ 
ing  forces,  to  gauge  the  state  of  the  national 
mind,  and  ascertain,  beyond  dispute,  the  rela¬ 
tive  strength  of  different  parties  and  opinions. 
This  is  not  done  conclusively  by  any  partial 
renewal,  even  where,  as  in  some  of  the  French 
constitutions,  a  large  fractions  fifth  or  a  third, 
go  out  at  once. 

The  reasons  for  allowing  to  the  executive 
the  power  of  dissolution  will  be  considered  in 
a  subsequent  chapter,  relating  to  the  constitu¬ 
tion  and  functions  of  the  Executive  in  a  repre¬ 
sentative  government. 

Chapter  12 

Ought  Pledges  to  be  Required  from 
Members  of  Parliament? 

Should  a  member  of  the  legislature  be  bound 
by  the  instructions  of  his  constituents?  Should 
he  be  the  organ  of  their  sentiments,  or  of  his 
own?  their  ambassador  to  a  congress,  or  their 
professional  agent,  empowered  not  only  to  act 
for  them,  but  to  judge  for  them  what  ought 
to  be  done?  These  two  theories  of  the  duty  of 
a  legislator  in  a  representative  government 
have  each  its  supporters,  and  each  is  the  recog¬ 
nised  doctrine  of  some  representative  govern¬ 
ments.  In  the  Dutch  United  Provinces,  the 
members  of  the  States  General  were  mere  dele¬ 
gates;  and  to  such  a  length  was  the  doctrine 
carried,  that  when  any  important  question 
arose  which  had  not  been  provided  for  in  their 
instructions,  they  had  to  refer  back  to  their 
constituents,  exactly  as  an  ambassador  does  to 
the  government  from  which  he  is  accredited. 
In  this  and  most  other  countries  which  possess 
representative  constitutions,  law  and  custom 
warrant  a  member  of  Parliament  in  voting  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  opinion  of  right,  however  differ¬ 
ent  from  that  of  his  constituents:  but  there  is 
a  floating  notion  of  the  opposite  kind,  which 
has  considerable  practical  operation  on  many 
minds,  even  of  members  of  Parliament,  and 
often  makes  them,  independently  of  desire  for 
popularity,  or  concern  for  their  re-election, 
feel  bound  in  conscience  to  let  their  conduct, 
on  questions  on  w'hich  their  constituents  have 
a  decided  opinion,  be  the  expression  of  that 
opinion  rather  than  of  their  own.  Abstractedly 


from  positive  law,  and  from  the  historical  tra¬ 
ditions  of  any  particular  people,  which  of  these 
notions  of  the  duty  of  a  representative  is  the 
true  one? 

Unlike  the  questions  which  we  have  hither¬ 
to  treated,  this  is  not  a  question  of  constitu¬ 
tional  legislation,  but  of  what  may  more  prop¬ 
erly  be  called  constitutional  morality— the  eth¬ 
ics  of  representative  government.  It  does  not  so 
much  concern  institutions,  as  the  temper  of 
mind  which  the  electors  ought  to  bring  to  the 
discharge  of  their  functions;  the  ideas  which 
should  prevail  as  to  the  moral  duties  of  an 
elector.  For,  let  the  system  of  representation 
be  what  it  may,  it  will  be  converted  into  one 
of  mere  delegation  if  the  electors  so  choose. 
As  long  as  they  are  free  not  to  vote,  and  free 
to  vote  as  they  like,  they  cannot  be  prevented 
from  making  their  vote  depend  on  any  condi¬ 
tion  they  think  fit  to  annex  to  it.  By  refusing 
to  elect  any  one  w7ho  will  not  pledge  himself 
to  all  their  opinions,  and  even,  if  they  please, 
to  consult  with  them  before  voting  on  any  im¬ 
portant  subject  not  foreseen,  they  can  reduce 
their  representative  to  their  mere  mouthpiece, 
or  compel  him  in  honour,  wdien  no  longer  will¬ 
ing  to  act  in  that  capacity,  to  resign  his  seat. 
And  since  they  have  the  power  of  doing  this, 
the  theory  of  the  Constitution  ought  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  they  will  wish  to  do  it;  since  the 
very  principle  of  constitutional  government  re¬ 
quires  it  to  be  assumed  that  political  power 
will  be  abused  to  promote  the  particular  pur¬ 
poses  of  the  holder;  not  because  it  always  is 
so,  but  because  such  is  the  natural  tendency  of 
things,  to  guard  against  which  is  the  especial 
use  of  free  institutions.  However  wrong,  there¬ 
fore,  or  however  foolish,  we  may  think  it  in 
the  electors  to  convert  their  representative  into 
a  delegate,  that  stretch  of  the  electoral  privi¬ 
lege  being  a  natural  and  not  improbable  one, 
the  same  precautions  ought  to  be  taken  as  if 
it  were  certain.  We  may  hope  that  the  elec¬ 
tors  will  not  act  on  this  notion  of  the  use  of 
the  suffrage;  but  a  representative  government 
needs  to  be  so  framed  that,  even  if  they  do, 
they  shall  not  be  able  to  effect  what  ought 
not  to  be  in  the  power  of  any  body  of  persons 
—class  legislation  for  their  own  benefit. 

When  it  is  said  that  the  question  is  only  one 
of  political  morality,  this  does  not  extenuate 
its  importance.  Questions  of  constitutional  mo¬ 
rality  are  of  no  less  practical  moment  than 
those  relating  to  the  constitution  itself.  The 
very  existence  of  some  governments,  and  all 
that  renders  others  endurable,  rests  on  the  prac- 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


402 

tical  observance  of  doctrines  of  constitutional 
morality;  traditional  notions  in  the  minds  of 
the  several  con st i tu ted  a u th or i  t i es,  wh i ch  mod  1  - 
fy  the  use  that  might  otherwise  be  made  of 
their  powers.  In  unbalanced  governments- 
pure  monarchy,  pure  aristocracy,  pure  democ¬ 
racy-such  maxims  are  the  only  barrier  which 
restrains  the  government  from  the  utmost  ex¬ 
cesses  in  the  direction  of  its  characteristic  tend¬ 
ency  In  imperfectly  balanced  governments, 
where  some  attempt  is  made  to  set  constitu¬ 
tional  limits  to  the  impulses  of  the  strongest 
power,  but  where  that  power  is  strong  enough 
to  overstep  them  with  at  least  temporary  im¬ 
punity,  it  is  only  by  doctrines  of  constitutional 
morality,  recognised  and  sustained  by  opinion, 
that  any  regard  at  all  is  preserved  for  the 
checks  and  limitations  of  the  constitution.  In 
well-balanced  governments,  in  which  the  su¬ 
preme  power  is  divided,  and  each  sharer  is  pro¬ 
tected  against  the  usurpations  of  the  others  in 
the  only  manner  possible— namely,  by  being 
armed  for  defence  with  weapons  as  strong  as 
the  others  can  wield  for  attack— the  govern¬ 
ment  can  only  be  carried  on  by  forbearance 
on  all  sides  to  exercise  those  extreme  powers, 
unless  provoked  by  conduct  equally  extreme 
on  the  part  of  some  other  sharer  of  power:  and 
in  this  case  we  may  truly  say  that  only  by  the 
regard  paid  to  maxims  of  constitutional  mo¬ 
rality  is  the  constitution  kept  in  existence.  The 
question  of  pledges  is  not  one  of  those  which 
vitally  concern  the  existence  of  representative 
governments;  but  it  is  very  material  to  their 
beneficial  operation.  The  laws  cannot  prescribe 
to  the  electors  the  principles  by  which  they  shall 
direct  their  choice;  but  it  makes  a  great  prac¬ 
tical  difference  by  what  principles  they  think 
they  ought  to  direct  it.  And  the  whole  of 
that  great  question  is  involved  in  the  inquiry 
whether  they  should  make  it  a  condition  that 
the  representative  shall  adhere  to  certain  opin¬ 
ions  laid  down  for  him  by  his  constituents. 

No  reader  of  this  treatise  can  doubt  what 
cone  lusion,  as  to  this  matter,  results  from  the 
general  principles  which  it  prolcsses.  We  have 
from  the  fust  allmued,  and  unveryingly  kept 
in  view,  the  co-equal  importance  of  two  great 
resquisites  of  government:  responsibility  10 
those  lor  whose  benefit  political  power  ought 
to  be,  and  always  professes  to  be,  employed; 
and  jointly  therewith  to  obtain,  in  the  greatest 
measure  possible,  lor  the  func  tion  of  govern¬ 
ment  the  benefits  of  superior  intellect,  trained 
In  long  meditation  and  practical  discipline  to 
that  special  task.  If  this  second  purpose  is 


worth  attaining,  it  is  worth  the  necessary  price. 
Superior  powers  of  mind  and  profound  study 
are  of  no  use  if  they  do  not  sometimes  lead  a 
person  to  different  conclusions  from  those 
which  are  formed  by  ordinary  powers  of  mind 
without  study:  and  if  it  be  an  object  to  possess 
representatives  in  any  intellectual  respect  su¬ 
perior  to  average  electors,  it  must  be  counted 
upon  that  the  representative  will  sometimes 
differ  in  opinion  from  the  majority  of  his  con¬ 
stituents,  and  that  when  he  does,  his  opinion 
will  be  the  often est  right  of  the  two.  It  follows 
that  the  electors  will  not  do  wisely  if  they  in¬ 
sist  on  absolute  conformity  to  their  opinions  as 
the  condition  of  his  retaining  his  seat. 

The  principle  is,  thus  far.  obvious:  but  there 
are  real  difficulties  in  its  application:  and  we 
will  begin  by  stating  them  in  their  greatest 
force.  It  it  is  important  that  the  electors  should 
choose  a  representative  more  highly  instructed 
than  themselves,  it  is  no  less  necessary  that  this 
wiser  man  should  be  responsible  to  them;  in 
other  words,  they  are  the  judges  of  the  manner 
in  which  he  fulfils  his  trust:  and  how  are  they 
to  judge,  except  by  the  standard  of  their  own 
opinions?  How  are  they  even  to  select  him  in 
the  first  instance  but  by  the  same  standard?  It 
will  not  do  to  choose  bv  mere  brilliancy— by 
superiority  of  showy  talent.  The  tests  by  which 
an  ordinary  man  can  judge  beforehand  of 
mere  ability  arc  very  imperfect:  such  as  they 
arc,  they  have  almost  exclusive  reference  to 
the  arts  of  expression,  and  little  or  none  to  the 
worth  of  what  is  expressed.  The  latter  cannot 
be  inferred  from  the  former:  and  if  the  electors 
arc  to  put  their  own  opinions  in  abeyance, 
what  criterion  remains  to  them  of  the  ability 
to  govern  well?  Neither,  if  they  could  ascer¬ 
tain,  even  infallibly,  the  ablest  man,  ought 
they  to  allow  him  altogether  to  judge  for  them, 
without  any  reference  to  their  own  opinions. 
The  ablest  candidate  may  he  a  Tory  and  the 
electors  Liberals;  ora  Liberal  and  they  may  he 
Tories.  The  political  questions  of  the  day  may 
he  Church  questions,  and  he  may  be  a  High 
Churchman  or  a  Rationalist,  while  they  may 
be  Dissenters  or  Evangelicals;  and  vice  versa. 
1 1  is  abilities,  in  these  cases,  might  only  enable 
him  to  go  greater  lengths,  and  act  with  greatci 
effect,  in  what  they  may  const  ientiously  believe 
to  be  a  wrong  course;  and  they  may  he  bound, 
bv  their  sincere  convictions,  to  tliink  it  moic 
important  that  their  representative  should  be 
kept,  on  these  points,  to  what  they  deem  the 
dictate  of  duty,  than  that  they  should  be  repre¬ 
sented  by  a  person  of  more  than  average  abil- 


PLEDGES  4°3 


ities.  They  may  also  have  to  consider,  not  sole¬ 
ly  how  they  can  be  most  ably  represented,  but 
how  their  particular  moral  position  and  men¬ 
tal  point  of  view  shall  be  represented  at  all. 

The  influence  of  every  mode  of  thinking 
which  is  shared  by  numbers  ought  to  be  felt 
in  the  legislature:  and  the  constitution  being 
supposed  to  have  made  due  provision  that 
other  and  conflicting  modes  of  thinking  shall 
be  represented  likewise,  to  secure  the  proper 
representation  for  their  own  mode  may  be  the 
most  important  matter  which  the  electors  on 
the  particular  occasion  have  to  attend  to.  In 
some  cases,  too,  it  may  be  necessary  that  the 
representative  should  have  his  hands  tied,  to 
keep  him  true  to  their  interest,  or  rather  to  the 
public  interest  as  they  conceive  it.  This  would 
not  be  needful  under  a  political  system  which 
assured  them  an  indefinite  choice  of  honest  and 
unprejudiced  candidates;  but  under  the  exist¬ 
ing  system,  in  which  the  electors  are  almost  al¬ 
ways  obliged,  by  the  expenses  of  election  and 
the  general  circumstances  of  society,  to  select 
their  representative  from  persons  of  a  station 
in  life  widely  different  from  theirs,  and  having 
a  different  class-interest,  who  will  affirm  that 
they  ought  to  abandon  themselves  to  his  dis¬ 
cretion?  Can  we  blame  an  elector  of  the  poorer 
classes,  who  has  only  the  choice  among  two 
or  three  rich  men,  for  requiring  from  the  one 
he  votes  for  a  pledge  to  those  measures  which 
he  considers  as  a  test  of  emancipation  from  the 
class-interests  of  the  rich?  It  moreover  always 
happens  to  some  members  of  the  electoral 
body  to  be  obliged  to  accept  the  representative 
selected  by  a  majority  of  their  own  side.  But 
though  a  candidate  of  their  own  choosing 
would  have  no  chance,  their  votes  may  be  nec¬ 
essary  to  the  success  of  the  one  chosen  for  them; 
and  their  only  means  of  exerting  their  share 
of  influence  on  his  subsequent  conduct,  may 
be  to  make  their  support  of  him  dependent  on 
his  pledging  himself  to  certain  conditions. 

These  considerations  and  counter-considera¬ 
tions  are  so  intimately  interwoven  with  one 
another;  it  is  so  important  that  the  electors 
should  choose  as  their  representatives  wiser 
men  than  themselves,  and  should  consent  to 
be  governed  according  to  that  superior  wis¬ 
dom,  while  it  is  impossible  that  conformity  to 
their  own  opinions,  when  they  have  opinions, 
should  not  enter  largely  into  their  judgment 
as  to  who  possesses  the  wisdom,  and  how  far 
its  presumed  possessor  has  verified  the  pre¬ 
sumption  by  his  conduct;  that  it  seems  quite 
impracticable  to  lay  down  for  the  elector  any 


positive  rule  of  duty:  and  the  result  will  de¬ 
pend,  less  on  any  exact  prescription,  or  author¬ 
itative  doctrine  of  political  morality,  than  on 
the  general  tone  of  mind  of  the  electoral  body, 
in  respect  to  the  important  requisite  of  defer¬ 
ence  to  mental  superiority.  Individuals,  and 
peoples,  who  are  acutely  sensible  of  the  value 
of  superior  wisdom,  are  likely  to  recognise  it, 
where  it  exists,  by  other  signs  than  thinking 
exactly  as  they  do,  and  even  in  spite  of  con¬ 
siderable  differences  of  opinion:  and  when 
they  have  recognised  it  they  will  be  far  too  de¬ 
sirous  to  secure  it.  at  any  admissible  cost,  to 
be  prone  to  impose  their  own  opinion  as  a  law 
upon  persons  whom  they  look  up  to  as  wiser 
than  themselves.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
a  character  of  mind  which  does  not  look  up 
to  any  one;  which  thinks  no  other  person’s 
opinion  much  better  than  its  own,  or  nearly 
so  good  as  that  of  a  hundred  or  a  thousand 
persons  like  itself.  Where  this  is  the  turn  of 
mind  of  the  electors,  they  will  elect  no  one 
who  is  not,  or  at  least  who  does  not  profess  to 
be,  the  image  of  their  own  sentiments,  and 
will  continue  him  no  longer  than  while  he  re¬ 
flects  those  sentiments  in  his  conduct:  and  all 
aspirants  to  political  honours  will  endeavour, 
as  Plato  says  in  the  “Gorgias,”  to  fashion  them¬ 
selves  after  the  model  of  the  Demos,  and  make 
themselves  as  like  to  it  as  possible.  It  cannot 
be  denied  that  a  complete  democracy  has  a 
strong  tendency  to  cast  the  sentiments  of  the 
electors  in  this  mould.  Democracy  is  not  favour¬ 
able  to  the  reverential  spirit.  That  it  destroys 
reverence  for  mere  social  position  must  be 
counted  among  the  good,  not  the  bad  part  of 
its  influences;  though  by  doing  this  it  closes 
the  principal  school  of  reverence  (as  to  merely 
human  relations)  which  exists  in  society.  But 
also  democracy,  in  its  very  essence,  insists  so 
much  more  forcibly  on  the  things  in  which  all 
are  entitled  to  be  considered  equally,  than  on 
those  in  which  one  person  is  entitled  to  more 
consideration  than  another,  that  respect  for 
even  personal  superiority  is  likely  to  be  below 
the  mark.  It  is  for  this,  among  other  reasons,  1 
hold  it  of  so  much  importance  that  the  insti¬ 
tutions  of  the  country  should  stamp  the  opin¬ 
ions  of  persons  of  a  more  educated  class  as  en¬ 
titled  to  greater  weight  than  those  of  the  less 
educated:  and  I  should  still  contend  for  assign¬ 
ing  plurality  of  votes  to  authenticated  supe¬ 
riority  of  education,  were  it  only  to  give  the 
tone  to  public  feeling,  irrespective  of  any  di¬ 
rect  political  consequences. 

When  there  does  exist  in  the  electoral  body 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


4°4 

an  adequate  sense  of  the  extraordinary  differ¬ 
ence  in  value  between  one  person  and  another, 
they  will  not  lack  signs  by  which  to  distinguish 
the  persons  whose  worth  for  their  purposes  is 
the  greatest.  Actual  public  services  will  natu- 
rallv  be  the  foremost  indication:  to  have  filled 
posts  of  magnitude,  and  done  important  things 
in  them,  of  which  the  wisdom  has  been  justi¬ 
fied  by  the  results;  to  have  been  the  author  of 
measures  which  appear  from  their  effects  to 
have  been  wisely  planned;  to  have  made  pre¬ 
dictions  which  have  been  often  verified  by  the 
event,  seldom  or  never  falsified  by  it;  to  have 
given  advice,  which  when  taken  has  been  fol¬ 
lowed  by  good  consequences,  when  neglected, 
by  bad.  There  isdoubtlessa  large  portion  of  un¬ 
certainty  in  these  signs  of  wisdom;  but  we  are 
seeking  for  such  as  can  be  applied  by  persons 
of  ordinary  discernment.  They  will  do  well 
not  to  rely  much  on  any  one  indication,  unless 
corroborated  by  the  rest;  and,  in  their  estima¬ 
tion  of  the  success  or  merit  of  any  practical 
effort,  to  lay  great  stress  on  the  general  opinion 
of  disinterested  persons  conversant  with  the 
subject  matter.  The  tests  which  1  have  spoken 
of  are  only  applicable  to  tried  men;  among 
whom  must  be  reckoned  those  who,  though 
untried  practically,  have  been  tried  specula¬ 
tively;  who,  in  public  speech  or  in  print,  have 
discussed  public  affairs  in  a  manner  which 
proves  that  they  have  given  serious  study  to 
them.  Such  persons  may,  in  the  mere  character 
of  political  thinkers,  have  exhibited  a  con¬ 
siderable  amount  of  the  same  titles  to  confi¬ 
dence  as  those  who  have  been  proved  in  the 
position  of  practical  statesmen.  When  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  to  choose  persons  wholly  untried,  the 
best  criteria  arc,  reputation  for  ability  among 
those  who  personally  know'  them,  and  the  con¬ 
fidence  placed  and  recommendations  given  by 
persons  already  looked  up  to.  By  tests  like 
these,  constituencies  w'ho  sufficiently  value 
mental  ability,  and  eagerly  seek  for  it,  will 
generally  succeed  in  obtaining  men  beyond 
mediocrity,  and  often  men  w  hom  they  can  trust 
to  carry  on  public  affairs  according  to  their  un¬ 
fettered  judgment;  to  whom  it  would  be  an 
affront  to  require  that  they  should  give  up  that 
judgment  at  the  behest  of  their  inferiors  in 
knowledge. 

If  such  persons,  honestly  sought,  are  not  to 
be  found,  then  indeed  the  electors  are  justi¬ 
fied  in  taking  other  precautions;  for  they  can¬ 
not  be  expected  to  postpone  their  particular 
opinions,  unless  in  order  that  the)  may  be 
served  by  a  person  of  superior  knowledge  to 


their  own.  They  would  do  well,  indeed,  even 
then,  to  remember,  that  when  once  chosen,  the 
representative,  if  he  devotes  himself  to  his 
duty,  has  greater  opportunities  of  correcting 
an  original  false  judgment  than  fall  to  the  lot 
of  most  of  his  constituents;  a  consideration 
w  hich  generally  ought  to  prevent  them  (unless 
compelled  by  necessity  to  choose  some  one 
whose  impartiality  they  do  not  fully  trust)  from 
exacting  a  pledge  not  to  change  his  opinion, 
or,  if  he  does,  to  resign  his  seat.  But  when  an 
unknown  person,  not  certified  in  unmistakable 
terms  by  some  high  authority,  is  elected  for 
the  first  time,  the  elector  cannot  be  expected 
not  to  make  conformity  to  his  own  sentiments 
the  primary  requisite.  It  is  enough  if  he  does 
not  regard  a  subsequent  change  of  those  senti¬ 
ments,  honestly  avowed,  with  its  grounds  un- 
disguisedly  stated,  as  a  peremptory  reason  for 
withdrawing  his  confidence. 

Even  supposing  the  most  tried  ability  and 
acknowledged  eminence  of  character  in  the 
representative,  the  private  opinions  of  the  elec¬ 
tors  are  not  to  be  placed  entirely  in  abeyance. 
Deference  to  mental  superiority  is  not  to  go 
the  length  of  self-annihilation— abnegation  of 
any  personal  opinion.  But  when  the  difference 
does  not  relate  to  the  fundamentals  of  politics, 
however  decided  the  elector  may  be  in  his 
own  sentiments,  he  ought  to  consider  that  when 
an  able  man  differs  from  him  there  is  at  least 
a  considerable  chance  of  his  being  in  the 
wrong,  and  that  even  if  otherwise,  it  is  worth 
while  to  give  up  his  opinion  in  things  not  abso¬ 
lutely  essential,  for  the  sake  of  the  inestimable 
advantage  of  having  an  able  man  to  act  for 
him  in  the  many  matters  in  which  he  himself 
is  not  qualified  to  form  a  judgment.  In  such 
cases  he  often  endeavours  to  reconcile  both 
wishes,  by  inducing  the  able  man  to  sacrifice 
his  own  opinion  on  the  points  of  difference: 
but,  for  the  able  man  to  lend  himself  to  this 
compromise,  is  treason  against  his  especial 
office;  abdication  of  the  peculiar  duties  of 
mental  superiority,  of  which  it  is  one  of  the 
most  sacred  not  to  desert  the  cause  which  has 
the  clamour  against  it,  nor  to  deprive  of  his 
services  those  of  his  opinions  w  hich  need  them 
the  most.  A  man  of  conscience  and  known  abil¬ 
ity  should  insist  on  full  freedom  to  act  as  he 
in  his  own  judgment  deems  best;  and  should 
not  consent  to  serve  on  any  other  terms.  But 
the  electors  arc  entitled  to  know'  how  he  means 
to  act;  what  opinions,  on  all  things  which  con¬ 
cern  his  public  duty,  he  intends  should  guide 
his  conduct.  If  some  of  these  are  unacceptable 


PLEDGES  405 


to  them,  it  is  for  him  to  satisfy  them  that  he 
nevertheless  deserves  to  be  their  representa¬ 
tive;  and  if  they  are  wise,  they  will  overlook, 
in  favour  of  his  general  value,  many  and  great 
differences  between  his  opinions  and  their 
own. 

There  are  some  differences,  however,  which 
they  cannot  be  expected  to  overlook.  Whoever 
feels  the  amount  of  interest  in  the  government 
of  his  country  which  befits  a  freeman,  has  some 
convictions  on  national  affairs  which  are  like 
his  life-blood;  which  the  strength  of  his  belief 
in  their  truth,  together  with  the  importance 
he  attaches  to  them,  forbid  him  to  make  a  sub¬ 
ject  of  compromise,  or  postpone  to  the  judg¬ 
ment  of  any  person,  however  greatly  his  supe¬ 
rior.  Such  convictions,  when  they  exist  in  a 
people,  or  in  any  appreciable  portion  of  one, 
are  entitled  to  influence  in  virtue  of  their 
mere  existence,  and  not  solely  in  that  of  the 
probability  of  their  being  grounded  in  truth. 
A  people  cannot  be  well  governed  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  their  primary  notions  of  right,  even 
though  these  may  be  in  some  points  erroneous. 
A  correct  estimate  of  the  relation  which  should 
subsist  between  governors  and  governed,  does 
not  require  the  electors  to  consent  to  be  repre¬ 
sented  by  one  who  intends  to  govern  them  in 
opposition  to  their  fundamental  convictions. 
If  they  avail  themselves  of  his  capacities  of  use¬ 
ful  service  in  other  respects,  at  a  time  when 
the  points  on  which  he  is  vitally  at  issue  with 
them  are  not  likely  to  be  mooted,  they  are  jus¬ 
tified  in  dismissing  him  at  the  first  moment 
when  a  question  arises  involving  these,  and  on 
which  there  is  not  so  assured  a  majority  for 
what  they  deem  right  as  to  make  the  dissent¬ 
ing  voice  of  that  particular  individual  unim¬ 
portant.  Thus  (I  mention  names  to  illustrate 
my  meaning,  not  for  any  personal  application) 
the  opinions  supposed  to  be  entertained  by 
Mr.  Cobden  and  Mr.  Bright  on  resistance  to 
foreign  aggression  might  be  overlooked  during 
the  Crimean  war,  when  there  was  an  over¬ 
whelming  national  feeling  on  the  contrary 
side,  and  might  yet  very  properly  lead  to  their 
rejection  by  the  electors  at  the  time  of  the 
Chinese  quarrel  (though  in  itself  a  more  doubt¬ 
ful  question),  because  it  was  then  for  some 
time  a  moot  point  whether  their  view  of  the 
case  might  not  prevail. 

As  the  general  result  of  what  precedes,  we 
may  affirm  that  actual  pledges  should  not  be 
required,  unless,  from  unfavourable  social  cir¬ 
cumstances  or  faulty  institutions,  the  electors 
are  so  narrowed  in  their  choice  as  to  be  com¬ 


pelled  to  fix  it  on  a  person  presumptively  un¬ 
der  the  influence  of  partialities  hostile  to  their 
interest:  That  they  are  entitled  to  a  full  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  political  opinions  and  sentiments 
of  the  candidate;  and  not  only  entitled,  but 
often  bound,  to  reject  one  who  differs  from 
themselves  on  the  few  articles  which  are  the 
foundation  of  their  political  belief:  That  in 
proportion  to  the  opinion  they  entertain  of  the 
mental  superiority  of  a  candidate,  they  ought 
to  put  up  with  his  expressing  and  acting  on 
opinions  different  from  theirs  on  any  number 
of  things  not  included  in  their  fundamental 
articles  of  belief:  That  they  ought  to  be  unre¬ 
mitting  in  their  search  for  a  representative  of 
such  calibre  as  to  be  entrusted  with  full  power 
of  obeying  the  dictates  of  his  own  judgment: 
That  they  should  consider  it  a  duty  which  they 
owe  to  their  fellow-countrymen,  to  do  their  ut¬ 
most  towards  placing  men  of  this  quality  in 
the  legislature:  and  that  it  is  of  much  greater 
importance  to  themselves  to  be  represented  by 
such  a  man  than  by  one  who  professes  agree¬ 
ment  in  a  greater  number  of  their  opinions: 
for  the  benefits  of  his  ability  are  certain,  while 
the  hypothesis  of  his  being  wrong  and  their 
being  right  on  the  points  of  difference  is  a  very 
doubtful  one. 

I  have  discussed  this  question  on  the  assump¬ 
tion  that  the  electoral  system,  in  all  that  de¬ 
pends  on  positive  institution,  conforms  to  the 
principles  laid  down  in  the  preceding  chapters. 
Even  on  this  hypothesis,  the  delegation  theory 
of  representation  seems  to  me  false,  and  its 
practical  operation  hurtful,  though  the  mis¬ 
chief  would  in  that  case  be  confined  within 
certain  bounds.  But  if  the  securities  by  which 
I  have  endeavoured  to  guard  the  representa¬ 
tive  principle  are  not  recognised  by  the  Con¬ 
stitution;  if  provision  is  not  made  for  the  rep¬ 
resentation  of  minorities,  nor  any  difference 
admitted  in  the  numerical  value  of  votes,  ac¬ 
cording  to  some  criterion  of  the  amount  of 
education  possessed  by  the  voters;  in  that  case 
no  words  can  exaggerate  the  importance  in 
principle  of  leaving  an  unfettered  discretion 
to  the  representative;  for  it  would  then  be  the 
only  chance,  under  universal  suffrage,  for  any 
other  opinions  than  those  of  the  majority  to  be 
heard  in  Parliament.  In  that  falsely  called 
democracy  which  is  really  the  exclusive  rule  of 
the  operative  classes,  all  others  being  unrepre¬ 
sented  and  unheard,  the  only  escape  from  class 
legislation  in  its  narrowest, and  political  ignor¬ 
ance  in  its  most  dangerous,  form,  would  lie  in 
such  disposition  as  the  uneducated  might  have 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


406 

to  choose  educated  representatives,  and  to  de¬ 
fer  to  their  opinions.  Some  willingness  to  do 
this  might  reasonably  be  expected,  and  every¬ 
thing  would  depend  upon  cultivating  it  to  the 
highest  point.  But,  once  invested  with  politi¬ 
cal  omnipotence,  if  the  operative  classes  volun¬ 
tarily  concurred  in  imposing  in  this  or  any 
other  manner  any  considerable  limitation  up¬ 
on  their  self-opinion  and  self-will,  they  would 
prove  themselves  wiser  than  any  class,  pos¬ 
sessed  of  absolute  power,  has  shown  itself,  or, 
we  may  venture  to  say,  is  ever  likely  to  show 
itself,  under  that  corrupting  influence. 

Chapter  iy 

Of  a  Second  Chamber 
Of  all  topics  relating  to  the  theory  of  repre¬ 
sentative  government,  none  has  been  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  more  discussion,  especially  on  the  Con¬ 
tinent,  than  what  is  known  as  the  question  of 
the  Two  Chambers.  It  has  occupied  a  greater 
amount  of  the  attention  of  thinkers  than  many 
questions  of  ten  times  its  importance,  and  has 
been  regarded  as  a  sort  of  touchstone  which 
distinguishes  the  partisans  of  limited  from 
those  of  uncontrolled  democracy.  For  my  own 
part,  1  set  little  value  on  any  check  which  a 
Second  Chamber  can  apply  to  a  democracy 
otherwise  unchecked;  and  I  am  inclined  to 
think  that  if  all  other  constitutional  questions 
are  rightly  decided,  it  is  but  of  secondary  im¬ 
portance  whether  the  Parliament  consists  of 
two  Chambers,  or  only  of  one. 

If  there  are  two  Chambers,  they  may  either 
be  of  similar,  or  of  dissimilar  composition.  If 
of  similar,  both  will  obey  the  same  influences, 
and  whatever  has  a  majority  in  one  of  the 
Houses  will  be  likely  to  have  it  in  the  other. 
It  is  true  that  the  necessity  of  obtaining  the 
consent  of  both  to  the  passing  of  any  measure 
may  at  times  be  a  material  obstacle  to  improve¬ 
ment,  since,  assuming  both  the  Houses  to  be 
representative,  and  equal  in  their  numbers,  a 
number  slightly  exceeding  a  fourth  of  the  en 
tire  representation  may  prevent  the  passing  of 
a  Bill;  while,  if  there  is  but  one  House,  a  Bill 
is  secure  of  passing  if  it  has  a  bare  majority. 
But  the  case  supposed  is  rather  abstractedly 
possible  than  likely  to  occur  in  practice.  It  will 
not  often  happen  that  of  two  Houses  similarly 
composed,  one  will  be  almost  unanimous,  and 
the  other  nearly  equally  div  ided:  if  a  majority 
in  one  rejects  a  measure,  there  will  generally 
have  been  a  large  minority  unfavourable  to  it 
in  the  other;  any  improvement,  therefore, 


which  could  be  thus  impeded,  would  in  almost 
all  cases  be  one  which  had  not  much  more  than 
a  simple  majority  in  the  entire  body,  and  the 
worst  consequence  that  could  ensue  would  be 
to  delay  for  a  short  time  the  passing  of  the 
measure,  or  give  rise  to  a  fresh  appeal  to  the 
electors  to  ascertain  if  the  small  majority  in 
Parliament  corresponded  to  an  effective  one 
in  the  country.  The  inconvenience  of  delay, 
and  the  advantages  of  the  appeal  to  the  na¬ 
tion.  might  be  regarded  in  this  case  as  about 
equally  balanced. 

I  attach  little  weight  to  the  argument  often- 
est  urged  for  having  two  Chambers— to  pre¬ 
vent  precipitancy,  and  compel  a  second  delib¬ 
eration;  for  it  must  be  a  very  ill-constituted 
representative  assembly  in  which  the  estab¬ 
lished  forms  of  business  do  not  require  many 
more  than  two  deliberations.  The  considera¬ 
tion  which  tells  most,  in  my  judgment,  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  two  Chambers  (and  this  I  do  regard  as 
of  some  moment)  is  the  evil  effect  produced  up¬ 
on  the  mind  of  any  holder  of  power,  whether 
an  individual  or  an  assembly,  by  the  conscious¬ 
ness  of  having  only  themselves  to  consult.  It  is 
important  that  no  set  of  persons  should,  in 
great  affairs,  be  able,  even  temporarily,  to 
make  their  sic  volo  prevail  without  asking  any 
one  else  for  his  consent.  A  majority  in  a  single 
assembly,  when  it  has  assumed  a  permanent 
character— when  composed  of  the  same  persons 
habitually  acting  together,  and  always  assured 
of  victory  in  their  own  Housc-easily  becomes 
despotic  and  overweening,  if  released  from  the 
necessity  of  considering  whether  its  acts  will 
be  concurred  in  by  another  constituted  au¬ 
thority.  The  same  reason  which  induced  the 
Romans  to  have  two  consuls  makes  it  desirable 
there  should  be  two  Chambers:  that  neither  of 
them  may  be  exposed  to  the  corrupting  in¬ 
fluence  of  undivided  power,  even  for  the  space 
of  a  single  year.  One  of  the  most  indispensable 
requisites  in  the  practical  conduct  of  politics, 
especially  in  the  management  of  free  institu¬ 
tions.  is  conciliation:  a  readiness  to  compro¬ 
mise;  a  willingness  to  concede  something  to 
opponents,  and  to  shape  good  measures  so  as 
to  be  as  little  offensive  as  possible  to  persons 
of  opposite  views;  and  oi  this  salutary  habit, 
the  mutual  give  and  take  (as  it  has  been  called) 
between  two  1  louses  is  a  perpetual  school;  use¬ 
ful  as  such  even  now,  and  its  utility  would 
probably  be  even  more  felt  in  a  more  demo¬ 
cratic  constitution  of  the  Legislature. 

But  the  I  louses  need  not  both  be  of  the  same 
composition;  they  may  be  intended  as  a  check 


A  SECOND  CHAMBER  4°7 


on  one  another.  One  being  supposed  demo¬ 
cratic,  the  other  will  naturally  be  constituted 
with  a  view  to  its  being  some  restraint  upon 
the  democracy.  But  its  efficacy  in  this  respect 
wholly  depends  on  the  social  support  which  it 
can  command  outside  the  House.  An  assembly 
which  does  not  rest  on  the  basis  of  some  great 
power  in  the  country  is  ineffectual  against  one 
which  does.  An  aristocratic  House  is  only  pow¬ 
erful  in  an  aristocratic  state  of  society.  The 
House  of  Lords  was  once  the  strongest  power 
in  our  Constitution,  and  the  Commons  only  a 
checking  body:  but  this  was  when  the  Barons 
were  almost  the  only  power  out  of  doors.  I  can¬ 
not  believe  that,  in  a  really  democratic  state  of 
society,  the  House  of  Lords  would  be  of  any 
practical  value  as  a  moderator  of  democracy. 
When  the  force  on  one  side  is  feeble  in  com¬ 
parison  with  that  on  the  other,  the  way  to  give 
it  effect  is  not  to  draw  both  out  in  line,  and 
muster  their  strength  in  open  field  over  against 
one  another.  Such  tactics  would  ensure  the 
utter  defeat  of  the  less  powerful.  It  can  only 
act  to  advantage  by  not  holding  itself  apart, 
and  compelling  every  one  to  declare  himself 
either  with  or  against  it,  but  taking  a  position 
among,  rather  than  in  opposition  to,  the  crowd, 
and  drawing  to  itself  the  elements  most  capa¬ 
ble  of  allying  themselves  with  it  on  any  given 
point;  not  appearing  at  all  as  an  antagonist 
body,  to  provoke  a  general  rally  against  it, 
but  working  as  one  of  the  elements  in  a  mixed 
mass,  infusing  its  leaven,  and  often  making 
what  would  be  the  weaker  part  the  stronger, 
by  the  addition  of  its  influence.  The  really 
moderating  power  in  a  democratic  constitu¬ 
tion  must  act  in  and  through  the  democratic 
House. 

That  there  should  be,  in  every  polity,  a  cen¬ 
tre  of  resistance  to  the  predominant  power  in 
the  Constitution— and  in  a  democratic  consti¬ 
tution,  therefore,  a  nucleus  of  resistance  to  the 
democracy— I  have  already  maintained;  and  I 
regard  it  as  a  fundamental  maxim  of  govern¬ 
ment.  If  any  people,  who  possess  a  democratic 
representation,  are,  from  their  historical  ante¬ 
cedents,  more  willing  to  tolerate  such  a  centre 
of  resistance  in  the  form  of  a  Second  Chamber 
or  House  of  Lords  than  in  any  other  shape, 
this  constitutes  a  stronge  reason  for  having  it 
in  that  shape.  But  it  does  not  appear  to  me  the 
best  shape  in  itself,  nor  by  any  means  the  most 
efficacious  for  its  object.  If  there  are  two 
Houses,  one  considered  to  represent  the  peo¬ 
ple,  the  other  to  represent  only  a  class,  or  not 
to  be  representative  at  all,  I  cannot  think  that 


where  democracy  is  the  ruling  power  in  so¬ 
ciety  the  Second  House  would  have  any  real 
ability  to  resist  even  the  aberrations  of  the  first. 

It  might  be  suffered  to  exist  in  deference  to 
habit  and  association,  but  not  as  an  effective 
check.  If  it  exercised  an  independent  will,  it 
would  be  required  to  do  so  in  the  same  general 
spirit  as  the  other  House;  to  be  equally  demo¬ 
cratic  with  it,  and  to  content  itself  with  cor¬ 
recting  the  accidental  oversights  of  the  more 
popular  branch  of  the  legislature,  or  compet¬ 
ing  with  it  in  popular  measures. 

The  practicability  of  any  real  check  to  the 
ascendancy  of  the  majority  depends  hence¬ 
forth  on  the  distribution  of  strength  in  the 
most  popular  branch  of  the  governing  body; 
and  I  have  indicated  the  mode  in  which,  to  the 
best  of  my  judgment,  a  balance  of  forces  might 
most  advantageously  be  established  there.  I 
have  also  pointed  out,  that  even  if  the  numeri¬ 
cal  majority  were  allowed  to  exercise  complete 
predominance  by  means  of  a  corresponding 
majority  in  Parliament,  yet  if  minorities  also 
are  permitted  to  enjoy  the  equal  right  due  to 
them  on  strictly  democratic  principles,  of  be¬ 
ing  represented  proportionally  to  their  num¬ 
bers,  this  provision  will  ensure  the  perpetual 
presence  in  the  House,  by  the  same  popular 
title  as  its  other  members,  of  so  many  of  the 
first  intellects  in  the  country,  that  without  be¬ 
ing  in  any  way  banded  apart,  or  invested  with 
any  invidious  prerogative,  this  portion  of  the 
national  representation  will  have  a  personal 
weight  much  more  than  in  proportion  to  its 
numerical  strength,  and  will  afford,  in  a  most 
effective  form,  the  moral  centre  of  resistance 
which  is  needed.  A  Second  Chamber,  there¬ 
fore,  is  not  required  for  this  purpose,  and 
would  not  contribute  to  it,  but  might  even,  in 
some  conceivable  modes,  impede  its  attain¬ 
ment.  If,  however,  for  the  other  reasons  al¬ 
ready  mentioned,  the  decision  were  taken  that 
there  should  be  such  a  Chamber,  it  is  desirable 
that  it  should  be  composed  of  elements  which, 
without  being  open  to  the  imputation  of  class 
interests  adverse  to  the  majority,  would  incline 
it  to  oppose  itself  to  the  class  interests  of  the 
majority,  and  qualify  it  to  raise  its  voice  with 
authority  against  their  errors  and  weaknesses. 
These  conditions  evidently  are  not  found  in  a 
body  constituted  in  the  manner  of  our  House 
of  Lords.  So  soon  as  conventional  rank  and  in¬ 
dividual  riches  no  longer  overawe  the  democ¬ 
racy,  a  House  of  Lords  becomes  insignificant. 

Of  all  principles  on  which  a  wisely  conserva¬ 
tive  body,  destined  to  moderate  and  regulate 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


408 

democratic  ascendancy,  could  possibly  be  con¬ 
structed,  the  best  seems  to  be  that  exemplified 
in  the  Roman  Senate,  itself  the  most  consist¬ 
ently  prudent  and  sagacious  body  that  ever  ad¬ 
ministered  public  affairs.  The  deficiencies  of  a 
democratic  assembly,  which  represents  the  gen¬ 
eral  public,  are  the  deficiencies  of  the  public 
itself,  want  of  special  training  and  knowledge. 
The  appropriate  corrective  is  to  associate  with 
it  a  body  of  which  special  training  and  knowl- 
edgeshould  be  the  characteristics.  If  one  House 
represents  popular  feeling,  the  other  should 
represent  personal  merit,  tested  and  guaran¬ 
teed  by  actual  public  service,  and  fortified  by 
practical  experience.  If  one  is  the  People  s 
Chamber,  the  other  should  be  the  Chamber  of 
Statesmen;  a  council  composed  of  all  living 
public  men  who  have  passed  through  impor¬ 
tant  political  offices  or  employments.  Such  a 
Chamber  would  be  fitted  for  much  more  than 
to  be  a  merely  moderating  body.  It  would  not 
be  exclusively  a  check,  but  also  an  impelling 
force.  In  its  hands  the  power  of  holding  the 
people  back  would  be  vested  in  those  most 
competent,  and  who  would  generally  be  most 
inclined,  to  lead  them  forward  in  any  right 
course.  The  council  to  whom  the  task  would  be 
entrusted  of  rectifying  the  people’s  mistakes 
would  not  represent  a  class  believed  to  be  op¬ 
posed  to  their  interest,  but  would  consist  of 
(heir  own  natural  leaders  in  the  path  of  prog¬ 
ress.  No  mode  of  composition  could  approach 
to  this  in  giving  weight  and  efficacy  to  their 
function  of  moderators.  It  would  be  impossi¬ 
ble  to  cry  down  a  body  always  foremost  in  pro¬ 
moting  improvements  as  a  mere  obstructive 
body,  whatever  amount  of  mischief  it  might 
obstruct. 

Were  the  place  vacant  in  England  for  such 
a  Senate  (1  need  scarcely  say  that  this  is  a  mere 
hypothesis),  it  might  be  composed  of  some  such 
elements  as  the  following.  All  who  were  or  had 
been  members  of  the  Legislative  Commission 
described  in  a  former  chapter,  and  which  I 
regard  as  an  indispensable  ingredient  in  a 
well -constituted  popular  government.  All  who 
were  or  had  been  Chief  Justices,  or  heads  of 
any  of  the  superior  courts  of  law  or  equity.  All 
who  had  for  five  years  filled  the  office  of  puisne 
judge.  All  who  had  held  for  two  years  any 
Cabinet  ollu  c:  but  these  should  also  be  eligible 
to  the  I  louse  of  Commons,  and  if  elec  led  mem¬ 
bers  of  it,  t licit  peerage  or  senatorial  office 
should  be  held  in  suspense.  1  he  condition  of 
time  is  needed  to  present  persons  from  being 
named  Cabinet  Ministers  merely  to  give  them 


a  seat  in  the  Senate;  and  the  period  of  two 
years  is  suggested,  that  the  same  term  which 
qualifies  them  for  a  pension  might  entitle  them 
to  a  senatorship.  All  who  had  filled  the  office 
of  Commander-in-Chief;  and  all  who,  having 
commanded  an  army  or  a  fleet,  had  been 
thanked  by  Parliament  for  military  or  naval 
successes.  All  who  had  held,  during  ten  years, 
first-class  diplomatic  appointments.  All  who 
had  been  Governors-General  of  India  or  Brit¬ 
ish  America,  and  all  who  had  held  for  ten  years 
any  Colonial  Governorships.  The  permanent 
civil  service  should  also  be  represented;  all 
should  be  senators  who  had  filled,  during  ten 
years,  the  important  offices  of  Under-Secretary 
to  the  Treasury,  permanent  Under-Secretary 
of  State,  or  any  others  equally  high  and  re¬ 
sponsible.  If,  along  with  the  persons  disquali¬ 
fied  by  practical  experience  in  the  administra¬ 
tion  of  public  affairs,  any  representation  of  the 
speculative  class  were  to  be  included— a  thing 
in  itself  desirable— it  would  be  worth  consider¬ 
ation  whether  certain  professorships,  in  cer¬ 
tain  national  institutions,  after  a  tenure  of  a 
few  years,  might  confer  a  seat  in  the  Senate. 
Mere  scientific  and  literary  eminence  arc  too 
indefinite  and  disputable:  they  imply  a  power 
of  selection,  whereas  the  other  qualifications 
speak  for  themselves;  if  the  writings  by  which 
reputation  lias  been  gained  are  unconnected 
with  politics,  they  are  no  evidence  of  the  spe¬ 
cial  qualities  required,  while  if  political,  (hey 
would  enable  successive  Ministries  to  deluge 
the  House  with  party  tools. 

The  historical  antecedents  of  England  ren¬ 
der  it  nil  but  certain  that,  unless  in  the  im¬ 
probable  case  of  a  violent  subversion  of  the 
existing  Constitution,  any  Second  Chamber 
which  could  possibly  exist  would  have  to  be 
built  on  the  foundation  of  the  House  of  Lords. 
It  is  out  of  the  question  to  think  practically  of 
abolishing  that  assembly,  to  replace  it  by  such 
a  Senate  as  I  have  sketched,  or  by  any  other; 
but  there  might  not  he  the  same  insuperable 
difficulty  in  aggregating  the  classes  or  cate¬ 
gories  just  spoken  of  to  the  existing  body,  in 
the  ( haracler  of  Leers  for  life.  An  ulterior,  and 
perhaps,  on  this  supposition,  a  necessary  step, 
might  be,  that  1  lie  hereditary  Peerage  should 
be  present  in  the  I  louse  by  their  representa¬ 
tives  instead  of  personally;  a  practice  already 
established  in  the  case  of  the  Scott  li  and  Irish 
Peers,  and  which  the  mere  multiplication  of 
the  order  will  probably  at  some  time  or  other 
render  inevitable.  An  easy  adaptation  of  Mr. 
Hare’s  plan  would  prevent  the  representative 


THE  EXECUTIVE  4°9 


Peers  from  representing  exclusively  the  party 
which  has  the  majority  in  the  Peerage.  If.  lor 
example,  one  representative  were  allowed  for 
every  ten  Peers,  any  ten  might  be  admitted  to 
choose  a  representative,  and  the  Peers  might 
be  free  to  group  themselves  for  that  purpose 
as  they  pleased.  The  election  might  be  thus 
conducted:  All  Peers  who  were  candidates  for 
the  representation  of  their  order  should  be  re¬ 
quired  to  declare  themselves  such,  and  enter 
their  names  in  a  list.  A  day  and  place  should 
be  appointed  at  which  Peers  desirous  of  voting 
should  be  present,  either  in  person,  or,  in  the 
usual  parliamentary  manner,  by  their  proxies. 
The  votes  should  be  taken,  each  Peer  voting 
for  only  one.  Every  candidate  who  had  as  many 
as  ten  votes  should  be  declared  elected.  If  any 
one  had  more,  all  but  ten  should  be  allowed  to 
withdraw  their  votes,  or  ten  of  the  number 
should  be  selected  by  lot.  These  ten  would 
form  his  constituency,  and  the  remainder  of 
his  voters  would  be  set  free  to  give  their  votes 
over  again  for  some  one  else.  This  process 
should  be  repeated  until  (so  far  as  possible) 
every  Peer  present  either  personally  or  by 
proxy  was  represented.  When  a  number  less 
than  ten  remained  over,  if  amounting  to  five 
they  might  still  be  allowed  to  agree  on  a  repre¬ 
sentative;  if  fewer  than  five,  their  votes  must 
be  lost,  or  they  might  be  permitted  to  record 
them  in  favour  of  somebody  already  elected. 
With  this  inconsiderable  exception,  every  rep¬ 
resentative  Peer  would  represent  ten  members 
of  the  Peerage,  all  of  whom  had  not  only  voted 
for  him,  but  selected  him  as  the  one,  among  all 
open  to  their  choice,  by  whom  they  were  most 
desirous  to  be  represented.  As  a  compensation 
to  the  Peers  who  were  not  chosen  representa¬ 
tives  of  their  order,  they  should  be  eligible  to 
the  House  of  Commons;  a  justice  now  refused 
to  Scotch  Peers,  and  to  Irish  Peers  in  their  own 
part  of  the  kingdom,  while  the  representation 
in  the  House  of  Lords  of  any  but  the  most  nu¬ 
merous  party  in  the  Peerage  is  denied  equally 
to  both. 

The  mode  of  composing  a  Senate,  which  has 
been  here  advocated,  not  only  seems  the  best 
in  itself,  but  is  that  for  which  historical  prec¬ 
edent,  and  actual  brilliant  success,  can  to 
the  greatest  extent  be  pleaded.  It  is  not,  how¬ 
ever,  the  only  feasible  plan  that  might  be  pro¬ 
posed.  Another  possible  mode  of  forming  a 
Second  Chamber  would  be  to  have  it  elected 
by  the  First;  subject  to  the  restriction  that  they 
should  not  nominate  any  of  their  own  mem¬ 
bers.  Such  an  assembly,  emanating  like  the 


American  Senate  from  popular  choice,  only 
once  removed,  would  not  be  considered  to 
clash  with  democratic  institutions,  and  would 
probably  acquire  considerable  popular  influ¬ 
ence.  Front  the  mode  of  its  nomination  it 
would  be  peculiarly  unlikely  to  excite  the 
jealousy  of,  or  to  come  into  any  hostile  collision 
with,  the  popular  House,  It  would,  moreover 
(due  provision  being  made  for  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  the  minority),  be  almost  sure  to  be  well 
composed,  and  to  comprise  many  of  that  class 
of  highly  capable  men,  who,  either  from  ac¬ 
cident  or  for  want  of  showy  qualities,  had  been 
unwilling  to  seek,  or  unable  to  obtain,  the  suf¬ 
frages  of  a  popular  constituency. 

The  best  constitution  of  a  Second  Chamber 
is  that  which  embodies  the  greatest  number  of 
elements  exempt  from  the  class  interests  and 
prejudices  of  the  majority,  but  having  in  them¬ 
selves  nothing  offensive  to  democratic  feeling. 

I  repeat,  however,  that  the  main  reliance  for 
tempering  the  ascendancy  of  the  majority  can 
not  be  placed  in  a  Second  Chamber  of  am 
kind.  The  character  of  a  representative  gov¬ 
ernment  is  fixed  by  the  constitution  of  the 
popular  House.  Compared  with  this,  all  other 
questions  relating  to  the  form  of  government 
are  insignificant. 

Chapter  14 

Of  the  Executive  in  a  Representative 
Government 

It  would  be  out  of  place,  in  this  treatise,  to 
discuss  the  question  into  what  departments  or 
branches  the  executive  business  of  government 
may  most  conveniently  be  divided.  In  this  re¬ 
spect  the  exigencies  of  different  governments 
are  different;  and  there  is  little  probability  that 
any  great  mistake  will  be  made  in  the  classifica¬ 
tion  of  the  duties  when  men  are  willing  to  be¬ 
gin  at  the  beginning,  and  do  not  hold  them¬ 
selves  bound  by  the  series  of  accidents  which, 
in  an  old  government  like  ours,  has  produced 
the  existing  division  of  the  public  business.  It 
may  be  sufficient  to  say  that  the  classification 
of  functionaries  should  correspond  to  that  of 
subjects,  and  that  there  should  not  be  several 
departments  independent  of  one  another  to 
superintend  different  parts  of  the  same  natural 
whole;  as  in  our  own  military  administration 
down  to  a  recent  period,  and  in  a  less  degree 
even  at  present.  Where  the  object  to  be  at¬ 
tained  is  single  (such  as  that  of  having  an  ef¬ 
ficient  army),  the  authority  commissioned  to 
attend  to  it  should  be  single  likewise.  The 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


410 

entire  aggregate  of  means  provided  for  one  end 
should  be  under  one  and  the  same  control  and 
responsibility.  If  they  are  divided  among  inde¬ 
pendent  authorities,  the  means,  with  each  of 
those  authorities,  become  ends,  and  it  is  the 
business  of  nobody  except  the  head  of  the  Gov¬ 
ernment,  who  is  probably  without  the  appro¬ 
priate  departmental  experience,  to  take  care 
of  the  real  end.  The  different  classes  of  means 
are  not  combined  and  adapted  to  one  another 
under  the  guidance  of  any  leading  idea;  and 
while  every  department  pushes  forward  its  own 
reejuirements,  regardless  of  those  of  the  rest, 
the  purpose  of  the  work  is  perpetually  sacri¬ 
ficed  to  the  work  itself. 

As  a  general  rule,  every  executive  function, 
whether  superior  or  subordinate,  should  be  the 
appointed  duty  of  some  given  individual.  It 
should  be  apparent  to  all  the  world  who  did 
everything,  and  through  whose  default  any¬ 
thing  was  left  undone.  Responsibility  is  null 
when  nobody  knows  who  is  responsible.  Nor, 
even  when  real,  can  it  be  divided  without  be¬ 
ing  weakened.  To  maintain  it  at  its  highest 
there  must  be  one  person  who  receives  the 
whole  praise  of  what  is  well  done,  the  whole 
blame  of  what  is  ill.  There  are,  however,  two 
modes  of  sharing  responsibility:  by  one  it  is 
only  enfeebled,  by  the  other,  absolutely  de¬ 
stroyed.  It  is  enfeebled  when  the  concurrence 
of  more  than  one  functionary  is  required  to  the 
same  act.  Each  one  among  them  has  still  a  real 
responsibility;  if  a  wrong  has  been  done,  none 
of  them  can  say  he  did  not  do  it;  he  is  as  much 
a  participant  as  an  accomplice  is  in  an  offence: 
if  there  has  been  legal  criminality  they  may  all 
be  punished  legally,  and  their  punishment 
needs  not  be  less  severe  than  if  there  had  been 
only  one  person  concerned.  Rut  it  is  not  so 
with  the  penalties,  any  more  than  with  the  re¬ 
wards,  of  opinion:  these  are  always  dimin¬ 
ished  by  being  shared.  Where  there  has  been 
no  definite  legal  offence,  no  corruption  or  mal¬ 
versation,  only  an  error  or  an  imprudence,  or 
what  may  pass  for  such,  every  participator  has 
an  excuse  to  himself  and  to  the  world,  in  the 
fact  that  other  persons  are  jointly  involved 
with  him.  There  is  hardly  anything,  even  to 
pecuniary  dishonesty,  for  which  men  will  not 
feel  themselves  almost  absolved,  if  those  whose 
duty  it  was  to  resist  and  remonstrate  have 
failed  to  do  it,  still  more  if  they  have  given  a 
formal  assent. 

In  this  case,  however,  though  responsibility 
is  weakened,  there  still  is  responsibility:  every 
one  of  those  implicated  has  in  his  individual 


capacity  assented  to,  and  joined  in,  the  act. 
Things  are  much  worse  when  the  act  itself  is 
only  that  of  a  majority— a  Board,  deliberating 
with  closed  doors,  nobody  knowing,  or,  except 
in  some  extreme  case,  being  ever  likely  to 
know,  whether  an  individual  member  voted 
for  the  act  or  against  it.  Responsibility  in  this 
case  is  a  mere  name.  “Boards,”  it  is  happily 
said  by  Bcntham,  “are  screens.”  What  “the 
Board”  does  is  the  act  of  nobody;  and  nobody 
can  be  made  to  answer  for  it.  The  Board  suf¬ 
fers,  even  in  reputation,  only  in  its  collective 
character;  and  no  individual  member  feels  this 
further  than  his  disposition  leads  him  to  iden¬ 
tify  his  own  estimation  with  that  of  the  body— 
a  feeling  often  very  strong  when  the  body  is  a 
permanent  one,  and  he  is  wedded  to  it  for  bet¬ 
ter  for  worse;  but  the  fluctuations  of  a  modern 
official  career  give  no  time  for  the  formation  of 
such  an  esprit  de  corps;  which,  if  it  exists  at 
all,  exists  only  in  the  obscure  ranks  of  the  per¬ 
manent  subordinates.  Boards,  therefore,  are 
not  a  fit  instrument  for  executive  business;  and 
are  only  admissible  in  it  when,  for  other  rea¬ 
sons,  to  give  full  discretionary  power  to  a 
single  minister  would  be  worse. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  a  maxim  of  ex¬ 
perience  that  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors 
there  is  wisdom;  and  that  a  man  seldom  judges 
right,  even  in  his  own  concerns,  still  less  in 
those  of  the  public,  when  he  makes  habitual 
use  of  no  knowledge  but  his  own,  or  that  of 
some  single  adviser.  There  is  no  necessary  in¬ 
compatibility  between  this  principle  and  the 
other.  It  is  easy  to  give  the  effective  power,  and 
the  full  responsibility,  to  one,  providing  him 
when  necessary  with  advisers,  each  of  whom  is 
responsible  only  for  the  opinion  he  gives. 

In  general,  the  head  of  a  department  of  the 
executive  government  is  a  mere  politician.  He 
may  be  a  good  politician,  and  a  man  of  merit; 
and  unless  this  is  usually  the  case,  the  govern¬ 
ment  is  bad.  But  his  general  capacity,  and  the 
knowledge  he  ought  to  possess  of  the  general 
interests  of  the  country,  will  not,  unless  by  oc¬ 
casional  accident,  be  accompanied  by  ade¬ 
quate,  and  what  may  be  called  professional, 
knowledge  of  the  department  over  which  he 
is  called  to  preside.  Professional  advisers  must 
therefore  be  provided  for  him.  Wherever  mere 
experience  and  attainments  are  sufficient— 
wherever  the  qualities  required  in  a  profes¬ 
sional  adviser  may  possibly  be  united  in  a 
single  well-selected  individual  (as  in  the  case, 
for  example,  of  a  law  olliccr),  one  such  person 
for  general  purposes,  and  a  staff  of  clerks  to 


THE  EXECUTIVE  4» 


supply  knowledge  of  details,  meet  the  demands 
of  the  case.  But,  more  frequently,  it  is  not  suf¬ 
ficient  that  the  minister  should  consult  some 
one  competent  person,  and,  when  himself  not 
conversant  with  the  subject,  act  implicitly  on 
that  person’s  advice.  It  is  often  necessary  that 
he  should,  not  only  occasionally  but  habitual¬ 
ly,  listen  to  a  variety  of  opinions,  and  inform 
his  judgment  by  the  discussions  among  a  body 
of  advisers.  This,  for  example,  is  emphatically 
necessary  in  military  and  naval  affairs.  T.  he 
military  and  naval  ministers,  therefore,  and 
probably  several  others,  should  be  provided 
with  a  Council,  composed,  at  least  in  those 
two  departments,  of  able  and  experienced  pro¬ 
fessional  men.  As  a  means  of  obtaining  the 
best  men  for  the  purpose  under  every  change 
of  administration,  they  ought  tobe  permanent: 
by  which  I  mean,  that  they  ought  not,  like  the 
Lords  of  the  Admiralty,  to  be  expected  to  re¬ 
sign  with  the  ministry  by  whom  they  were  ap¬ 
pointed:  but  it  is  a  good  rule  that  all  who  hold 
high  appointments  to  which  they  have  risen 
by  selection,  and  not  by  the  ordinary  course  of 
promotion,  should  retain  their  office  only  for 
a  fixed  term,  unless  reappointed;  as  is  now  the 
rule  with  Staff  appointments  in  the  British 
army.  This  rule  renders  appointments  some¬ 
what  less  likely  to  be  jobbed,  not  being  a  pro¬ 
vision  for  life,  and  at  the  same  time  affords  a 
means,  without  affront  to  any  one,  of  getting 
rid  of  those  who  are  least  worth  keeping,  and 
bringing  in  highly  qualified  persons  of  young¬ 
er  standing,  for  whom  there  might  never  be 
room  if  death  vacancies,  or  voluntary  resigna¬ 
tions,  were  waited  for. 

The  Councils  should  be  consultative  merely, 
in  this  sense,  that  the  ultimate  decision  should 
rest  undividedly  with  the  minister  himself: 
but  neither  ought  they  to  be  looked  upon,  or 
to  look  upon  themselves,  as  ciphers,  or  as 
capable  of  being  reduced  to  such  at  his  pleas¬ 
ure.  The  advisers  attached  to  a  powerful  and 
perhaps  self-willed  man  ought  to  be  placed 
under  conditions  which  make  it  impossible 
for  them,  without  discredit,  not  to  express  an 
opinion,  and  impossible  for  him  not  to  listen 

to  and  consider  their  recommendations,  wheth¬ 
er  he  adopts  them  or  not.  The  relation  which 
ought  to  exist  between  a  chief  and  this  descrip¬ 
tion  of  advisers  is  very  accurately  hit  by  the 
constitution  of  the  Council  of  the  Governor- 
General  and  those  of  the  different  Presidencies 
in  India.  These  Councils  are  composed  of  per¬ 
sons  who  have  professional  knowledge  of  In¬ 
dian  affairs,  which  the  Governor-General  and 


Governors  usually  lack,  and  which  it  would 
not  be  desirable  to  require  of  them.  As  a  rule, 
every  member  of  Council  is  expected  to  give 
an  opinion,  which  is  of  course  very  often  a 
simple  acquiescence:  but  if  there  is  a  difference 
of  sentiment,  it  is  at  the  option  of  every  mem¬ 
ber,  and  is  the  invariable  practice,  to  record 
the  reasons  of  his  opinion:  the  Governor-Gen¬ 
eral,  or  Governor,  doing  the  same.  In  ordinary 
cases  the  decision  is  according  to  the  sense  of 
the  majority;  the  Council,  therefore,  has  a  sub¬ 
stantial  part  in  the  government:  but  if  the 
Governor-General,  or  Governor,  thinks  fit,  he 
may  set  aside  even  their  unanimous  opinion, 
recording  his  reasons.  The  result  is,  that  the 
chief  is  individually  and  effectively  responsi¬ 
ble  for  every  act  of  the  Government.  The  mem¬ 
bers  of  Council  have  only  the  responsibility  of 
advisers;  but  it  is  always  known,  from  docu¬ 
ments  capable  of  being  produced,  and  which  if 
called  for  by  Parliament  or  public  opinion  al¬ 
ways  are  produced,  what  each  has  advised,  and 
what  reasons  he  gave  for  his  advice:  while, 
from  their  dignified  position,  and  ostensible 
participation  in  all  acts  of  government,  they 
have  nearly  as  strong  motives  to  apply  them¬ 
selves  to  the  public  business,  and  to  form  and 
express  a  well-considered  opinion  on  every 
part  of  it,  as  if  the  whole  responsibility  rested 
with  themselves. 

This  mode  of  conducting  the  highest  class 
of  administrative  business  is  one  of  the  most 
successful  instances  of  the  adaptation  of  means 
to  ends  which  political  history,  not  hitherto 
very  prolific  in  works  of  skill  and  contrivance, 
has  yet  to  show.  It  is  one  of  the  acquisitions 
with  which  the  art  of  politics  has  been  en¬ 
riched  by  the  experience  of  the  East  India 
Company’s  rule;  and,  like  most  of  the  other 
wise  contrivances  by  which  India  has  been  pre¬ 
served  to  this  country,  and  an  amount  of  good 
government  produced  w'hich  is  truly  wonder¬ 
ful  considering  the  circumstances  and  the  ma¬ 
terials,  it  is  probably  destined  to  perish  in  the 
general  holocaust  which  the  traditions  of  In¬ 
dian  government  seem  fated  to  undergo,  since 
they  have  been  placed  at  the  mercy  of  public 
ignorance,  and  the  presumptuous  vanity  of 
political  men.  Already  an  outcry  is  raised  for 
abolishing  the  Councils,  as  a  superfluous  and 
expensive  clog  on  the  wheels  of  government: 
while  the  clamour  has  long  been  urgent,  and 
is  daily  obtaining  more  countenance  in  the 
highest  quarters,  for  the  abrogation  of  the  pro¬ 
fessional  civil  service  which  breeds  the  men 
that  compose  the  Councils,  and  the  existence 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERN  ME  N  T 


of  which  is  the  sole  guarantee  for  their  being 
of  any  value. 

A  most  important  principle  of  good  govern¬ 
ment  in  a  popular  constitution  is  that  no  ex¬ 
ecutive  functionaries  should  be  appointed  by 
popular  election:  neither  by  the  votes  of  the 
people  themselves,  nor  by  those  of  their  repre¬ 
sentatives.  The  entire  business  of  government 
is  skilled  employment;  the  qualifications  for  the 
discharge  of  it  are  of  that  special  and  profes¬ 
sional  kind  which  cannot  be  properly  judged 
of  except  bv  persons  who  have  themselves  some 
share  of  those  qualifications,  or  some  practical 
experience  of  them.  The  business  of  finding 
the  fittest  persons  to  fill  public  employments— 
not  merely  selecting  the  best  who  offer,  but 
looking  out  for  the  absolutely  best,  and  taking 
note  of  all  fit  persons  who  are  met  with,  that 
they  may  be  found  when  wanted— is  very  la¬ 
borious,  and  requires  a  delicate  as  well  as 
highly  conscientious  discernment;  and  as  there 
is  no  public  duty  which  is  in  general  so  badly 
performed,  so  there  is  none  for  which  it  is  of 
greater  importance  to  enforce  the  utmost  prac¬ 
ticable  amount  of  personal  responsibility,  by 
imposing  it  as  a  special  obligation  on  high 
functionaries  in  the  several  departments.  All 
subordinate  public  officers  who  are  not  ap¬ 
pointed  by  some  mode  of  public  competition 
should  be  selected  on  the  direct  responsibility 
of  the  minister  under  whom  they  serve.  The 
ministers,  all  but  the  chief,  will  naturally  be 
selected  by  the  chief;  and  the  chief  himself, 
though  really  designated  by  Parliament,  should 
be,  in  a  regal  government,  officially  appointed 
by  the  Crown.  The  functionary  who  appoints 
should  be  the  sole  person  empowered  to  re¬ 
move  any  subordinate  officer  who  is  liable  to 
removal;  which  the  far  greater  number  ought 
not  to  be,  except  for  personal  misconduct; 
since  it  would  be  vain  to  expect  that  the  body 
of  persons  by  whom  the  whole  detail  of  the 
public  business  is  transacted,  and  whose  quali¬ 
fications  are  generally  of  much  more  impor¬ 
tance  to  the  public  than  those  of  the  minister 
himself,  will  devote  themselves  to  their  profes¬ 
sion.  and  acquire  the  knowledge  and  skill  on 
whit  h  the  minister  must  often  plat e  entire  de¬ 
pendence.  if  they  are  liable  at  any  moment  to 
be  turned  adrift  for  no  fault,  that  the  minister 
may  gratify  himself,  or  promote  his  political 
interest,  by  appointing  somebody  else. 

To  the  principle  which  condemns  the  ap¬ 
pointment  of  exec  utive  olfit  ers  by  popular  suf- 
fiage,  ought  the  chief  ol  the  executive,  in  a 


republican  government,  to  be  an  exception?  Is 
it  a  good  rule,  which,  in  the  American  Con¬ 
stitution.  provides  for  the  election  of  the  Presi¬ 
dent  once  in  every  four  years  by  the  entire 
people?  The  question  is  not  free  from  diffi¬ 
culty.  There  is  unquestionably  some  advan¬ 
tage,  in  a  country  like  America,  where  no 
apprehension  needs  be  entertained  of  a  coup 
d'etat,  in  making  the  chief  minister  constitu¬ 
tionally  independent  of  the  legislative  body, 
and  rendering  the  two  great  branches  of  the 
government,  while  equally  popular  both  in 
their  origin  and  in  their  responsibility,  an  ef¬ 
fective  check  on  one  another.  The  plan  is  in 
accordance  with  that  sedulous  avoidance  of 
the  concentration  of  great  masses  of  power  in 
the  same  hands,  which  is  a  marked  character¬ 
istic  of  the  American  Federal  Constitution. 
But  the  advantage,  in  this  instance,  is  pur¬ 
chased  at  a  price  above  all  reasonable  estimates 
of  its  value.  It  seems  far  better  that  the  chief 
magistrate  in  a  republic  should  be  appointed 
avowedly,  as  the  chief  minister  in  a  constitu¬ 
tional  monarchy  is  virtually,  by  the  represen¬ 
tative  body.  In  the  first  place,  he  is  certain, 
when  thus  appointed,  to  be  a  more  eminent 
man.  The  party  which  has  the  majority  in 
Parliament  would  then,  as  a  rule,  appoint  its 
own  leader;  who  is  always  one  of  the  foremost, 
and  often  the  very  foremost  person  in  political 
life:  while  the  President  of  the  United  States, 
since  the  last  survivor  of  the  founders  of  the 
republic  disappeared  from  the  scene,  is  al¬ 
most  always  either  an  obscure  man,  or  one 
who  has  gained  any  reputation  he  may  possess 
in  some  other  field  than  politics.  And  this,  as 
1  have  before  observed,  is  no  accident,  but 
the  natural  effect  of  the  situation.  The  emi¬ 
nent  men  of  a  party,  in  an  election  extending 
to  the  whole  country,  are  never  its  most  avail¬ 
able  candidates.  All  eminent  men  have  made 
personal  enemies,  or  have  done  something,  or 
at  the  lowest  professed  some  opinion,  obnox¬ 
ious  to  some  local  or  other  considerable  divi¬ 
sion  of  the  community,  and  likely  to  tell  with 
fatal  effect  upon  the  number  of  votes;  whereas 
a  man  without  antecedents,  of  whom  nothing 
is  known  but  that  he  professes  the  creed  of 
the  party,  is  readily  voted  for  by  its  entire 
strength,  \nother  important  consideration  is 
the  great  misc hie!  ol  unintermitted electioneer¬ 
ing.  When  the  highest  dignity  in  the  State  is  to 
be  conferred  by  popular  elec  tion  once  in  every 
few  years,  the  whole  intervening  time  is  spent 
in  what  is  \  irtuallv  a  canvass.  Pre  sident,  minis¬ 
ters,  chiefs  of  parties,  and  their  followers,  are 


THE  EXECUTIVE 


all  electioneered:  the  whole  community  is 
kept  intent  on  the  mere  personalities  of  poli¬ 
tics,  and  every  public  question  is  discussed  and 
decided  with  less  reference  to  its  merits  than 
to  its  expected  bearing  on  the  presidential 
election.  If  a  system  had  been  devised  to  make 
party  spirit  the  ruling  principle  of  action  in 
all  public  affairs,  and  create  an  inducement 
not  only  to  make  every  question  a  party  ques¬ 
tion,  but  to  raise  questions  for  the  purpose  of 
founding  parties  upon  them,  it  would  have 
been  difficult  to  contrive  any  means  better 
adapted  to  the  purpose. 

I  will  not  affirm  that  it  would  at  all  times 
and  places  be  desirable  that  the  head  of  the 
executive  should  be  so  completely  dependent 
upon  the  votes  of  a  representative  assembly 
as  the  Prime  Minister  is  in  England,  and  is 
without  inconvenience.  If  it  were  thought  best 
to  avoid  this,  he  might,  though  appointed  by 
Parliament,  hold  his  office  for  a  fixed  period, 
independent  of  a  parliamentary  vote:  which 
would  be  the  American  system,  minus  the 
popular  election  and  its  evils.  There  is  another 
mode  of  giving  the  head  of  the  administration 
as  much  independence  of  the  legislature  as  is 
at  all  compatible  with  the  essentials  of  free 
government.  He  never  could  be  unduly  de¬ 
pendent  on  a  vote  of  Parliament,  if  he  had, 
as  the  British  Prime  Minister  practically  has, 
the  power  to  dissolve  the  House  and  appeal  to 
the  people:  if  instead  of  being  turned  out  of 
office  by  a  hostile  vote,  he  could  only  be  re¬ 
duced  by  it  to  the  alternative  of  resignation 
or  dissolution.  The  power  of  dissolving  Par¬ 
liament  is  one  which  I  think  it  desirable  he 
should  possess,  even  under  the  system  by  which 
his  own  tenure  of  office  is  secured  to  him  for 
a  fixed  period.  There  ought  not  to  be  any 
possibility  of  that  deadlock  in  politics  which 
would  ensue  on  a  quarrel  breaking  out  be¬ 
tween  a  President  and  an  Assembly,  neither  of 
whom,  during  an  interval  which  might  amount 
to  years,  would  have  any  legal  means  of  rid¬ 
ding  itself  of  the  other.  To  get  through  such 
a  period  without  a  coup  d'etat  being  at¬ 
tempted,  on  either  side  or  on  both,  requires 
such  a  combination  of  the  love  of  liberty  and 
the  habit  of  self-restraint  as  very  few  nations 
have  yet  shown  themselves  capable  of:  and 
though  this  extremity  were  avoided,  to  ex¬ 
pect  that  the  two  authorities  would  not  para¬ 
lyse  each  other’s  operations  is  to  suppose  that 
the  political  life  of  the  country  will  always 
be  pervaded  by  a  spirit  of  mutual  forbearance 
and  compromise,  imperturbable  by  the  pas¬ 


4l3 

sions  and  excitements  of  the  keenest  party 
struggles.  Such  a  spirit  may  exist,  but  even 
where  it  does  there  is  imprudence  in  trying 
it  too  far. 

Other  reasons  make  it  desirable  that  some 
power  in  the  state  (which  can  only  be  the 
executive)  should  have  the  liberty  of  at  any 
time,  and  at  discretion,  calling  a  new  Parlia¬ 
ment.  When  there  is  a  real  doubt  which  of 
two  contending  parties  has  the  strongest  fol¬ 
lowing,  it  is  important  that  there  should  exist 
a  constitutional  means  of  immediately  testing 
the  point,  and  setting  it  at  rest.  No  other  po¬ 
litical  topic  has  a  chance  of  being  properly 
attended  to  while  this  is  undecided:  and  such 
an  interval  is  mostly  an  interregnum  for  pur¬ 
poses  of  legislative  or  administrative  improve¬ 
ment:  neither  party  having  sufficient  confi¬ 
dence  in  its  strength  to  attempt  things  likely 
to  promote  opposition  in  any  quarter  that  has 
either  direct  or  indirect  influence  in  the  pend¬ 
ing  struggle. 

1  have  not  taken  account  of  the  case  in  which 
the  vast  power  centralised  in  the  chief  magis¬ 
trate,  and  the  insufficient  attachment  of  the 
mass  of  the  people  to  free  institutions,  give  him 
a  chance  of  success  in  an  attempt  to  subvert 
the  Constitution,  and  usurp  sovereign  power. 
Where  such  peril  exists,  no  first  magistrate  is 
admissible  whom  the  Parliament  cannot,  by  a 
single  vote,  reduce  to  a  private  station.  In  a 
state  of  things  holding  out  any  encourage¬ 
ment  to  that  most  audacious  and  profligate  of 
all  breaches  of  trust,  even  this  entireness  of 
constitutional  dependence  is  but  a  weak  pro¬ 
tection. 

Of  all  officers  of  government,  those  in  whose 
appointment  any  participation  of  popular  suf¬ 
frage  is  the  most  objectionable  are  judicial  of¬ 
ficers.  While  there  are  no  functionaries  whose 
special  and  professional  qualifications  the  pop¬ 
ular  judgment  is  less  fitted  to  estimate,  there 
are  none  in  whose  case  absolute  impartiality, 
and  freedom  from  connection  with  politicians 
or  sections  of  politicians,  are  of  anything  like 
equal  importance.  Some  thinkers,  among  oth¬ 
ers  Mr.  Bentham,  have  been  of  opinion  that, 
although  it  is  better  that  judges  should  not 
be  appointed  by  popular  election,  the  people 
of  their  district  ought  to  have  the  power,  after 
sufficient  experience,  of  removing  them  from 
their  trust.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  irre¬ 
movability  of  any  public  officer,  to  whom  great 
interests  are  entrusted,  is  in  itself  an  evil.  It 
is  far  from  desirable  that  there  should  be  no 
means  of  getting  rid  of  a  bad  or  incompetent 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


judge,  unless  for  such  misconduct  as  he  can 
be  made  to  answer  for  in  a  criminal  court; 
and  that  a  functionary  on  whom  so  much  de¬ 
pends  should  have  the  feeling  of  being  free 
front  responsibility  except  to  opinion  and  his 
own  conscience.  The  question  however  is, 
whether  in  the  peculiar  position  of  a  judge, 
and  supposing  that  all  practicable  securities 
have  been  taken  for  an  honest  appointment, 
irresponsibility,  except  to  his  own  and  the 
public  conscience,  has  not  on  the  whole  less 
tendency  to  pervert  his  conduct  than  responsi¬ 
bility  to  the  government,  or  to  a  popular  vote. 
Experience  has  long  decided  this  point  in  the 
affirmative  as  regardsresponsibility  to  the  exec¬ 
utive;  and  the  case  is  quite  equally  strong 
when  the  responsibility  sought  to  be  enforced 
is  to  the  suffrages  of  electors.  Among  the  good 
qualities  of  a  popular  constituency,  those  pe¬ 
culiarly  incumbent  upon  a  judge,  calmness 
and  impartiality,  are  not  numbered.  Happily, 
in  that  intervention  of  popular  suffrage  which 
is  essential  to  freedom  they  are  not  the  quali¬ 
ties  required.  Even  the  quality  of  justice, 
though  necessary  to  all  human  beings,  and 
therefore  to  all  electors,  is  not  the  inducement 
which  decides  any  popular  election.  Justice 
and  impartiality  are  as  little  wanted  for  elect¬ 
ing  a  member  of  Parliament  as  they  can  be 
in  any  transaction  of  men.  The  electors  have 
not  to  award  something  which  either  candi¬ 
date  has  a  right  to,  nor  to  pass  judgment  on 
the  general  merits  of  the  competitors,  but  to 
declare  which  of  them  has  most  of  their  per¬ 
sonal  confidence,  or  best  represents  their  polit¬ 
ical  convictions.  A  judge  is  bound  to  treat 
his  political  friend,  or  the  person  best  known 
to  him,  exactly  as  he  treats  other  people;  but 
it  would  be  a  breach  of  duty  as  well  as  an 
absurdity  if  an  elector  did  so.  No  argument 
can  be  grounded  on  the  beneficial  effect  pro¬ 
duced  on  judges,  as  on  all  other  functionaries, 
by  the  moral  jurisdiction  of  opinion;  for  even 
in  this  respect,  that  which  really  exercises  a 
useful  control  over  the  proceedings  of  a  judge, 
when  fit  for  the  judicial  office,  is  not  (except 
sometimes  in  political  cases)  the  opinion  of 
the  community  generally,  but  that  of  the  only 
public  by  whom  his  conduct  or  qualifications 
can  be  duly  estimated,  the  bar  of  his  own 
court. 

1  must  not  be  understood  to  say  that  the  par¬ 
ticipation  of  the  general  public  in  the  admin¬ 
istration  of  justice  is  of  no  importance;  it  is 
of  the  greatest:  but  in  what  manner?  By  the 
actual  discharge  of  a  part  of  the  judicial  office. 


in  the  capacity  of  jurymen.  This  is  one  of 
the  few  cases  in  politics  in  which  it  is  better 
that  the  people  should  act  directly  and  person¬ 
ally  than  through  their  representatives;  being 
almost  the  only  case  in  which  the  errors  that 
a  person  exercising  authority  may  commit  can 
be  better  borne  than  the  consequences  of 
making  him  responsible  for  them.  If  a  judge 
could  be  removed  from  office  by  a  popular 
vote,  whoever  was  desirous  of  supplanting 
him  would  make  capital  for  that  purpose  out 
of  all  his  judicial  decisions;  would  carry  all 
of  them,  as  far  as  he  found  practicable,  by  ir¬ 
regular  appeal  before  a  public  opinion  wholly 
incompetent,  for  want  of  having  heard  the 
case,  or  from  having  heard  it  without  either 
the  precautions  or  the  impartiality  belonging 
to  a  judicial  hearing;  would  play  upon  popu¬ 
lar  passion  and  prejudice  where  they  existed, 
and  take  pains  to  arouse  them  where  they  did 
not.  And  in  this,  if  the  case  were  interesting, 
and  he  took  sufficient  trouble,  he  would  in¬ 
fallibly  be  successful,  unless  the  judge  or  his 
friends  descended  into  the  arena,  and  made 
equally  powerful  appeals  on  the  other  side. 
Judges  would  end  by  feeling  that  they  risked 
their  office  upon  every  decision  they  gave  in 
a  case  susceptible  of  general  interest,  and  that 
it  was  less  essential  for  them  to  consider  what 
decision  was  just  than  what  would  be  most 
applauded  by  the  public,  or  would  least  ad¬ 
mit  of  insidious  misrepresentation.  The  prac¬ 
tice  introduced  by  some  of  the  new  or  revised 
State  Constitutions  in  America,  of  submitting 
judicial  officers  to  periodical  popular  re-elec¬ 
tion,  will  be  found,  I  apprehend,  to  be  one  of 
the  most  dangerous  errors  ever  yet  committed 
by  democracy:  and,  were  it  not  that  the  prac¬ 
tical  good  sense  which  never  totally  deserts 
the  people  of  the  United  States  is  said  to  be 
producing  a  reaction,  likely  in  no  long  time  to 
lead  to  the  retraction  of  the  error,  it  might 
with  reason  be  regarded  as  the  first  great  down¬ 
ward  step  in  the  degeneration  of  modern 
democratic  government. 1 

1 1  have  been  informed,  however,  that  in  the 
States  which  have  made  their  judges  elective,  the 
choice  is  not  realh  made  In  the  people,  hut  by 
the  lenders  of  parties;  no  elector  ever  thinking  of 
voting  for  any  one  hut  the  party  candidate:  and 
that,  in  consequence,  the  person  elected  is  usually 
in  effect  the  same  who  would  have  been  appointed 
to  the  office  h\  the  President  or  by  the  Governor 
of  the  State.  T  hus  one  had  practice  limits  and 
corrects  another;  and  the  habit  of  voting  en  tfiassc 
under  a  party  banner,  w  hich  is  so  full  of  evil  in  all 
cases  in  which  the  function  of  electing  is  rightly 
vested  in  the  people,  tends  to  alleviate  a  still  great- 


THE  EXECUTIVE  4*5 


With  regard  to  that  large  and  important 
Dody  which  constitutes  the  permanent  strength 
}f  the  public  service,  those  who  do  not  change 
with  changes  of  politics,  but  remain  to  aid 
2 very  minister  by  their  experience  and  tradi¬ 
tions,  inform  him  by  their  knowledge  of  busi¬ 
ness,  and  conduct  official  details  under  his  gen¬ 
eral  control;  those,  in  short,  who  form  the  class 
of  professional  public  servants,  entering  their 
profession  as  others  do  while  young,  in  the 
hope  of  rising  progressively  to  its  higher  grades 
as  they  advance  in  life;  it  is  evidently  inadmis¬ 
sible  that  these  should  be  liable  to  be  turned 
out,  and  deprived  of  the  whole  benefit  of  their 
previous  service,  except  for  positive,  proved, 
and  serious  misconduct.  Not,  of  course,  such 
delinquency  only  as  makes  them  amenable  to 
the  law;  but  voluntary  neglect  of  duty,  or  con¬ 
duct  implying  untrustworthiness  for  the  pur¬ 
poses  for  which  their  trust  is  given  them.  Since, 
therefore,  unless  in  case  of  personalculpability, 
there  is  no  way  of  getting  rid  of  them  except 
by  quartering  them  on  the  public  as  pension¬ 
ers,  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  the  ap¬ 
pointments  should  be  well  made  in  the  first 
instance;  and  it  remains  to  be  considered  by 
what  mode  of  appointment  this  purpose  can 
best  be  attained. 

In  making  first  appointments,  little  danger 
is  to  be  apprehended  from  want  of  special  skill 
and  knowledge  in  the  choosers,  but  much  from 
partiality,  and  private  or  political  interest. 
Being,  as  a  rule,  appointed  at  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  manhood,  not  as  having  learnt,  but 
in  order  that  they  may  learn,  their  profession, 
the  only  thing  by  which  the  best  candidates 
can  be  discriminated  is  proficiency  in  the  ordi¬ 
nary  branches  of  liberal  education:  and  this 
can  be  ascertained  without  difficulty,  provided 
there  be  the  requisite  pains  and  the  requisite 
impartiality  in  those  who  are  appointed  to  in¬ 
quire  into  it.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
can  reasonably  be  expected  from  a  minister; 
who  must  rely  wholly  on  recommendations, 
and  however  disinterested  as  to  his  personal 
wishes,  never  will  be  proof  against  the  solicita¬ 
tions  of  persons  who  have  the  power  of  influ¬ 
encing  his  own  election,  or  whose  political  ad¬ 
herence  is  important  to  the  ministry  to  which 
he  belongs.  These  considerations  have  intro¬ 
duced  the  practice  of  submitting  all  candidates 
for  first  appointments  to  a  public  examina- 


er  mischief  in  a  case  where  the  officer  to  be  elected 
is  one  who  ought  to  be  chosen  not  by  the  people 
but  for  them. 


tion,  conducted  by  persons  not  engaged  in 
politics,  and  of  the  same  class  and  quality  with 
the  examiners  for  honours  at  the  Universities. 
This  would  probably  be  the  best  plan  under 
any  system;  and  under  our  parliamentary  gov¬ 
ernment  it  is  the  only  one  which  affords  a 
chance,  I  do  not  say  of  honest  appointment, 
but  even  of  abstinence  from  such  as  are  mani¬ 
festly  and  flagrantly  profligate. 

It  is  also  absolutely  necessary  that  the  exam¬ 
inations  should  be  competitive,  and  the  ap¬ 
pointments  given  to  those  who  are  most  suc¬ 
cessful.  A  mere  pass  examination  never,  in  the 
long  run,  does  more  than  exclude  absolute 
dunces.  When  the  question,  in  the  mind  of  an 
examiner,  lies  between  blighting  the  prospects 
of  an  individual,  and  neglecting  a  duty  to  the 
public  which,  in  the  particular  instance,  sel¬ 
dom  appears  of  first-rate  importance;  and  when 
he  is  sure  to  be  bitterly  reproached  for  doing 
the  first,  while  in  general  no  one  will  either 
know  or  care  whether  he  has  done  the  latter; 
the  balance,  unless  he  is  a  man  of  very  unusual 
stamp,  inclines  to  the  side  of  good  nature.  A 
relaxation  in  one  instance  establishes  a  claim 
to  it  in  others,  which  every  repetition  of  in¬ 
dulgence  makes  it  more  difficult  to  resist;  each 
of  these  in  succession  becomes  a  precedent  for 
more,  until  the  standard  of  proficiency  sinks 
gradually  to  something  almost  contemptible. 
Examinations  for  degrees  at  the  two  great 
Universities  have  generally  been  as  slender  in 
their  requirements  as  those  for  honours  are  try¬ 
ing  and  serious.  Where  there  is  no  inducement 
to  exceed  a  certain  minimum,  the  minimum 
comes  to  be  the  maximum:  it  becomes  the  gen¬ 
eral  practice  not  to  aim  at  more,  and  as  in 
everything  there  are  some  who  do  not  attain 
all  they  aim  at,  however  low  the  standard  may 
be  pitched,  there  are  always  several  who  fall 
short  of  it.  When,  on  the  contrary,  the  appoint¬ 
ments  are  given  to  those,  among  a  great  num¬ 
ber  of  candidates,  who  most  distinguish  them¬ 
selves,  and  where  the  successful  competitors 
are  classed  in  order  of  merit,  not  only  each  is 
stimulated  to  do  his  very  utmost,  but  the  in¬ 
fluence  is  felt  in  every  place  of  liberal  educa¬ 
tion  throughout  the  country.  It  becomes  with 
every  schoolmaster  an  object  of  ambition,  and 
an  avenue  to  success,  to  have  furnished  pupils 
who  have  gained  a  high  place  in  these  com¬ 
petitions;  and  there  is  hardly  any  other  mode 
in  which  the  State  can  do  so  much  to  raise  the 
quality  of  educational  institutions  throughout 
the  country. 

Though  the  principle  of  competitive  exam- 


RE  PR  E  S  E  X  7\ 4  T IV  E  GOVE  R  N  M  ENT 


416 

inations  for  public  employment  is  of  such  re¬ 
cent  introduction  in  this  country,  and  is  still 
so  imperfectly  carried  out,  the  Indian  service 
being  as  yet  nearly  the  only  case  in  which  it 
exists  in  its  completeness,  a  sensible  effect  has 
already  begun  to  be  produced  on  the  places  of 
middle-class  education;  notwithstanding  the 
difficulties  which  the  principle  has  encount¬ 
ered  from  the  disgracefully  low  existing  state 
of  education  in  the  country,  which  these  very 
examinations  have  brought  into  strong  light. 
So  contemptible  has  the  standard  of  acquire¬ 
ment  been  found  to  be  among  the  youths  who 
obtain  the  nomination  from  the  minister  which 
entitles  them  to  offer  themselves  as  candidates, 
that  the  competition  of  such  candidates  pro¬ 
duces  almost  a  poorer  result  than  would  be  ob¬ 
tained  from  a  mere  pass  examination;  for  no 
one  would  think  of  fixing  the  conditions  of  a 
pass  examination  so  low  as  is  actually  found 
sufficient  to  enable  a  young  man  to  surpass  his 
fellow-candidates.  Accordingly,  it  is  said  that 
successive  years  show  on  the  whole  a  decline 
of  attainments,  less  effort  being  made  because 
the  resultsof  former  examinations  have  proved 
that  the  exertions  then  used  were  greater  than 
would  have  been  sufficient  to  attain  the  object. 
Partly  from  this  decrease  of  effort,  and  partly 
because,  even  at  the  examinations  which  do 
not  require  a  previous  nomination,  conscious 
ignorance  reduces  the  number  of  competitors 
to  a  mere  handful,  it  has  so  happened  that 
though  there  have  always  been  a  few  instances 
of  great  proficiency,  the  lower  part  of  the  list 
of  successful  candidates  represents  but  a  very 
moderate  amountof  acquirement;  and  we  have 
it  on  the  word  of  the  Commissioners  that  near¬ 
ly  all  who  have  been  unsuccessful  have  owed 
their  failure  to  ignorance  not  of  the  higher 
branches  of  instruction,  but  of  its  very  hum¬ 
blest  elements— spelling  and  arithmetic. 

The  outcries  which  continue  to  be  made 
against  these  examinations  by  some  of  the 
organs  of  opinion,  are  often,  1  regret  to  say,  as 
litt  le  c  reditable  to  the  good  faith  as  to  the  good 
sense  of  the  assailants.  I  hey  proceed  partly 
In  misrepresentation  of  the  kind  ol  ignorance 
whidt.  as  a  matter  of  fact,  actually  leads  to 
failure  in  the  examinations.  I'hey  quote  with 
emphasis  the  most  recondite  questions'  which 

’Not  always,  however,  the  most  recondite;  for  a 
laic  denouncer  of  competitive  examination  in  the 
House  of  Commons  had  the  naivete  to  produce  a 
set  of  almost  elemental  y  questions  in  algebra,  his- 
ioi\,  and  geography,  as  a  prool  ol  the  exoihitanl 
amount  of  high  scientific  attainment  which  the 
Commissioners  were  so  wild  as  to  exact 


can  be  shown  to  have  been  ever  asked,  and 
make  it  appear  as  if  unexceptionable  answers 
to  all  these  were  made  the  sine  qua  non  of  suc¬ 
cess.  Vet  it  has  been  repeated  to  satiety  that 
such  questions  are  not  put  because  it  is  ex¬ 
pected  of  every  one  that  he  should  answer 
them,  but  in  order  that  whoever  is  able  to  do 
so  may  have  the  means  of  proving  and  avail¬ 
ing  himself  of  that  portion  of  his  knowledge. 
It  is  not  as  a  ground  of  rejection,  but  as  an 
additional  means  of  success,  that  this  opportu¬ 
nity  is  given.  We  are  then  asked  whether  the 
kind  of  knowledge  supposed  in  this,  that,  or 
the  other  question  is  calculated  to  be  of  any 
use  to  the  candidate  after  he  has  attained  his 
object.  People  differ  greatly  in  opinion  as  to 
what  knowledge  is  useful.  There  are  persons 
in  existence,  and  a  late  Foreign  Secretary  of 
State  is  one  of  them,  who  think  English  spell¬ 
ing  a  useless  accomplishment  in  a  diplomatic 
attache,  or  a  clerk  in  a  government  office. 
About  one  thing  the  objectors  seem  to  he 
unanimous,  that  general  mental  cultivation  is 
not  useful  in  these  employments,  whatever  else 
may  be  so.  If.  however  (as  I  presume  to  think), 
it  is  useful,  or  if  any  education  at  all  is  useful, 
it  must  be  tested  by  the  tests  most  likely  to 
show  whether  the  candidate  possesses  it  or 
not.  To  ascertain  whether  he  has  been  well 
educated,  he  must  he  interrogated  in  the 
things  which  he  is  likely  to  know  if  he  has  been 
well  educated,  even  though  not  directly  perti¬ 
nent  to  the  work  to  which  he  is  to  be  ap¬ 
pointed.  Will  those  who  object  to  his  being 
questioned  in  classics  and  mathematics,  in  a 
country  where  the  only  things  regularly  taught 
are  classics  and  mathematics,  tell  us  what  they 
would  have  him  questioned  in?  There  seems, 
however,  to  be  equal  objec  tion  to  examining 
him  in  these,  and  to  examining  him  in  any¬ 
thing  but  these.  If  the  Commissioners— anxious 
to  open  a  door  of  admission  to  those  who  have 
not  gone  through  the  routine  of  a  grammar 
school,  or  who  make  up  for  the  smallness  of 
their  knowledge  of  what  is  there  taught  by 
greater  knowledge  of  something  else— allow 
marks  to  he  gained  by  proficiency  in  any  other 
subject  of  real  utility,  they  arc  reproached  for 
that  too.  Nothing  will  satisfy  the  objectors  blit 
free  admission  of  total  ignorance. 

We  are  triumphantly  told  that  neither  Clive 
nor  Wellington  could  have  passed  the  test 
which  is  prescribed  for  an  aspirant  to  an  en¬ 
gineer  cadetship.  As  if.  because  Clive  and 
Wellington  did  not  do  what  was  not  required 
of  them,  they  could  not  have  done  it  if  it  had 


LOCAL  REPRESENTATIVE  BODIES 


been  required.  If  it  be  only  meant  to  inform 
us  that  it  is  possible  to  be  a  great  general  with¬ 
out  these  things,  so  it  is  without  many  other 
things  which  are  very  useful  to  great  gener¬ 
als.  Alexander  the  Great  had  never  heard  of 
Vauban’s  rules,  nor  could  Julius  Caesar  speak 
French.  We  are  next  informed  that  book¬ 
worms,  a  term  which  seems  to  be  held  appli¬ 
cable  to  whoever  has  the  smallest  tincture  of 
book-knowledge,  may  not  be  good  at  bodily 
exercises,  or  have  the  habits  of  gentlemen.  7  his 
is  a  very  common  line  of  remark  with  dunces 
of  condition;  but  whatever  the  dunces  may 
think,  they  have  no  monopoly  of  either  gentle¬ 
manly  habitsor  bodily  activity.  Wherever  these 
are  needed,  let  them  be  inquired  into  and 
separately  provided  for,  not  to  the  exclusion 
of  mental  qualifications,  but  in  addition.  Mean¬ 
while,  I  am  credibly  informed,  that  in  the 
Military  Academy  at  Woolwich  the  competi¬ 
tion  cadets  are  as  superior  to  those  admitted 
on  the  old  system  of  nomination  in  these  re¬ 
spects  as  in  all  others;  that  they  learn  even 
their  drill  more  quickly;  as  indeed  might  be 
expected,  for  an  intelligent  person  learns  all 
things  sooner  than  a  stupid  one:  and  that  in 
general  demeanour  they  contrast  so  favourably 
with  their  predecessors,  that  the  authorities  of 
the  institutions  are  impatient  for  the  day  to 
arrive  when  the  last  remains  of  the  old  leaven 
shall  have  disappeared  from  the  place.  If  this 
be  so,  and  it  is  easy  to  ascertain  whether  it  is 
so,  it  is  to  be  hoped  we  shall  soon  have  heard 
for  the  last  time  that  ignorance  is  a  better 
qualification  than  knowledge  for  the  military, 
and  a  fortiori  for  every  other,  profession;  or 
that  any  one  good  quality,  however  little  ap¬ 
parently  connected  with  liberal  education,  is 
at  all  likely  to  be  promoted  by  going  with¬ 
out  it. 

Though  the  first  admission  to  government 
employment  be  decided  by  competitive  exam¬ 
ination,  it  would  in  most  cases  be  impossible 
that  subsequent  promotion  should  be  so  de¬ 
cided:  and  it  seems  proper  that  this  should 
take  place,  as  it  usually  does  at  present,  on  a 
mixed  system  of  seniority  and  selection.  Those 
whose  duties  are  of  a  routine  character  should 
rise  by  seniority  to  the  highest  point  to  which 
duties  merely  of  that  description  can  carry 
them;  while  those  to  whom  functions  of  partic¬ 
ular  trust,  and  requiring  special  capacity,  are 
confided,  should  be  selected  from  the  body  on 
the  discretion  of  the  chief  of  the  office.  And  this 
selection  will  generally  be  made  honestly  by 
him  if  the  original  appointments  take  place  by 


4*7 

open  competition:  for  under  that  system  his 
establishment  will  generally  consist  of  individ¬ 
uals  to  whom,  but  for  the  official  connection,  he 
would  have  been  a  stranger.  If  among  them 
there  be  any  in  whom  he,  or  his  political 
friends  and  supporters,  take  an  interest,  it  will 
be  but  occasionally,  and  only  when,  to  this 
advantage  of  connection,  is  added,  as  far  as  the 
initiatory  examination  could  test  it,  at  least 
equality  of  real  merit.  And,  except  when  there 
is  a  very  strong  motive  to  job  these  appoint¬ 
ments,  there  is  always  a  strong  one  to  appoint 
the  fittest  person;  being  the  one  who  gives  to 
his  chief  the  most  useful  assistance,  saves  him 
most  trouble,  and  helps  most  to  build  up  that 
reputation  for  good  management  of  public 
business  which  necessarily  and  properly  re¬ 
dounds  to  the  credit  of  the  minister,  however 
much  the  qualities  to  which  it  is  immediately 
owing  may  be  those  of  his  subordinates. 

Chapter  75 

Of  Local  Representative  Bodies 

It  is  but  a  small  portion  of  the  public  business 
of  a  country  which  can  be  well  done,  or  safely 
attempted,  by  the  central  authorities;  and  even 
in  our  own  government,  the  least  centralised 
in  Europe,  the  legislative  portion  at  least  of 
the  governing  body  busies  itself  far  too  much 
with  local  affairs,  employing  the  supreme  pow¬ 
er  of  the  State  in  cutting  small  knots  which 
there  ought  to  be  other  and  better  means  of 
untying.  The  enormous  amount  of  private 
business  which  takes  up  the  time  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  and  the  thoughts  of  its  individual  mem¬ 
bers,  distracting  them  from  the  proper  occu¬ 
pations  of  the  great  council  of  the  nation,  is 
felt  by  all  thinkers  and  observers  as  a  serious 
evil,  and  what  is  worse,  an  increasing  one. 

It  would  not  be  appropriate  to  the  limited 
design  of  this  treatise  to  discuss  at  large  the 
great  question,  in  no  way  peculiar  to  repre¬ 
sentative  government,  of  the  proper  limits  of 
governmental  action.  I  have  said  elsewhere 
what  seemed  to  me  most  essential  respecting 
the  principles  by  which  the  extent  of  that  ac¬ 
tion  ought  to  be  determined.  But  after  sub¬ 
tracting  from  the  functions  performed  by  most 
European  governments  those  which  ought  not 
to  be  undertaken  by  public  authorities  at  all, 
there  still  remains  so  great  and  various  an  ag- 

1  On  Liberty ,  concluding  chapter;  and,  at 
greater  length,'  in  the  final  chapter  of  Principles 
of  Political  Economy. 


REPRESENTATIVE  GO  VERNMEN7 


gregate  of  duties  that,  if  only  on  the  principle 
of  division  of  labour,  it  is  indispensable  to 
share  them  between  central  and  local  author¬ 
ities.  Not  only  are  separate  executive  officers 
required  for  purely  local  duties  (an  amount 
of  separation  which  exists  under  all  gov¬ 
ernments),  but  the  popular  control  over  those 
officers  can  only  be  advantageously  exerted 
through  a  separate  organ.  Their  original  ap¬ 
pointment,  the  function  of  watchingand  check¬ 
ing  them,  the  duty  of  providing,  or  the  dis¬ 
cretion  of  withholding,  the  supplies  necessary 
for  their  operations,  should  rest,  not  with  the 
national  Parliament  or  the  national  executive, 
but  with  the  people  of  the  locality.  In  some  of 
the  New  England  States  these  functions  are 
still  exercised  directly  bv  the  assembled  people; 
it  is  said  with  better  results  than  might  be  ex¬ 
pected;  and  those  highly  educated  commu¬ 
nities  are  so  well  satisfied  with  this  primitive 
mode  of  local  government,  that  they  have  no 
desire  to  exchange  it  for  the  only  representa¬ 
tive  system  they  are  acquainted  with,  by  which 
all  minorities  are  disfranchised.  Such  very  pe¬ 
culiar  circumstances,  however,  are  required  to 
make  this  arrangement  work  tolerably  in  prac¬ 
tice,  that  recourse  must  generally  be  had  to  the 
plan  of  representative  sub-Parliaments  for  lo¬ 
cal  affairs.  These  exist  in  England,  but  very 
incompletely,  and  with  great  irregularity  and 
want  of  system:  in  some  other  countries  much 
less  popularly  governed  their  constitution  is 
far  more  rational.  In  England  there  has  al¬ 
ways  been  more  liberty,  but  worse  organisa¬ 
tion,  while  in  other  countries  there  is  better 
organisation,  but  less  liberty.  It  is  necessary, 
then,  that  in  addition  to  the  national  repre¬ 
sentation  there  should  be  municipal  and  pro¬ 
vincial  representations:  and  the  two  questions 
which  remain  to  be  resolved  are,  how  the  local 
representative  bodies  should  be  constituted, 
and  what  should  be  the  extent  of  their  func¬ 
tions. 

In  considering  these  questions  two  points 
require  an  equal  degree  of  our  attention:  how 
the  local  business  itself  can  be  best  done;  and 
how  its  transaction  can  be  made  most  instru¬ 
mental  to  the  nourishment  of  public  spirit 
and  the  development  of  intelligence.  In  an 
earlier  part  of  this  inquiry  1  have  dwelt  in 
strong  language— hardly  any  language  is  strong 
enough  to  express  the  strength  of  my  convic¬ 
tion— on  the  importance  of  that  portion  of  the 
operation  of  free  institutions  which  may  be 
called  the  public  education  of  the  citizens. 
Now,  of  this  operation  the  local  administra¬ 


tive  institutions  are  the  chief  instrument.  Ex¬ 
cept  by  the  part  they  may  take  as  jurymen  in 
the  administration  of  justice,  the  mass  of  the 
population  have  very  little  opportunity  of 
sharing  personally  in  the  conduct  of  the  gen¬ 
eral  affairs  of  the  community.  Reading  news¬ 
papers,  and  perhaps  writing  to  them,  public 
meetings,  and  solicitations  of  different  sorts 
addressed  to  the  political  authorities,  are  the 
extent  of  the  participation  of  private  citi¬ 
zens  in  general  politics  during  the  interval  be¬ 
tween  one  parliamentary  election  and  another. 
Though  it  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  im¬ 
portance  of  these  various  liberties,  both  as 
securities  for  freedom  and  as  means  of  general 
cultivation,  the  practice  which  they  give  is 
more  in  thinking  than  in  action,  and  in  think¬ 
ing  without  the  responsibilities  of  action; 
which  with  most  people  amounts  to  little  more 
than  passively  receiving  the  thoughts  of  some 
one  else.  But  in  the  case  of  local  bodies,  be¬ 
sides  the  function  of  electing,  many  citizens  in 
turn  have  the  chance  of  being  elected,  and 
many,  either  by  selection  or  by  rotation,  fill 
one  or  other  of  the  numerous  local  executive 
offices.  In  these  positions  they  have  to  act  for 
public  interests,  as  well  as  to  think  and  to 
speak,  and  the  thinking  cannot  all  be  done  b\ 
proxy.  It  may  be  added,  that  these  local  func¬ 
tions,  not  being  in  general  sought  by  the  high¬ 
er  ranks,  carry  down  the  important  political 
education  which  they  are  the  means  of  con¬ 
ferring  to  a  much  lower  grade  in  society.  The 
mental  discipline  being  thus  a  more  impor¬ 
tant  feature  in  local  concerns  than  in  the  gen¬ 
eral  affairs  of  the  State,  while  there  are  not 
such  vital  interests  dependent  on  the  quality 
of  the  administration,  a  greater  weight  may  be 
given  to  the  former  consideration,  and  the  lat¬ 
ter  admits  much  more  frequently  of  being 
postponed  to  it  than  in  matters  of  general  leg¬ 
islation  and  the  conduct  of  imperial  affairs. 

The  proper  constitution  of  local  representa¬ 
tive  bodies  does  not  present  much  difficulty. 
The  principles  which  apply  to  it  do  not  differ 
in  any  respect  from  those  applicable  to  the 
national  representation.  The  same  obligation 
exists,  as  in  the  case  of  the  more  important 
function,  for  making  the  bodies  elective;  and 
the  same  reasons  operate  as  in  that  case,  but 
with  still  greater  force,  for  giving  them  a  wide¬ 
ly  democratic  basis:  the  dangers  being  less,  and 
the  advantages,  in  point  of  popular  education 
and  cultivation,  in  some  respects  even  greater. 
As  the  principal  duty  of  the  local  bodies  con¬ 
sists  of  the  imposition  and  expenditure  of  local 


LOCAL  REPRESENTATIVE  BODIES  4*9 


axation,  the  electoral  franchise  should  vest 
n  all  who  contribute  to  the  local  rates,  to  the 
exclusion  of  all  who  do  not.  I  assume  that  there 
s  no  indirect  taxation,  no  octroi  duties,  or 
hat  if  there  are,  they  are  supplementary  only; 
;hose  on  whom  their  burden  falls  being  also 
rated  to  a  direct  assessment.  The  representa¬ 
tion  of  minorities  should  be  provided  for  in 
the  same  manner  as  in  the  national  Parlia¬ 
ment,  and  there  are  the  same  strong  reasons 
for  plurality  of  votes.  Only,  there  is  not  so  deci¬ 
sive  an  objection,  in  the  inferior  as  in  the  higher 
body,  to  making  the  plural  voting  depend  (as 
in  some  of  the  local  elections  of  our  own  coun¬ 
try)  on  a  mere  money  qualification:  for  the 
honest  and  frugal  dispensation  of  money  forms 
so  much  larger  a  part  of  the  business  of  the 
local  than  of  the  national  body,  that  there  is 
more  justice  as  well  as  policy  in  allowing  a 
greater  proportional  influence  to  those  who 
have  a  larger  money  interest  at  stake. 

In  the  most  recently  established  of  our  lo¬ 
cal  representative  institutions,  the  Boards  of 
Guardians,  the  justices  of  peace  of  the  district 
sit  ex  officio  along  with  the  elected  members, 
in  number  limited  by  law  to  a  third  of  the 
whole.  In  the  peculiar  constitution  of  English 
society  I  have  no  doubt  of  the  beneficial  effect 
of  this  provision.  It  secures  the  presence,  in 
these  bodies,  of  a  more  educated  class  than  it 
would  perhaps  be  practicable  to  attract  thither 
on  any  other  terms;  and  while  the  limitation 
in  number  of  the  ex  officio  members  precludes 
them  from  acquiring  predominance  by  mere 
numerical  strength,  they,  as  a  virtual  repre¬ 
sentation  of  another  class,  having  sometimes  a 
different  interest  from  the  rest,  are  a  check 
upon  the  class  interests  of  the  farmers  or  petty 
shopkeepers  who  form  the  bulk  of  the  elected 
Guardians.  A  similar  commendation  cannot 
be  given  to  the  constitution  of  the  only  pro¬ 
vincial  boards  we  possess,  the  Quarter  Sessions, 
consisting  of  the  justices  of  peace  alone;  on 
whom,  over  and  above  their  judicial  duties, 
some  of  the  most  important  parts  of  the  ad¬ 
ministrative  business  of  the  country  depend 
for  their  performance.  The  mode  of  forma¬ 
tion  of  these  bodies  is  most  anomalous,  they 
being  neither  elected,  nor,  in  any  proper  sense 
of  the  term,  nominated,  but  holding  their 
important  functions,  like  the  feudal  lords  to 
whom  they  succeeded,  virtually  by  right  of  their 
acres:  the  appointment  vested  in  the  Crown 
(or,  speaking  practically,  in  one  of  themselves, 
the  Lord  Lieutenant)  being  made  use  of  only 
as  a  means  of  excluding  any  one  who  it  is 


thought  would  do  discredit  to  the  body,  or, 
now  and  then,  one  who  is  on  the  wrong  side  in 
politics.  The  institution  is  the  most  aristocrat¬ 
ic  in  principle  which  now  remains  in  England; 
far  more  so  than  the  House  of  Lords,  for  it 
grants  public  money  and  disposes  of  impor¬ 
tant  public  interests,  not  in  conjunction  with 
a  popular  assembly,  but  alone.  It  is  clung  to 
with  proportionate  tenacity  by  our  aristocratic 
classes;  but  is  obviously  at  variance  with  all  the 
principles  which  are  the  foundation  of  rep¬ 
resentative  government.  In  a  County  Board 
there  is  not  the  same  justification  as  in  Boards 
of  Guardians,  for  even  an  admixture  of  ex 
officio  with  elected  members:  since  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  a  county  being  on  a  sufficiently  large 
scale  to  be  an  object  of  interest  and  attraction 
to  country  gentlemen,  they  would  have  no 
more  difficulty  in  getting  themselves  elected  to 
the  Board  than  they  have  in  being  returned  to 
Parliament  as  county  members. 

In  regard  to  the  proper  circumscription  of 
the  constituencies  which  elect  the  local  repre¬ 
sentative  bodies;  the  principle  which,  when 
applied  as  an  exclusive  and  unbending  rule 
to  parliamentary  representation,  is  inappro¬ 
priate,  namely  community  of  local  interests,  is 
here  the  only  just  and  applicable  one.  The 
very  object  of  having  a  local  representation  is 
in  order  that  those  who  have  any  interest  in 
common,  which  they  do  not  share  with  the 
general  body  of  their  countrymen,  may  manage 
that  joint  interest  by  themselves:  and  the  pur¬ 
pose  is  contradicted  if  the  distribution  of  the 
local  representation  follows  any  other  rule  than 
the  grouping  of  those  joint  interests.  There 
are  local  interests  peculiar  to  every  town, 
whether  great  or  small,  and  common  to  all  its 
inhabitants:  every  town,  therefore,  without 
distinction  of  size,  ought  to  have  its  municipal 
council.  It  is  equally  obvious  that  every  town 
ought  to  have  but  one.  The  different  quarters 
of  the  same  town  have  seldom  or  never  any 
material  diversities  of  local  interest;  they  all 
require  to  have  the  same  things  done,  the  same 
expenses  incurred;  and,  except  as  to  their 
churches,  which  it  is  probably  desirable  to  leave 
under  simplyparochial  management,  the  same 
arrangements  may  be  made  to  serve  for  all. 
Paving,  lighting,  water  supply,  drainage,  port 
and  market  regulations,  cannot  without  great 
waste  and  inconvenience  be  different  for  differ¬ 
ent  quarters  of  the  same  town.  The  subdivision 
of  London  into  six  or  seven  independent  dis¬ 
tricts,  each  with  its  separate  arrangements  for 
local  business  (several  of  them  without  unity 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


of  administration  even  within  themselves), 
prevents  the  possibility  of  consecutive  or  well- 
regulated  cooperation  for  common  objects, 
precludes  any  uniform  principle  for  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  local  duties,  compels  the  general  gov¬ 
ernment  to  take  things  upon  itself  which 
would  be  best  left  to  local  authorities  if  there 
were  any  whose  authority  extended  to  the  en¬ 
tire  metropolis,  and  answers  no  purpose  but 
to  keep  up  the  fantastical  trappings  of  that 
union  of  modern  jobbing  and  antiquated  fop¬ 
pery,  the  Corporation  of  the  City  of  London. 

Another  equally  important  principle  is.  that 
in  each  local  circumscription  there  should  be 
but  one  elected  body  for  all  local  business,  not 
different  bodies  for  different  parts  of  it.  Divi¬ 
sion  of  labour  does  not  mean  cutting  up  every 
business  into  minute  fractions;  it  means  the 
union  of  such  operations  as  are  fit  to  be  per¬ 
formed  by  the  same  persons,  and  the  separa¬ 
tion  of  such  as  can  be  better  performed  by  dif¬ 
ferent  persons.  The  executive  duties  of  the 
locality  do  indeed  require  to  be  divided  into 
departments,  for  the  same  reason  as  those  of 
the  State;  because  they  are  of  diverse  kinds, 
each  requiring  knowledge  peculiar  to  itself, 
and  needing,  for  its  due  performance,  the  un¬ 
divided  attention  of  a  specially  qualified  func¬ 
tionary.  But  the  reasons  for  subdivision  which 
apply  to  the  execution  do  not  apply  to  the  con¬ 
trol.  The  business  of  the  elective  body  is  not  to 
do  the  work,  but  to  see  that  it  is  properly  done, 
and  that  nothing  necessary  is  left  undone.  This 
function  can  be  fulfilled  for  all  departments 
by  the  same  superintending  body;  and  by  a 
collective  and  comprehensive  far  better  than 
by  a  minute  and  microscopic  view.  It  is  as  ab¬ 
surd  in  public  affairs  as  it  would  be  in  private 
that  every  workman  should  be  looked  after  by 
a  superintendent  to  himself.  The  Government 
of  the  Crown  consists  of  many  departments, 
and  there  are  many  ministers  to  conduct  them, 
but  those  ministers  have  not  a  Parliament 
apiece  to  keep  them  to  their  duty.  The  local, 
like  the  national  Parliament,  has  for  its  proper 
business  to  consider  the  interest  of  the  locality 
as  a  whole,  composed  of  parts  all  of  which  must 
be  adapted  to  one  another,  and  attended  to  in 
the  order  and  ratio  of  their  importance. 

I  here  is  another  very  weighty  reason  for 
uniting  the  control  of  a  II  the  I  nisi  ness  ol  a  local¬ 
ity  nuclei  one  body.  The  greatest  imperfection 
of  popular  local  institutions,  and  the  chief 
cause  of  the  failure  which  so  often  attends 
them,  is  the  low  calibre  of  the*  men  by  whom 
they  are  almost  always  carried  on.  I  hat  these 


should  be  of  a  very  miscellaneous  character  is, 
indeed,  part  of  the  usefulnessof  the  institution; 
it  is  that  circumstance  chiefly  which  renders  it  a 
school  of  political  capacity  and  general  intelli¬ 
gence.  But  a  school  supposes  teachers  as  well 
as  scholars;  the  utility  of  the  instruction  great¬ 
ly  depends  on  its  bringing  inferior  minds  into 
contact  with  superior,  a  contact  which  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  life  is  altogether  exceptional, 
and  the  want  of  which  contributes  more  than 
anything  else  to  keep  the  generality  of  man¬ 
kind  on  one  level  of  contented  ignorance.  The 
school,  moreover,  is  worthless,  and  a  school  of 
evil  instead  of  good,  if  through  the  want  of  due 
surveillance,  and  of  the  presence  within  itself 
of  a  higher  order  of  characters,  the  action  of 
the  body  is  allowed,  as  it  so  often  is,  to  degen¬ 
erate  into  an  equally  unscrupulous  and  stupid 
pursuit  of  the  self-interest  of  its  members.  Now 
it  is  quite  hopeless  to  induce  persons  of  a  high 
class,  either  socially  or  intellectually,  to  take 
a  share  of  local  administration  in  a  corner  by 
piece-meal,  as  members  of  a  Paving  Board  or  a 
Drainage  Commission.  The  entire  local  busi¬ 
ness  of  their  town  is  not  more  than  a  sullicient 
object  to  induce  men  whose  tastes  incline  them 
and  whose  knowledge  qualifies  them  for  na¬ 
tional  affairs  to  become  members  of  a  mere 
local  body,  and  devote  to  it  the  time  and  study 
which  are  necessary  to  render  their  presence 
anything  more  than  a  screen  for  the  jobbing 
of  inferior  persons  under  the  shelter  of  their 
responsibility.  A  mere  Board  of  Works,  though 
it  comprehend  the  entire  metropolis,  is  sure  to 
be  composed  of  the  same  class  of  persons  as  the 
vestries  of  the  London  parishes;  nor  is  it  prac¬ 
ticable.  or  even  desirable,  that  such  should  not 
form  the  majority:  but  it  is  important  for  every 
purpose  which  local  bodies  are  designed  to 
serve,  whether  it  be  thecnlightcned  and  honest 
performance  of  their  special  duties,  or  the  cul¬ 
tivation  of  the  political  intelligence  of  the  na¬ 
tion,  that  every  such  body  should  contain  a 
portion  of  the  very  best  minds  of  the  locality: 
who  arc  thus  brought  into  perpetual  contact, 
of  the  most  useful  kind,  with  minds  of  a  lower 
grade,  receiving  from  them  what  local  or  pro¬ 
fessional  knowledge  they  have  to  give,  and  in 
return  inspiring  them  with  a  portion  of  their 
own  more  enlarged  ideas,  and  higher  and  more 
enlightened  purposes. 

A  meie  village  has  no  claim  to  a  municipal 
representation.  By  a  village  l  mean  a  place 
whose  inhabitants  arc  not  markedly  distin¬ 
guished  In  ex  <  n  pa  lion  or  social  relations  from 
those  of  the  rural  districts  adjoining,  and  for 


LOCAL  REPRESENTATIVE  BODIES 


whose  local  wants  the  arrangements  made  for 
the  surrounding  territory  will  suffice.  Such 
small  places  have  rarely  a  sufficient  public  to 
furnish  a  tolerable  municipal  council:  if  they 
contain  any  talent  or  knowledge  applicable  to 
public  business,  it  is  apt  to  be  all  concentrated 
in  some  one  man,  who  thereby  becomes  the 
dominator  of  the  place.  It  is  better  that  such 
places  should  be  merged  in  a  larger  circum¬ 
scription.  The  local  representation  of  rural 
districts  will  naturally  be  determined  by  geo¬ 
graphical  considerations:  with  due  regard  to 
those  sympathies  of  feeling  by  which  human 
beings  are  so  much  aided  to  act  in  concert,  and 
which  partly  follow  historical  boundaries,  such 
as  those  of  counties  or  provinces,  and  partly 
community  of  interest  and  occupation,  as  in 
agricultural,  maritime,  manufacturing, or  min¬ 
ing  districts.  Different  kinds  of  local  business 
may  require  different  areas  of  representation. 
The  Unions  of  parishes  have  been  fixed  on  as 
the  most  appropriate  basis  for  the  representa¬ 
tive  bodies  which  superintend  the  relief  of  in¬ 
digence:  while,  for  the  proper  regulation  of 
highways,  or  prisons,  or  police,  a  large  extent, 
like  that  of  an  average  county,  is  not  more  than 
sufficient.  In  these  large  districts,  therefore,  the 
maxim,  that  an  elective  body  constituted  in 
any  locality  should  have  authority  over  all  the 
local  concerns  common  to  the  locality,  requires 
modification  from  another  principle-as  well 
as  from  the  competing  consideration  of  the 
importance  of  obtaining  for  the  discharge  of 
the  local  duties  the  highest  qualifications  pos¬ 
sible.  For  example,  if  it  be  necessary  (as  I  be¬ 
lieve  it  to  be)  for  the  proper  administration  of 
the  Poor  Laws  that  the  area  of  rating  should 
not  be  more  extensive  than  most  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  Unions,  a  principle  which  requires  a  Board 
of  Guardians  for  each  Union— yet,  as  a  much 
more  highly  qualified  class  of  persons  is  likely 
to  be  obtainable  for  a  County  Board  than  those 
who  compose  an  average  Board  of  Guardians, 
it  may  on  that  ground  be  expedient  to  reserve 
for  the  County  Boards  some  higher  descrip¬ 
tions  of  local  business,  which  might  otherwise 
have  been  conveniently  managed  within  itself 
by  each  separate  Union. 

Besides  the  controlling  Council,  or  local  sub- 
Parliament,  local  business  has  its  executive  de¬ 
partment.  With  respect  to  this,  the  same  ques¬ 
tions  arise  as  with  respect  to  the  executive  au¬ 
thorities  in  the  State;  and  they  may,  for  the 
most  part,  be  answered  in  the  same  manner. 
The  principles  applicable  to  all  public  trusts 
are  in  substance  the  same.  In  the  first  place, 


421 

each  executive  officer  should  be  single,  and 
singly  responsible  for  the  whole  of  the  duty 
committed  to  his  charge.  In  the  next  place,  he 
should  be  nominated,  not  elected.  It  is  ridicu¬ 
lous  that  a  surveyor,  or  a  health  officer,  or  even 
a  collector  of  rates,  should  be  appointed  by 
popular  suffrage.  The  popular  choice  usually 
depends  on  interest  with  a  few  local  leaders, 
who,  as  they  are  not  supposed  to  make  the  ap¬ 
pointment,  are  not  responsible  for  it;  or  on  an 
appeal  to  sympathy,  founded  on  having  twelve 
children,  and  having  been  a  rate-payer  in  the 
parish  for  thirty  years.  If  in  cases  of  this  de¬ 
scription  election  by  the  population  is  a  farce, 
appointment  by  the  local  representative  body 
is  little  less  objectionable.  Such  bodies  have  a 
perpetual  tendency  to  become  joint-stock  as¬ 
sociations  for  carrying  into  effect  the  private 
jobs  of  their  various  members.  Appointments 
should  be  made  on  the  individual  responsibil¬ 
ity  of  the  Chairman  of  the  body,  let  him  be 
called  Mayor,  Chairman  of  Quarter  Sessions, 
or  by  whatever  other  title.  He  occupies  in  the 
locality  a  position  analogous  to  that  of  the 
prime  minister  in  the  State,  and  under  a  well- 
organised  system  the  appointment  and  watch¬ 
ing  of  the  local  officers  would  be  the  most  im¬ 
portant  part  of  his  duty:  he  himself  being  ap¬ 
pointed  by  the  Council  from  its  own  number, 
subject  either  to  annual  re-election,  or  to  re¬ 
moval  by  a  vote  of  the  body. 

From  the  constitution  of  the  local  bodies  I 
now  pass  to  the  equally  important  and  more 
difficult  subject  of  their  proper  attributions. 
This  question  divides  itself  into  two  parts: 
what  should  be  their  duties,  and  whether  they 
should  have  full  authority  within  the  sphere 
of  those  duties,  or  should  be  liable  to  any,  and 
what,  interference  on  the  part  of  the  central 
government. 

It  is  obvious,  to  begin  with,  that  all  business 
purely  local — all  which  concerns  only  a  single 
locality— should  devolve  upon  the  local  author¬ 
ities.  The  paving,  lighting,  and  cleansing  of 
the  streets  of  a  town,  and  in  ordinary  circum¬ 
stances  the  draining  of  its  houses,  are  of  little 
consequence  to  any  but  its  inhabitants.  The 
nation  at  large  is  interested  in  them  in  no 
other  way  than  that  in  which  it  is  interested  in 
the  private  well-being  of  all  its  individual 
citizens.  But  among  the  duties  classed  as  local, 
or  performed  by  local  functionaries,  there  are 
many  which  might  with  equal  propriety  be 
termed  national,  being  the  share,  belonging  to 
the  locality,  of  some  branch  of  the  public  ad¬ 
ministration  in  the  efficiency  of  which  the 


R  E  P  R  E  S  E  X  TAT  I  V  E  GO  l '  E  R  X  M  EXT 


whole  nation  is  alike  interested:  the  gaols,  for 
instance,  most  of  which  in  this  country  are  un¬ 
der  county  management;  the  local  police;  the 
local  administration  of  justice,  much  of  which, 
especially  in  corporate  towns,  is  performed  by 
officers  elected  by  the  locality,  and  paid  from 
local  funds.  None  of  these  can  be  said  to  be 
matters  of  local,  as  distinguished  from  nation¬ 
al.  importance.  It  would  not  be  a  matter  per¬ 
sonally  indifferent  to  the  rest  of  the  country  if 
any  part  of  it  became  a  nest  of  robbers  or  a 
focus  of  demoralisation,  owing  to  the  malad¬ 
ministration  of  its  police;  or  if,  through  the 
bad  regulations  of  its  gaol,  the  punishment 
which  the  courts  of  justice  intended  to  inflict 
on  the  criminals  confined  therein  (who  might 
have  come  from,  or  committed  their  offences 
in,  any  other  district)  might  be  doubled  in  in¬ 
tensity,  or  lowered  to  practical  impunity.  The 
points,  moreover,  which  constitute  good  man¬ 
agement  of  these  things  are  the  same  every¬ 
where;  there  is  no  good  reason  why  police,  or 
gaols,  or  the  administration  of  justice,  should 
be  differently  managed  in  one  part  of  the  king¬ 
dom  and  in  another;  while  there  is  great  peril 
that  in  things  so  important,  and  to  which  the 
most  instructed  mindsavailable  to  the  State  are 
not  more  than  adequate,  the  lower  average  of 
capacities  which  alone  can  be  counted  on  for 
the  service  of  the  localities  might  commit  errors 
of  such  magnitude  as  to  be  a  serious  blot  upon 
the  general  administration  of  the  country. 

Security  of  person  and  property,  and  equal 
justice  between  individuals,  are  the  first  needs 
of  society,  and  the  primary  ends  of  govern¬ 
ment:  if  these  things  can  be  left  to  any  respon¬ 
sibility  below  the  highest,  there  is  nothing,  ex¬ 
cept  war  and  treaties,  which  requires  a  general 
government  at  all.  Whatever  arc  the  best  ar¬ 
rangements  for  securing  these  primary  objects 
should  be  made  universally  obligatory,  and,  to 
set urc  their  enforcement,  should  be  placed 
under  central  superintendence.  It  is  often  use¬ 
ful,  and  with  the  institutions  of  our  own  coun¬ 
try  even  net  cssary,  from  the  scarcity,  in  the 
localities,  of  officers  representing  the  general 
government,  that  the  execution  of  duties  im¬ 
posed  by  the  central  authority  should  he  en¬ 
trusted  to  functionaries  appointed  for  local 
purposes  by  the  locality.  Hut  expel  icme  is 
daily  forcing  upon  the  public  a  conviction  of 
the  necessity  of  having  at  least  inspectors  ap¬ 
pointed  by  the  general  government  to  see  that 
the  local  officers  do  their  duty.  If  prisons  are 
under  local  management,  the  central  govern¬ 
ment  appoints  inspectors  of  prisons  to  take 


care  that  the  rules  laid  down  by  Parliament 
are  observed,  and  to  suggest  others  if  the  state 
of  the  gaols  shows  them  to  be  requisite:  as 
there  are  inspectors  of  factories,  and  inspectors 
of  schools,  to  watch  over  the  observance  of  the 
Acts  of  Parliament  relating  to  the  first,  and  the 
fulfilment  of  the  conditions  on  which  State  as¬ 
sistance  is  granted  to  the  latter. 

But,  if  the  administration  of  justice,  police 
and  gaols  included,  is  both  so  universal  a  con¬ 
cern,  and  so  much  a  matter  of  general  science 
independent  of  local  peculiarities,  that  it  may 
be,  and  ought  to  be,  uniformly  regulated 
throughout  the  country,  and  its  regulation  en¬ 
forced  by  more  trained  and  skilful  hands  than 
those  of  purely  local  authorities— there  is  also 
business,  such  as  the  administration  of  the 
poor  laws,  sanitary  regulation,  and  others, 
which,  while  really  interesting  to  the  whole 
country,  cannot  consistently  with  the  very  pur¬ 
poses  of  local  administration,  be  managed 
otherwise  than  by  the  localities.  Jn  regard  to 
such  duties  the  question  arises,  how  far  the 
local  authorities  ought  to  be  trusted  with  dis¬ 
cretionary  power,  free  from  any  superintend¬ 
ence  or  control  of  the  State. 

To  decide  this  question  it  is  essential  to  con¬ 
sider  what  is  the  comparative  position  of  the 
central  and  the  local  authorities  as  to  capacity 
for  the  work,  and  security  against  negligence 
or  abuse.  In  the  first  place,  the  local  represent¬ 
ative  bodies  and  their  officers  are  almost  cer¬ 
tain  to  be  of  a  much  lower  grade  of  intelli¬ 
gence  and  knowledge  than  Parliament  and  the 
national  executive.  Secondly,  besides  being 
themselves  of  inferior  qualifications,  they  are 
watched  by,  and  accountable  to,  an  inferior 
public  opinion.  The  public  under  whose  eyes 
they  act,  and  by  whom  they  are  criticised,  is 
both  more  limited  in  extent,  and  generally  far 
less  enlightened,  than  that  which  surrounds 
and  admonishes  the  highest  authorities  at  the 
capital;  while  the  comparative  smallness  of  the 
interests  involved  causes  even  that  inferiorpub- 
lic  to  direct  its  thoughts  to  the  subject  less  in¬ 
tently,  and  with  less  solicitude.  Far  less  inter¬ 
ference  is  exercised  by  the  press  and  by  public 
discussion,  and  that  which  is  exercised  may 
with  much  more  impunity  be  disregarded  in 
the  proceedings  of  local  than  in  those  of  na¬ 
tional  authorities. 

Thus  far  the  advantage  seems  wholly  on  the 
side  of  management  by  the  central  govern¬ 
ment.  But,  when  we  look  more  <losel\,  these 
motives  of  preference  are  found  to  he  balanced 
by  others  fully  as  substantial.  If  the  local  au- 


LOCAL  REPRESENTATIVE  BODIES  423 


thorities  and  public  are  inferior  to  the  central 
ones  in  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  admin¬ 
istration,  they  have  the  compensating  advan¬ 
tage  of  a  far  more  direct  interest  in  the  result. 

A  man's  neighbours  or  his  landlord  may  be 
much  cleverer  than  himself,  and  not  without 
an  indirect  interest  in  his  prosperity,  but  for 
all  that  his  interests  will  be  better  attended  to 
in  his  own  keeping  than  in  theirs.  It  is  further 
to  be  remembered,  that  even  supposing  the 
central  government  to  administer  through  its 
own  officers,  its  officers  do  not  act  at  the  centre, 
but  in  the  locality:  and  however  inferior  the 
local  public  may  be  to  the  central,  it  is  the 
local  public  alone  which  has  any  opportunity 
of  watching  them,  and  it  is  the  local  opinion 
alone  which  either  acts  directly  upon  theirown 
conduct,  or  calls  the  attention  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  to  the  points  in  which  they  may  require 
correction.  It  is  but  in  extreme  cases  that  the 
general  opinion  of  the  country  is  brought  to 
bear  at  all  upon  details  of  local  administra¬ 
tion,  and  still  more  rarely  has  it  the  means  of 
deciding  upon  them  with  any  just  apprecia¬ 
tion  of  the  case.  Now,  the  local  opinion  neces¬ 
sarily  acts  far  more  forcibly  upon  purely  local 
administrators.  They,  in  the  natural  course 
of  things,  are  permanent  residents,  not  expect¬ 
ing  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  place  when  they 
cease  to  exercise  authority  in  it;  and  their  au¬ 
thority  itself  depends,  by  supposition,  on  the 
will  of  the  local  public.  I  need  not  dwell  on  the 
deficiencies  of  the  central  authority  in  detailed 
knowledge  of  local  persons  and  things,  and  the 
too  great  engrossment  of  its  time  and  thoughts 
by  other  concerns,  to  admit  of  its  acquiring  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  local  knowledge  neces¬ 
sary  even  for  deciding  on  complaints,  and  en¬ 
forcing  responsibility  from  so  great  a  number 
of  local  agents.  In  the  details  of  management, 
therefore,  the  local  bodies  will  generally  have 
the  advantage;  but  in  comprehension  of  the 
principles  even  of  purely  local  management, 
the  superiority  of  the  central  government, 
when  rightly  constituted,  ought  to  be  prodi¬ 
gious:  not  only  by  reason  of  the  probably  great 
personal  superiority  of  the  individuals  com¬ 
posing  it,  and  the  multitude  of  thinkers  and 
writers  who  are  at  all  times  engaged  in  pressing 
useful  ideas  upon  their  notice,  but  also  because 
the  knowledge  and  experience  of  any  local  au¬ 
thority  is  but  local  knowledge  and  experience, 
confined  to  their  own  part  of  the  country  and 
its  modes  of  management,  whereas  the  central 
government  has  the  means  of  knowing  all  that 
is  to  be  learnt  from  the  united  experience  of 


the  whole  kingdom,  with  the  addition  of  easy 
access  to  that  of  foreign  countries. 

The  practical  conclusion  from  these  prem¬ 
ises  is  not  difficult  to  draw.  The  authority 

which  is  most  conversant  with  principles  should 

be  supreme  over  principles,  while  that  which 
is  most  competent  in  details  should  have  the 
details  left  to  it.  The  principal  business  of  the 
central  authority  should  be  to  give  instruction, 
of  the  local  authority  to  apply  it.  Power  may 
be  localised,  but  knowledge,  to  be  most  useful, 
must  be  centralised;  there  must  be  somewhere 
a  focus  at  which  all  its  scattered  rays  are  col¬ 
lected,  that  the  broken  and  coloured  lights 
which  exist  elsewhere  may  find  there  what  is 
necessary  to  complete  and  purify  them.  To 
every  branch  of  local  administration  which  af¬ 
fects  the  general  interest  there  should  be  a  cor¬ 
responding  central  organ,  either  a  minister,  or 
some  specially  appointed  functionary  under 
him;  even  if  that  functionary  does  no  more 
than  collect  information  from  all  quarters,  and 
bring  the  experience  acquired  in  one  locality 
to  the  knowledge  of  another  where  it  is  want¬ 
ed.  But  there  is  also  something  more  than  this 
for  the  central  authority  to  do.  It  ought  to  keep 
open  a  perpetual  communication  with  the  lo¬ 
calities:  informing  itself  by  their  experience, 
and  them  by  its  own;  giving  advice  freely  when 
asked,  volunteering  it  when  seen  to  be  re¬ 
quired;  compelling  publicity  and  recordation 
of  proceedings,  and  enforcing  obedience  to 
every  general  law  which  the  legislature  has  laid 
down  on  the  subject  of  local  management. 

That  some  such  laws  ought  to  be  laid  down 
few  are  likely  to  deny.  The  localities  may  be 
allowed  to  mismanage  their  own  interests,  but 
not  to  prejudice  those  of  others,  nor  violate 
those  principles  of  justice  between  one  person 
and  another  of  which  it  is  the  duty  of  the  State 
to  maintain  the  rigid  observance.  If  the  local 
majority  attempts  to  oppress  the  minority,  or 
one  class  another,  the  State  is  bound  to  inter¬ 
pose.  For  example,  all  local  rates  ought  to  be 
voted  exclusively  by  the  local  representative 
body;  but  that  body,  though  elected  solely  by 
rate-payers,  may  raise  its  revenues  by  impostsof 
such  a  kind,  or  assess  them  in  such  a  manner,  as 
to  throw  an  unjust  share  of  the  burden  on  the 
poor,  the  rich,  or  some  particular  class  of  the 
population:  it  is  the  duty,  therefore,  of  the 
legislature,  while  leaving  the  mere  amount  of 
the  local  taxes  to  the  discretion  of  the  local 
body,  to  lay  down  authoritatively  the  modes 
of  taxation,  and  rules  of  assessment,  which 
alone  the  localities  shall  be  permitted  to  use. 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


Again,  in  the  administration  of  public  charity 
the  industry  and  morality  of  the  whole  labour¬ 
ing  population  depend,  to  a  most  serious  ex¬ 
tent,  upon  adherence  to  certain  fixed  princi¬ 
ples  in  awarding  relief.  Though  it  belongs  es¬ 
sentially  to  the  local  functionaries  to  deter¬ 
mine  who,  according  to  those  principles,  is  en¬ 
titled  to  be  relieved,  the  national  Parliament 
is  the  proper  authority  to  prescribe  the  prin¬ 
ciples  themselves;  and  it  would  neglect  a  most 
important  part  of  its  duty  if  it  did  not,  in  a 
matter  of  such  grave  national  concern,  lay 
down  imperative  rules,  and  make  effectual 
provision  that  those  rules  should  not  be  de¬ 
parted  from.  What  power  of  actual  interfer¬ 
ence  with  the  local  administrators  it  may  be 
necessary  to  retain,  for  the  due  enforcement  of 
the  laws,  is  a  question  of  detail  into  which  it 
would  be  useless  to  enter.  The  laws  themselves 
will  naturally  define  the  penalties,  and  fix  the 
mode  of  their  enforcement.  It  may  be  requi¬ 
site,  to  meet  extreme  cases,  that  the  power  of 
the  central  authority  should  extend  to  dissolv¬ 
ing  the  local  representative  council,  or  dis¬ 
missing  the  local  executive:  but  not  to  making 
new  appointments,  or  suspending  the  local 
institutions.  Where  Parliament  has  not  inter¬ 
fered,  neither  ought  any  branch  of  the  execu¬ 
tive  to  interfere  with  authority;  but  as  an  ad¬ 
viser  and  critic,  ari  enforcer  of  the  laws,  and  a 
denouncer  to  Parliament  or  the  local  constit¬ 
uencies  of  conduct  which  it  deems  condemna- 
ble,  the  functions  of  the  executive  arc  of  the 
greatest  possible  value. 

Some  may  think  that  however  much  the  cen¬ 
tral  authority  surpasses  the  local  in  knowledge 
of  the  principles  of  administration,  the  great 
object  which  has  been  so  much  insisted  on,  the 
social  and  political  education  of  the  citizens, 
requires  that  they  should  be  left  to  manage 
these  matters  by  their  own,  however  imperfect, 
lights.  To  this  it  might  be  answered,  that  the 
education  of  the  citizens  is  not  the  only  thing 
to  be  considered;  government  and  administra¬ 
tion  do  not  exist  for  that  alone,  great  as  its  im¬ 
portance  is.  But  the  objection  shows  a  very  im¬ 
perfect  understanding  of  the  function  of  pop¬ 
ular  institutions  as  a  means  of  political  in¬ 
struction.  It  is  but  a  poor  education  that  as¬ 
sociates  ignorance  with  ignorance,  and  leaves 
them,  it  they  care  for  knowledge,  to  grope  their 
way  to  it  without  help,  and  to  do  without  it 
if  they  do  not.  What  is  wanted  is,  t he  means  of 
making  ignorance  aware  of  itself,  and  able  to 
profit  by  knowledge;  accustomingminds  whit  h 
know  only  routine  to  act  upon,  and  feel  the 


value  of,  principles:  teaching  them  to  com¬ 
pare  different  modes  of  action,  and  learn,  by 
the  use  of  their  reason,  to  distinguish  the  best. 
When  we  desire  to  have  a  good  school,  we  do 
not  eliminate  the  teacher.  The  old  remark,  “as 
the  schoolmaster  is,  so  will  be  the  school,”  is 
as  true  of  the  indirect  schooling  of  grown  peo¬ 
ple  by  public  business  as  of  the  schooling  of 
youth  in  academies  and  colleges.  A  govern¬ 
ment  which  attempts  to  do  everything  is  aptly 
compared  by  M.  Charles  cle  Remusat  to  a 
schoolmaster  who  does  all  the  pupils’  tasks  for 
them:  he  may  be  very  popular  with  the  pupils, 
but  he  will  teach  them  little.  A  government, 
on  the  other  hand,  which  neither  does  any¬ 
thing  itself  that  can  possibly  be  done  by  any 
one  else,  nor  shows  any  one  else  how  to  do  any¬ 
thing,  is  like  a  school  in  which  there  is  no 
schoolmaster,  but  only  pupil  teachers  who 
have  never  themselves  been  taught. 

Chapter  16 

Of  Nationality,  as  connected  with 
Representative  Government 

A  portion  of  mankind  may  be  said  to  consti¬ 
tute  a  Nationality  if  they  are  united  among 
themselves  by  common  sympathies  which  do 
not  exist  between  them  and  any  others— which 
make  them  co-operate  with  each  other  more 
willingly  than  with  other  people,  desire  to  be 
under  the  same  government,  and  desire  that 
it  should  be  government  by  themselves  or  a 
portion  of  themselves  exclusively.  This  feel¬ 
ing  of  nationality  may  have  been  generated  by 
various  causes.  Sometimes  it  is  the  effect  of 
identity  of  race  and  descent.  Community  of 
language,  and  commtinit\  of  religion,  greatly 
contribute  to  it.  Geographical  limits  are  one  of 
its  causes.  But  the  strongest  of  all  is  identity  of 
political  antecedents:  the  possession  of  a  na¬ 
tional  history,  and  consequent  community  of 
recollections;  collective  pride  and  humilia¬ 
tion,  pleasure  and  regret,  connected  with  the 
same  incidents  in  the  past.  None  of  these  cir¬ 
cumstances.  however,  are  either  indispensable, 
or  necessarily  sufficient  by  themselves.  Switzer¬ 
land  has  a  strong  sentiment  of  nationality, 
though  the  cantons  are  of  different  races,  dif¬ 
ferent  languages,  and  different  religions. Sicily 
has,  throughout  history,  felt  itself  quite  dis¬ 
tinct  in  nationality  from  Naples,  notwith¬ 
standing  identity  of  religion,  almost  identity 
of  language,  and  a  considerable  amount  of 
common  historical  antecedents.  The  f  lemish 
and  the  Walloon  provinces  of  Belgium,  not- 


NATIONALITY 


425 


withstanding  diversity  of  race  and  language, 
have  a  much  greater  feeling  of  common  na¬ 
tionality  than  the  former  have  with  Holland, 
or  the  latter  with  France.  Yet  in  general  the 
national  feeling  is  proportionally  weakened 
by  the  failure  of  any  of  the  causes  which  con¬ 
tribute  to  it.  Identity  of  language,  literature, 
and,  to  some  extent,  of  race  and  recollections, 
have  maintained  the  feeling  of  nationality  in 
considerable  strength  among  the  different  por¬ 
tions  of  the  German  name,  though  they  have 
at  no  time  been  really  united  under  the  same 
government;  but  the  feeling  has  never  reached 
to  making  the  separate  states  desire  to  get  rid 
of  their  autonomy.  Among  Italians  an  identity 
far  from  complete,  of  language  and  literature, 
combined  with  a  geographical  position  which 
separates  them  by  a  distinct  line  from  other 
countries,  and,  perhaps  more  than  everything 
else,  the  possession  of  a  common  name,  which 
makes  them  all  glory  in  the  past  achievements 
in  arts,  arms,  politics,  religious  primacy,  sci¬ 
ence,  and  literature,  of  any  who  share  the  same 
designation,  give  rise  to  an  amount  of  nation¬ 
al  feeling  in  the  population  which,  though  still 
imperfect,  has  been  sufficient  to  produce  the 
great  events  now  passing  before  us,  notwith¬ 
standing  a  great  mixture  of  races,  and  al¬ 
though  they  have  never,  in  either  ancient  or 
modern  history,  been  under  the  same  govern¬ 
ment,  except  while  that  government  extend¬ 
ed  or  was  extending  itself  over  the  greater 
part  of  the  known  world. 

Where  the  sentiment  of  nationality  exists 
in  any  force,  there  is  a  prima  facie  case  for 
uniting  all  the  members  of  the  nationality  un¬ 
der  the  same  government,  and  a  government 
to  themselves  apart.  This  is  merely  saying  that 
the  question  of  government  ought  to  be  de¬ 
cided  by  the  governed.  One  hardly  knows  what 
any  division  of  the  human  race  should  be  free 
to  do  if  not  to  determine  with  which  of  the 
various  collective  bodies  of  human  beings  they 
choose  to  associate  themselves. 

But,  when  a  people  are  ripe  for  free  institu¬ 
tions,  there  is  a  still  more  vital  consideration. 
Free  institutions  are  next  to  impossible  in  a 
country  made  up  of  different  nationalities. 
Among  a  people  without  fellow-feeling,  es¬ 
pecially  if  they  read  and  speak  different  lan¬ 
guages,  the  united  public  opinion,  necessary 
to  the  working  of  representative  government, 
cannot  exist.  The  influences  which  form  opin¬ 
ions  and  decide  political  acts  are  different  in 
the  different  sections  of  the  country.  An  al¬ 
together  different  set  of  leaders  have  the  con¬ 


fidence  of  one  part  of  the  country  and  of  an¬ 
other.  The  same  books,  newspapers,  pamphlets, 
speeches,  do  not  reach  them.  One  section 
does  not  know  what  opinions,  or  what  instiga¬ 
tions,  are  circulating  in  another.  The  same 
incidents,  the  same  acts,  the  same  system  of 
government,  affect  them  in  different  ways;  and 
each  fears  more  injury  to  itself  from  the  other 
nationalities  than  from  the  common  arbiter, 
the  state.  Their  mutual  antipathies  are  gener¬ 
ally  much  stronger  than  jealousy  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment.  That  any  one  of  them  feels  aggrieved 
by  the  policy  of  the  common  ruler  is  sufficient 
to  determine  another  to  support  that  policy. 
Even  if  all  are  aggrieved,  none  feel  that  they 
can  rely  on  the  others  for  fidelity  in  a  joint 
resistance;  the  strength  of  none  is  sufficient  to 
resist  alone,  and  each  may  reasonably  think 
that  it  consults  its  own  advantage  most  by  bid¬ 
ding  for  the  favour  of  the  government  against 
the  rest.  Above  all,  the  grand  and  only  effec¬ 
tual  security  in  the  last  resort  against  the  aes- 
potism  of  the  government  is  in  that  case  want¬ 
ing:  the  sympathy  of  the  army  with  the  people. 
The  military  are  the  part  of  every  community 
in  whom,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  their  fellow-countrymen  and 
foreigners  is  the  deepest  and  strongest.  To  the 
rest  of  the  people  foreigners  are  merely  stran¬ 
gers;  to  the  soldier,  they  are  men  against  whom 
he  may  be  called,  at  a  week’s  notice,  to  fight  for 
life  or  death.  The  difference  to  him  is  that  be¬ 
tween  friends  and  foes — we  may  almost  say  be¬ 
tween  fellow-men  and  another  kind  of  ani¬ 
mals:  for  as  respects  the  enemy,  the  only  law 
is  that  of  force,  and  the  only  mitigation  the 
same  as  in  the  case  of  other  animals— that  of 
simple  humanity.  Soldiers  to  whose  feelings 
half  or  three-fourths  of  the  subjects  of  the  same 
government  are  foreigners  will  have  no  more 
scruple  in  mowing  them  down,  and  no  more 
desire  to  ask  the  reason  why,  than  they  would 
have  in  doing  the  same  thing  against  declared 
enemies.  An  army  composed  of  various  na¬ 
tionalities  has  no  other  patriotism  than  devo¬ 
tion  to  the  flag.  Such  armies  have  been  the  ex¬ 
ecutioners  of  liberty  through  the  whole  dura¬ 
tion  of  modern  history.  The  sole  bond  which 
holds  them  together  is  their  officers  and  the 
government  which  they  serve;  and  their  only 
idea,  if  they  have  any,  of  public  duty  is  obedi¬ 
ence  to  orders.  A  government  thus  supported, 
by  keeping  its  Hungarian  regiments  in  Italy 
and  its  Italian  in  Hungary,  can  long  continue 
to  rule  in  both  places  with  the  iron  rod  of 
foreign  conquerors. 


^26  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


If  it  be  said  that  so  broadly  marked  a  dis¬ 
tinction  between  what  is  due  to  a  fellow-coun¬ 
tryman  and  what  is  due  merely  to  a  human 
creature  is  more  worthy  of  savages  than  of 
civilised  beings,  and  ought,  with  the  utmost 
energy,  to  be  contended  against,  no  one  holds 
that  opinion  more  strongly  than  myself.  But 
this  object,  one  of  the  worthiest  to  which  hu¬ 
man  endeavour  can  be  directed,  can  never,  in 
the  present  state  of  civilisation,  be  promoted 
by  keeping  different  nationalities  of  anything 
like  equivalent  strength  under  the  same  gov¬ 
ernment.  In  a  barbarous  state  of  society  the 
case  is  sometimes  different.  The  government 
may  then  be  interested  in  softening  the  antip¬ 
athies  of  the  races  that  peace  may  be  pre¬ 
served  and  the  country  more  easily  governed. 
But  when  there  are  cither  free  institutions  or  a 
desire  for  them,  in  any  of  the  peoples  artificial¬ 
ly  tied  together,  the  interest  of  the  government 
lies  in  an  exactly  opposite  direction.  It  is  then 
interested  in  keeping  up  anti  envenoming 
their  antipathies  that  they  may  be  prevented 
from  coalescing,  and  it  may  be  enabled  to  use 
some  of  them  as  tools  for  the  enslavement  of 
others.  The  Austrian  Court  has  now  for  a 
whole  generation  made  these  tactics  its  prin¬ 
cipal  means  of  government;  with  what  fatal 
success,  at  the  time  of  the  Vienna  insurrection 
and  the  Hungarian  contest,  the  world  knows 
too  well.  Happily  there  are  now  signs  that  im¬ 
provement  is  too  far  advanced  to  permit  this 
policy  to  be  any  longer  successful. 

For  the  preceding  reasons,  it  is  in  general  a 
necessary  condition  of  free  institutions  that 
the  boundaries  of  governments  should  coincide 
in  the  main  with  those  of  nationalities.  But 
several  considerations  are  liable  to  conflict  in 
practice  with  this  general  principle.  In  the  first 
place,  its  application  is  often  precluded  by 
geographical  hindrances.  There  are  parts  even 
of  Europe  in  which  different  nationalities  arc 
so  locally  intermingled  that  it  is  not  practica¬ 
ble  for  them  to  be  under  separate  govern¬ 
ments.  The  population  of  Hungary  is  com¬ 
posed  of  Magyars,  Slovaks,  Croats,  Serbs, 
Roumans,  and  in  some  districts  Germans,  so 
mixed  up  as  to  be  incapable  of  local  separa¬ 
tion;  and  there  is  no  course  open  to  them  but 
to  make  a  virtue  of  necessity,  and  reconcile 
themselves  to  living  together  under  equal 
rights  and  laws  I  heir  community  of  servitude, 
which  dates  only  from  the  destruction  of  1  Bul¬ 
garian  independence  in  1849,  sccins  10  he 
ripening  and  disposing  them  for  sin  h  an  equal 
union.  The  German  colony  of  East  Prussia  is 


cut  off  from  Germany  by  part  of  the  ancient 
Poland,  and  being  too  weak  to  maintain  sepa¬ 
rate  independence,  must,  if  geographical  con¬ 
tinuity  is  to  be  maintained,  be  either  tinder  a 
non-German  government,  or  the  intervening 
Polish  territory  must  be  under  a  German  one. 
Another  considerable  region  in  which  the  dom¬ 
inant  element  of  the  population  is  German, 
the  provinces  of  Couiiand,  Esthonia,  and  Li¬ 
vonia,  is  condemned  by  its  local  situation  to 
form  part  of  a  Slavonian  state.  In  Eastern  Ger¬ 
many  itself  there  is  a  large  Slavonic  popula¬ 
tion:  Bohemia  is  principally  Slavonic,  Silesia 
and  other  districts  partially  so.  The  most 
united  country  in  Europe,  France,  is  far  from 
being  homogeneous:  independently  of  the 
fragments  of  foreign  nationalities  at  its  remote 
extremities,  it  consists,  as  language  and  history 
prove,  of  two  portions,  one  occupied  almost  ex¬ 
clusively  by  a  Gallo-Roman  population,  while 
in  the  other  the  Frankish,  Burgundian,  and 
other  Teutonic  races  form  a  considerable  in¬ 
gredient. 

When  proper  allowance  has  been  made  for 
geographical  exigencies,  another  more  purely 
moral  and  social  consideration  offers  itself. 
Experience  proves  that  it  is  possible  for  one 
nationality  to  merge  and  be  absorbed  in  an¬ 
other:  and  when  it  was  originally  an  inferior 
and  more  backward  portion  of  the  human  race 
the  absorption  is  greatly  to  its  advantage.  No¬ 
body  can  suppose  that  it  is  not  more  beneficial 
to  a  Breton,  or  a  Basque  of  French  Navarre,  to 
be  brought  into  the  current  of  the  ideas  and 
feelings  of  a  highly  civilised  and  cultivated 
people— to  be  a  member  of  the  French  nation¬ 
ality,  admitted  on  equal  terms  to  all  the  privi¬ 
leges  of  French  citizenship,  sharing  the  advan¬ 
tages  of  French  protection,  and  the  dignity 
and  prestige  of  French  power— than  to  sulk 
on  his  own  rocks,  the  half-savage  relic  of  past 
times,  revolving  in  his  own  little  mental  orbit, 
without  participation  or  interest  in  the  gen¬ 
eral  movement  of  the  world.  The  same  remark 
applies  to  (he  Welshman  or  the  Scottish  High¬ 
lander  as  members  of  the  British  nation. 

Whatever  really  tends  to  the  admixture  of 
nationalities,  and  the  blending  of  their  at¬ 
tributes  and  peculiarities  in  a  common  union, 
is  a  benefit  to  the  human  race.  Not  by  extin¬ 
guishing  types,  of  which,  in  these  cases,  suf¬ 
ficient  examples  are  sure  to  remain,  but  by 
softening  their  extreme  forms,  and  filling  up 
the  intervals  between  them.  The  united  peo¬ 
ple,  like  a  crossed  breed  of  animals  (but  in  a 
still  greater  degree,  because  the  influences  in 


NATIONALITY  427 


operation  are  moral  as  well  as  physical),  in¬ 
herits  the  special  aptitudes  and  excellences  of 
all  its  progenitors,  protected  by  the  admixture 
from  being  exaggerated  into  the  neighbouring 
vices.  But  to  render  this  admixture  possible, 
there  must  be  peculiar  conditions.  The  com¬ 
binations  of  circumstances  which  occur,  and 
which  effect  the  result,  are  various. 

The  nationalities  brought  together  under 
the  same  government  may  be  about  equal  in 
numbers  and  strength,  or  they  may  be  very  un¬ 
equal.  If  unequal,  the  least  numerous  of  the 
two  may  either  be  the  superior  in  civilisation, 
or  the  inferior.  Supposing  it  to  be  superior,  it 
may  either,  through  that  superiority,  be  able 
to  acquire  ascendancy  over  the  other,  or  it  may 
be  overcome  by  brute  strength  and  reduced  to 
subjection.  This  last  is  a  sheer  mischief  to  the 
human  race,  and  one  which  civilised  human¬ 
ity  with  one  accord  should  rise  in  arms  to  pre¬ 
vent.  The  absorption  of  Greece  by  Macedonia 
was  one  of  the  greatest  misfortunes  which  ever 
happened  to  the  world:  that  of  any  of  the  prin¬ 
cipal  countries  of  Europe  by  Russia  would  be 
a  similar  one. 

If  the  smaller  nationality,  supposed  to  be 
the  more  advanced  in  improvement,  is  able  to 
overcome  the  greater,  as  the  Macedonians,  re¬ 
inforced  by  the  Greeks,  did  Asia,  and  the  Eng¬ 
lish  India,  there  is  often  a  gain  to  civilisation: 
but  the  conquerors  and  the  conquered  cannot 
in  this  case  live  together  under  the  same  free 
institutions.  The  absorption  of  the  conquerors 
in  the  less  advanced  people  would  be  an  evil: 
these  must  be  governed  as  subjects,  and  the 
state  of  things  is  either  a  benefit  or  a  misfor¬ 
tune,  according  as  the  subjugated  people  have 
or  have  not  reached  the  state  in  which  it  is  an 
injury  not  to  be  under  a  free  government,  and 
according  as  the  conquerors  do  or  do  not  use 
their  superiority  in  a  manner  calculated  to 
fit  the  conquered  for  a  higher  stage  of  improve¬ 
ment.  This  topic  will  be  particularly  treated 
of  in  a  subsequent  chapter. 

When  the  nationality  which  succeeds  in  over¬ 
powering  the  other  is  both  the  most  numerous 
and  the  most  improved;  and  especially  if  the 
subdued  nationality  is  small,  and  has  no  hope 
of  reasserting  its  independence;  then,  if  it  is 
governed  with  any  tolerable  justice,  and  if  the 
members  of  the  more  powerful  nationality  are 
not  made  odious  by  being  invested  with  exclu¬ 
sive  privileges,  the  smaller  nationality  is  grad¬ 
ually  reconciled  to  its  position,  and  becomes 
amalgamated  with  the  larger.  No  Bas-Breton, 
nor  even  any  Alsatian,  has  the  smallest  wish  at 


the  present  day  to  be  separated  from  France. 

If  all  Irishmen  have  not  yet  arrived  at  the 
same  disposition  towards  England,  it  is  partly 
because  they  are  sufficiently  numerous  to  be 
capable  of  constituting  a  respectable  national¬ 
ity  by  themselves;  but  principally  because,  un¬ 
til  of  late  years,  they  had  been  so  atrociously 
governed,  that  all  their  best  feelings  combined 
with  their  bad  ones  in  rousing  bitter  resent¬ 
ment  against  the  Saxon  rule.  This  disgrace  to 
England,  and  calamity  to  the  whole  empire, 
has,  it  may  be  truly  said,  completely  ceased  for 
nearly  a  generation.  No  Irishman  is  now  less 
free  than  an  Anglo-Saxon,  nor  has  a  less  share 
of  every  benefit  either  to  his  country  or  to  his 
individual  fortunes  than  if  he  were  sprung 
from  any  other  portion  of  the  British  domin¬ 
ions,  The  only  remaining  real  grievance  of 
Ireland,  that  of  the  State  Church,  is  one  which 
half,  or  nearly  half,  the  people  of  the  larger 
island  have  in  common  with  them.  There  is 
now  next  to  nothing,  except  the  memory  of 
the  past,  and  the  difference  in  the  predomi¬ 
nant  religion,  to  keep  apart  two  races,  per¬ 
haps  the  most  fitted  of  any  two  in  the  world  to 
be  the  completing  counterpart  of  one  another. 
The  consciousness  of  being  at  last  treated  not 
only  with  equal  justice  but  with  equal  con¬ 
sideration  is  making  such  rapid  way  in  the 
Irish  nation  as  to  be  wearing  off  all  feelings 
that  could  make  them  insensible  to  the  bene¬ 
fits  which  the  less  numerous  and  less  wealthy 
people  must  necessarily  derive  from  being  fel¬ 
low-citizens  instead  of  foreigners  to  those  who 
are  not  only  their  nearest  neighbours,  but  the 
wealthiest,  and  one  of  the  freest,  as  well  as  most 
civilised  and  powerful,  nations  of  the  earth. 

The  cases  in  which  the  greatest  practical  ob¬ 
stacles  exist  to  the  blending  of  nationalities 
are  when  the  nationalities  which  have  been 
bound  together  are  nearly  equal  in  numbers 
and  in  the  other  elements  of  power.  In  such 
cases,  each,  confiding  in  its  strength,  and  feel¬ 
ing  itself  capable  of  maintaining  an  equal 
struggle  with  any  of  the  others,  is  unwilling  to 
be  merged  in  it:  each  cultivates  with  party 
obstinacy  its  distinctive  peculiarities;  obsolete 
customs,  and  even  declining  languages,  are  re¬ 
vived  to  deepen  the  separation;  each  deems  it¬ 
self  tyrannised  over  if  any  authority  is  exer¬ 
cised  within  itself  by  functionaries  of  a  rival 
race;  and  whatever  is  given  to  one  of  the  con¬ 
flicting  nationalities  is  considered  to  be  taken 
from  all  the  rest.  When  nations,  thus  divided, 
are  under  a  despotic  government  which  is  a 
stranger  to  all  of  them,  or  which,  though 


428  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


sprung  from  one,  yet  feeling  greater  interest 
in  its  own  power  than  in  any  sympathies  of  na¬ 
tionality,  assigns  no  privilege  to  either  nation, 
and  chooses  its  instruments  indifferently  from 
all:  in  the  course  of  a  few  generations,  identity 
of  situation  often  produces  harmony  of  feel¬ 
ing.  and  the  different  races  come  to  feel  to¬ 
wards  each  other  as  fellow-countrymen:  par¬ 
ticularly  if  they  are  dispersed  over  the  same 
tract  of  country.  But  if  the  era  of  aspiration  to 
free  government  arrives  before  this  fusion  has 
been  effected,  the  opportunity  has  gone  by  for 
effecting  it.  From  that  time,  if  the  unreconciled 
nationalities  are  geographically  separate,  and 
especially  if  their  local  position  is  such  that 
there  is  no  natural  fitness  or  convenience  in 
their  being  under  the  same  government  (as  in 
the  case  of  an  Italian  province  under  a  French 
or  German  yoke),  there  is  not  only  an  obvious 
propriety,  but,  if  either  freedom  or  concord  is 
cared  for,  a  necessity,  for  breaking  the  connec¬ 
tion  altogether.  There  may  be  cases  in  which 
the  provinces,  after  separation,  might  usefully 
remain  united  by  a  federal  tie:  but  it  generally 
happens  that  if  they  are  willing  to  forego  com¬ 
plete  independence,  and  become  members  of 
a  federation,  each  of  them  has  other  neigh¬ 
bours  with  whom  it  would  prefer  to  connect  it¬ 
self,  having  more  sympathies  in  common,  if 
not  also  greater  community  of  interest. 

Chapter  ij 

Of  Federal  Representative 
Governments 

Portions  of  mankind  who  are  not  fitted,  or 
not  disposed,  to  live  under  the  same  internal 
government,  may  often  with  advantage  be 
federally  united  as  to  their  relations  with  for¬ 
eigners:  both  to  prevent  wars  among  them¬ 
selves,  and  for  the  sake  of  moreeffectual  protec¬ 
tion  against  the  aggression  of  powerful  States. 

To  render  a  federation  advisable,  several 
conditions  are  necessary.  The  first  is,  that  there 
should  be  a  sufficient  amount  of  mutual  sym- 
pathv  among  the  populations.  T  he  federation 
binds  them  always  to  fight  on  the  same  side: 
and  if  they  have  such  feelings  towards  one  an¬ 
other.  or  stub  diversity  of  feeling  towards  their 
neighbours,  that  they  would  generally  prefer 
to  light  on  opposite  sides,  the  federal  tie  is 
neither  likely  to  be  of  long  duration,  not  to  be 
well  obsened  while  it  subsists.  Thesympathies 
available  for  the  purpose  are  those  of  rate,  lan¬ 
guage,  religion,  and,  above  all,  of  political  in¬ 
stitutions.  as  conducing  most  to  a  feeling  of 


identity  of  political  interest.  When  a  few  free 
states,  separately  insufficient  for  their  own  de¬ 
fence,  are  hemmed  in  on  all  sides  by  military 
or  feudal  monarchs,  who  hate  and  despise  free¬ 
dom  even  in  a  neighbour,  those  states  have  no 
chance  for  preserving  liberty  and  its  blessings 
but  by  a  federal  union.  The  common  interest 
arising  from  this  cause  has  in  Switzerland,  for 
several  centuries,  been  found  adequate  to 
maintain  efficiently  the  federal  bond,  in  spite 
not  only  of  difference  of  religion  when  reli¬ 
gion  was  the  grand  source  of  irreconcilable  po¬ 
litical  enmity  throughout  Europe,  but  also  in 
spite  of  great  weakness  in  the  constitution  of 
the  federation  itself.  In  America,  where  all  the 
conditions  for  the  maintenance  of  union  ex¬ 
isted  at  the  highest  point,  with  the  sole  draw¬ 
back  of  difference  of  institutions  in  the  single 
but  most  important  article  of  Slavery,  this  one 
difference  has  gone  so  far  in  alienating  from 
each  other’s  sympathies  the  two  divisions  of 
the  Union,  that  the  maintenance  or  disruption 
of  a  tie  of  so  much  value  to  them  both  depends 
on  the  issue  of  an  obstinate  civil  war. 

A  second  condition  of  the  stability  of  a  fed¬ 
eral  government  is  that  the  separate  states  be 
not  so  powerful  as  to  be  able  to  rely,  for  pro¬ 
tection  against  foreign  encroachment,  on  their 
individual  strength.  If  they  are,  they  will  be 
apt  to  think  that  they  do  not  gain,  by  union 
with  others,  the  equivalent  of  what  they  sacri¬ 
fice  in  their  own  liberty  of  action:  and  conse¬ 
quently,  whenever  the  policy  of  the  Confeder¬ 
ation,  in  things  reserved  to  its  cognisance,  is 
different  from  that  which  any  one  of  its  mem¬ 
bers  would  separately  pursue,  the  internal  and 
sectional  breach  will,  through  absence  of  suf¬ 
ficient  anxiety  to  preserve  the  union,  be  in 
danger  of  going  so  far  as  to  dissolve  it. 

A  third  condition,  not  less  important  than 
the  two  others,  is  that  there  be  not  a  very 
marked  inequality  of  strength  among  the  sev¬ 
eral  contracting  states.  They  cannot,  indeed, 
be  exactly  equal  in  resources:  in  all  federations 
there  will  be  a  gradation  of  power  among  the 
members:  some  will  be  more  populous,  rich, 
and  civilised  than  others.  There  is  a  wide  dif¬ 
ference  in  wealth  and  population  between 
New  York  and  Rhode  Island;  between  Bern 
and  Zug  or  Claris.  Flic*  essential  is,  that  there 
should  not  be  any  one  State  so  much  more 
powerful  than  the  rest  as  to  be  capableof  vying 
in  strength  with  many  of  them  combined.  If 
there  be  such  a  one,  and  only  one,  it  will  insist 
on  being  master  of  the  joint  deliberations:  if 
there  be  two,  they  will  be  irresistible  when 


FEDERAL  REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENTS  429 


they  agree;  and  whenever  they  differ  every* 
thing  will  be  decided  by  a  struggle  for  ascend¬ 
ancy  between  the  rivals.  This  cause  is  alone 
enough  to  reduce  the  German  bund  to  almost 
a  nullity,  independently  of  its  wretched  inter¬ 
nal  constitution.  It  effects  none  of  the  real  pur¬ 
poses  of  a  confederation.  It  has  never  bestowed 
on  Germany  a  uniform  system  of  customs,  nor 
so  much  as  a  uniform  coinage;  and  has  served 
only  to  give  Austria  and  Prussia  a  legal  right  of 
pouring  in  their  troops  to  assist  the  local  sov¬ 
ereigns  in  keeping  their  subjects  obedient  to 
despotism:  while  in  regard  to  external  con¬ 
cerns,  the  Bund  would  make  all  Germany  a 
dependency  of  Prussia  if  there  were  no  Aus¬ 
tria,  and  of  Austria  if  there  were  no  Prussia: 
and  in  the  meantime  each  petty  prince  has 
little  choice  but  to  be  a  partisan  of  one  or  the 
other,  or  to  intrigue  with  foreign  governments 
against  both. 

There  are  two  different  modes  of  organising 
a  Federal  Union.  The  federal  authorities  may 
represent  the  Governments  solely,  and  their 
acts  may  be  obligatory  only  on  the  Govern¬ 
ments  as  such;  or  they  may  have  the  power  of 
enacting  laws  and  issuing  orders  which  are 
binding  directly  on  individual  citizens.  The 
former  is  the  plan  of  the  German  so-called 
Confederation,  and  of  the  Swiss  Constitution 
previous  to  1847.  It  was  tried  in  America  for  a 
few  years  immediately  following  the  War  of 
Independence.  The  other  principle  is  that  of 
the  existing  Constitution  of  the  United  States, 
and  has  been  adopted  within  the  last  dozen 
years  by  the  Swiss  Confederacy.  The  Federal 
Congress  of  the  American  Union  is  a  substan¬ 
tive  part  of  the  government  of  every  individ¬ 
ual  State.  Within  the  limits  of  its  attributions, 
it  makes  laws  which  are  obeyed  by  every  citi¬ 
zen  individually,  executes  them  through  its 
own  officers,  and  enforces  them  by  its  own 
tribunals.  This  is  the  only  principle  which  has 
been  found,  or  which  is  ever  likely,  to  produce 
an  effective  federal  government.  A  union  be¬ 
tween  the  governments  only  is  a  mere  alliance, 
and  subject  to  all  the  contingencies  which  ren¬ 
der  alliances  precarious.  If  the  acts  of  the  Presi¬ 
dent  and  of  Congress  were  binding  solely  on 
the  Governments  of  New  York,  Virginia,  or 
Pennsylvania,  and  could  only  be  carried  into 
effect  through  orders  issued  by  those  Govern¬ 
ments  to  officers  appointed  by  them,  under 
responsibility  to  their  own  courts  of  justice,  no 
mandates  of  the  Federal  Government  which 
were  disagreeable  to  a  local  majority  would 
ever  be  executed.  Requisitions  issued  to  a  gov¬ 


ernment  have  no  other  sanction,  or  means  of 
enforcement,  than  war:  and  a  federal  army 
would  have  to  be  always  in  readiness  to  enforce 
the  decrees  of  the  Federation  against  any  re¬ 
calcitrant  State;  subject  to  the  probability  that 
other  States,  sympathising  with  the  recusant, 
and  perhaps  sharing  its  sentiments  on  the  par¬ 
ticular  point  in  dispute,  would  withhold  their 
contingents,  if  not  send  them  to  fight  in  the 
ranks  of  the  disobedient  State. 

Such  a  federation  is  more  likely  to  be  a  cause 
than  a  preventive  of  internal  wars:  and  if  such 
was  not  its  effect  in  Switzerland  until  the 
events  of  the  years  immediately  preceding 
1847,  it  was  only  because  the  Federal  Govern¬ 
ment  felt  its  weakness  so  strongly  that  it  hardly 
ever  attempted  to  exercise  any  real  authority. 
In  America,  the  experiment  of  a  Federation 
on  this  principle  broke  down  in  the  first  few 
years  of  its  existence;  happily  while  the  men  of 
enlarged  knowledge  and  acquired  ascendancy, 
who  founded  the  independence  of  the  Re¬ 
public,  were  still  alive  to  guide  it  through  the 
difficult  transition.  The  Federalist ,  a  collection 
of  papers  by  three  of  these  eminent  men,  writ¬ 
ten  in  explanation  and  defence  of  the  new 
Federal  Constitution  while  still  awaiting  the 
national  acceptance,  is  even  now  the  most  in¬ 
structive  treatise  we  possess  on  federal  govern¬ 
ment.1 

In  Germany,  the  more  imperfect  kind  of 
federation,  as  all  know\  has  not  even  answered 
the  purpose  of  maintaining  an  alliance.  It  has 
never,  in  any  European  war,  prevented  single 
members  of  the  Confederation  from  allying 
themselves  with  foreign  powers  against  the 
rest.  Yet  this  is  the  only  federation  which  seems 
possible  among  monarchical  states.  A  king, 
who  holds  his  power  by  inheritance,  not  by 
delegation,  and  who  cannot  be  deprived  of  it, 
nor  made  responsible  to  any  one  for  its  use, 
is  not  likely  to  renounce  having  a  separate 
army,  or  to  brook  the  exercise  of  sovereign  au¬ 
thority  over  his  own  subjects,  not  through  him 
but  directly,  by  another  power.  To  enable  two 
or  more  countries  under  kingly  government 
to  be  joined  together  in  an  effectual  confedera¬ 
tion  it  seems  necessary  that  they  should  all  be 
under  the  same  king.  England  and  Scotland 
were  a  federation  of  this  description  during 
the  interval  of  about  a  century  between  the 

1  Mr.  Freeman’s  History  of  Federal  Governments, 
of  which  onlv  the  first  volume  has  yet  appeared,  is 
already  an  accession  to  the  literature  of  the  sub¬ 
ject,  equally  valuable  by  its  enlightened  princi¬ 
ples  and  its  mastery  of  historical  details. 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


union  of  the  Crowns  and  that  of  the  Parlia¬ 
ments.  Even  this  was  effective,  not  through 
federal  institutions,  for  none  existed,  but  be¬ 
cause  the  regal  power  in  both  Constitutions 
was  during  the  greater  part  of  that  time  so 
nearly  absolute  as  to  enable  the  foreign  policy 
of  both  to  be  shaped  according  to  a  single  will. 

Under  the  more  perfect  mode  of  federation, 
where  every  citizen  of  each  particular  State 
owes  obedience  to  two  Governments,  that  of 
his  own  state  and  that  of  the  federation,  it  is 
evidently  necessary  not  only  that  the  consti¬ 
tutional  limits  of  the  authority  of  each  should 
be  precisely  and  clearly  defined,  but  that  the 
power  to  decide  between  them  in  any  case  of 
dispute  should  not  reside  in  either  of  the  Gov¬ 
ernments,  or  in  any  functionary  subject  to  it, 
but  in  an  umpire  independent  of  both.  There 
must  be  a  Supreme  Court  of  Justice,  and  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  subordinate  Courts  in  every  State  of 
the  Union,  before  whom  such  questions  shall 
be  carried,  and  whose  judgment  on  them,  in 
the  last  stage  of  appeal,  shall  be  final.  Every 
State  of  the  Union,  and  the  Federal  Govern¬ 
ment  itself,  as  well  as  every  functionary  of 
each,  must  be  liable  to  be  sued  in  those  Courts 
for  exceeding  their  powers,  or  for  non-per¬ 
formance  of  their  federal  duties,  and  must  in 
general  be  obliged  to  employ  those  Courts  as 
the  instrument  for  enforcing  their  federal 
rights.  This  involves  the  remarkable  conse¬ 
quence,  actually  realised  in  the  United  States, 
that  a  Court  of  Justice,  the  highest  federal 
tribunal,  is  supreme  over  the  various  Govern¬ 
ments,  both  State  and  Federal;  having  the 
right  to  declare  that  any  law  made,  or  act  done 
by  them,  exceeds  the  powers  assigned  to  them 
by  the  Federal  Constitution,  and,  in  conse¬ 
quence,  has  no  legal  validity.  It  was  natural  to 
feel  strong  doubts,  before  trial  had  been  made, 
how  such  a  provision  would  work;  whether  the 
tribunal  would  have  the  courage  to  exercise 
its  constitutional  power;  if  it  did,  whether  it 
would  exercise  it  wisely  and  whether  the  Gov¬ 
ernments  would  consent  to  submit  peaceably 
to  its  decision.  The  discussions  on  the  Amer¬ 
ican  Constitution,  before  its  final  adoption, 
give  evidence  that  these  natural  apprehensions 
were  strongly  felt;  but  they  are  now  entirely 
quieted,  since,  during  the  two  generations  and 
more  which  have  subsequently  elapsed,  noth¬ 
ing  has  occurred  to  verify  them,  though  there 
have  at  times  been  disputes  of  considerable 
acrimony,  and  which  became  the  badges  of 
parties,  respecting  the  limits  of  the  authority 
of  the  Federal  and  State  Governments. 


The  eminently  beneficial  working  of  so  sin¬ 
gular  a  provision  is  probably,  as  M.  de  Tocque- 
ville  remarks,  in  a  great  measure  attributable 
to  the  peculiarity  inherent  in  a  Court  of  Jus¬ 
tice  acting  as  such— namely,  that  it  does  not  de¬ 
clare  the  law  eo  nomine  and  in  the  abstract, 
but  waits  until  a  case  between  man  and  man 
is  brought  before  it  judicially  involving  the 
point  in  dispute:  from  which  arises  the  happy 
effect  that  its  declarations  are  not  made  in  a 
very  early  stage  of  the  controversy;  that  much 
popular  discussion  usually  precedes  them;  that 
the  Court  decides  after  hearing  the  point  fully 
argued  on  both  sides  by  lawyers  of  reputation; 
decides  only  as  much  of  the  question  at  a  time 
as  is  required  by  the  case  before  it,  and  its  de¬ 
cision,  instead  of  being  volunteered  for  politi¬ 
cal  purposes,  is  drawn  from  it  by  the  duty 
which  it  cannot  refuse  to  fulfil,  of  dispensing 
justice  impartially  between  adverse  litigants.  \ 
Even  these  grounds  of  confidence  would  not 
have  sufficed  to  produce  the  respectful  submis¬ 
sion  with  which  all  authorities  have  yielded  to 
the  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  on  the  in¬ 
terpretation  of  the  Constitution,  were  it  not 
that  complete  reliance  has  been  felt,  not  only 
on  the  intellectual  pre-eminence  of  the  judges 
composing  that  exalted  tribunal,  but  on  their 
entire  superiority  over  either  private  or  sec¬ 
tional  partialities.  This  reliance  has  been  in 
the  main  justified;  but  there  is  nothing  which 
more  vitally  imports  the  American  people  than 
to  guard  with  the  most  watchful  solicitude 
against  everything  which  has  the  remotest 
tendency  to  produce  deterioration  in  the  qual¬ 
ity  of  this  great  national  institution.  The  con¬ 
fidence  on  which  depends  the  stability  of  fed¬ 
eral  institutions  was  for  the  first  time  impaired 
by  the  judgment  declaring  slavery  to  be  of 
common  right,  and  consequently  lawful  in 
the  Territories  while  not  yet  constituted  as 
States,  even  against  the  will  of  a  majority  of 
their  inhabitants.  This  memorable  decision 
has  probably  done  more  than  anything  else 
to  bring  the  sectional  division  to  the  crisis 
which  has  issued  in  civil  war.  The  main  pillar 
of  the  American  Constitution  is  scarcely  strong 
enough  to  bear  many  more  such  shocks. 

Fhe  tribunals  which  act  as  umpires  between 
the  Federal  and  the  State  Governments  natu¬ 
rally  also  decide  all  disputes  between  two 
States,  or  between  a  citizen  of  one  State  and 
the  government  of  another.  The  usual  reme¬ 
dies  between  nations,  war  and  diplomacy,  be¬ 
ing  precluded  by  the  federal  union,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  a  judicial  remedy  should  supply  their 


FEDERAL  REPRESENTA 

place.  The  Supreme  Court  of  the  Federation 
dispenses  international  law,  and  is  the  first 
great  example  of  what  is  now  one  of  the  most 
prominent  wants  of  civilised  society,  a  real  In¬ 
ternational  Tribunal. 

The  powers  of  a  Federal  Government  natu¬ 
rally  extend  not  only  to  peace  and  war,  and  all 
questions  which  arise  between  the  country  and 
foreign  governments,  but  to  making  any  other 
arrangements  which  are,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
States,  necessary  to  their  enjoyment  of  the  full 
benefits  of  union.  For  example,  it  is  a  great 
advantage  to  them  that  their  mutual  com¬ 
merce  should  be  free,  without  the  impediment 
of  frontier  duties  and  custom-houses.  But  this 
internal  freedom  cannot  exist  if  each  State  has 
the  power  of  fixing  the  duties  on  interchange 
of  commodities  between  itself  and  foreign 
countries;  since  every  foreign  product  let  in 
by  one  State  would  be  let  into  all  the  rest.  And 
hence  all  custom  duties  and  trade  regulations, 
in  the  United  States,  are  made  or  repealed  by 
the  Federal  Government  exclusively.  Again, 
it  is  a  great  convenience  to  the  States  to  have 
but  one  coinage,  and  but  one  system  of  weights 
and  measures;  which  can  only  be  ensured  if 
the  regulation  of  these  matters  is  entrusted  to 
the  Federal  Government.  The  certainty  and 
celerity  of  Post  Office  communication  is  im¬ 
peded,  and  its  expense  increased,  if  a  letter  has 
to  pass  through  half  a  dozen  sets  of  public 
offices,  subject  to  different  supreme  authori¬ 
ties:  it  is  convenient,  therefore,  that  all  Post 
Offices  should  be  under  the  Federal  Govern¬ 
ment.  But  on  such  questions  the  feelings  of 
different  communities  are  liable  to  be  differ¬ 
ent.  One  of  the  American  States,  under  the 
guidance  of  a  man  who  has  displayed  powers 
as  a  speculative  political  thinker  superior  to 
any  who  has  appeared  in  American  politics 
since  the  authors  of  the  Federalist /  claimed  a 
veto  for  each  State  on  the  custom  laws  of  the 
Federal  Congress:  and  that  statesman,  in  a 
posthumous  work  of  great  ability,  which  has 
been  printed  and  widely  circulated  by  the 
legislature  of  South  Carolina,  vindicated  this 
pretension  on  the  general  principle  of  limit¬ 
ing  the  tyranny  of  the  majority,  and  protecting 
minorities  by  admitting  them  to  a  substantial 
participation  in  political  power.  One  of  the 
most  disputed  topics  in  American  politics, 
during  the  early  part  of  this  century,  was 
whether  the  power  of  the  Federal  Govern¬ 
ment  ought  to  extend,  and  whether  by  the 
Constitution  it  did  extend,  to  making  roads 

Air.  Calhoun. 


FIVE  GOVERNMENTS  431 

and  canals  at  the  cost  of  the  Union.  It  is  only 
in  transactions  with  foreign  powers  thattheau- 
thority  of  the  Federal  Government  is  of  neces¬ 
sity  complete.  On  every  other  subject,  the  ques¬ 
tion  depends  on  how  closely  the  people  in  gen¬ 
eral  wish  to  draw  the  federal  tie;  what  portion 
of  their  local  freedom  of  action  they  are  will¬ 
ing  to  surrender,  in  order  to  enjoy  more  fully 
the  benefit  of  being  one  nation. 

Respecting  the  fitting  constitution  of  a  fed¬ 
eral  government  within  itself  much  need  not 
be  said.  It  of  course  consists  of  a  legislative 
branch  and  an  executive,  and  the  constitution 
of  each  is  amenable  to  the  same  principles  as 
that  of  representative  governments  generally. 
As  regards  the  mode  of  adapting  these  general 
principles  to  a  federal  government,  the  pro¬ 
vision  of  the  American  Constitution  seems  ex¬ 
ceedingly  judicious,  that  Congress  should  con¬ 
sist  of  two  Houses,  and  that  while  one  of  them 
is  constituted  according  to  population,  each 
State  being  entitled  to  representatives  in  the 
ratio  of  the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  the 
other  should  represent  not  the  citizens,  but  the 
State  Governments,  and  every  State,  whether 
large  or  small,  should  be  represented  in  it  by 
the  same  number  of  members.  This  provision 
precludes  any  undue  power  from  being  exer¬ 
cised  by  the  more  powerful  States  over  the  rest, 
and  guarantees  the  reserved  rights  of  the  State 
Governments,  by  making  it  impossible,  as  far 
as  the  mode  of  representation  can  prevent,  that 
any  measure  should  pass  Congress  unless  ap¬ 
proved  not  only  by  a  majority  of  the  citizens, 
but  by  a  majority  of  the  States.  I  have  before 
adverted  to  the  further  incidental  advantage 
obtained  of  raising  the  standard  of  qualifica¬ 
tions  in  one  of  the  Houses.  Being  nominated 
by  select  bodies,  the  Legislatures  of  the  various 
States,  whose  choice,  for  reasons  already  in¬ 
dicated,  is  more  likely  to  fall  on  eminent  men 
than  any  popular  election-who  have  not  only 
the  power  of  electing  such,  but  a  strong  motive 
to  do  so,  because  the  influence  of  their  State  in 
the  general  deliberations  must  be  materially 
affected  by  the  personal  weight  and  abilities  of 
its  representatives;  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States,  thus  chosen,  has  always  contained  near¬ 
ly  all  the  political  men  of  established  and  high 
reputation  in  the  Union:  while  the  Lower 
House  of  Congress  has,  in  the  opinion  of  com¬ 
petent  observers,  been  generally  as  remark¬ 
able  for  the  absence  of  conspicuous  personal 
merit  as  the  Upper  House  for  its  presence. 

When  the  conditions  exist  for  the  formation 
of  efficient  and  durable  Federal  Unions,  the 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


432 

multiplication  of  them  is  always  a  benefit  to 
the  world.  It  has  the  same  salutary  effect  as  any 
other  extension  of  the  practice  of  co-operation, 
through  which  the  weak,  by  uniting,  can  meet 
on  equal  terms  with  the  strong.  By  diminish¬ 
ing  the  number  of  those  petty  states  which  are 
not  equal  to  their  own  defence,  it  weakens  the 
temptations  to  an  aggressive  policy,  whether 
working  directly  by  arms,  or  through  the  pres¬ 
tige  of  superior  power.  It  of  course  puts  an 
end  to  war  and  diplomatic  quarrels,  and  usu¬ 
ally  also  to  restrictions  on  commerce,  between 
the  States  composing  the  Union;  while,  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  neighbouring  nations,  the  increased 
military  strength  conferred  by  it  is  of  a  kind 
to  be  almost  exclusively  available  for  defen¬ 
sive,  scarcely  at  all  for  aggressive,  purposes.  A 
federal  government  has  not  a  sufficiently  con¬ 
centrated  authority  to  conduct  with  much  effi¬ 
ciency  any  war  but  one  of  self-defence,  in 
which  it  can  rely  on  the  voluntary  co-operation 
of  every  citizen:  nor  is  there  anything  very 
flattering  to  national  vanity  or  ambition  in  ac¬ 
quiring,  by  a  successful  war,  not  subjects,  nor 
even  fellow-citizens,  but  only  new,  and  per¬ 
haps  troublesome,  independent  members  of 
the  confederation.  The  warlike  proceedings  of 
the  Americans  in  Mexico  were  purely  excep¬ 
tional,  having  been  carried  on  principally  by 
volunteers,  under  the  influence  of  the  mi¬ 
gratory  propensity  which  prompts  individual 
Americans  to  possess  themselves  of  unoccupied 
land;  and  stimulated,  if  by  any  public  motive, 
not  by  that  of  national  aggrandisement,  but 
by  the  purely  sectional  purpose  of  extending 
slavery.  There  are  few  signs  in  the  proceedings 
of  Americans,  nationally  or  individually,  that 
the  desire  of  territorial  acquisition  for  their 
country  as  such  has  any  considerable  power 
over  them.  Their  hankering  after  Cuba  is,  in 
the  same  manner,  merely  sectional,  and  the 
northern  States,  those  opposed  to  slavery,  have 
never  in  any  way  favoured  it. 

The  question  may  present  itself  (as  in  Italy 
at  its  present  uprising)  whether  a  country, 
which  is  determined  to  be  united,  should  form 
a  complete  or  a  merely  federal  union.  The 
point  is  sometimes  necessarily  decided  by  the 
mere  territorial  magnitudeof  the  united  whole. 
There  is  a  limit  to  the  extent  of  country  whic  h 
can  advantageously  be  governed,  or  even  whose 
government  can  be  conveniently  superintend¬ 
ed,  from  a  single  centre.  'There  ale  vast  conn 
tries  so  governed;  but  they,  or  at  least  their 
distant  provinces,  are  in  general  deplorably  ill 
administered,  and  it  is  only  when  the  inhabi¬ 


tants  are  almost  savages  that  they  could  not 
manage  their  affairs  better  separately.  This 
obstacle  does  not  exist  in  the  case  of  Italy,  the 
size  of  which  does  not  come  up  to  that  of  several 
very  efficiently  governed  single  states  in  past 
and  present  times.  The  question  then  is, 
whether  the  different  parts  of  the  nation  re¬ 
quire  to  be  governed  in  a  way  so  essentially 
different  that  it  is  not  probable  the  same  Leg¬ 
islature,  and  the  same  ministry  or  administra¬ 
tive  body,  will  give  satisfaction  to  them  all.  Un¬ 
less  this  be  the  case,  whic h  is  a  question  of  fact, 
it  is  better  for  them  to  be  completely  united. 
That  a  totally  different  system  of  laws,  and  very 
different  administrative  institutions,  may  exist 
in  two  portions  of  a  country  without  being  any 
obstacle  to  legislative  unity  is  proved  by  the 
case  of  England  and  Scotland.  Perhaps,  how¬ 
ever,  this  undisturbed  co-existence  of  two  legal 
systems,  under  one  united  legislature,  making 
different  laws  for  the  two  sections  of  the  coun¬ 
try  in  adaptation  to  the  previous  differences, 
might  not  be  so  well  preserved,  or  the  same 
confidence  might  not  be  felt  in  its  preserva¬ 
tion,  in  a  country  whose  legislators  were  more 
possessed  (as  is  apt  to  be  the  case  on  the  Con¬ 
tinent)  with  the  mania  for  uniformity.  A  peo¬ 
ple  having  that  unbounded  toleration  which  is 
characteristic  of  this  country  for  every  descrip¬ 
tion  of  anomaly,  so  long  as  those  whose  inter¬ 
ests  it  concerns  do  not  feel  aggrieved  by  it, 
afforded  an  exceptionally  advantageous  field 
for  trying  this  difficult  experiment.  In  most 
countries,  if  it  was  an  object  to  retain  different 
systems  of  law,  it  might  probably  be  necessary 
to  retain  distinct  legislatures  as  guardians  of 
them;  which  is  perfectly  compatible  with  a 
national  Parliament  and  King,  or  a  national 
Parliament  without  a  King,  supreme  over  the 
external  relations  of  all  the  members  of  the 
body. 

Whenever  it  is  not  deemed  necessary  to 
maintain  permanently,  in  the  different  prov¬ 
inces,  different  systems  of  jurisprudence,  and 
fundamental  institutions  grounded  on  differ¬ 
ent  principles,  it  is  always  practicable  to  recon¬ 
cile  minor  diversities  with  the  maintenance  of 
unity  of  government.  All  that  is  uecdlul  is  to 
give  a  sufficiently  large  sphere  of  action  to  the 
local  authorities.  Under  one  and  the  same  cen¬ 
tral  government  there  may  be  local  governors, 
and  provincial  assemblies  for  local  purposes, 
it  niiiv  happen,  for  instance,  that  the  people  of 
different  provinc  es  may  have  preferences  in  la 
vour  of  different  modes  of  taxation.  If  the  gen¬ 
eral  legislature  could  not  be  depended  on  for 


GOVERNMENT  OF  DEPENDENCIES 


433 


being  guided  by  the  members  for  each  province 
in  modifying  the  general  system  of  taxation  to 
suit  that  province,  the  Constitution  might  pro¬ 
vide  that  as  many  of  the  expenses  of  the  gov¬ 
ernment  as  could  by  any  possibility  be  made 
local  should  be  defrayed  by  local  rates  imposed 
by  the  provincial  assemblies,  and  that  those 
which  must  of  necessity  be  general,  such  as  the 
support  of  an  army  and  navy,  should,  in  the 
estimates  for  the  year,  be  apportioned  among 
the  different  provinces  according  to  some  gen¬ 
eral  estimate  of  their  resources,  the  amount 
assigned  to  each  being  levied  by  the  local  as¬ 
sembly  on  the  principles  most  acceptable  to  the 
locality,  and  paid  en  bloc  into  the  national 
treasury.  A  practice  approaching  to  this  existed 
even  in  the  old  French  monarchy,  so  far  as  re¬ 
garded  the  pays  d’etats ;  each  of  which,  having 
consented  or  been  required  to  furnish  a  fixed 
sum,  was  left  to  assess  it  upon  theinhabitantsby 
its  own  officers,  thus  escaping  the  grinding  des¬ 
potism  of  the  royal  inteudants  and  subdele - 
gues;  and  this  privilege  is  always  mentioned  as 
one  of  the  advantages  which  mainly  contrib¬ 
uted  to  render  them,  as  some  of  them  were,  the 
most  flourishing  provinces  of  France. 

Identity  of  central  government  is  compati¬ 
ble  with  many  different  degrees  of  centralisa¬ 
tion,  not  only  administrative,  but  even  legis¬ 
lative.  A  people  may  have  the  desire,  and  the 
capacity,  for  a  closer  union  than  one  merely 
federal,  while  yet  their  local  peculiarities  and 
antecedents  render  considerable  diversities  de¬ 
sirable  in  the  details  of  their  government.  But 
if  there  is  a  real  desire  on  all  hands  to  make  the 
experiment  successful,  there  needs  seldom  be 
any  difficulty  in  not  only  preserving  these  di¬ 
versities,  but  giving  them  the  guarantee  of  a 
constitutional  provision  against  any  attempt 
at  assimilation,  except  by  the  voluntary  act  of 
those  who  would  be  affected  by  the  change. 

Chapter  18 

Of  the  Government  of  Dependencies 
by  a  Free  State 

Free  states,  like  all  others,  may  possess  de¬ 
pendencies,  acquired  either  by  conquest  or  by 
colonisation;  and  our  own  is  the  greatest  in¬ 
stance  of  the  kind  in  modern  history.  It  is  a 
most  important  question  how  such  dependen¬ 
cies  ought  to  be  governed. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  the  case  of  small 
posts,  like  Gibraltar,  Aden,  or  Heligoland, 
which  are  held  only  as  naval  or  military  posi¬ 
tions.  The  military  or  naval  object  is  in  this 


case  paramount,  and  the  inhabitants  cannot, 
consistently  with  it,  be  admitted  to  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  place;  though  they  ought  to  be 
allowed  all  liberties  and  privileges  compatible 
with  that  restriction,  including  the  free  man¬ 
agement  of  municipal  affairs;  and  as  a  com¬ 
pensation  for  being  locally  sacrificed  to  the 
convenience  of  the  governing  State,  should  be 
admitted  to  equal  rights  with  its  native  sub¬ 
jects  in  all  other  parts  of  the  empire. 

Outlying  territories  of  some  size  and  popu¬ 
lation,  which  are  held  as  dependencies,  that  is, 
which  are  subject,  more  or  less,  to  acts  of  sov¬ 
ereign  power  on  the  part  of  the  paramount 
country,  without  being  equally  represented 
(if  represented  at  all)  in  its  legislature,  may  be 
divided  into  two  classes.  Some  are  composed 
of  people  of  similar  civilisation  to  the  ruling 
country,  capable  of,  and  ripe  for,  representa¬ 
tive  government;  such  as  the  British  posses¬ 
sions  in  America  and  Australia.  Others,  like 
India,  are  still  at  a  great  distance  from  that 
state. 

In  the  case  of  dependencies  of  the  former 
class,  this  country  has  at  length  realised,  in 
rare  completeness,  the  true  principle  of  gov¬ 
ernment.  England  has  always  felt  under  a  cer¬ 
tain  degree  of  obligation  to  bestow  on  such  of 
her  outlying  populations  as  were  of  her  own 
blood  and  language,  and  on  some  who  were 
not,  representative  institutions  formed  in  im¬ 
itation  of  her  own:  but  until  the  present  gen¬ 
eration,  she  has  been  on  the  same  bad  level 
with  other  countries  as  to  the  amount  of  self- 
government  which  she  allowed  them  to  exer¬ 
cise  through  the  representative  institutions 
that  she  conceded  to  them.  She  claimed  to  be 
the  supreme  arbiter  even  of  their  purely  in¬ 
ternal  concerns,  according  to  her  own,  not 
their,  ideas  of  how  those  concerns  could  be 
best  regulated.  This  practice  was  a  natural  cor¬ 
ollary  from  the  vicious  theory  of  colonial  pol- 
jCy_once  common  to  all  Europe,  and  not  yet 
completely  relinquished  by  any  other  people 
—which  regarded  colonies  as  valuable  by  af¬ 
fording  markets  for  our  commodities,  that 
could  be  kept  entirely  to  ourselves:  a  privilege 
we  valued  so  highly  that  we  thought  it  worth 
purchasing  by  allowing  to  the  colonies  the 
same  monopoly  of  our  market  for  their  own 
productions  which  we  claimed  for  our  com¬ 
modities  in  theirs.  This  notable  plan  for  en¬ 
riching  them  and  ourselves,  by  making  each 
pay  enormous  sums  to  the  other,  dropping  the 
greatest  part  by  the  way,  has  been  for  some 
time  abandoned.  But  the  bad  habit  of  med- 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


434 

dling  in  the  internal  government  of  the  colo¬ 
nies  did  not  at  once  terminate  when  we  relin¬ 
quished  the  idea  of  making  any  profit  by  it.  We 
continued  to  torment  them,  not  for  any  benefit 
to  ourselves,  but  for  that  of  a  section  or  faction 
among  the  colonists:  and  this  persistence  in 
domineering  cost  us  a  Canadian  rebellion  be¬ 
fore  we  had  the  happy  thought  of  giving  it 
up.  England  was  like  an  ill-brought-up  cider 
brother,  who  persists  in  tyrannising  over  the 
younger  ones  from  mere  habit,  till  one  of  them, 
by  a  spirited  resistance,  though  with  unequal 
strength,  gives  him  notice  to  desist.  Wc  were 
wise  enough  not  to  require  a  second  warning. 
A  new  era  in  the  colonial  policy  of  nations 
began  with  Lord  Durham’s  Report;  the  im¬ 
perishable  memorial  of  that  nobleman’s  cour¬ 
age,  patriotism, and  enlightened  liberality, and 
of  the  intellect  and  practical  sagacity  of  its 
joint  authors,  Mr.  Wakefield  and  the  lamented 
Charles  Buller.1 

It  is  now  a  fixed  principle  of  the  policy  of 
Great  Britain,  professed  in  theory  and  faith¬ 
fully  adhered  to  in  practice,  that  her  colonies 
of  European  race,  equally  with  the  parent 
country,  possess  the  fullest  measure  of  internal 
self-government.  They  have  been  allowed  to 
make  their  own  free  representative  constitu¬ 
tions  by  altering  in  any  manner  they  thought 
fit  the  already  very  popular  constitutions  which 
we  had  given  them.  Each  is  governed  by  its  own 
legislature  and  executive,  constituted  on  high¬ 
ly  democratic  principles.  The  veto  of  the  Crown 
and  of  Parliament,  though  nominally  reserved, 
is  only  exercised  (and  that  very  rarely)  on  ques¬ 
tions  which  concern  the  empire,  and  not  sole¬ 
ly  the  particular  colony.  Mow  liberal  a  con¬ 
struction  has  been  given  to  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  imperial  and  colonial  questions  is  shown 
by  the  fact  that  the  whole  of  the  unappropriat¬ 
ed  lands  in  the  regions  behind  our  American 
and  Australian  colonies  have  been  given  up 
to  the  uncontrolled  disposal  of  the  colonial 
communities;  though  they  might,  without  in¬ 
justice,  have  been  kept  in  the  hands  of  the  Im¬ 
perial  Government,  to  be  administered  for  the 
greatest  advantage  of  future  emigrants  from 
all  parts  of  the  empire.  Every  colony  has  thus 
as  full  power  over  its  own  aflairs  as  it  could 
have  if  it  were  a  member  of  even  the  loosest 
federation;  and  much  fuller  than  would  be¬ 
long  to  it  under  the  Constitution  of  the  United 

1 1  am  speaking  here  of  the  adoption  of  this  im¬ 
proved  policy,  not,  of  course,  of  its  original  sug¬ 
gestion.  I  lie  honour  of  having  been  its  earliest 
champion  bchmgs unquestionably  to  Mr.  Roebuck. 


States,  being  free  even  to  tax  at  its  pleasure  the 
commodities  imported  from  the  mother  coun¬ 
try.  Their  union  with  Great  Britain  is  the 
slightest  kind  of  federal  union;  but  not  a  strict¬ 
ly  equal  federation,  the  mother  country  retain¬ 
ing  to  itself  the  powers  of  a  Federal  Govern¬ 
ment,  though  reduced  in  practice  to  their  very 
narrowest  limits.  This  inequality  is,  of  course, 
as  far  as  it  goes,  a  disadvantage  to  the  depend¬ 
encies,  which  have  no  voice  in  foreign  policy, 
but  are  bound  by  the  decisions  of  the  superior 
country.  They  are  compelled  to  join  England 
in  war,  without  being  in  any  way  consulted 
previous  to  engaging  in  it. 

Those  (now  happily  not  a  few)  who  think 
that  justice  is  as  binding  on  communities  as  it 
is  on  individuals,  and  that  men  are  not  war¬ 
ranted  in  doing  to  other  countries,  for  the  sup¬ 
posed  benefit  of  their  own  country,  what  they 
would  not  be  justified  in  doing  to  other  men 
for  their  own  benefit— feel  even  this  limited 
amount  of  constitutional  subordination  on  the 
part  of  the  colonies  to  be  a  violation  of  prin¬ 
ciple,  and  have  often  occupied  themselves  in 
looking  out  for  means  by  which  it  may  be 
avoided.  With  this  view  it  has  been  proposed 
by  some  that  the  colonies  should  return  repre¬ 
sentatives  to  the  British  legislature;  and  br¬ 
others,  that  the  powers  of  our  own,  as  well  as  of 
their  Parliaments,  should  be  confined  to  in¬ 
ternal  policy,  and  that  there  should  be  another 
representative  body  for  foreign  and  imperial 
concerns,  in  which  last  the  dependencies  of 
Great  Britain  should  be  represented  in  the 
same  manner,  and  with  the  same  completeness, 
as  Great  Britain  itself.  On  this  system  there 
would  be  a  perfectly  equal  federation  between 
the  mother  country  and  her  colonies,  then  no 
longer  dependencies. 

The  feelings  of  equity,  and  conceptions  of 
public  morality,  from  which  these  suggestions 
emanate,  are  worthy  of  all  praise;  but  the  sug¬ 
gestions  themselves  arc  so  inconsistent  with 
rational  principles  of  government  that  it  is 
doubtful  if  they  have  been  seriously  accepted 
as  a  possibility  by  any  reasonable  thinker. 
Countries  separated  by  half  the  globe  do  not 
present  the  natural  conditions  for  being  under 
one  government,  or  even  members  of  one  fed¬ 
eration.  If  they  had  sufficiently  the  same  inter¬ 
ests,  they  have  not,  and  never  can  have,  a  sulli- 
cicnt  habit  of  taking  counsel  together.  1  hey 
are  not  part  of  the  same  public;  they  do  not 
discuss  and  deliberate  in  the  same  arena,  but 
apart,  and  have  only  a  most  imperfect  knowl¬ 
edge  of  what  passes  in  the  minds  of  one  an- 


GOVERNMENT  OF 

other.  They  neither  know  each  other’s  objects, 
nor  have  confidence  in  each  other’s  principles 
of  conduct.  Let  any  Englishman  ask  himself 
how  he  should  like  his  destinies  to  depend  on 
an  assembly  of  which  one-third  was  British 
American,  and  another  third  South  African 
and  Australian.  Yet  to  this  it  must  come  if  there 
were  anything  like  fair  or  equal  representa¬ 
tion;  and  would  not  every  one  feel  that  the 
representatives  of  Canada  and  Australia,  even 
in  matters  of  an  imperial  character,  could  not 
know,  or  feel  any  sufficient  concern  for,  the  in¬ 
terests,  opinions,  or  wishes  of  English,  Irish, 
and  Scotch?  Even  for  strictly  federative  pur¬ 
poses  the  conditions  do  not  exist  which  we 
have  seen  to  be  essential  to  a  federation.  Eng¬ 
land  is  sufficient  for  her  own  protection  with¬ 
out  the  colonies;  and  would  be  in  a  much 
stronger,  as  well  as  more  dignified  position,  if 
separated  from  them,  than  when  reduced  to 
be  a  single  member  of  an  American,  African, 
and  Australian  confederation.  Over  and  above 
the  commerce  which  she  might  equally  enjoy 
after  separation,  England  derives  little  advan¬ 
tage,  except  in  prestige,  from  her  dependen¬ 
cies;  and  the  little  she  does  derive  is  quite  out¬ 
weighed  by  the  expense  they  cost  her,  and  the 
dissemination  they  necessitate  of  her  naval  and 
military  force,  which  in  case  of  war,  or  any  real 
apprehension  of  it,  requires  to  be  double  or 
treble  what  would  be  needed  for  the  defence 
of  this  country  alone. 

But  though  Great  Britain  could  do  perfect¬ 
ly  well  without  her  colonies,  and  though  on 
every  principle  of  morality  and  justice  she 
ought  to  consent  to  their  separation,  should 
the  time  come  when,  after  full  trial  of  the  best 
form  of  union,  they  deliberately  desire  to  be 
dissevered-there  are  strong  reasons  for  main¬ 
taining  the  present  slight  bond  of  connection, 
so  long  as  not  disagreeable  to  the  feelings  of 
either  party.  It  is  a  step,  as  far  as  it  goes,  to¬ 
wards  universal  peace,  and  general  friendly  co¬ 
operation  among  nations.  It  renders  war  impos¬ 
sible  among  a  large  number  of  otherwise  inde¬ 
pendent  communities;  and  moreover  hinders 
any  of  them  from  beingabsorbedintoa  foreign 
state,  and  becoming  a  source  of  additional  ag¬ 
gressive  strength  to  some  rival  power,  either 
more  despotic  or  closer  at  hand,  which  might 
not  always  be  so  unambitious  or  so  pacific  as 
Great  Britain.  It  at  least  keeps  the  markets  of 
the  different  countries  open  to  one  another, 
and  prevents  that  mutual  exclusion  by  hostile 
tariffs,  which  none  of  the  great  communities  of 
mankind,  except  England,  have  yet  completely 


DEPENDENCIES  435 

outgrown.  And  in  the  case  of  the  British  pos¬ 
sessions  it  has  the  advantage,  especially  valu¬ 
able  at  the  present  time,  of  adding  to  the  mor¬ 
al  influence,  and  weight  in  the  councils  of  the 
world,  of  the  Power  which,  of  all  in  existence, 
best  understands  liberty— and  whatever  may 
have  been  its  errors  in  the  past,  has  attained  to 
more  of  conscience  and  moral  principle  in  its 
dealings  with  foreigners  than  any  other  great 
nation  seems  either  to  conceive  as  possible  or 
recognise  as  desirable.  Since,  then,  the  union 
can  only  continue,  while  it  does  continue,  on 
the  footing  of  an  unequal  federation,  it  is  im¬ 
portant  to  consider  by  what  means  this  small 
amount  of  inequality  can  be  prevented  from 
being  either  onerous  or  humiliating  to  the 
communities  occupying  the  less  exalted  posi¬ 
tion. 

The  only  inferiority  necessarily  inherent  in 
the  case  is  that  the  mother  country  decides, 
both  for  the  colonies  and  for  herself,  on  ques¬ 
tions  of  peace  and  war.  They  gain,  in  return, 
the  obligation  on  the  mother  country  to  repel 
aggressions  directed  against  them;  but,  except 
when  the  minor  community  is  so  weak  that  the 
protection  of  a  stronger  power  is  indispensable 
to  it,  reciprocity  of  obligation  is  not  a  full 
equivalent  for  non-admission  to  a  voice  in  the 
deliberations.  It  is  essential,  therefore,  that  in 
all  wars,  save  those  which,  like  the  Caffre  or 
New  Zealand  wars,  are  incurred  for  the  sake  of 
the  particular  colony,  the  colonists  should  not 
(without  their  own  voluntary  request)  be  called 
on  to  contribute  anything  to  the  expense,  ex¬ 
cept  what  may  be  required  for  the  specific  local 
defence  of  their  own  ports,  shores,  and  frontiers 
against  invasion.  Moreover,  as  the  mother  coun¬ 
try  claims  the  privilege,  at  her  sole  discretion, 
of  taking  measures  or  pursuing  a  policy  which 
may  expose  them  to  attack,  it  is  just  that  she 
should  undertake  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
cost  of  their  military  defence  even  in  time  of 
peace;  the  whole  of  it,  so  far  as  it  depends  up¬ 
on  a  standing  army. 

But  there  is  a  means,  still  more  effectual  than 
these,  by  which,  and  in  general  by  which  alone, 
a  full  equivalent  can  be  given  to  a  smaller  com¬ 
munity  for  sinking  its  individuality,  as  a  sub¬ 
stantive  power  among  nations,  in  the  greater 
individuality  of  a  wide  and  powerful  empire. 
This  one  indispensable  and,  at  the  same  time, 
sufficient  expedient,  which  meets  at  once  the 
demands  of  justice  and  the  growing  exigencies 
of  policy,  is  to  open  the  service  of  Government 
in  all  its  departments,  and  in  every  part  of  the 
empire,  on  perfectly  equal  terms,  to  the  in- 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


habitants  of  the  Colonies.  Why  does  no  one 
ever  hear  a  breath  of  disloyalty  from  the  Islands 
in  the  British  Channel?  By  race,  religion,  and 
geographical  position  they  belong  less  to  Eng¬ 
land  than  to  France.  But,  while  they  enjoy,  like 
Canada  and  New  South  Wales,  complete  con¬ 
trol  over  their  internal  affairs  and  their  taxa¬ 
tion,  every  office  or  dignity  in  the  gift  of  the 
Crown  is  freely  open  to  the  native  of  Guernsey 
or  Jersey.  Generals,  admirals,  peers  of  the  Unit¬ 
ed  Kingdom,  are  made,  and  there  is  nothing 
which  hinders  prime  ministers  to  be  made, 
from  those  insignificant  islands.  The  same  sys¬ 
tem  was  commenced  in  reference  to  the  Colo¬ 
nies  generally  by  an  enlightened  Colonial  Sec¬ 
retary,  too  early  lost,  Sir  William  Molesworth, 
when  he  appointed  Mr.  H inches,  a  leading 
Canadian  politician,  to  a  West  Indian  govern¬ 
ment.  It  is  a  very  shallow  view  of  the  springs 
of  political  action  in  a  community  which  thinks 
such  things  unimportant  because  the  number 
of  those  in  a  position  actually  to  profit  by  the 
concession  might  not  be  very  considerable. 
That  limited  number  would  be  composed  pre¬ 
cisely  of  those  who  have  most  moral  power 
over  the  rest:  and  men  are  not  so  destitute  of 
the  sense  of  collective  degradation  as  not  to 
feel  the  withholding  of  an  advantage  from 
even  one  person,  because  of  a  circumstance 
which  they  all  have  in  common  with  him,  an 
affront  to  all.  If  we  prevent  the  leading  men 
of  a  community  from  standing  forth  to  the 
world  as  its  chiefs  and  representatives  in  the 
general  councils  of  mankind,  we  owe  it  both 
to  their  legitimate  ambition,  and  to  the  just 
pride  of  the  community,  to  give  them  in  return 
an  equal  chance  of  occupying  the  same  prom¬ 
inent  position  in  a  nation  of  greater  power 
and  importance. 

Thus  far  of  the  dependencies  whose  popula¬ 
tion  is  in  a  sufficiently  advanced  state  to  be 
fitted  for  representative  government.  But  there 
are  others  which  have  not  attained  that  state, 
and  which,  if  held  at  all,  must  be  governed  by 
the  dominant  country,  or  by  persons  delegated 
for  that  purpose  by  it.  This  mode  of  govern¬ 
ment  is  as  legitimatcas  any  other  if  it  is  the  one 
which  in  the  existing  state  of  civilisation  of  the 
subject  people  most  facilitates  their  transition 
to  a  highei  stageof  improvement.  There  are,  as 
we  have  already  seen,  conditions  of  society  in 
which  a  vigorous  despotism  is  in  itself  the  best 
mode  of  government  for  training  the  people 
in  what  is  specifically  wanting  to  render  them 
capable  of  a  higher  civilisation.  There  are 
others,  in  which  the  mere  fact  of  despotism  has 


indeed  no  beneficial  effect,  the  lessons  which 
it  teaches  having  already  been  only  too  com¬ 
pletely  learnt;  but  in  which,  there  being  no 
spring  of  spontaneous  improvement  in  the 
people  themselves,  their  almost  only  hope  of 
making  any  steps  in  advance  depends  on  the 
chances  of  a  good  despot.  Under  a  native  des¬ 
potism,  a  good  despot  is  a  rare  and  transitory 
accident:  but  when  the  dominion  they  are  un¬ 
der  is  that  of  a  more  civilised  people,  that  peo¬ 
ple  ought  to  be  able  to  supply  it  constantly. 
'The  ruling  country  ought  to  be  able  to  do  for 
its  subjects  all  that  could  be  clone  by  a  succes¬ 
sion  of  absolute  monarchs,  guaranteed  by  irre¬ 
sistible  force  against  the  precariousness  of  ten¬ 
ure  attendant  on  barbarous  despotisms,  and 
qualified  by  their  genius  to  anticipate  all  that 
experience  has  taught  to  the  more  advanced 
nation.  Such  is  the  ideal  rule  of  a  free  people 
over  a  barbarous  or  semi-barbarous  one.  We 
need  not  expect  to  see  that  ideal  realised;  but 
unless  some  approach  to  it  is,  the  rulers  are 
guilty  of  a  dereliction  of  the  highest  moral 
trust  which  can  devolve  upon  a  nation:  and  if 
they  do  not  even  aim  at  it,  they  are  selfish 
usurpers,  on  a  par  in  criminality  with  any  of 
those  whose  ambition  and  rapacity  have  sport¬ 
ed  from  age  to  age  with  the  destiny  of  masses  of 
mankind. 

As  it  is  already  a  common,  and  is  rapidly 
tending  to  become  the  universal,  condition  of 
the  more  backward  populations,  to  be  either 
held  in  direct  subjection  by  the  moreadvanced, 
or  to  be  under  their  complete  political  ascend¬ 
ancy;  there  are  in  this  age  of  the  world  few 
more  important  problems  than  how  to  organ¬ 
ise  this  rule,  so  as  to  make  it  a  good  instead  of 
an  evil  to  the  subject  people;  providing  them 
with  the  best  attainable  present  government, 
and  with  the  conditions  most  favourable  to 
future  permanent  improvement.  But  the  mode 
of  fitting  the  government  for  this  purpose  is 
by  no  means  so  well  understood  as  the  condi¬ 
tions  of  good  government  in  a  people  capable 
of  governing  themselves.  We  may  even  say  that 
it  is  not  understood  at  all. 

The  thing  appears  perfectly  easy  to  super¬ 
ficial  observers.  If  India  (for  example)  is  not 
fit  to  govern  itself,  all  that  seems  to  them  re¬ 
quired  is  that  there  should  be  a  minister  to 
govern  it:  and  that  this  minister,  like  all  other 
British  ministers,  should  be  responsible  to 
the  British  Parliament.  Unfortunately  this, 
though  the  simplest  mode  of  attempting  to 
govern  a  dependency,  is  about  the  worst;  and 
betrays  in  its  advocates  a  total  want  of  coinpre- 


GOVERNMENT  OF  DEPENDENCIES  437 


hension  of  the  conditions  of  good  government. 
To  govern  a  country  under  responsibility  to 
the  people  of  that  country,  and  to  govern  one 
country  under  responsibility  to  the  people  of 
another,  are  two  very  different  things.  What 
makes  the  excellence  of  the  first  is  that  freedom 
is  preferable  to  despotism:  but  the  last  is 
despotism.  The  only  choice  the  case  admits  is 
a  choice  of  despotisms:  and  it  is  not  certain 
that  the  despotism  of  twenty  millions  is  neces¬ 
sarily  better  than  that  of  a  few,  or  of  one.  But 
it  is  quite  certain  that  the  despotism  of  those 
who  neither  hear,  nor  see,  nor  know  anything 
about  their  subjects,  has  many  chances  of  being 
worse  than  that  of  those  who  do.  It  is  not  usu¬ 
ally  thought  that  the  immediate  agents  of  au¬ 
thority  govern  better  because  they  govern  in 
the  name  of  an  absent  master,  and  of  one  who 
has  a  thousand  more  pressing  interests  to  at¬ 
tend  to.  The  master  may  hold  them  to  a  strict 
responsibility,  enforced  by  heavy  penalties; 
but  it  is  very  questionable  if  those  penalties 
will  often  fall  in  the  right  place. 

It  is  always  under  great  difficulties,  and  very 
imperfectly,  that  a  country  can  be  governed  by 
foreigners;  even  when  there  is  no  extreme  dis¬ 
parity,  in  habits  and  ideas,  between  the  rulers 
and  the  ruled.  Foreigners  do  not  feel  with  the 
people.  They  cannot  judge,  by  the  light  in 
which  a  thing  appears  to  their  own  minds,  or 
the  manner  in  which  it  affects  their  feelings, 
how  it  will  affect  the  feelings  or  appear  to  the 
minds  of  the  subject  population.  What  a  na¬ 
tive  of  the  country,  of  average  practical  ability, 
knows  as  it  were  by  instinct,  they  have  to  learn 
slowly,  and  after  all  imperfectly,  by  study  and 
experience.  The  laws,  the  customs,  the  social 
relations,  for  which  they  have  to  legislate,  in¬ 
stead  of  being  familiar  to  them  from  child¬ 
hood,  are  all  strange  to  them.  For  most  of  their 
detailed  knowledge  they  must  depend  on  the 
information  of  natives;  and  it  is  difficult  for 
them  to  know  whom  to  trust.  They  are  feared, 
suspected,  probably  disliked  by  the  popula¬ 
tion;  seldom  sought  by  them  except  for  inter¬ 
ested  purposes;  and  they  are  prone  to  think 
that  the  servilely  submissive  are  the  trust¬ 
worthy.  Their  danger  is  of  despising  the  na¬ 
tives;  that  of  the  natives  is  of  disbelieving  that 
anything  the  strangers  do  can  be  intended  for 
their  good.  These  are  but  a  part  of  the  dif¬ 
ficulties  that  any  rulers  have  to  struggle  with 
who  honestly  attempt  to  govern  well  a  country 
in  which  they  are  foreigners.  To  overcome 
these  difficulties  in  any  degree  will  always  be  a 
work  of  much  labour,  requiring  a  very  superior 


degree  of  capacity  in  the  chief  administrators, 
and  a  high  average  among  the  subordinates: 
and  the  best  organisation  of  such  a  govern¬ 
ment  is  that  which  will  best  ensure  the  labour, 
develop  the  capacity,  and  place  the  highest 
specimens  of  it  in  the  situations  of  greatest 
trust.  Responsibility  to  an  authority  which  has 
gone  through  none  of  the  labour,  acquired 
none  of  the  capacity,  and  for  the  most  part 
is  not  even  aware  that  either,  in  any  peculiar 
degree,  is  required,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a 
very  effectual  expedient  for  accomplishing 
these  ends. 

The  government  of  a  people  by  itself  has  a 
meaning  and  a  reality;  but  such  a  thing  as  gov¬ 
ernment  of  one  people  by  another  does  not 
and  cannot  exist.  One  people  may  keep  an¬ 
other  as  a  warren  or  preserve  for  its  own  use,  a 
place  to  make  money  in,  a  human  cattle  farm 
to  be  worked  for  the  profit  of  its  own  inhabi¬ 
tants.  But  if  the  good  of  the  governed  is  the 
proper  business  of  a  government,  it  is  utterly 
impossible  that  a  people  should  directly  at¬ 
tend  to  it.  The  utmost  they  can  do  is  to  give 
some  of  their  best  men  a  commission  to  look 
after  it;  to  whom  the  opinion  of  their  own 
country  can  neither  be  much  of  a  guide  in  the 
performance  of  their  duty,  nor  a  competent 
judge  of  the  mode  in  which  it  has  been  per¬ 
formed.  Let  any  one  consider  how  the  English 
themselves  would  be  governed  if  they  knew 
and  cared  no  more  about  their  own  affairs 
than  they  know  and  care  about  the  affairs  of 
the  Hindoos.  Even  this  comparison  gives  no 
adequate  idea  of  the  state  of  the  case:  for  a 
people  thus  indifferent  to  politics  altogether 
would  probably  be  simply  acquiescent  and  let 
the  government  alone:  whereas  in  the  case  of 
India,  a  politically  active  people  like  the  Eng¬ 
lish,  amidst  habitual  acquiescence,  are  every 
now  and  then  interfering,  and  almost  always 
in  the  wrong  place.  The  real  causes  which  de¬ 
termine  the  prosperity  or  wretchedness,  the  im¬ 
provement  or  deterioration,  of  the  Hindoos 
are  too  far  off  to  be  within  their  ken.  They 
have  not  the  knowledge  necessary  for  suspect¬ 
ing  the  existence  of  those  causes,  much  less  for 
judging  of  their  operation.  The  most  essential 
interests  of  the  country  may  be  well  admin¬ 
istered  without  obtaining  any  of  their  appro¬ 
bation,  or  mismanaged  to  almost  any  excess 
without  attracting  their  notice. 

The  purposes  for  which  they  are  principally 
tempted  to  interfere  and  control  the  proceed¬ 
ings  of  their  delegates  are  of  two  kinds.  One 
is  to  force  English  ideas  down  the  throats  of 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


438 

the  natives;  for  instance,  by  measures  of  prose- 
lytism,  or  acts  intentionally  or  unintentionally 
offensive  to  the  religious  feelings  of  the  people. 
This  misdirection  of  opinion  in  the  ruling 
country  is  instructively  exemplified  (the  more 
so,  because  nothing  is  meant  but  justice  and 
fairness,  and  as  much  impartiality  as  can  be 
expected  from  persons  really  convinced)  by 
the  demand  now  so  general  in  England  for 
having  the  Bible  taught,  at  theoption  of  pupils 
or  of  their  parents,  in  the  Government  schools. 
From  the  European  point  of  view  nothing  can 
wear  a  fairer  aspect,  or  seem  less  open  to  objec¬ 
tion  on  the  score  of  religious  freedom.  To 
Asiatic  eyes  it  is  quite  another  thing.  No  Asiatic 
people  ever  believes  that  a  government  puts 
its  paid  officers  and  official  machinery  into  mo¬ 
tion  unless  it  is  bent  upon  an  object;  and  when 
bent  on  an  object,  no  Asiatic  believes  that  any 
government,  except  a  feeble  and  contemptible 
one,  pursues  it  by  halves.  If  Government 
schools  and  schoolmasters  taught  Christianity, 
whatever  pledges  might  be  given  of  teaching 
it  only  to  those  who  spontaneously  sought  it, 
no  amount  of  evidence  would  ever  persuade 
the  parents  that  improper  means  were  not  used 
to  make  their  children  Christians,  or  at  all 
events,  outcasts  from  Hindooism.  If  they  could, 
in  the  end,  be  convinced  of  the  contrary,  it 
would  only  be  by  the  entire  failure  of  the 
schools,  so  conducted,  to  make  any  converts. 
If  the  teaching  had  the  smallest  effect  in  pro¬ 
moting  itsobject  it  would  compromise  not  only 
the  utility  and  even  existence  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  education,  but  perhaps  the  safety  of 
the  government  itself.  An  English  Protestant 
would  not  be  easily  induced,  by  disclaimers  of 
prosclytism,  to  place  his  children  in  a  Roman 
Catholic  seminary:  Irish  Catholics  will  not 
send  their  children  to  schools  in  which  they 
(an  be  made  Protestants:  and  we  expect  that 
Hindoos,  who  believe  that  the  privileges  of 
Hindooism  can  be  forfeited  by  a  merely  phys¬ 
ical  act,  will  expose  theirs  to  the  danger  of 
being  made  Christians! 

Such  is  one  of  the  modes  in  which  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  dominant  country  tends  to  act  more 
injuriously  than  beneficially  on  the  conduct 
of  its  deputed  governors.  In  other  respects,  its 
interference  is  likely  to  be  oltcnest  exercised 
where  it  will  be  most  pertinaciously  demand¬ 
ed,  and  that  is  on  behalf  of  some  interest  of  the 
English  settlers.  English  settlers  have  friends 
at  home,  have  organs,  have  access  to  the  public; 
they  have  a  common  language  and  common 
ideas  with  their  countrymen:  any  complaint  by 


an  Englishman  is  more  sympathetically  heard, 
even  if  no  unjust  preference  is  intentionally 
accorded  to  it.  Now,  if  there  be  a  fact  to  which 
all  experience  testifies,  it  is  that  when  a  country 
holds  another  in  subjection,  the  individuals  of 
the  ruling  people  who  resort  to  the  foreign 
country  to  make  their  fortunes  are  of  all  others 
those  who  most  need  to  be  held  under  power¬ 
ful  restraint.  They  are  always  one  of  the  chief 
difficulties  of  the  government.  Armed  with  the 
prestige  and  filled  with  the  scornful  overbear¬ 
ingness  of  the  conquering  nation,  they  have  the 
feelings  inspired  by  absolute  power  without 
its  sense  of  responsibility. 

Among  a  people  like  that  of  India  the  utmost 
efforts  of  the  public  authorities  are  not  enough 
for  the  effectual  protection  of  the  weak  against 
the  strong;  and  of  all  the  strong,  the  European 
settlers  are  the  strongest.  Wherever  the  demor¬ 
alising  effect  of  the  situation  is  not  in  a  most 
remarkable  degree  corrected  by  the  personal 
character  of  the  individual,  they  think  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  the  country  mere  dirt  under  their  feet: 
it  seems  to  them  monstrous  that  any  rights  of 
the  natives  should  stand  in  the  way  of  their 
smallest  pretensions:  the  simplest  act  of  pro¬ 
tection  to  the  inhabitants  against  any  act  of 
power  on  their  part  which  they  may  consider 
useful  to  their  commercial  objects,  they  de¬ 
nounce,  and  sincerely  regard,  as  an  injury.  So 
natural  is  this  state  of  feeling  in  a  situation 
like  theirs  that  even  under  the  discouragement 
which  it  has  hitherto  met  with  from  the  ruling 
authorities  it  is  impossible  that  more  or  less  of 
the  spirit  should  not  perpetually  break  out. 
The  Government,  itself  free  from  this  spirit, 
is  never  able  sufficiently  to  keep  it  down  in  the 
young  and  raw  even  of  its  own  civil  and  mili¬ 
tary  officers,  over  whom  it  has  so  much  more 
control  than  over  the  independent  residents. 

As  it  is  with  the  English  in  India,  so,  accord¬ 
ing  to  trustworthy  testimony,  it  is  with  the 
French  in  Algiers;  so  with  the  Americans  in 
the  countries  conquered  from  Mexico;  so  it 
seems  to  be  with  the  Europeans  in  China,  and 
already  even  in  Japan:  there  is  no  necessity  to 
recall  how  it  was  with  the  Spaniards  in  South 
America.  In  all  these  cases,  the  government  to 
which  these  private  adventurers  arc  subject  is 
better  than  they,  and  docs  the  most  it  can  to 
protect  the  natives  against  them.  Even  the 
Spanish  Government  did  this,  sincerely  and 
earnestly,  though  inelfec  tually,  as  is  known  to 
every  reader  of  Mr.  Helps’  instructive  history. 
Had  the  Spanish  Government  been  directly  ac¬ 
countable  to  Spanish  opinion  we  may  question 


GOVERNMENT  OF  DEPENDENCIES 


if  it  would  have  made  the  attempt:  for  the 
Spaniards,  doubtless,  would  have  taken  part 
with  their  Christian  friends  and  relations  rath¬ 
er  than  with  Pagans.  The  settlers,  not  the  na¬ 
tives,  have  the  ear  of  the  public  at  home;  it  is 
they  whose  representations  are  likely  to  pass 
for  truth,  because  they  alone  have  both  the 
means  and  the  motive  to  press  them  persever- 
ingly  upon  the  inattentive  and  uninterested 
public  mind.  The  distrustful  criticism  with 
which  Englishmen,  more  than  any  other  peo¬ 
ple,  are  in  the  habit  of  scanning  the  conduct  of 
their  country  towards  foreigners,  they  usually 
reserve  for  the  proceedings  of  the  public  au¬ 
thorities.  In  all  questions  between  a  govern¬ 
ment  and  an  individual  the  presumption  in 
every  Englishman’s  mind  is  that  the  govern¬ 
ment  is  in  the  wrong.  And  when  the  resident 
English  bring  the  batteries  of  English  political 
action  to  bear  upon  any  of  the  bulwarks  erect¬ 
ed  to  protect  the  natives  against  their  en¬ 
croachments,  the  executive,  with  their  real  but 
faint  velleities  of  something  better,  generally 
find  it  safer  to  their  parliamentary  interest, 
and  at  any  rate  less  troublesome,  to  give  up  the 
disputed  position  than  to  defend  it. 

What  makes  matters  worse  is  that  when  the 
public  mind  is  invoked  (as,  to  its  credit,  the 
English  mind  is  extremely  open  to  be)  in  the 
name  of  justice  and  philanthropy,  in  behalf 
of  the  subject  community  or  race,  there  is  the 
same  probability  of  its  missing  the  mark.  For 
in  the  subject  community  also  there  are  op¬ 
pressors  and  oppressed;  powerful  individuals 
or  classes,  and  slaves  prostrate  before  them; 
and  it  is  the  former,  not  the  latter,  who  have 
the  means  of  access  to  the  English  public.  A 
tyrant  or  sensualist  who  has  been  deprived  of 
the  power  he  had  abused,  and,  instead  of  pun¬ 
ishment,  is  supported  in  as  great  wealth  and 
splendour  as  he  ever  enjoyed;  a  knot  of  privi¬ 
leged  landholders,  who  demand  that  the  State 
should  relinquish  to  them  its  reserved  right  to 
a  rent  from  their  lands,  or  who  resent  as  a 
wrong  any  attempt  to  protect  the  masses  from 
their  extortion;  these  have  no  difficulty  in  pro¬ 
curing  interested  or  sentimental  advocacy  in 
the  British  Parliament  and  press.  The  silent 
myriads  obtain  none. 

The  preceding  observations  exemplify  the 
operation  of  a  principle-which  might  be  called 
an  obvious  one,  were  it  not  that  scarcely  any¬ 
body  seems  to  be  aware  of  it— that,  while  re¬ 
sponsibility  to  the  governed  is  the  greatest  of 
all  securities  for  good  government,  responsibil¬ 
ity  to  somebody  else  not  only  has  no  such  tend- 


439 

ency,  but  is  as  likely  to  produce  evil  as  good. 
The  responsibility  of  the  British  rulers  of 
India  to  the  British  nation  is  chiefly  useful  be¬ 
cause,  when  any  acts  of  the  government  are 
called  in  question,  it  ensures  publicity  and  dis¬ 
cussion;  the  utility  of  which  does  not  require 
that  the  public  at  large  should  comprehend 
the  point  at  issue,  provided  there  are  any  in¬ 
dividuals  among  them  who  do;  for,  a  merely 
moral  responsibility  not  being  responsibility 
to  the  collective  people,  but  to  every  separate 
person  among  them  who  forms  a  judgment, 
opinions  may  be  weighed  as  well  as  counted, 
and  the  approbation  or  disapprobation  of  one 
person  well  versed  in  the  subject  may  out¬ 
weigh  that  of  thousands  who  know  nothing 
about  it  at  all.  It  is  doubtless  a  useful  restraint 
upon  the  immediate  rulers  that  they  can  be 
put  upon  their  defence,  and  that  one  or  two 
of  the  jury  will  form  an  opinion  worth  having 
about  their  conduct,  though  that  of  the  re¬ 
mainder  will  probably  be  several  degrees  worse 
than  none.  Such  as  it  is,  this  is  the  amount  of 
benefit  to  India,  from  the  control  exercised 
over  the  Indian  government  by  the  British 
Parliament  and  people. 

It  is  not  by  attempting  to  rule  directly  a 
country  like  India,  but  by  giving  it  good  rul¬ 
ers,  that  the  English  people  can  do  their  duty 
to  that  country;  and  they  can  scarcely  give  it 
a  worse  one  than  an  English  Cabinet  Minister, 
who  is  thinking  of  English,  not  Indian  politics; 
who  seldom  remains  long  enough  in  office  to 
acquire  an  intelligent  interest  in  so  compli¬ 
cated  a  subject;  upon  whom  the  factitious  pub¬ 
lic  opinion  got  up  in  Parliament,  consisting  of 
two  or  three  fluent  speakers,  acts  with  as  much 
force  as  if  it  were  genuine;  while  he  is  under 
none  of  the  influences  of  training  and  position 
which  would  lead  or  qualify  him  to  form  an 
honest  opinion  of  his  own.  A  free  country 
which  attempts  to  govern  a  distant  depend¬ 
ency,  inhabited  by  a  dissimilar  people,  by 
means  of  a  branch  of  its  own  executive,  will 
almost  inevitably  fail.  The  only  mode  which 
has  any  chance  of  tolerable  success  is  to  govern 
through  a  delegated  body  of  a  comparatively 
permanent  character;  allowing  only  a  right  of 
inspection,  and  a  negative  voice,  to  the  change¬ 
able  Administration  of  the  State.  Such  a  body 
did  exist  in  the  case  of  India;  and  I  fear  that 
both  India  and  England  will  pay  a  severe 
penalty  for  the  shortsighted  policy  by  which 
this  intermediate  instrument  of  government 
was  done  away  with. 

It  is  of  no  avail  to  say  that  such  a  delegated 


REPRESENTATIVE  GOVERNMENT 


body  cannot  have  all  the  requisites  of  good 
government;  above  all,  cannot  have  that  com¬ 
plete  and  ever-operative  identity  of  interest 
with  the  governed  which  it  is  so  difficult  to  ob¬ 
tain  even  where  the  people  to  be  ruled  are  in 
some  degree  qualified  to  look  after  their  own 
affairs.  Real  good  government  is  not  compati¬ 
ble  with  the  conditions  of  the  case.  There  is 
but  a  choice  of  imperfections.  The  problem  is, 
so  to  construct  the  governing  body  that,  under 
the  difficulties  of  the  position,  it  shall  have  as 
much  interest  as  possible  in  good  government, 
and  as  little  in  bad.  Now  these  conditions  are 
best  found  in  an  intermediate  body.  A  dele¬ 
gated  administration  has  always  this  advantage 
over  a  direct  one,  that  it  has,  at  all  events,  no 
duty  to  perform  except  to  the  governed.  It  has 
no  interests  to  consider  except  theirs.  Its  own 
power  of  deriving  profit  from  misgovernment 
may  be  reduced— in  the  latest  constitution  of 
the  East  India  Company  it  was  reduced— to  a 
singularly  small  amount:  and  it  can  be  kept 
entirely  clear  of  bias  from  the  individual  or 
class  interests  of  any  one  else. 

When  the  home  government  and  Parlia¬ 
ment  are  swayed  by  those  partial  influences  in 
the  exercise  of  the  power  reserved  to  them  in 
the  last  resort,  the  intermediate  body  is  the 
certain  advocate  and  champion  of  the  depend¬ 
ency  before  the  imperial  tribunal.  The  inter¬ 
mediate  body,  moreover,  is,  in  the  natural 
course  of  things,  chiefly  composed  of  persons 
who  have  acquired  professional  knowledge  of 
this  part  of  their  country’s  concerns;  who  have 
been  trained  to  it  in  the  place  itself,  and  have 
made  its  administration  the  main  occupation 
of  their  lives.  Furnished  with  these  qualifica¬ 
tions,  and  not  being  liable  to  lose  their  office 
from  the  accidents  of  home  politics,  they  iden¬ 
tify  their  character  and  consideration  with 
their  special  trust,  and  have  a  much  more  per¬ 
manent  interest  in  the  success  of  their  admin¬ 
istration,  and  in  the  prosperity  of  the  country 
which  they  administer,  than  a  member  of  a 
Cabinet  under  a  representative  constitution 
can  possibly  have  in  the  good  government  of 
any  country  except  the  one  which  he  serves. 
So  far  as  the  choice  of  those  who  carry  on  the 
management  on  the  spot  devolves  upon  this 
body,  the  appointments  are  kept  out  of  the 
vortex  of  party  and  parliamentary  jobbing, 
and  freed  from  the  influence  of  those  motives 
to  the  abuse  of  patronage,  for  the  reward  of 
adherents,  or  to  buy  oil  those  who  would  other¬ 
wise  be  opponents,  which  are  always  stronger, 
with  statesmen  of  average  honesty,  than  a  con¬ 


scientious  sense  of  the  duty  of  appointing  the 
fittest  man.  To  put  this  one  class  of  appoint¬ 
ments  as  far  as  possible  out  of  harm’s  way  is  of 
more  consequence  than  the  worst  which  can 
happen  to  all  other  offices  in  the  state;  for,  in 
every  other  department,  if  the  officer  is  un¬ 
qualified,  the  general  opinion  of  the  commu¬ 
nity  directs  him  in  a  certain  degree  what  to 
do:  but  in  the  position  of  the  administrators 
of  a  dependency  where  the  people  are  not  fit 
to  have  the  control  in  their  own  hands,  the 
character  of  the  government  entirely  depends 
on  the  qualifications,  moral  and  intellectual, of 
the  individual  functionaries. 

It  cannot  be  too  often  repeated,  that  in  a 
country  like  India  everything  depends  on  the 
personal  qualities  and  capacities  of  the  agents 
of  government.  This  truth  is  the  cardinal  prin¬ 
ciple  of  Indian  administration.  The  day  when 
it  comes  to  be  thought  that  the  appointment 
of  persons  to  situations  of  trust  from  motives 
of  convenience,  already  so  criminal  in  Eng¬ 
land,  can  be  practised  with  impunity  in  India, 
will  be  the  beginning  of  the  decline  and  fall  of 
our  empire  there.  Even  with  a  sincere  inten¬ 
tion  of  preferring  the  best  candidate,  it  will 
not  do  to  rely  on  chance  for  supplying  fit  per¬ 
sons.  The  system  must  be  calculated  to  form 
them.  It  has  done  this  hitherto;  and  because 
it  has  done  so,  our  rule  in  India  has  lasted,  and 
been  one  of  constant,  if  not  very  rapid,  im¬ 
provement  in  prosperity  and  good  administra¬ 
tion.  As  much  bitterness  is  now  manifested 
against  this  system,  and  as  much  eagerness  dis¬ 
played  to  overthrow  it,  as  if  educating  and 
training  the  officers  of  government  for  their 
work  were  a  thing  utterly  unreasonable  and 
indefensible,  an  tin  justifiable  interference  with 
the  rightsof  ignorance  and  inexperience.  There 
is  a  tacit  conspiracy  between  those  who  would 
like  to  job  in  first-rate  Indian  offices  for  their 
connections  here,  and  those  who,  being  al¬ 
ready  in  India,  claim  to  be  promoted  from  the 
indigo  factory  or  the  attorney’s  office,  to  ad¬ 
minister  justice  or  fix  the  payments  due  to  gov¬ 
ernment  from  millions  of  people.  The  “mo¬ 
nopoly”  of  the  Civil  Service, somuch  inveighed 
against,  i^  like  the  monopoly  of  judicial  offices 
by  the  bar;  and  its  abolition  would  be  like 
opening  the  bench  in  Westminster  Hall  to  the 
lirst  comer  whose  friends  certify  that  he  has 
now  and  then  looked  into  Hlackstonc.  Were 
the  course  ever  adopted  of  sending  men  from 
this  country,  or  encouraging  them  in  going 
out,  to  get  themselves  put  into  high  appoint¬ 
ments  without  having  learnt  their  business  by 


GOVERNMENT  OF  DEPENDENCIES  441 


passing  through  the  lower  ones,  the  most 
important  offices  would  be  thrown  to  Scotch 
cousins  and  adventurers,  connected  by  no 
professional  feeling  with  the  country  or  the 
work,  held  to  no  previous  knowledge,  and 
eager  only  to  make  money  rapidly  and  return 
home. 

The  safety  of  the  country  is,  that  those  by 
whom  it  is  administered  be  sent  out  in  youth, 
as  candidates  only,  to  begin  at  the  bottom  of 
the  ladder,  and  ascend  higher  or  not,  as,  after 
a  proper  interval,  they  are  proved  qualified. 
The  defect  of  the  East  India  Company  s  system 
was,  that  though  the  best  men  were  carefully 
sought  out  for  the  most  important  posts,  yet  if 
an  officer  remained  in  the  service,  promotion, 
though  it  might  be  delayed,  came  at  last  in 
some  shape  or  other,  to  the  least  as  well  as  to 
the  most  competent.  Even  the  inferior  in  qual¬ 
ifications,  among  such  a  corps  of  functionaries, 
consisted,  it  must  be  remembered,  of  men  who 
had  been  brought  up  to  their  duties,  and  had 
fulfilled  them  for  many  years,  at  lowest  with¬ 
out  disgrace,  under  the  eye  and  authority  of  a 
superior.  But  though  this  diminished  the  evil, 
it  was  nevertheless  considerable.  A  man  who 
never  becomes  fit  for  more  than  an  assistant  s 
duty  should  remain  an  assistant  all  his  life, 
and  his  juniors  should  be  promoted  over  him. 
With  this  exception,  I  am  not  aware  of  any 
real  defect  in  the  old  system  of  Indian  ap¬ 
pointments.  It  had  already  received  the  great¬ 
est  other  improvement  it  was  susceptible  of, 
the  choice  of  the  original  candidates  by  com¬ 
petitive  examination:  which,  besides  the  ad¬ 
vantage  of  recruiting  from  a  higher  grade  of 
industry  and  capacity,  has  the  recommenda¬ 
tion,  that  under  it,  unless  by  accident,  there 
are  no  personal  ties  between  the  candidates 
for  offices  and  those  who  have  a  voice  in  con¬ 
ferring  them. 

It  is  in  no  way  unjust  that  public  officers 
thus  selected  and  trained  should  be  exclusive¬ 
ly  eligible  to  offices  which  require  specially  In¬ 
dian  knowledge  and  experience.  If  any  door 
to  the  higher  appointments,  without  passing 
through  the  lower,  be  opened  even  for  occa¬ 
sional  use,  there  will  be  such  incessant  knock¬ 
ing  at  it  by  persons  of  influence  that  it  will  be 
impossible  ever  to  keep  it  closed.  The  only  ex¬ 
cepted  appointment  should  be  the  highest  one 
of  all.  The  Viceroy  of  British  India  should  be 
a  person  selected  from  all  Englishmen  for  his 
great  general  capacity  for  government.  If  he 
have  this,  he  will  be  able  to  distinguish  in 
others,  and  turn  to  his  own  use,  that  special 


knowledge  and  judgment  in  local  affairs  which 
he  has  not  himself  had  the  opportunity  of  ac¬ 
quiring.  There  are  good  reasons  why  (saving 
exceptional  cases)  the  Viceroy  should  not  be  a 
member  of  the  regular  service.  All  services 
have,  more  or  less,  their  class  prejudices,  from 
which  the  supreme  ruler  ought  to  be  exempt. 
Neither  are  men,  however  able  and  experi¬ 
enced,  who  have  passed  their  lives  in  Asia,  so 
likely  to  possess  the  most  advanced  European 
ideas  in  general  statesmanship;  which  the  chief 
ruler  should  carry  out  with  him,  and  blend 
with  the  results  of  Indian  experience.  Again, 
being  of  a  different  class,  and  especially  if 
chosen  by  a  different  authority,  he  will  seldom 
have  any  personal  partialities  to  warp  his  ap¬ 
pointments  to  office.  This  great  security  for 
honest  bestowal  of  patronage  existed  in  rare 
perfection  under  the  mixed  government  of  the 
Crown  and  the  East  India  Company.  The  su¬ 
preme  dispensers  of  office,  the  Governor-Gen¬ 
eral  and  Governors,  were  appointed,  in  fact 
though  not  formally,  by  the  Crown,  that  is, 
by  the  general  Government,  not  by  the  inter¬ 
mediate  body;  and  a  great  officer  of  the  Crown 
probably  had  not  a  single  personal  or  political 
connection  in  the  local  service:  while  the  dele¬ 
gated  body,  most  of  whom  had  themselves 
served  in  the  country,  had  and  were  likely  to 
have  such  connections. 

This  guarantee  for  impartiality  would  be 
much  impaired  if  the  civil  servants  of  Govern¬ 
ment,  even  though  sent  out  in  boyhood  as 
mere  candidates  for  employment,  should  come 
to  be  furnished,  in  any  considerable  pro¬ 
portion,  by  the  class  of  society  which  supplies 
Viceroys  and  Governors.  Even  the  initiatory 
competitive  examination  would  then  be  an  in¬ 
sufficient  security.lt  would  exclude  mere  ignor¬ 
ance  and  incapacity;  it  would  compel  youths 
of  family  to  start  in  the  race  with  the  same 
amount  of  instruction  and  ability  as  other  peo¬ 
ple;  the  stupidest  son  could  not  be  put  into 
the  Indian  service  ashe  can  be  into  the  Church; 
but  there  would  be  nothing  to  prevent  undue 
preference  afterwards.  No  longer  all  equally 
unknown  and  unheard  of  by  the  arbiter  of 
their  lot,  a  portion  of  the  service  would  be  per¬ 
sonally,  and  a  still  greater  number  politically, 
in  close  relation  with  him.  Members  of  certain 
families,  and  of  the  higher  classes  and  influen¬ 
tial  connections  generally,  would  rise  more 
rapidly  than  their  competitors,  and  be  often 
kept  in  situations  for  which  they  were  unfit, 
or  placed  in  those  for  which  others  were  fitter. 
The  same  influences  would  be  brought  into 


REPRESENTATIVE  GO  VERNMENT 


442 

play  which  affect  promotions  in  the  army:  and 
those  alone,  if  such  miracles  of  simplicity  there 
be,  who  believe  that  these  are  impartial,  would 
expect  impartiality  in  those  of  India.  This 
evil  is,  I  fear,  irremediable  by  any  general 
measures  which  can  be  taken  under  the  pres¬ 
ent  system.  No  such  will  afford  a  degree  of  se¬ 
curity  comparable  to  that  which  once  flowed 
spontaneously  from  the  so-called  double  gov¬ 
ernment. 

What  is  accounted  so  great  an  advantage  in 
the  case  of  the  English  system  of  government 
at  home  has  been  its  misfortune  in  India— 
that  it  grew  up  of  itself,  not  from  preconceived 
design,  but  by  successive  expedients,  and  by 
the  adaptation  of  machinery  originally  created 
for  a  different  purpose.  As  the  country  on 
which  its  maintenance  depended  was  not  the 
one  out  of  whose  necessities  it  grew,  its  prac¬ 
tical  benefits  did  not  come  home  to  the  mind 
of  that  country,  and  it  would  have  required 
theoretic  recommendations  to  render  it  accept¬ 
able.  Unfortunately,  these  were  exactly  what 
it  seemed  to  be  destitute  of:  and  undoubtedly 
the  common  theories  of  government  did  not 
furnish  it  with  such,  framed  as  those  theories 
have  been  for  states  of  circumstances  differing 
in  all  the  most  important  features  from  the 
case  concerned.  But  in  government,  as  in  other 
departments  of  human  agency,  almost  all  prin¬ 
ciples  which  have  been  durable  were  first  sug¬ 
gested  by  observation  of  some  particular  case 
in  which  the  general  laws  of  nature  acted  in 


some  new  or  previously  unnoticed  combina¬ 
tion  of  circumstances.  The  institutionsof  Great 
Britain, and  thoseof  theUnitedStates, have  had 
the  distinction  of  suggestingmost  of  the  theories 
of  government  which,  through  good  and  evil 
fortune,  are  now,  in  the  course  of  generations, 
reawakening  political  life  in  the  nations  of 
Europe.  It  has  been  the  destiny  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  East  India  Company  to  suggest 
the  true  theory  of  the  government  of  a  semi- 
barbarous  dependency  by  a  civilised  country, 
and  after  having  done  this,  to  perish.  It  would 
be  a  singular  fortune  if,  at  the  end  of  two  or 
three  more  generations,  this  speculative  result 
should  be  the  only  remaining  fruit  of  our  as¬ 
cendancy  in  India;  if  posterity  should  say  of 
us,  that  having  stumbled  accidentally  upon 
better  arrangements  than  our  wisdom  would 
ever  have  devised,  the  first  use  we  made  of  our 
awakened  reason  was  to  destroy  them,  and  al¬ 
low  the  good  which  had  been  in  course  of  be¬ 
ing  realised  to  fall  through  and  be  lost,  from 
ignorance  of  the  principles  on  which  it  de¬ 
pended.  Di  meliora:  but  if  a  fate  so  disgraceful 
to  England  and  to  civilisation  can  be  averted, 
it  must  be  through  far  wider  political  concep¬ 
tions  than  merely  English  or  European  prac¬ 
tice  can  supply,  and  through  a  much  more  pro¬ 
found  study  of  Indian  experience,  and  of  the 
conditions  of  Indian  government,  than  either 
English  politicians,  or  those  who  supply  the 
English  public  with  opinions,  have  hitherto 
shown  any  willingness  to  undertake. 


CONTENTS:  UTILITARIANISM 


1.  General  Remarks  445 

2.  What  Utilitarianism  Is  447 

g.  Of  the  Ultimate  Sanction  of  the  Prin¬ 
ciple  of  Utility  457 

4.  Of  what  sort  of  Proof  the  Principle  of 

Utility  is  Susceptible  46 1 

5.  On  the  Connection  between  Justice  and 

Utility  4^4 


UTILITARIANISM 


Chapter  i 

General  Remarks 

There  are  few  circumstances  among  those 
which  make  up  the  present  condition  of  human 
knowledge,  more  unlike  what  might  have  been 
expected,  or  more  significant  of  the  backward 
state  in  which  speculation  on  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  subjects  still  lingers,  than  the  little  prog¬ 
ress  which  has  been  made  in  the  decision  of  the 
controversy  respecting  the  criterion  of  right 
and  wrong.  From  the  dawn  of  philosophy,  the 
question  concerning  the  summum  bonum,  or, 
what  is  the  same  thing,  concerning  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  morality,  has  been  accounted  the  main 
problem  in  speculative  thought,  has  occupied 
the  most  gifted  intellects,  and  divided  them 
into  sects  and  schools,  carrying  on  a  vigorous 
warfare  against  one  another.  And  after  more 
than  two  thousand  years  the  same  discussions 
continue,  philosophers  are  still  ranged  under 
the  same  contending  banners,  and  neither 
thinkers  nor  mankind  at  large  seem  nearer  to 
being  unanimous  on  the  subject,  than  when 
the  youth  Socrates  listened  to  the  old  Pro¬ 
tagoras,  and  asserted  (if  Plato  s  dialogue  be 
grounded  on  a  real  conversation)  the  theory 
of  utilitarianism  against  the  popular  morality 
of  the  so-called  sophist. 

It  is  true  that  similar  confusion  and  uncer¬ 
tainty,  and  in  some  cases  similar  discordance, 
exist  respecting  the  first  principles  of  all  the 
sciences,  not  excepting  that  which  is  deemed 
the  most  certain  of  them,  mathematics;  with¬ 
out  much  impairing,  generally  indeed  without 
impairing  at  all,  the  trustworthiness  of  the 
conclusions  of  those  sciences.  An  apparent 
anomaly,  the  explanation  of  which  is,  that  the 
detailed  doctrines  of  a  science  are  not  usually 
deduced  from,  nor  depend  for  their  evidence 
upon,  what  are  called  its  first  principles.  Were 
it  not  so,  there  would  be  no  science  more  pre¬ 
carious.  or  whose  conclusions  were  more  in¬ 


sufficiently  made  out,  than  algebra;  which  de¬ 
rives  none  of  its  certainty  from  what  are  com¬ 
monly  taught  to  learners  as  its  elements,  since 
these,  as  laid  down  by  some  of  its  most  eminent 
teachers,  are  as  full  of  fictions  as  English  law, 
and  of  mysteries  as  theology.  The  truths  which 
are  ultimately  accepted  as  the  first  principles 
of  a  science,  are  really  the  last  results  of  meta¬ 
physical  analysis,  practised  on  the  elementary 
notions  with  which  the  science  is  conversant; 
and  their  relation  to  the  science  is  not  that  of 
foundations  to  an  edifice,  but  of  roots  to  a 
tree,  which  may  perform  their  office  equally 
well  though  they  be  never  dug  down  to  and 
exposed  to  light.  But  though  in  science  the 
particular  truths  precede  the  general  theory, 
the  contrary  might  be  expected  to  be  the  case 
with  a  practical  art,  such  as  morals  or  legisla¬ 
tion.  All  action  is  for  the  sake  of  some  end,  and 
rules  of  action,  it  seems  natural  to  suppose, 
must  take  their  whole  character  and  colour 
from  the  end  to  which  they  are  subservient. 
When  we  engage  in  a  pursuit,  a  clear  and  pre¬ 
cise  conception  of  what  we  are  pursuing  would 
seem  to  be  the  first  thing  we  need,  instead  of 
the  last  we  are  to  look  forward  to.  A  test  of 
right  and  wrong  must  be  the  means,  one  would 
think,  of  ascertaining  what  is  right  or  wrong, 
and  not  a  consequence  of  having  already  as¬ 
certained  it. 

The  difficulty  is  not  avoided  by  having  re¬ 
course  to  the  popular  theory  of  a  natural  fac¬ 
ulty,  a  sense  or  instinct,  informing  us  of  right 
and  wrong.  For-besides  that  the  existence  of 
such  a  moral  instinct  is  itself  one  of  the  mat¬ 
ters  in  dispute— those  believers  in  it  who  have 
any  pretensions  to  philosophy,  have  been 
obliged  to  abandon  the  idea  that  it  discerns 
what  is  right  or  wrong  in  the  particular  case 
in  hand,  as  our  other  senses  discern  the  sight 
or  sound  actually  present.  Our  moral  faculty, 
according  to  all  those  of  its  interpreters  who 
are  entitled  to  the  name  of  thinkers,  supplies 
us  only  with  the  general  principles  of  moral 


445 


446  U  TIL1 TA  RIAN  ISM 


judgments;  it  is  a  branch  of  our  reason,  not 
of  our  sensitive  faculty;  and  must  be  looked 
to  for  the  abstract  doctrines  of  morality,  not 
for  perception  of  it  in  the  concrete.  The  in¬ 
tuitive,  no  less  than  what  may  be  termed  the 
inductive,  school  of  ethics,  insists  on  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  general  laws.  They  both  agree  that 
the  morality  of  an  individual  action  is  not  a 
question  of  direct  perception,  but  of  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  a  law  to  an  individual  case.  They 
recognise  also,  to  a  great  extent,  the  same  moral 
laws;  but  differ  as  to  their  evidence,  and  the 
source  from  which  they  derive  their  authority. 
According  to  the  one  opinion,  the  principles 
of  morals  are  evident  a  priori ,  requiring  noth¬ 
ing  to  command  assent,  except  that  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  the  terms  be  understood.  According  to 
the  other  doctrine,  right  and  wrong,  as  well 
as  truth  and  falsehood,  are  questions  of  obser¬ 
vation  and  experience.  But  both  hold  equally 
that  morality  must  be  deduced  from  princi¬ 
ples;  and  the  intuitive  school  affirm  as  strongly 
as  the  inductive,  that  there  is  a  science  of 
morals.  Yet  they  seldom  attempt  to  make  out 
a  list  of  the  a  priori  principles  which  are  to 
serve  as  the  premises  of  the  science;  still  more 
rarely  do  they  make  any  effort  to  reduce  those 
various  principles  to  one  first  principle,  or 
common  ground  of  obligation.  They  either 
assume  the  ordinary  precepts  of  morals  as  of 
a  priori  authority,  or  they  lay  down  as  the  com¬ 
mon  groundwork  of  those  maxims,  some  gen¬ 
erality  much  less  obviously  authoritative  than 
the  maxims  themselves,  and  which  has  never 
succeeded  in  gaining  popular  acceptance.  Yet 
to  support  their  pretensions  there  ought  either 
to  be  some  one  fundamental  principle  or  law, 
at  the  root  of  all  morality,  or  if  there  be 
several,  there  should  be  a  determinate  order 
of  precedence  among  them;  and  the  one  prin¬ 
ciple, or  the  rule  for  deciding  between  the  vari¬ 
ous  principles  when  they  conflict,  ought  to  be 
self-evident. 

To  inquire  how  far  the  bad  effects  of  this 
deficiency  have  been  mitigated  in  practice,  or 
to  what  extent  the  moral  beliefs  of  mankind 
have  been  vitiated  or  made  uncertain  by  the 
absence  of  any  distinct  recognition  of  an  ulti¬ 
mate  standard,  would  imply  a  complete  survey 
and  criticism  of  past  and  present  ethical  doc¬ 
trine.  It  would,  however,  be  easy  to  show  that 
whatever  steadiness  or  consistency  these  moral 
beliefs  have  attained,  has  been  mainly  clue  to 
the  tacit  inlluence  of  a  standard  not  recog¬ 
nised.  Although  the  non  existence  of  an  ac¬ 
knowledged  first  princ  iple  has  made  ethics  not 


so  much  a  guide  as  a  consecration  of  men’s 
actual  sentiments,  still,  as  men's  sentiments, 
both  of  favour  and  of  aversion,  are  greatly  in¬ 
fluenced  by  what  they  suppose  to  be  the  effects 
of  things  upon  their  happiness,  the  principle 
of  utility,  or  as  Bentham  latterly  called  it,  the 
greatest  happiness  principle,  has  had  a  large 
share  in  forming  the  moral  doctrines  even  of 
those  who  most  scornfully  reject  its  authority. 
Nor  is  there  any  school  of  thought  which  re¬ 
fuses  to  admit  that  the  influence  of  actions  on 
happiness  is  a  most  material  and  even  pre¬ 
dominant  consideration  in  many  of  the  details 
of  morals,  however  unwilling  to  acknowledge 
it  as  the  fundamental  principle  of  morality, 
and  the  source  of  moral  obligation.  I  might  go 
much  further,  and  say  that  to  all  those  a  priori 
moralists  who  deem  it  necessary  to  argue  at  all. 
utilitarian  arguments  are  indispensable.  It 
is  not  my  present  purpose  to  criticise  these 
thinkers;  but  I  cannot  help  referring,  for  illus¬ 
tration,  to  a  systematic  treatise  by  one  of  the 
most  illustrious  of  them,  the  Metaphysics  of 
Ethics,  by  Kant.  This  remarkable  man.  whose 
system  of  thought  will  long  remain  one  of  the 
landmarks  in  the  history  of  philosophical  spec¬ 
ulation,  does,  in  the  treatise  in  question.  lay 
down  a  universal  first  principle  as  the  origin 
and  ground  of  moral  obligation;  it  is  this:  — 
“So  act,  that  the  rule  on  which  thou  actcst 
would  admit  of  being  adopted  as  a  law  by  all 
rational  beings.”  Butwhen  he  begins  to  deduce 
from  this  precept  any  of  the  actual  duties  ol 
morality,  he  fails,  almost  grotesquely,  to  show 
that  there  would  be  any  contradiction,  any 
logical  (not  to  say  physical)  impossibility,  in 
the  adoption  by  all  rational  beings  of  the  most 
outrageously  immoral  rules  of  conduct.  All  he 
shows  is  that  the  consequences  of  their  univer¬ 
sal  adoption  would  be  such  as  no  one  would 
choose  to  incur. 

On  the  present  occasion,  I  shall,  without 
further  discussion  of  theother  theories,  attempt 
to  contribute  something  towards  the  under¬ 
standing  and  appreciation  of  the  Utilitarian 
or  Happiness  theory,  and  towards  such  proof 
as  it  is  susceptible  of.  It  is  evident  that  this 
cannot  be  proof  in  the  ordinary  and  popular 
meaning  of  the  term.  Questions  of  ultimate 
ends  are  not  amenable  to  direct  proof.  What¬ 
ever  can  be  proved  to  be  good,  must  be  so  by 
being  shown  to  be  a  means  to  something  ad¬ 
mitted  to  be  good  without  proof,  l  be  medical 
art  is  proved  to  be  good  by  its  conducing  to 
health;  but  how  is  it  possible  to  prove  that 
health  is  good?  The  art  of  music  is  good,  for 


ITS  MEANING  447 


the  reason,  among  others,  that  it  produces 
pleasure;  but  what  proof  is  it  possible  to  give 
that  pleasure  is  good?  If,  then,  it  is  asserted 
that  there  is  a  comprehensive  formula,  in¬ 
cluding  all  things  which  are  in  themselves 
good,  and  that  whatever  else  is  good,  is  not  so 
as  an  end,  but  as  a  mean,  the  formula  may  be 
accepted  or  rejected,  but  is  not  a  subject  of 
what  is  commonly  understood  by  proof.  We 
are  not,  however,  to  infer  that  its  acceptance  or 
rejection  must  depend  on  blind  impulse,  or 
arbitrary  choice.  There  is  a  larger  meaning 
of  the  word  proof,  in  which  this  question  is 
as  amenable  to  it  as  any  other  of  the  disputed 
questions  of  philosophy.  The  subject  is  within 
the  cognisance  of  the  rational  faculty;  and 
neither  does  that  faculty  deal  with  it  solely  in 
the  way  of  intuition.  Considerations  may  be 
presented  capable  of  determining  the  intellect 
either  to  give  or  withhold  its  assent  to  the  doc¬ 
trine;  and  this  is  equivalent  to  proof. 

We  shall  examine  presently  of  what  nature 
are  these  considerations;  in  what  manner  they 
apply  to  the  case,  and  what  rational  grounds, 
therefore,  can  be  given  for  accepting  or  re¬ 
jecting  the  utilitarian  formula.  But  it  is  a  pre¬ 
liminary  condition  of  rational  acceptance  or 
rejection,  that  the  formula  should  be  correctly 
understood.  I  believe  that  the  very  imperfect 
notion  ordinarily  formed  of  its  meaning,  is 
the  chief  obstacle  which  impedes  its  reception; 
and  that  could  it  be  cleared,  even  from  only 
the  grosser  misconceptions,  the  question  would 
be  greatly  simplified,  and  a  large  proportion 
of  its  difficulties  removed.  Before,  therefore, 

I  attempt  to  enter  into  the  philosophical 
grounds  which  can  be  given  for  assenting  to 
the  utilitarian  standard,  I  shall  offer  some  illus¬ 
trations  of  the  doctrine  itself;  with  the  view  of 
showing  more  clearly  what  it  is,  distinguishing 
it  from  what  it  is  not,  and  disposing  of  such 
of  the  practical  objections  to  it  as  either  origi¬ 
nate  in,  or  are  closely  connected  with,  mis¬ 
taken  interpretations  of  its  meaning.  Having 
thus  prepared  the  ground,  I  shall  afterwards 
endeavour  to  throw  such  light  as  I  can  upon 
the  question,  considered  as  one  of  philosophi¬ 
cal  theory. 

Chapter  2 

What  Utilitarianism  Is 

A  passing  remark  is  all  that  needs  be  given  to 
the  ignorant  blunder  of  supposing  that  those 
who  stand  up  for  utility  as  the  test  of  right  and 
wrong,  use  the  term  in  that  restricted  and 


merely  colloquial  sense  in  which  utility  is 
opposed  to  pleasure.  An  apology  is  due  to  the 
philosophical  opponents  of  utilitarianism,  for 
even  the  momentary  appearance  of  confound¬ 
ing  them  with  any  one  capable  of  so  absurd  a 
misconception;  which  is  the  more  extraordi¬ 
nary,  inasmuch  as  the  contrary  accusation,  of 
referring  everything  to  pleasure,  and  that  too 
in  its  grossest  form,  is  another  of  the  common 
charges  against  utilitarianism:  and,  as  has  been 
pointedly  remarked  by  an  able  writer,  the  same 
sort  of  persons,  and  often  the  very  same  per¬ 
sons,  denounce  the  theory  “as  impracticably 
dry  when  the  word  utility  precedes  the  word 
pleasure,  and  as  too  practicably  voluptuous 
when  the  word  pleasure  precedes  the  word 
utility.”  Those  who  know  anything  about  the 
matter  are  awrare  that  every  writer,  from  Epi¬ 
curus  to  Bentham,  who  maintained  the  theory 
of  utility,  meant  by  it, not  something  to  be  con¬ 
tradistinguished  from  pleasure,  but  pleasure 
itself,  together  with  exemption  from  pain; 
and  instead  of  opposing  the  useful  to  the  agree¬ 
able  or  the  ornamental,  have  always  declared 
that  the  useful  means  these,  among  other 
things.  Yet  the  common  herd,  including  the 
herd  of  writers,  not  only  in  newspapers  and 
periodicals,  but  in  books  of  weight  and  pre¬ 
tension,  are  perpetually  falling  into  this  shal¬ 
low  mistake.  Having  caught  up  the  word  utili¬ 
tarian,  while  knowing  nothing  whatever  about 
it  but  its  sound,  they  habitually  express  by  it 
the  rejection,  or  the  neglect,  of  pleasure  in 
some  of  its  forms;  of  beauty,  of  ornament,  or 
of  amusement.  Nor  is  the  term  thus  ignorantly 
misapplied  solely  in  disparagement,  but  occa¬ 
sionally  in  compliment;  as  though  it  implied 
superiority  to  frivolity  and  the  mere  pleasures 
of  the  moment.  And  this  perverted  use  is  the 
only  one  in  which  the  word  is  popularly 
known,  and  the  one  from  which  the  new  gen¬ 
eration  are  acquiring  their  sole  notion  of  its 
meaning.  Those  who  introduced  the  word,  but 
who  had  for  many  years  discontinued  it  as  a 
distinctive  appellation,  may  well  feel  them¬ 
selves  called  upon  to  resume  it,  if  by  doing  so 
they  can  hope  to  contribute  anything  towards 
rescuing  it  from  this  utter  degradation.1 

iThe  author  of  this  essay  has  reason  for  believ¬ 
ing  himself  to  be  the  first  person  who  brought  the 
word  utilitarian  into  use.  He  did  not  invent  it, 
but  adopted  it  from  a  passing  expression  in  Mr. 
Galt’s  Annals  of  the  Parish.  After  using  it  as  a  des¬ 
ignation  for  several  years,  he  and  others  aban¬ 
doned  it  from  a  growing  dislike  to  anything  re¬ 
sembling  a  badge  or  watchword  of  sectarian  dis¬ 
tinction.  But  as  a  name  for  one  single  opinion,  not 


UTILITARIANISM 


448 

The  creed  which  accepts  as  the  foundation 
of  morals,  Utility,  or  the  Greatest  Happiness 
Principle,  holds  that  actions  are  right  in  pro¬ 
portion  as  they  tend  to  promote  happiness, 
wrong  as  they  tend  to  produce  the  reverse  of 
happiness.  By  happiness  is  intended  pleasure, 
and  the  absence  of  pain;  by  unhappiness,  pain, 
and  the  privation  of  pleasure.  To  give  a  clear 
view  of  the  moral  standard  set  up  by  the  theory, 
much  more  requires  to  be  said;  in  particular, 
what  things  it  includes  in  the  ideas  of  pain 
and  pleasure;  and  to  what  extent  this  is  left 
an  open  question.  But  these  supplementary 
explanations  do  not  affect  the  theory  of  life  on 
which  this  theory  of  morality  is  grounded— 
namely,  that  pleasure,  and  freedom  from  pain, 
are  the  only  things  desirable  as  ends;  and  that 
all  desirable  things  (which  are  as  numerous 
in  the  utilitarian  as  in  any  other  scheme)  are 
desirable  either  for  the  pleasure  inherent  in 
themselves,  or  as  means  to  the  promotion  of 
pleasure  and  the  prevention  of  pain. 

Now,  such  a  theory  of  life  excites  in  many 
minds,  and  among  them  in  some  of  the  most 
estimable  in  feeling  and  purpose,  inveterate 
dislike.  To  suppose  that  life  has  (as  they  ex¬ 
press  it)  no  higher  end  than  pleasure-no  better 
and  nobler  object  of  desire  and  pursuit— they 
designate  as  utterly  mean  and  grovelling;  as 
a  doctrine  worthy  only  of  swine,  to  whom  the 
followers  of  Epicurus  were,  at  a  very  early 
period,  contemptuously  likened;  and  modern 
holders  of  the  doctrine  are  occasionally  made 
the  subject  of  equally  polite  comparisons  by 
its  German,  French,  and  English  assailants. 

When  thus  attacked,  the  Epicureans  have 
always  answered,  that  it  is  not  they,  but  their 
accusers,  who  represent  human  nature  in  a 
degrading  light;  since  the  accusation  supposes 
human  beings  to  be  capable  of  no  pleasures 
except  those  of  which  swine  arc  capable.  If  this 
supposition  were  true,  the  charge  could  not 
be  gainsaid,  but  would  then  be  no  longer  an 
imputation:  for  if  the  sources  of  pleasure  were 
precisely  the  same  to  human  beings  and  to 
swine,  the  rule  of  life  whic  h  is  good  enough  for 
the  one  would  be  good  enough  for  the  other. 
The  comparison  of  the  Epicurean  life  to  that 
of  beasts  is  felt  as  degrading,  precisely  because 
a  beast’s  pleasures  do  not  satisfy  a  human  be¬ 
ing’s  conceptions  of  happiness.  Human  beings 

a  set  of  opinions— to  denote  the  recognition  of  util¬ 
ity  as  a  standard,  not  any  particular  way  of  apply¬ 
ing  it— the  term  supplies  a  want  in  the  language, 
and  oilers,  in  many  cases,  a  convenient  mode  of 
avoiding  tiresome  circumlocution. 


have  faculties  more  elevated  than  the  animal 
appetites,  and  when  once  made  conscious  of 
them,  do  not  regard  anything  as  happiness 
which  does  not  include  their  gratification.  I 
do  not,  indeed,  consider  the  Epicureans  to 
have  been  by  any  means  faultless  in  drawing 
out  their  scheme  of  consequences  from  the 
utilitarian  principle.  To  do  this  in  any  suffi¬ 
cient  manner,  many  Stoic,  as  well  as  Christian 
elements  require  to  be  included.  But  there  is 
no  known  Epicurean  theory  of  life  which  does 
not  assign  to  the  pleasures  of  the  intellect,  of 
the  feelings  and  imagination,  and  of  the  moral 
sentiments,  a  much  higher  value  as  pleasures 
than  to  those  of  mere  sensation,  it  must  be 
admitted,  however,  that  utilitarian  writers  in 
general  have  placed  the  superiority  of  mental 
over  bodily  pleasures  chiefly  in  the  greater 
permanency,  safety,  uncostliness,  etc.,  of  the 
former— that  is,  in  their  circumstantial  advan¬ 
tages  rather  than  in  their  intrinsic  nature. 
And  on  all  these  points  utilitarians  have  fully 
proved  their  case;  but  they  might  have  taken 
the  other,  and,  as  it  may  be  called,  higher 
ground,  with  entire  consistency.  It  is  quite 
compatible  with  the  principle  of  utility  to 
recognise  the  fact,  that  some  kinds  of  pleas¬ 
ure  are  more  desirable  and  more  valuable  than 
others.  It  would  be  absurd  that  while,  in  esti¬ 
mating  all  other  things,  quality  is  considered 
as  well  as  quantity,  the  estimation  of  pleasures 
should  be  supposed  to  depend  on  quantity 
alone. 

If  I  am  asked,  what  I  mean  by  difference  of 
quality  in  pleasures,  or  what  makes  one  pleas¬ 
ure  more  valuable  than  another,  merely  as  a 
pleasure,  except  its  being  greater  in  amount, 
there  is  but  one  possible  answer.  Of  two  pleas¬ 
ures,  if  there  be  one  to  which  all  or  almost  all 
who  have  experience  of  both  give  a  decided 
preference,  irrespective  of  any  feeling  of  moral 
obligation  to  prefer  it,  that  is  the  more  de¬ 
sirable  pleasure.  If  one  of  the  two  is,  by  those 
who  are  competently  acquainted  with  both, 
placed  so  far  above  the  other  that  they  prefer 
it,  even  though  knowing  it  to  be  attended  with 
a  greater  amount  of  disc  ontent,  and  would  not 
resign  it  for  any  quantity  of  the  other  pleasure 
which  their  nature  is  capable  of,  we  are  justi¬ 
fied  in  ascribing  to  the  preferred  enjoyment  a 
superiority  in  quality,. so  far  outweighingquan- 
titv  as  to  render  it,  in  comparison,  of  small  ac¬ 
count. 

Now  it  is  an  unquestionable  fact  that  those 
who  arc  equally  acquainted  with,  and  equally 
capable  of  appreciating  and  enjoying,  both, 


ITS  MEANING  449 


do  give  a  most  marked  preference  to  the  man¬ 
ner  of  existence  which  employs  their  higher 
faculties.  Few  human  creatures  would  consent 
to  be  changed  into  any  of  the  lower  animals, 
for  a  promise  of  the  fullest  allowance  of  a 
beast’s  pleasures;  no  intelligent  human  being 
would  consent  to  be  a  fool,  no  instructed  per¬ 
son  would  be  an  ignoramus,  no  person  of  feel¬ 
ing  and  conscience  would  be  selfish  and  base, 
even  though  they  should  be  persuaded  that 
the  fool,  the  dunce,  or  the  rascal  is  better  satis¬ 
fied  with  his  lot  than  they  are  with  theirs.  They 
would  not  resign  what  they  possess  more  than 
he  for  the  most  complete  satisfaction  of  all  the 
desires  which  they  have  in  common  with  him. 

If  they  ever  fancy  they  would,  it  is  only  in  cases 
of  unhappiness  so  extreme,  that  to  escape  from 
it  they  would  exchange  their  lot  for  almost 
any  other,  however  undesirable  in  their  own 
eyes.  A  being  of  higher  faculties  requires  more 
to  make  him  happy,  is  capable  probably  of 
more  acute  suffering,  and  certainly  accessible 
to  it  at  more  points,  than  one  of  an  inferior 
type;  but  in  spite  of  these  liabilities,  he  can 
never  really  wish  to  sink  into  what  he  feels  to 
be  a  lower  grade  of  existence.  We  may  give  what 
explanation  we  please  of  this  unwillingness; 
we  may  attribute  it  to  pride,  a  name  which 
is  given  indiscriminately  to  some  of  the  most 
and  to  some  of  the  least  estimable  feelings  of 
which  mankind  are  capable:  we  may  refer  it  to 
the  love  of  liberty  and  personal  independence, 
an  appeal  to  which  was  with  the  Stoics  one  of 
the  most  effective  means  for  the  inculcation  of 
it;  to  the  love  of  power,  or  to  the  love  of  excite¬ 
ment,  both  of  which  do  really  enter  into  and 
contribute  to  it:  but  its  most  appropriate  ap¬ 
pellation  is  a  sense  of  dignity,  which  all  human 
beings  possess  in  one  form  or  other,  and  in 
some,  though  by  no  means  in  exact,  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  higher  faculties,  and  which  is  so 
essential  a  part  of  the  happiness  of  those  in 
whom  it  is  strong,  that  nothing  which  conflicts 
with  it  could  be,  otherwise  than  momentarily, 
an  object  of  desire  to  them. 

Whoever  supposes  that  this  preference  takes 
place  at  a  sacrifice  of  happiness— that  the  supe¬ 
rior  being,  in  anything  like  equal  circum¬ 
stances,  is  not  happier  than  the  inferior— con¬ 
founds  the  two  very  different  ideas,  of  happi¬ 
ness,  and  content.  It  is  indisputable  that  the  be¬ 
ing  whose  capacities  of  enjoyment  are  low,  has 
the  greatest  chance  of  having  them  fully  satis¬ 
fied:  and  a  highly  endowed  being  will  always 
feel  that  any  happiness  which  he  can  look  for, 
as  the  world  is  constituted,  is  imperfect.  But  he 


can  learn  to  bear  its  imperfections,  if  they  are 
at  all  bearable;  and  they  will  not  make  him 
envy  the  being  who  is  indeed  unconscious  of 
the  imperfections,  but  only  because  he  feels 
not  at  all  the  good  which  those  imperfections 
qualify.  It  is  better  to  be  a  human  being  dis¬ 
satisfied  than  a  pig  satisfied;  better  to  be  Soc¬ 
rates  dissatisfied  than  a  fool  satisfied.  And  if 
the  fool,  or  the  pig,  are  of  a  different  opinion,  it 
is  because  they  only  know  their  own  side  of 
the  question.  The  other  party  to  the  compari¬ 
son  knows  both  sides. 

It  may  be  objected,  that  many  who  are  capa¬ 
ble  of  the  higher  pleasures,  occasionally,  under 
the  influence  of  temptation,  postpone  them  to 
the  lower.  But  this  is  quite  compatible  with 
a  full  appreciation  of  the  intrinsic  superiority 
of  the  higher.  Men  often,  from  infirmity  of 
character,  make  their  election  for  the  nearer 
good,  though  they  know  it  to  be  the  less  valu¬ 
able;  and  this  no  less  when  the  choice  is  be¬ 
tween  two  bodily  pleasures,  than  when  it  is  be¬ 
tween  bodily  and  mental.  They  pursue  sensual 
indulgences  to  the  injury  of  health,  though 
perfectly  aware  that  health  is  the  greater 
good. 

It  may  be  further  objected,  that  many  who 
begin  with  youthful  enthusiasm  for  everything 
noble,  as  they  advance  in  years  sink  into  in¬ 
dolence  and  selfishness.  But  I  do  not  believe 
that  those  who  undergo  this  very  common 
change,  voluntarily  choose  the  lower  descrip¬ 
tion  of  pleasures  in  preference  to  the  higher. 

I  believe  that  before  they  devote  themselves 
exclusively  to  the  one,  they  have  already  be¬ 
come  incapable  of  the  other.  Capacity  for  the 
nobler  feelings  is  in  most  natures  a  very  ten¬ 
der  plant,  easily  killed,  not  only  by  hostile  in¬ 
fluences,  but  by  mere  want  of  sustenance;  and 
in  the  majority  of  young  persons  it  speedily 
dies  away  if  the  occupations  to  which  their 
position  'in  life  has  devoted  them,  and  the 
society  into  which  it  has  thrown  them,  are  not 
favourable  to  keeping  that  higher  capacity 
in  exercise.  Men  lose  their  high  aspirations  as 
they  lose  their  intellectual  tastes,  because  they 
have  not  time  or  opportunity  for  indulging 
them;  and  they  addict  themselves  to  inferior 
pleasures,  not  because  they  deliberately  prefer 
them,  but  because  they  are  either  the  only  ones 
to  which  they  have  access,  or  the  only  ones 
which  they  are  any  longer  capable  of  enjoy¬ 
ing.  It  may  be  questioned  whether  any  one 
who  has  remained  equally  susceptible  to  both 
classes  of  pleasures,  ever  knowingly  and  calm¬ 
ly  preferred  the  lower;  though  many,  in  all 


uri  LIT  ARIA  N  ISM 


45° 

ages,  have  broken  down  in  an  ineffectual  at¬ 
tempt  to  combine  both. 

From  this  verdict  of  the  only  competent 
judges,  I  apprehend  there  can  be  no  appeal. 
On  a  question  which  is  the  best  worth  having 
of  two  pleasures,  or  which  of  two  modes  of 
existence  is  the  most  grateful  to  the  feelings, 
apart  from  its  moral  attributes  and  from  its 
consequences,  the  judgment  of  those  who  are 
qualified  by  knowledge  of  both,  or,  if  they 
differ,  that  of  the  majority  among  them,  must 
be  admitted  as  final.  And  there  needs  be  the 
less  hesitation  to  accept  this  judgment  respect¬ 
ing  the  quality  of  pleasures,  since  there  is  no 
other  tribunal  to  be  referred  to  even  on  the 
question  of  quantity.  What  means  are  there  of 
determining  which  is  the  acutest  of  two  pains, 
or  the  in  tensest  of  two  pleasurable  sensations, 
except  the  general  suffrage  of  those  who  are 
familiar  with  both?  Neither  pains  nor  pleas¬ 
ures  are  homogeneous,  and  pain  is  always  het¬ 
erogeneous  with  pleasure.  What  is  there  to 
decide  whether  a  particular  pleasure  is  worth 
purchasing  at  the  cost  of  a  particular  pain, 
except  the  feelings  and  judgment  of  the  expe¬ 
rienced?  When,  therefore,  those  feelings  and 
judgment  declare  the  pleasures  derived  from 
the  higher  faculties  to  be  preferable  in  kind , 
apart  from  the  question  of  intensity,  to  those 
of  which  the  animal  nature,  disjoined  from  the 
higher  faculties,  is  suspectible,  they  are  entitled 
on  this  subject  to  the  same  regard. 

I  have  dwelt  on  this  point,  as  being  a  nec¬ 
essary  part  of  a  perfectly  just  conception  of 
Utility  or  Happiness,  considered  as  the  direc¬ 
tive  rule  of  human  conduct.  But  it  is  by  no 
means  an  indispensable  condition  to  the  ac¬ 
ceptance  of  the  utilitarian  standard;  for  that 
standard  is  not  the  agent’s  own  greatest  hap¬ 
piness,  but  the  greatest  amount  of  happiness 
altogether;  and  if  it  may  possibly  be  doubted 
whether  a  nobler haracter  is  always  the  happier 
for  its  nobleness,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
it  makes  other  people  happier,  and  that  the 
world  in  general  is  immensely  a  gainer  by  it. 
Utilitarianism,  therefore,  could  only  attain  its 
end  by  the  general  cultivation  of  nobleness  of 
character,  even  if  each  individual  were  only 
benefited  by  the  nobleness  of  others,  and  his 
own,  so  far  as  happiness  is  concerned,  were  a 
sheer  deduction  from  the  benefit.  But  the 
bare  enunciation  of  such  an  absurdity  as  this 
last,  renders  refutation  superfluous. 

According  to  the  Greatest  Happiness  Prin¬ 
ciple,  as  above  explained,  the  ultimate  end, 


with  reference  to  and  for  the  sake  of  which 
all  other  things  are  desirable  (whether  we  are 
considering  our  own  good  or  that  of  other 
people),  is  an  existence  exempt  as  far  as  pos¬ 
sible  from  pain,  and  as  rich  as  possible  in  en¬ 
joyments,  both  in  point  of  quantity  and  qual¬ 
ity;  the  test  of  quality,  and  the  rule  for  meas¬ 
uring  it  against  quantity,  being  the  preference 
felt  by  those  who  in  their  opportunities  of  ex¬ 
perience,  to  which  must  be  added  their  habits 
of  self-consciousness  and  self-observation,  are 
best  furnished  with  the  means  of  comparison. 
This,  being,  according  to  the  utilitarian  opin¬ 
ion,  the  end  of  human  action,  is  necessarily 
also  the  standard  of  morality;  which  may  ac¬ 
cordingly  be  defined,  the  rules  and  precepts 
for  human  conduct,  by  the  observance  of 
which  an  existence  such  as  has  been  described 
might  be,  to  the  greatest  extent  possible,  se¬ 
cured  to  all  mankind;  and  not  to  them  only, 
but,  so  far  as  the  nature  of  things  admits,  to 
the  whole  sentient  creation. 

Against  this  doctrine,  however,  arises  an¬ 
other  class  of  objectors,  who  say  that  happiness, 
in  any  form,  cannot  be  the  rational  purpose  of 
human  life  and  action:  because,  in  the  first 
place,  it  is  unattainable:  and  they  contemptu¬ 
ously  ask,  what  right  hast  thou  to  be  happy? 
a  question  which  Mr.  Carlyle  clenches  by  the 
addition,  What  right,  a  short  time  ago,  hadst 
thou  even  to  be?  Next,  they  say,  that  men  can 
do  without  happiness;  that  all  noble  human 
beings  have  felt  this,  and  could  not  have  be¬ 
come  noble  but  by  learning  the  lesson  of  Entsa- 
gen,  or  renunciation;  which  lesson,  thoroughly 
learnt  and  submitted  to,  they  affirm  to  be  the 
beginning  and  necessary  condition  of  all  virtue. 

The  first  of  these  objections  would  go  to  the 
root  of  the  matter  were  it  well  founded:  for  if 
no  happiness  is  to  be  had  at  all  by  human 
beings,  the  attainment  of  it  cannot  be  the 
end  of  morality,  or  of  any  rational  conduct. 
Though,  even  in  that  case,  something  might 
still  be  said  for  the  utilitarian  theory;  since 
utility  includes  not  solely  the  pursuit  of  hap¬ 
piness,  but  the  prevention  or  mitigation  of  un¬ 
happiness:  and  if  the  former  aim  be  chimeri¬ 
cal,  there  will  be  all  the  greater  scope  and  more 
imperative  need  for  the  latter,  so  long  at  least 
as  mankind  think  fit  to  live,  and  do  not  take 
refuge  in  the  simultaneous  act  of  suicide 
recommended  under  certain  conditions  by 
Novalis.  When,  however,  it  is  thus  positively 
asserted  to  be  impossible  that  human  life 
should  be  happy,  the  assertion,  if  not  some¬ 
thing  like  a  verbal  quibble,  is  at  least  an  ex- 


aggeration.  If  by  happiness  be  meant  a  con¬ 
tinuity  of  highly  pleasurable  excitement,  it  is 
evident  enough  that  this  is  impossible.  A  state 
of  exalted  pleasure  lasts  only  moments,  or  in 
some  cases,  and  with  some  intermissions,  hours 
or  days,  and  is  the  occasional  brilliant  flash  of 
en  joyment,  not  its  permanent  and  steady  flame. 
Of  this  the  philosophers  who  have  taught  that 
happiness  is  the  end  of  life  were  as  fully  aware 
as  those  who  taunt  them.  The  happiness  which 
they  meant  was  not  a  life  of  rapture;  but  mo¬ 
ments  of  such,  in  an  existence  made  up  of  few 
and  transitory  pains,  many  and  various  pleas¬ 
ures,  with  a  decided  predominance  of  the  ac¬ 
tive  over  the  passive,  and  having  as  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  the  whole,  not  to  expect  more  from 
life  than  it  is  capable  of  bestowing.  A  life  thus 
composed,  to  those  who  have  been  fortunate 
enough  to  obtain  it,  has  always  appeared  wor¬ 
thy  of  the  name  of  happiness.  And  such  an 
existence  is  even  now  the  lot  of  many,  during 
some  considerable  portion  of  their  lives.  The 
present  wretched  education,  and  wretched  so¬ 
cial  arrangements,  are  the  only  real  hindrance 
to  its  being  attainable  by  almost  all. 

The  objectors  perhaps  may  doubt  whether 
human  beings,  if  taught  to  consider  happiness 
as  the  end  of  life,  would  be  satisfied  with  such 
a  moderate  share  of  it.  But  great  numbers  of 
mankind  have  been  satisfied  with  much  less. 
The  main  constituents  of  a  satisfied  life  appear 
to  be  two,  either  of  which  by  itself  is  often 
found  sufficient  for  the  purpose:  tranquillity, 
and  excitement.  With  much  tranquillity,  many 
find  that  they  can  be  content  with  very  little 
pleasure:  with  much  excitement,  many  can  rec¬ 
oncile  themselves  to  a  considerable  quantity  of 
pain.  There  is  assuredly  no  inherent  impossi¬ 
bility  in  enabling  even  the  mass  of  mankind 
to  unite  both:  since  the  two  are  so  far  from 
being  incompatible  that  they  are  in  natural 


alliance,  the  prolongation  of  either  being  a 
preparation  for,  and  exciting  a  wish  for,  the 
other.  It  is  only  those  in  whom  indolence 
amounts  to  a  vice,  that  do  not  desire  excite¬ 
ment  after  an  interval  of  repose:  it  is  only  those 
in  whom  the  need  of  excitement  is  a  disease, 
that  feel  the  tranquillity  which  follows  excite¬ 
ment  dull  and  insipid,  instead  of  pleasurable 
in  direct  proportion  to  the  excitement  which 
preceded  it.  When  people  who  are  tolerably 
fortunate  in  their  outward  lot  do  not  find  in 
life  sufficient  enjoyment  to  make  it  valuable  to 
them,  the  cause  generally  is,  caring  for  nobody 
but  themselves.  To  those  who  have  neither 
public  nor  private  affections,  the  excitements 


ITS  MEANING  451 

of  life  are  much  curtailed,  and  in  any  case 
dwindle  in  value  as  the  time  approaches  when 
all  selfish  interests  must  be  terminated  by 
death:  while  those  who  leave  after  them  ob¬ 
jects  of  personal  affection,  and  especially  those 
who  have  also  cultivated  a  fellow-feeling  with 
the  collective  interests  of  mankind,  retain  as 
lively  an  interest  in  life  on  the  eve  of  death 
as  in  the  vigour  of  youth  and  health.  Next  to 
selfishness,  the  principal  cause  which  makes 
life  unsatisfactory  is  want  of  mental  cultiva¬ 
tion.  A  cultivated  mind— I  do  not  mean  that 
of  a  philosopher,  but  any  mind  to  which  the 
fountains  of  knowledge  have  been  opened,  and 
which  has  been  taught,  in  any  tolerable  degree, 
to  exercise  its  faculties— finds  sources  of  inex¬ 
haustible  interest  in  all  that  surrounds  it;  in 
the  objects  of  nature,  the  achievements  of  art, 
the  imaginations  of  poetry,  the  incidents  of 
history,  the  ways  of  mankind,  past  and  present, 
and  their  prospects  in  the  future.  It  is  possible, 
indeed,  to  become  indifferent  to  all  this,  and 
that  too  without  having  exhausted  a  thou¬ 
sandth  part  of  it;  but  only  when  one  has  had 
from  the  beginning  no  moral  or  human  in¬ 
terest  in  these  things,  and  has  sought  in  them 
only  the  gratification  of  curiosity. 

Now  there  is  absolutely  no  reason  in  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things  why  an  amount  of  mental  cul¬ 
ture  sufficient  to  give  an  intelligent  interest  in 
these  objects  of  contemplation,  should  not  be 
the  inheritance  of  every  one  born  in  a  civilised 
country.  As  little  is  there  an  inherent  necessity 
that  any  human  being  should  be  a  selfish  ego¬ 
tist,  devoid  of  every  feeling  or  care  but  those 
which  centre  in  his  own  miserable  individual¬ 
ity.  Something  far  superior  to  this  is  sufficiently 
common  even  now,  to  give  ample  earnest  of 
what  the  human  species  may  be  made.  Genuine 
private  affections,  and  a  sincere  interest  in  the 
public  good,  are  possible,  though  in  unequal 


degrees,  to  every  rightly  brought  up  human 
being.  In  a  world  in  which  there  is  so  much  to 
interest,  so  much  to  enjoy,  and  so  much  also 
to  correct  and  improve,  every  one  who  has  this 
moderate  amount  of  moral  and  intellectual 
requisites  is  capable  of  an  existence  which  may 
be  called  enviable;  and  unless  such  a  person, 
through  bad  laws,  or  subjection  to  the  will  of 
others,  is  denied  the  liberty  to  use  the  sources 
of  happiness  within  his  reach,  he  will  not  fail 
to  find  this  enviable  existence,  if  he  escape  the 
positive  evils  of  life,  the  great  sources  of  physi¬ 
cal  and  mental  suffering-such  as  indigence, 
disease,  and  the  unkindness,  worthlessness,  or 
premature  lossof  objectsof  affection.  I  he  main 


UTILITARIANISM 


stress  of  the  problem  lies,  therefore,  in  the 
contest  with  these  calamities,  from  which  it  is 
a  rare  good  fortune  entirely  to  escape;  which, 
as  things  now  are,  cannot  be  obviated,  and 
often  cannot  be  in  any  material  degree  miti¬ 
gated.  Yet  no  one  whose  opinion  deserves  a 
moment’s  consideration  can  doubt  that  most 
of  the  great  positive  evils  of  the  world  are 
in  themselves  removable,  and  will,  it  human 
affairs  continue  to  improve,  be  in  the  end  re¬ 
duced  within  narrow  limits.  Poverty,  in  any 
sense  implying  suffering,  may  be  completely 
extinguished  by  the  wisdom  of  society,  com¬ 
bined  with  the  good  sense  and  providence  of 
individuals.  Even  that  most  intractable  of 
enemies,  disease,  may  be  indefinitely  reduced 
in  dimensions  by  good  physical  and  moral 
education,  and  proper  control  of  noxious  in¬ 
fluences;  while  the  progress  of  science  holds 
out  a  promise  for  the  future  of  still  more 
direct  conquests  over  this  detestable  foe.  And 
every  advance  in  that  direction  relieves  us  from 
some,  not  only  of  the  chances  which  cut  short 
our  own  lives,  but,  what  concerns  us  still  more, 
which  deprive  us  of  those  in  whom  our  hap¬ 
piness  is  wrapt  up.  As  for  vicissitudes  of  for¬ 
tune,  and  other  disappointments  connected 
with  worldly  circumstances,  these  are  princi¬ 
pally  the  effect  either  of  gross  imprudence,  of 
ill-regulated  desires,  or  of  bad  or  imperfect  so¬ 
cial  institutions. 

All  the  grand  sources,  in  short,  of  human 
suffering  are  in  a  great  degree,  many  of  them 
almost  entirely,  conquerable  by  human  care 
and  effort;  and  though  their  removal  is  griev¬ 
ously  slow— though  a  long  succession  of  gen¬ 
erations  will  perish  in  the  breach  before  the 
conquest  is  completed,  and  this  world  becomes 
all  that,  if  will  and  knowledge  were  not  want¬ 
ing,  it  might  easily  be  made— yet  every  mind 
sufficiently  intelligent  and  generous  to  bear 
a  part,  however  small  and  unconspicuous,  in 
the  endeavour,  will  draw  a  noble  enjoyment 
from  the  contest  itself,  which  he  would  not  for 
any  bribe  in  the  form  of  selfish  indulgence  con¬ 
sent  to  be  without. 

And  this  leads  to  the  true  estimation  of  what 
is  said  by  the  objectors  concerning  the  possi¬ 
bility,  and  the  obligation,  of  learning  to  do 
without  happiness.  Unquestionably  it  is  possi¬ 
ble  to  do  without  happiness;  it  is  done  in¬ 
voluntarily  by  nineteen-twentieths  of  man¬ 
kind,  even  in  those  parts  of  our  present  world 
which  arc  least  deep  in  barbarism;  and  it  often 
has  to  be  done  voluntarily  by  the  hero  or  the 
martyr,  for  the  sake  of  something  which  he 


prizes  more  than  his  individual  happiness. 
But  this  something,  what  is  it,  unless  the  hap¬ 
piness  of  others,  or  some  of  the  requisites  of 
happiness?  It  is  noble  to  be  capable  of  resign¬ 
ing  entirely  one’s  own  portion  of  happiness, 
or  chances  of  it:  but,  after  all,  this  self-sacrifice 
must  be  for  some  end;  it  is  not  its  own  end; 
and  if  we  are  told  that  its  end  is  not  happiness, 
but  virtue,  which  is  better  than  happiness,  I 
ask,  would  the  sacrifice  be  made  if  the  hero  or 
martyr  did  not  believe  that  it  would  earn  for 
others  immunity  from  similar  sacrifices?  Would 
it  be  made  if  he  thought  that  his  renunciation 
of  happiness  for  himself  would  produce  no 
fruit  for  any  of  his  fellow  creatures,  but  to 
make  their  lot  like  his,  and  place  them  also  in 
the  condition  of  persons  who  have  renounced 
happiness?  All  honour  to  those  who  can  abne¬ 
gate  for  themselves  the  personal  enjoyment  of 
life,  when  by  such  renunciation  they  contrib¬ 
ute  worthily  to  increase  the  amount  of  happi¬ 
ness  in  the  world;  but  he  who  does  it,  or  pro¬ 
fesses  to  do  it,  for  any  other  purpose,  is  no 
more  deserving  of  admiration  than  the  ascetic 
mounted  on  his  pillar.  He  may  be  an  inspirit¬ 
ing  proof  of  what  men  can  do,  but  assuredly 
not  an  example  of  what  they  should. 

Though  it  is  only  in  a  very  imperfect  state 
of  the  world’s  arrangements  that  any  one  can 
best  serve  the  happiness  of  others  by  the  abso¬ 
lute  sacrifice  of  his  own,  yet  so  long  as  the 
world  is  in  that  imperfect  state,  I  fully  acknowl¬ 
edge  that  the  readiness  to  make  such  a  sacrifice 
is  the  highest  virtue  which  can  be  found  in 
man.  I  will  add,  that  in  this  condition  of  the 
world,  paradoxical  as  the  assertion  may  be.  the 
conscious  ability  to  do  without  happiness  gives 
the  best  prospect  of  realising  such  happiness 
as  is  attainable.  For  nothing  except  that  con¬ 
sciousness  can  raise  a  person  above  the  chances 
of  life,  by  making  him  feel  that,  let  fate  and 
fortune  do  their  worst,  they  have  not  power  to 
subdue  him:  which,  once  fell,  frees  him  from 
excess  of  anxiety  concerning  the  evils  of  life, 
and  enables  him.  like  many  a  Stoic  in  the  worst 
times  of  the  Roman  Empire,  to  cultivate  in 
tranquillity  the  sources  of  satisfaction  accessi¬ 
ble  to  him,  without  concerning  himself  about 
the  uncertainty  of  their  duration,  any  more 
than  about  their  inevitable  end. 

Meanwhile,  let  utilitarians  never  cease  to 
claim  the  morality  of  self  devotion  as  a  posses¬ 
sion  which  belongs  by  as  good  a  right  to  them, 
as  either  to  the  Stoic  or  to  the  Transcendental 
ist.  1  he  utilitarian  morality  does  recognise  in 
human  beings  the  power  of  sacrificing  their 


ITS  ME 

own  greatest  good  for  the  good  of  others.  It 
only  refuses  to  admit  that  the  sacrifice  is  itself  a 
good.  A  sacrifice  which  does  not  increase,  or 
tend  to  increase,  the  sum  total  of  happiness,  it 
considers  as  wasted.  The  only  self-renunciation 
which  it  applauds,  is  devotion  to  the  happi¬ 
ness,  or  to  some  of  the  means  of  happiness,  of 
others;  either  of  mankind  collectively,  or  of 
individuals  within  the  limits  imposed  by  the 
collective  interests  of  mankind. 

I  must  again  repeat,  what  the  assailants  of 
utilitarianism  seldom  have  the  justice  to  ac¬ 
knowledge,  that  the  happiness  which  forms  the 
utilitarian  standard  of  what  is  right  in  con¬ 
duct,  is  not  the  agent’s  own  happiness,  but  that 
of  all  concerned.  As  between  his  own  happi¬ 
ness  and  that  of  others,  utilitarianism  requires 
him  to  be  as  strictly  impartial  as  a  disinterested 
and  benevolent  spectator.  In  the  golden  rule 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  we  read  the  complete 
spirit  of  the  ethics  of  utility.  To  do  as  you 
would  be  done  by,  and  to  love  your  neighbour 
as  yourself,  constitute  the  ideal  perfection  of 
utilitarian  morality.  As  the  means  of  making 
the  nearest  approach  to  this  ideal,  utility 
would  enjoin,  first,  that  laws  and  social  ar¬ 
rangements  should  place  the  happiness,  or  (as 
speaking  practically  it  may  be  called)  the  in¬ 
terest,  of  every  individual,  as  nearly  as  possible 
in  harmony  with  the  interest  of  the  whole;  and 
secondly,  that  education  and  opinion,  which 
have  so  vast  a  power  over  human  character, 
should  so  use  that  power  as  to  establish  in  the 
mind  of  every  individual  an  indissoluble  as¬ 
sociation  between  his  own  happiness  and  the 
good  of  the  whole;  especially  between  his  own 
happiness  and  the  practice  of  such  modes  of 
conduct,  negative  and  positive,  as  regard  for 
the  universal  happiness  prescribes;  so  that  not 
only  he  may  be  unable  to  conceive  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  happiness  to  himself,  consistently 
with  conduct  opposed  to  the  general  good,  but 
also  that  a  direct  impulse  to  promote  the  gen¬ 
eral  good  may  be  in  every  individual  one  of 
the  habitual  motives  of  action,  and  the  senti¬ 
ments  connected  therewith  may  fill  a  large  and 
prominent  place  in  every  human  being  s  senti¬ 
ent  existence.  If  the  impugners  of  the  utilita¬ 
rian  morality  represented  it  to  their  own  minds 
in  this  its  true  character,  I  know  not  what 
recommendation  possessed  by  any  other  moral¬ 
ity  they  could  possibly  affirm  to  be  wanting  to 
it;  what  more  beautiful  or  more  exalted  de¬ 
velopments  of  human  nature  any  other  ethical 
system  can  be  supposed  to  foster,  or  what 
springs  of  action,  not  accessible  to  the  utili- 


ANING  453 

tarian,  such  systems  rely  on  for  giving  effect  to 
their  mandates. 

The  objectors  to  utilitarianism  cannot  al¬ 
ways  be  charged  with  representing  it  in  a  dis¬ 
creditable  light.  On  the  contrary,  those  among 
them  who  entertain  anything  like  a  just  idea 
of  its  disinterested  character,  sometimes  find 
fault  with  its  standard  as  being  too  high  for 
humanity.  They  say  it  is  exacting  too  much  to 
require  that  people  shall  always  act  from  the 
inducement  of  promoting  the  general  interests 
of  society.  But  this  is  to  mistake  the  very  mean¬ 
ing  of  a  standard  of  morals,  and  confound  the 
rule  of  action  with  the  motive  of  it.  It  is  the 
business  of  ethics  to  tell  us  what  are  our  duties, 
or  by  what  test  we  may  know  them;  but  no 
system  of  ethics  requires  that  the  sole  motive 
of  all  we  do  shall  be  a  feeling  of  duty;  on  the 
contrary,  ninety-nine  hundredths  of  all  our  ac¬ 
tions  are  done  from  other  motives,  and  rightly 
so  done,  if  the  rule  of  duty  does  not  condemn 
them.  It  is  the  more  unjust  to  utilitarianism 
that  this  particular  misapprehension  should 
be  made  a  ground  of  objection  to  it,  inasmuch 
as  utilitarian  moralists  have  gone  beyond  al¬ 
most  all  others  in  affirming  that  the  motive 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  morality  of  the  ac¬ 
tion,  though  much  with  the  worth  of  the 
agent.  He  who  saves  a  fellow  creature  from 
drowning  does  what  is  morally  right,  whethei 
his  motive  be  duty,  or  the  hope  of  being  paid 
for  his  trouble;  he  who  betrays  the  friend  that 
trusts  him,  is  guilty  of  a  crime,  even  if  his  ob¬ 
ject  be  to  serve  another  friend  to  whom  he  is 
under  greater  obligations. 

But  to  speak  only  of  actions  done  from  the 
motive  of  duty,  and  in  direct  obedience  to 
principle;  it  is  a  misapprehension  of  the  utili¬ 
tarian  mode  of  thought,  to  conceive  it  as  im¬ 
plying  that  people  should  fix  their  minds  upon 
so  wide  a  generality  as  the  world,  or  society 
at  large.  The  great  majority  of  good  actions  are 
intended  not  for  the  benefit  of  the  world,  but 
for  that  of  individuals,  of  which  the  good  of 
the  world  is  made  up;  and  the  thoughts  of  the 
most  virtuous  man  need  not  on  these  occasions 
travel  beyond  the  particular  persons  concerned, 
except  so  far  as  is  necessary  to  assure  him¬ 
self  that  in  benefiting  them  he  is  not  violating 
the  rights,  that  is,  the  legitimate  and  author¬ 
ised  expectations,  of  any  one  else.  The  multi¬ 
plication  of  happiness  is,  according  to  the 
utilitarian  ethics,  the  object  of  virtue:  the  oc¬ 
casions  on  which  any  person  (except  one  in  a 
thousand)  has  it  in  his  power  to  do  this  on  an 
extended  scale,  in  other  words  to  be  a  public 


UTILITARIANISM 


benefactor,  are  but  exceptional;  and  on  these 
occasions  alone  is  he  called  on  to  consider 
public  utility;  in  every  other  case,  private  util¬ 
ity,  the  interest  or  happiness  of  some  few  per¬ 
sons,  is  all  he  has  to  attend  to.  Those  alone  the 
influence  of  whose  actions  extends  to  society 
in  general,  need  concern  themselves  habitually 
about  so  large  an  object.  In  the  case  of  absti¬ 
nences  indeed— of  things  which  people  forbear 
to  do  from  moral  considerations,  though  the 
consequences  in  the  particular  case  might  be 
beneficial— it  would  be  unworthy  of  an  intelli¬ 
gent  agent  not  to  be  consciously  aware  that  the 
action  is  of  a  class  which,  if  practised  generally, 
would  be  generally  injurious,  and  that  this  is 
the  ground  of  the  obligation  to  abstain  from 
it.  The  amount  of  regard  for  the  public  inter¬ 
est  implied  in  this  recognition,  is  no  greater 
than  is  demanded  by  every  system  of  morals, 
for  they  all  enjoin  to  abstain  from  whatever  is 
manifestly  pernicious  to  society. 

The  same  considerations  dispose  of  another 
reproach  against  the  doctrine  of  utility,  found¬ 
ed  on  a  still  grosser  misconception  of  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  a  standard  of  morality,  and  of  the  very 
meaning  of  the  words  right  and  wrong.  It  is 
often  affirmed  that  utilitarianism  renders  men 
cold  and  unsympathising;  that  it  chills  their 
moral  feelings  towards  individuals;  that  it 
makes  them  regard  only  the  dry  and  hard  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  consequences  of  actions,  not 
taking  into  their  moral  estimate  the  qualities 
from  which  those  actions  emanate.  If  the  as¬ 
sertion  means  that  they  do  not  allow  their 
judgment  respecting  the  rightness  or  wrong¬ 
ness  of  an  action  to  be  influenced  by  their 
opinion  of  the  qualities  of  the  person  who 
does  it,  this  is  a  complaint  not  against  utili¬ 
tarianism,  but  against  having  any  standard  of 
morality  at  all;  for  certainly  no  known  ethical 
standard  decides  an  action  to  be  good  or  bad 
because  it  is  done  by  a  good  or  a  bad  man,  still 
less  because  done  by  an  amiable,  a  brave,  or 
a  benevolent  man,  or  the  contrary.  These  con¬ 
siderations  are  relevant,  not  to  the  estimation 
of  actions,  but  of  persons;  and  there  is  nothing 
in  the  utilitarian  theory  inconsistent  with  the 
fact  that  there  are  other  things  which  interest 
us  in  persons  besides  the  rightness  and  wrong¬ 
ness  of  their  actions.  The  Stoics,  indeed,  with 
the  paradoxical  misuse  of  language  which  was 
part  of  their  system,  and  by  which  they  strove 
to  raise  themselves  above  all  concern  about 
anything  but  virtue,  were  fond  of  saying  that 
he  who  has  that  has  everything:  that  he,  and 
only  lie,  is  rich,  is  beautiful,  is  a  king.  But  no 


claim  of  this  description  is  made  for  the  virtu¬ 
ous  man  by  the  utilitarian  doctrine.  Utili¬ 
tarians  are  quite  aware  that  there  are  other  de¬ 
sirable  possessions  and  qualities  besides  virtue, 
and  are  perfectly  willing  to  allow  to  all  of 
them  their  full  worth.  They  are  also  aware  that 
a  right  action  does  not  necessarily  indicate  a 
virtuous  character,  and  that  actions  which  are 
blamable,  often  proceed  from  qualities  en¬ 
titled  to  praise.  When  this  is  apparent  in  any 
particular  case,  it  modifies  their  estimation, 
not  certainly  of  the  act.  but  of  the  agent.  I 
grant  that  they  are,  notwithstanding,  of  opin¬ 
ion,  that  in  the  long  run  the  best  proof  of  a 
good  character  is  good  actions;  and  resolutely 
refuse  to  consider  any  mental  disposition  as 
good,  of  which  the  predominant  tendency  is  to 
produce  bad  conduct.  This  makes  them  un¬ 
popular  with  many  people;  but  it  is  an  un¬ 
popularity  which  they  must  share  with  every 
one  who  regards  the  distinction  between  right 
and  wrong  in  a  serious  light;  and  the  reproach 
is  not  one  which  a  conscientious  utilitarian 
need  be  anxious  to  repel. 

If  no  more  be  meant  by  the  objection  than 
that  many  utilitarians  look  on  the  morality  of 
actions,  as  measured  by  the  utilitarian  stand¬ 
ard,  with  too  exclusive  a  regard,  and  do  not 
lay  sufficient  stress  upon  the  other  beauties  of 
character  which  go  towards  making  a  human 
being  lovable  or  admirable,  this  may  be  ad¬ 
mitted.  Utilitarians  who  have  cultivated  their 
moral  feelings,  but  not  their  sympathies  nor 
their  artistic  perceptions,  do  fall  into  this  mis¬ 
take;  and  so  do  all  other  moralists  under  the 
same  conditions.  What  can  be  said  in  excuse 
for  other  moralists  is  equally  available  for 
them,  namely,  that,  if  there  is  to  be  any  error, 
it  is  better  that  it  should  be  on  that  side.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  we  may  affirm  that  among  utili¬ 
tarians  as  among  adherents  of  other  systems, 
there  is  every  imaginable  degree  of  rigidity  and 
of  laxity  in  the  application  of  their  standard: 
some  arc  even  puritanically  rigorous,  while 
others  are  as  indulgent  as  can  possibly  be  de¬ 
sired  by  sinner  or  by  sentimentalist.  But  on  the 
whole,  a  doctrine  which  brings  prominently 
forward  the  interest  that  mankind  have  in  the 
repression  and  prevention  of  conduct  which 
violates  the  moral  law,  is  likely  to  be  inferior 
to  no  other  in  turning  the  sanctions  of  opinion 
again  such  violations.  It  is  true,  the  question. 
What  does  violate  the  moral  law?  is  one  on 
which  those  who  recognise  different  standards 
of  morality  are  likely  now  and  then  to  differ. 
But  difference  of  opinion  on  moral  questions 


ITS  MEANING 


455 


was  not  first  introduced  into  the  world  by 
utilitarianism,  while  that  doctrine  does  supply, 
if  not  always  an  easy,  at  all  events  a  tangible 
and  intelligible  mode  of  deciding  such  differ- 
ences. 

It  may  not  be  superfluous  to  notice  a  few 
more  of  the  common  misapprehensions  of  util¬ 
itarian  ethics,  even  those  which  are  so  obvious 
and  gross  that  it  might  appear  impossible  for 
any  person  of  candour  and  intelligence  to  fall 
into  them;  since  persons,  even  of  considerable 
mental  endowments,  often  give  themselves  so 
little  trouble  to  understand  the  bearings  of 
any  opinion  against  which  they  entertain  a 
prejudice,  and  men  are  in  general  so  little  con¬ 
scious  of  this  voluntary  ignorance  as  a  defect, 
that  the  vulgarest  misunderstandings  of  ethi¬ 
cal  doctrines  are  continually  met  with  in  the 
deliberate  writings  of  persons  of  the  greatest 
pretensions  both  to  high  principle  and  to  phi¬ 
losophy.  We  not  uncommonly  hear  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  utility  inveighed  against  as  a  godless 
doctrine.  If  it  be  necessary  to  say  anything  at 
all  against  so  mere  an  assumption,  we  may  say 
that  the  question  depends  upon  what  idea  we 
have  formed  of  the  moral  character  of  the 
Deity.  If  it  be  a  true  belief  that  God  desires, 
above  all  things,  the  happiness  of  his  creatures, 
and  that  this  was  his  purpose  in  their  creation, 
utility  is  not  only  not  a  godless  doctrine,  but 
more  profoundly  religious  than  any  other.  If 
it  be  meant  that  utilitarianism  does  not  recog¬ 
nise  the  revealed  will  of  God  as  the  supreme 
law  of  morals,  I  answer,  that  a  utilitarian  who 
believes  in  the  perfect  goodness  and  wisdom  of 
God,  necessarily  believes  that  whatever  God 
has  thought  fit  to  reveal  on  the  subject  of  mor¬ 
als,  must  fulfil  the  requirements  of  utility  in  a 
supreme  degree.  But  others  besides  utilitarians 
have  been  of  opinion  that  the  Christian  revela¬ 
tion  was  intended,  and  is  fitted,  to  inform  the 
hearts  and  minds  of  mankind  with  a  spirit 
which  should  enable  them  to  find  for  them¬ 
selves  what  is  right,  and  incline  them  to  do  it 
when  found,  rather  than  to  tell  them,  except 
in  a  very  general  way,  what  it  is;  and  that  we 
need  a  doctrine  of  ethics,  carefully  followed 
out,  to  interpret  to  us  the  will  of  God.  Whether 
this  opinion  is  correct  or  not,  it  is  superfluous 
here  to  discuss;  since  whatever  aid  religion, 
either  natural  or  revealed,  can  afford  to  ethical 
investigation,  is  as  open  to  the  utilitarian  mor¬ 
alist  as  to  any  other.  He  can  use  it  as  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  God  to  the  usefulness  or  hurtfulness 
of  any  given  course  of  action,  by  as  good  a 


right  as  others  can  use  it  for  the  indication  of 
a  transcendental  law,  having  no  connection 
with  usefulness  or  with  happiness. 

Again,  Utility  is  often  summarily  stigma¬ 
tised  as  an  immoral  doctrine  by  giving  it  the 
name  of  Expediency,  and  taking  advantage  of 
the  popular  use  of  that  term  to  contrast  it 
with  Principle.  But  the  Expedient,  in  the  sense 
in  which  it  is  opposed  to  the  Right,  generally 
means  that  which  is  expedient  for  the  par¬ 
ticular  interest  of  the  agent  himself;  as  when  a 
minister  sacrifices  the  interests  of  his  country 
to  keep  himself  in  place.  When  it  means  any¬ 
thing  better  than  this,  it  means  that  which  is 
expedient  for  some  immediate  object,  some 
temporary  purpose,  but  which  violates  a  rule 
whose  observance  is  expedient  in  a  much 
higher  degree.  The  Expedient,  in  this  sense,  in¬ 
stead  of  being  the  same  thing  with  the  usefid, 
is  a  branch  of  the  hurtful.  Thus,  it  would  often 
be  expedient,  for  the  purpose  of  getting  over 
some  momentary  embarrassment,  or  attaining 
some  object  immediately  useful  to  ourselves  or 
others,  to  tell  a  lie.  But  inasmuch  as  the  culti¬ 
vation  in  ourselves  of  a  sensitive  feeling  on  the 
subject  of  veracity,  is  one  of  the  most  useful, 
and  the  enfeeblement  of  that  feeling  one  of 
the  most  hurtful,  things  to  which  our  conduct 
can  be  instrumental;  and  inasmuch  as  any, 
even  unintentional,  deviation  from  truth,  does 
that  much  towards  weakening  the  trustworthi¬ 
ness  of  human  assertion,  which  is  not  only  the 
principal  support  of  all  present  social  well¬ 
being,  but  the  insufficiency  of  which  does  more 
than  any  one  thing  that  can  be  named  to  keep 
back  civilisation,  virtue,  everything  on  which 
human  happiness  on  the  largest  scale  depends; 
we  feel  that  the  violation,  for  a  present  ad¬ 
vantage,  of  a  rule  of  such  transcendant  ex¬ 
pediency,  is  not  expedient,  and  that  he  who, 
for  the  sake  of  a  convenience  to  himself  or  to 
some  other  individual,  does  what  depends  on 
him  to  deprive  mankind  of  the  good,  and  in¬ 
flict  upon  them  the  evil,  involved  in  the  great¬ 
er  or  less  reliance  which  they  can  place  in  each 
other’s  word,  acts  the  part  of  one  of  their  worst 
enemies.  Yet  that  even  this  rule,  sacred  as  it  is, 
admits  of  possible  exceptions,  is  acknowledged 
by  all  moralists;  the  chief  of  which  is  when  the 
withholding  of  some  fact  (as  of  information 
from  a  malefactor,  or  of  bad  news  from  a  per¬ 
son  dangerously  ill)  would  save  an  individual 
(especially  an  individual  other  than  oneself) 
from  great  and  unmerited  evil,  and  when  the 
withholding  can  only  be  effected  by  denial. 
But  in  order  that  the  exception  may  not  ex- 


UTILITARIANISM 


456 

tend  itself  beyond  the  need,  and  may  have  the 
least  possible  effect  in  weakening  reliance  on 
veracity,  it  ought  to  be  recognised,  and.  if  pos¬ 
sible,  its  limits  defined;  and  if  the  principle  of 
utility  is  good  for  anything,  it  must  be  good 
for  weighing  these  conflicting  utilities  against 
one  another,  and  marking  out  the  region  with¬ 
in  which  one  or  the  other  preponderates. 

Again,  defenders  of  utility  often  find  them¬ 
selves  called  upon  to  reply  to  such  objections 
as  this— that  there  is  not  time,  previous  to  ac¬ 
tion,  for  calculating  and  weighing  the  effects 
of  any  line  of  conduct  on  the  general  happi¬ 
ness.  This  is  exactly  as  if  any  one  were  to  say 
that  it  is  impossible  to  guide  our  conduct  by 
Christianity,  because  there  is  not  time,  on 
every  occasion  on  which  anything  has  to  be 
done,  to  read  through  the  Old  and  New  Tes¬ 
taments.  The  answer  to  the  objection  is,  that 
there  has  been  ample  time,  namely,  the  whole 
past  duration  of  the  human  species.  During  all 
that  time,  mankind  have  been  learning  by  ex¬ 
perience  the  tendencies  of  actions;  on  which 
experience  all  the  prudence,  as  well  as  all  the 
morality  of  life,  are  dependent.  People  talk  as 
if  the  commencement  of  this  course  of  experi¬ 
ence  had  hitherto  been  put  off,  and  as  if,  at  the 
moment  when  some  man  feels  tempted  to  med¬ 
dle  with  the  property  or  life  of  another,  he  had 
to  begin  considering  for  the  first  time  whether 
murder  and  theft  are  injurious  to  human  hap¬ 
piness.  Even  then  I  do  not  think  that  he 
would  find  the  question  very  puzzling;  but, 
at  all  events,  the  matter  is  now  done  to  his 
hand. 

It  is  truly  a  whimsical  supposition  that,  if 
mankind  were  agreed  in  considering  utility 
to  be  the  test  of  morality,  they  would  remain 
without  any  agreement  as  to  what  is  useful, 
and  would  take  no  measures  for  having  their 
notions  on  the  subject  taught  to  the  young, 
and  enforced  by  law  and  opinion.  There  is  no 
difficulty  in  proving  any  ethical  standard  what¬ 
ever  to  work  ill,  if  we  suppose  universal  idiocy 
to  be  conjoined  with  it;  but  on  any  hypothesis 
short  of  that,  mankind  must  by  this  time  have 
acquired  positive  beliefs  as  to  the  effects  of 
some  actions  on  their  happiness;  and  the  be¬ 
liefs  which  have  thus  come  down  are  the  rules 
of  morality  for  the  multitude,  and  for  the  phi¬ 
losopher  until  he  lias  succeeded  in  finding  bet¬ 
ter.  That  philosophers  might  easily  do  this, 
even  now,  on  many  subjects;  that  the  received 
code  of  ethics  is  by  no  means  of  divine  right; 
and  that  mankind  have  still  much  to  learn  as 
to  the  eflccts  of  actions  on  the  general  happi¬ 


ness,  I  admit,  or  rather,  earnestly  maintain. 
The  corollaries  from  the  principle  of  utility, 
like  the  precepts  of  every  practical  art,  admit 
of  indefinite  improvement,  and,  in  a  progres¬ 
sive  state  of  the  human  mind,  their  improve¬ 
ment  is  perpetually  going  on. 

But  to  consider  the  rules  of  morality  as  im¬ 
provable,  is  one  thing;  to  pass  over  the  inter¬ 
mediate  generalisations  entirely,  and  endeav¬ 
our  to  lest  each  individual  action  directly  by 
the  first  principle,  is  another.  It  is  a  strange 
notion  that  the  acknowledgment  of  a  first  prin¬ 
ciple  is  inconsistent  with  the  admission  of 
secondary  ones.  To  inform  a  traveller  respect¬ 
ing  the  place  of  his  ultimate  destination,  is 
not  to  forbid  the  use  of  landmarks  and  direc¬ 
tion-posts  on  the  way.  The  proposition  that 
happiness  is  the  end  and  aim  of  morality,  does 
not  mean  that  no  road  ought  to  be  laid  clown 
to  that  goal,  or  that  persons  going  thither 
should  not  be  advised  to  take  one  direction 
rather  than  another.  Men  really  ought  to  leave 
off  talking  a  kind  of  nonsense  on  this  subject, 
which  they  would  neither  talk  nor  listen  to  on 
other  matters  of  practical  concernment.  No¬ 
body  argues  that  the  art  of  navigation  is  not 
founded  on  astronomy,  because  sailors  cannot 
wait  to  calculate  the  Nautical  Almanack.  Be¬ 
ing  rational  creatures,  they  go  to  sea  with  it 
ready  calculated;  and  all  rational  creatures  go 
out  upon  the  sea  of  life  with  their  minds  made 
up  on  the  common  questions  of  right  and 
wrong,  as  well  as  on  many  of  the  far  more  dif¬ 
ficult  questions  of  wise  and  foolish.  And  this, 
as  long  as  foresight  is  a  human  quality,  it  is  to 
be  presumed  they  will  continue  to  do.  What¬ 
ever  we  adopt  as  the  fundamental  principle 
of  morality,  we  require  subordinate  principles 
to  apply  it  by;  the  impossibility  of  doing  with¬ 
out  them,  being  common  to  all  systems,  can 
afford  no  argument  against  any  one  in  par¬ 
ticular;  but  gravely  to  argue  as  if  no  such 
secondary  principles  could  be  had,  and  as  if 
mankind  had  remained  till  now,  and  always 
must  remain,  without  drawing  any  general 
conclusions  from  the  experience  of  human 
life,  is  as  high  a  pitch,  I  think,  as  absurdity  has 
ever  readied  in  philosophical  controversy. 

The  remainder  of  the  stock  arguments 
against  utilitarianism  mostly  consist  in  laying 
to  its  charge  the  common  infirmities  of  human 
nature,  and  the  general  diiliculties  which  em¬ 
barrass  conscientious  persons  in  shaping  their 
course  through  life.  We  are  told  that  a  utili 
tarian  will  be  apt  to  make  his  own  particular 
case  an  exception  to  moral  rules,  and,  when 


457 


ITS  SANC 

under  temptation,  will  see  a  utility  in  the 
breach  of  a  rule,  greater  than  he  will  see  in  its 
observance.  But  is  utility  the  only  creed  which 
is  able  to  furnish  us  with  excuses  for  evil 
doing,  and  means  of  cheating  our  own  con¬ 
science?  They  are  afforded  in  abundance  by 
all  doctrines  which  recognise  as  a  fact  in  mor¬ 
als  the  existence  of  conflicting  considerations; 
which  all  doctrines  do,  that  have  been  believed 
by  sane  persons.  It  is  not  the  fault  of  any  creed 
but  of  the  complicated  nature  of  human  af- 
fairs,  that  rules  of  conduct  cannot  be  so  framed 
as  to  require  no  exceptions,  and  that  hardly 
anv  kind  of  action  can  safely  be  laid  down  as 
either  always  obligatory  or  always  condemna- 
ble  There  is  no  ethical  creed  which  does  not 
temper  the  rigidity  of  its  laws,  by  giving  a 

certain  latitude,  under  the  moral  responsibil¬ 
ity  of  the  agent,  for  accommodation  to  pecu¬ 
liarities  of  circumstances;  and  under  every 
creed,  at  the  opening  thus  made,  self-deception 
and  dishonest  casuistry  get  in.  There  exists  no 
moral  system  under  which  there  do  not  arise 
unequivocal  cases  of  conflicting  obligation. 
These  are  the  real  difficulties,  the  knotty  points 
both  in  the  theory  of  ethics,  and  in  the  con¬ 
scientious  guidance  of  personal  conduct.  They 
are  overcome  practically,  with  greater  or  with 
less  success,  according  to  the  intellect  and  vir¬ 
tue  of  the  individual;  but  it  can  hardly  be  pre¬ 
tended  that  any  one  will  be  the  less  qualified 
for  dealing  with  them,  from  possessing  an  ulti- 
mate  standard  to  which  conflicting  rights  and 
duties  can  be  referred.  If  utility  is  the  ultimate 
source  of  moral  obligations,  utility  may  be  in¬ 
voked  to  decide  between  them  when  their  de¬ 
mands  are  incompatible.  Though  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  the  standard  may  be  difficult,  it  is  bet¬ 
ter  than  none  at  all:  while  in  other  systems, 
the  moral  laws  all  claiming  independent  au¬ 
thority,  there  is  no  common  umpire  entitled  to 
interfere  between  them;  their  claims  to  prece¬ 
dence  one  over  another  rest  on  little  better 
than  sophistry,  and  unless  determined,  as  they 
generally  are,  by  the  unacknowledged  influ¬ 
ence  of  considerations  of  utility,  afford  a  free 
scope  for  the  action  of  personal  desires  and 
partialities.  We  must  remember  that  only  in 
these  cases  of  conflict  between  secondary  prin¬ 
ciples  is  it  requisite  that  first  principles  should 
be  appealed  to.  There  is  no  case  of  moral  ob¬ 
ligation  in  which  some  secondary  principle  is 
not  involved;  and  if  only  one,  there  can  sel¬ 
dom  be  any  real  doubt  which  one  it  is,  in  the 
mind  of  any  person  by  whom  the  principle 
itself  is  recognised. 


:tions 

Chapter  y 

Of  the  Ultimate  Sanction  of  the 
Principle  of  Utility 

The  question  is  often  asked,  and  properly  so, 
in  regard  to  any  supposed  moral  standaid— 
What  is  its  sanction?  what  are  the  motives  to 
obey  it?  or  more  specifically,  what  is  the  source 
of  its  obligation?  whence  does  it  derive  its 
binding  force?  It  is  a  necessary  part  of  moral 
philosophy  to  provide  the  answer  to  this  ques¬ 
tion:  which,  though  frequently  assuming  the 
shape  of  an  objection  to  the  utilitarian  moral¬ 
ity  as  if  it  had  some  special  applicability  to 
that  above  others,  really  arises  in  regard  to  all 
standards.  It  arises,  in  fact,  whenever  a  person 
is  called  on  to  adopt  a  standard,  or  refer  mo¬ 
rality  to  anv  basis  on  which  he  has  not  been 
accustomed  to  rest  it.  For  the  customary  moral¬ 
ity  that  which  education  and  opinion  have 
consecrated,  is  the  only  one  which  presents 
itself  to  the  mind  with  the  feeling  of  being  in 
itself  obligatory:  and  when  a  person  is  asked 
to  believe  that  this  morality  derives  its  obliga¬ 
tion  from  some  general  principle  round  which 
custom  has  not  thrown  the  same  halo,  the  as¬ 
sertion  is  to  him  a  paradox;  the  supposed  cor¬ 
ollaries  seem  to  have  a  more  binding  force  than 
the  original  theorem;  the  superstructure  seems 
to  stand  better  without,  than  with,  what  is 
represented  as  its  foundation.  He  says  to  him¬ 
self,  I  feel  that  I  am  bound  not  to  rob  or  mur¬ 
der,  betray  or  deceive;  but  why  am  I  bound  to 
promote  the  general  happiness?  If  mv  own 
happiness  lies  in  something  else,  why  may  I 
not  give  that  the  preference? 

If  the  view7  adopted  by  the  utilitarian  phi¬ 
losophy  of  the  nature  of  the  moral  sense  be  cor¬ 
rect.  this  difficulty  will  always  present  itself, 
until  the  influences  which  form  moral  char¬ 
acter  have  taken  the  same  hold  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  which  they  have  taken  of  some  of  the 
consequences— until,  by  the  improvement  of 
education,  the  feeling  of  unity  with  our  fellow- 
creatures  shall  be  (what  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  Christ  intended  it  to  be)  as  deeply  rooted 
in  our  character,  and  to  our  own  consciousness 
as  completely  a  part  of  our  nature,  as  the  hor¬ 
ror  of  crime  is  in  an  ordinarily  well  brought 
up  voting  person.  In  the  meantime,  how-ever. 
the  difficulty  has  no  peculiar  application  to 
the  doctrine  of  utility,  but  is  inherent  in  every 
attempt  to  analyse  morality  and  reduce  it  to 
principles;  which,  unless  the  principle  is  al¬ 
ready  in  men's  minds  invested  with  as  much 


458  U  T l  LI  TA 

sacredness  as  any  of  its  applications,  always 
seems  to  divest  them  of  a  part  of  their  sanctity. 

The  principle  of  utility  either  has,  or  there 
is  no  reason  why  it  might  not  have,  all  the 
sanctions  which  belong  to  any  other  system  of 
morals.  Those  sanctions  are  either  external 
or  internal.  Of  the  external  sanctions  it  is  not 
necessary  to  speak  at  any  length.  They  are,  the 
hope  of  favour  and  the  fear  of  displeasure, 
from  our  fellow  creatures  or  from  the  Ruler 
of  the  Universe,  along  with  whatever  we  may 
have  of  sympathy  or  affection  for  them,  or  of 
love  and  awe  of  Him,  inclining  us  to  do  his 
will  independently  of  selfish  consequences. 
There  is  evidently  no  reason  why  all  these  mo¬ 
tives  for  observance  should  not  attach  them¬ 
selves  to  the  utilitarian  morality,  ascompletely 
and  as  powerfully  as  to  any  other.  Indeed, 
those  of  them  which  refer  to  our  fellow  crea¬ 
tures  are  sure  to  do  so,  in  proportion  to  the 
amount  of  general  intelligence;  for  whether 
there  be  any  other  ground  of  moral  obliga¬ 
tion  than  the  general  happiness  or  not,  men 
do  desire  happiness;  and  however  imperfect 
may  be  their  own  practice,  they  desire  and 
commend  all  conduct  in  others  towards  them¬ 
selves,  by  which  they  think  their  happiness  is 
promoted.  With  regard  to  the  religious  mo¬ 
tive,  if  men  believe,  as  most  profess  to  do,  in 
the  goodness  of  God,  those  who  think  that  con¬ 
duciveness  to  the  general  happiness  is  the  es¬ 
sence,  or  even  only  the  criterion  of  good,  must 
necessarily  believe  that  it  is  also  that  which 
God  approves.  The  whole  force  therefore  of  ex¬ 
ternal  reward  and  punishment,  whether  phys¬ 
ical  or  moral,  and  whether  proceeding  from 
God  or  from  our  fellow  men,  together  with  all 
that  the  capacities  of  human  nature  admit  of 
disinterested  devotion  to  cither,  become  avail¬ 
able  to  enforce  the  utilitarian  morality,  in  pro¬ 
portion  as  that  morality  is  recognised;  and  the 
more  powerfully,  the  more  the  appliances  of 
education  and  general  cultivation  are  bent  to 
the  purpose. 

So  far  as  to  external  sanctions.  The  internal 
sanction  of  duty,  whatever  our  standard  of 
duty  may  be,  is  one  and  the  same— a  feeling 
in  our  own  mind;  a  pain,  more  or  less  intense, 
attendant  on  violation  of  duty,  which  in  prop¬ 
erly  cultivated  moral  natures  rises,  in  the  more 
serious  cases,  into  shrinking  from  it  as  an  im¬ 
possibility.  This  feeling,  when  disinterested, 
and  connecting  itself  with  the  pure  idea  of 
duty,  and  not  with  some  particular  form  of  it, 
or  with  any  of  the  merely  accessory  circum¬ 
stances,  is  the  essence  of  Conscience;  though 


R1AN1SM 

in  that  complex  phenomenon  as  it  actually 
exists,  the  simple  fact  is  in  general  all  en¬ 
crusted  over  with  collateral  associations,  de¬ 
rived  from  sympathy,  from  love,  and  still  more 
from  fear;  from  all  the  forms  of  religious 
feeling;  from  the  recollections  of  childhood 
and  of  all  our  past  life;  from  self-esteem,  desire 
of  the  esteem  of  others,  and  occasionally  even 
self-abasement.  This  extreme  complication  is, 
I  apprehend,  the  origin  of  the  sort  of  mystical 
character  which,  by  a  tendency  of  the  human 
mind  of  which  there  are  many  other  examples, 
is  apt  to  be  attributed  to  the  idea  of  moral 
obligation,  and  which  leads  people  to  believe 
that  the  idea  cannot  possibly  attach  itself  to 
any  other  objects  than  those  which,  by  a  sup¬ 
posed  mysterious  law,  are  found  in  our  pres¬ 
ent  experience  to  excite  it.  Its  binding  force, 
however,  consists  in  the  existence  of  a  mass 
of  feeling  which  must  be  broken  through  in 
order  to  do  what  violates  our  standard  of 
right,  and  which,  if  we  do  nevertheless  violate 
that  standard,  will  probably  have  to  be  en¬ 
countered  afterwards  in  the  form  of  remorse. 
Whatever  theory  we  have  of  the  nature  or 
origin  of  conscience,  this  is  what  essentially 
constitutes  it. 

The  ultimate  sanction,  therefore,  of  all  mo¬ 
rality  (external  motives  apart)  being  a  sub¬ 
jective  feeling  in  our  own  minds,  I  see  nothing 
embarrassing  to  those  whose  standard  is  util¬ 
ity,  in  the  question,  what  is  the  sanction  of  that 
particular  standard?  We  may  answer,  the  same 
as  of  all  other  moral  standards— the  conscien¬ 
tious  feelings  of  mankind.  Undoubtedly  this 
sanction  has  no  binding  efficacy  on  those  who 
do  not  possess  the  feelings  it  appeals  to;  but 
neither  will  these  persons  be  more  obedient  to 
any  other  moral  principle  than  to  the  utili¬ 
tarian  one.  On  them  morality  of  any  kind  has 
no  hold  but  through  the  external  sanctions. 
Meanwhile  the  feelings  exist,  a  fact  in  human 
nature,  the  reality  of  which,  and  the  great 
power  with  which  they  arc  capable  of  acting 
on  those  in  whom  they  have  been  duly  culti¬ 
vated,  are  proved  by  experience.  No  reason  has 
ever  been  shown  why  they  may  not  be  culti¬ 
vated  to  as  great  intensity  in  connection  with 
the  utilitarian,  as  with  any  other  rule  of  mor¬ 
als. 

There  is,  I  am  aware,  a  disposition  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  a  person  who  secs  in  moral  obliga¬ 
tion  a  transcendental  fact,  an  objective  real¬ 
ity  belonging  to  the  province  of  "Tilings  in 
themselves/'  is  likely  to  be  more  obedient  to 
it  than  one  who  believes  it  to  be  entirely  sub- 


ITS  SANCTIONS 


459 


iective,  having  its  seat  in  human  conscious 
ness  only.  But  whatever  a  person’s  opinion  may 
be  on  this  point  of  Ontology,  the  force  he  is 
really  urged  by  is  his  own  subjective  feeling, 
and  is  exactly  measured  by  its  strength.  No 
one’s  belief  that  duty  is  an  objective  reality  is 
stronger  than  the  belief  that  God  is  so,  yet 
the  belief  in  God,  apart  from  the  expectation 
of  actual  reward  and  punishment,  only  oper¬ 
ates  on  conduct  through,  and  in  proportion  to, 
the  subjective  religious  feeling.  The  sanction, 
so  far  as  it  is  disinterested,  is  always  in  the 
mind  itself;  and  the  notion  therefore  of  the 
transcendental  moralists  must  be,  that  this 
sanction  will  not  exist  in  the  mind  unless  it 
is  believed  to  have  its  root  out  of  the  mind; 
and  that  if  a  person  is  able  to  say  to  himself, 
This  which  is  restraining  me,  and  which  is 
called  my  conscience,  is  only  a  feeling  in  my 
own  mind,  he  may  possibly  draw  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  when  the  feeling  ceases  the  obliga¬ 
tion  ceases,  and  that  if  he  find  the  feeling 
inconvenient,  he  may  disregard  it,  and  en¬ 
deavour  to  get  rid  of  it.  But  is  this  danger 
confined  to  the  utilitarian  morality?  Does  the 
belief  that  moral  obligation  has  its  seat  outside 
the  mind  make  the  feeling  of  it  too  strong  to 
be  got  rid  of?  The  fact  is  so  far  otherwise,  that 
all  moralists  admit  and  lament  the  ease  with 
which,  in  the  generality  of  minds,  conscience 
can  be  silenced  or  stifled.  The  question,  Need 
I  obey  my  conscience?  is  quite  as  often  put  to 
themselves  by  persons  who  never  heard  of  the 
principle  of  utility,  as  by  its  adherents.  Those 
whose  conscientious  feelings  are  so  weak  as 
to  allow  of  their  asking  this  question,  if  they 
answer  it  affirmatively,  will  not  do  so  because 
they  believe  in  the  transcendental  theory,  but 
because  of  the  external  sanctions. 

It  is  not  necessary,  for  the  present  purpose, 
to  decide  whether  the  feeling  of  duty  is  in¬ 
nate  or  implanted.  Assuming  it  to  be  innate, 
it  is  an  open  question  to  what  objects  it  natu¬ 
rally  attaches  itself;  for  the  philosophic  sup¬ 
porters  of  that  theory  are  now  agreed  that  the 
intuitive  perception  is  of  principles  of  moral¬ 
ity  and  not  of  the  details.  If  there  be  anything 
innate  in  the  matter,  I  see  no  teason  why  the 
feeling  which  is  innate  should  not  be  that  of 
regard  to  the  pleasures  and  pains  of  others. 
If  there  is  any  principle  of  morals  which  is 
intuitively  obligatory,  I  should  say  it  must  be 
that.  If  so,  the  intuitive  ethics  would  coincide 
with  the  utilitarian,  and  there  would  be  no 
further  quarrel  between  them.  Even  as  it  is, 
the  intuitive  moralists,  though  they  believe 


that  there  are  other  intuitive  moral  obliga¬ 
tions,  do  already  believe  this  to  be  one;  for 
they  unanimously  hold  that  a  large  poition 
of  morality  turns  upon  the  consideration  due 
to  the  interests  of  our  fellow-creatures.  There¬ 
fore,  if  the  belief  in  the  transcendental  origin 
of  moral  obligation  gives  any  additional  ef¬ 
ficacy  to  the  internal  sanction,  it  appears  to 
me  that  the  utilitarian  principle  has  already 
the  benefit  of  it. 

On  the  other  hand,  if,  as  is  my  own  belief, 
the  moral  feelings  are  not  innate,  but  acquir¬ 
ed,  they  are  not  for  that  reason  the  less  natural. 

It  is  natural  to  man  to  speak,  to  reason,  to 
build  cities,  to  cultivate  the  ground,  though 
these  are  acquired  faculties.  The  moral  feel¬ 
ings  are  not  indeed  a  part  of  our  nature,  in 
the  sense  of  being  in  any  perceptible  degree 
present  in  all  of  us;  but  this,  unhappily,  is  a 
fact  admitted  by  those  who  believe  the  most 
strenuously  in  their  transcendental  origin. 
Like  the  other  acquired  capacities  above  re¬ 
ferred  to,  the  moral  faculty,  if  not  a  part  of 
our  nature,  is  a  natural  outgrowth  from  it; 
capable,  like  them,  in  a  certain  small  degree, 
of  springing  up  spontaneously;  and  suscepti¬ 
ble  of  being  brought  by  cultivation  to  a  high 
degree  of  development.  Unhappily  it  is  also 
susceptible,  by  a  sufficient  use  of  the  external 
sanctions  and  of  the  force  of  early  impressions, 
of  being  cultivated  in  almost  any  direction:  so 
that  there  is  hardly  anything  so  absurd  or  so 
mischievous  that  it  may  not,  by  means  of  these 
influences,  be  made  to  act  on  the  human  mind 
with  all  the  authority  of  conscience.  To  doubt 
that  the  same  potency  might  be  given  by  the 
same  means  to  the  principle  of  utility,  even  if 
it  had  no  foundation  in  human  nature,  would 
be  flying  in  the  face  of  all  experience. 

But  moral  associations  which  are  wholly  of 
artificial  creation,  when  intellectual  culture 
goes  on,  yield  by  degrees  to  the  dissolving  force 
of  analysis:  and  if  the  feeling  of  duty,  when 
associated  with  utility,  would  appear  equally 
arbitrary;  if  there  were  no  leading  department 
of  our  nature,  no  powerful  class  of  sentiments, 
with  which  that  association  would  harmonise, 
which  would  make  us  feel  it  congenial,  and  in¬ 
cline  us  not  only  to  foster  it  in  others  (for 
which  we  have  abundant  interested  motives), 
but  also  to  cherish  it  in  ourselves;  if  there  were 
not,  in  short,  a  natural  basis  of  sentiment  for 
utilitarian  morality,  it  might  well  happen  that 
this  association  also,  even  after  it  had  been 
implanted  by  education,  might  be  analysed 
away. 


UTILITARIANISM 


460 

But  there  is  this  basis  of  powerful  natural 
sentiment;  and  this  it  is  which,  when  once  the 
general  happiness  is  recognised  as  the  ethical 
standard,  will  constitute  the  strength  of  the 
utilitarian  morality.  This  firm  foundation  is 
that  of  the  social  feelings  of  mankind;  the  de¬ 
sire  to  be  in  unity  with  our  fellow  creatures, 
which  is  already  a  powerful  principle  in  hu¬ 
man  nature,  and  happily  one  of  those  which 
tend  to  become  stronger,  even  without  express 
inculcation,  from  the  influences  of  advancing 
civilisation.  The  social  state  is  at  once  so  nat¬ 
ural,  so  necessary,  and  so  habitual  to  man,  that, 
except  in  some  unusual  circumstances  or  by  an 
effort  of  voluntary  abstraction,  he  never  con¬ 
ceives  himself  otherwise  than  as  a  member  of 
a  body;  and  this  association  is  riveted  more 
and  more,  as  mankind  are  further  removed 
from  the  state  of  savage  independence.  Any 
condition,  therefore,  which  is  essential  to  a 
state  of  society,  becomes  more  and  more  an 
inseparable  part  of  every  person’s  conception 
of  the  state  of  things  which  he  is  born  into, 
and  which  is  the  destiny  of  a  human  being. 

Now,  society  between  human  beings,  except 
in  the  relation  of  master  and  slave,  is  mani¬ 
festly  impossible  on  any  other  footing  than 
that  the  interests  of  all  are  to  be  consulted. 
Society  between  equals  can  only  exist  on  the 
understanding  that  the  interests  of  all  are  to 
be  regarded  equally.  And  since  in  nil  states  of 
civilisation,  every  person,  except  an  absolute 
monarch,  has  equals,  every  one  is  obliged  to 
live  on  these  terms  with  somebody;  and  in 
every  age  some  advance  is  made  towards  a  state 
in  which  it  will  be  impossible  to  live  perma¬ 
nently  on  other  terms  with  anybody.  In  this 
way  people  grow  up  unable  to  conceive  as 
possible  to  them  a  state  of  total  disregard  of 
other  people’s  interests.  They  are  under  a 
necessity  of  conceiving  themselves  as  at  least 
abstaining  from  all  the  grosser  injuries,  and 
(if  only  for  their  own  protection)  living  in  a 
state  of  constant  protest  against  them.  They 
are  also  familiar  with  the  fact  of  co-operating 
with  others  and  proposing  to  themselves  a  col 
lectivc,  not  an  individual  interest  as  the  aim 
(at  least  for  the  time  being)  of  their  actions. 
So  long  as  they  are  (o-operating,  their  ends  are 
identified  with  those  of  others;  there  is  at  least 
a  temporary  feeling  that  the  interests  of  others 
are  their  own  interests.  Not  only  does  all 
strengthening  of  social  ties,  and  all  healthy 
growth  of  society,  give  to  each  individual  a 
stronger  personal  interest  in  practically  con¬ 
sulting  the  welfare  of  others;  it  also  leads  him 


to  identify  his  feelings  more  and  more  with 
their  good,  or  at  least  with  an  even  greater  de¬ 
gree  of  practical  consideration  for  it.  He 
comes,  as  though  instinctively,  to  be  conscious 
of  himself  as  a  being  who  of  course  pays  re¬ 
gard  to  others.  The  good  of  others  becomes  to 
him  a  thing  naturally  and  necessarily  to  be  at¬ 
tended  to,  like  any  of  the  physical  conditions 
of  our  existence.  Now,  whatever  amount  of 
this  feeling  a  person  has.  he  is  urged  by  the 
strongest  motives  both  of  interest  and  of  sym¬ 
pathy  to  demonstrate  it,  and  to  the  utmost  of 
his  power  encourage  it  in  others:  and  even  if 
he  has  none  of  it  himself,  he  is  as  greatly  in¬ 
terested  as  any  one  else  that  others  should 
have  it.  Consequently  the  smallest  germs  of 
the  feeling  are  laid  hold  of  and  nourished  by 
the  contagion  of  sympathy  and  the  influences 
of  education;  and  a  complete  web  of  corrobo¬ 
rative  association  is  woven  round  it.  by  the 
powerful  agency  of  the  external  sanctions. 

This  mode  of  conceiving  ourselves  and  hu¬ 
man  life,  as  civilisation  goes  on,  is  felt  to  be 
more  and  more  natural.  Every  step  in  political 
improvement  renders  it  more  so,  by  removing 
the  sources  of  opposition  of  interest,  and  level¬ 
ling  those  inequalities  of  legal  privilege  be¬ 
tween  individuals  or  classes,  owing  to  which 
there  are  large  portions  of  mankind  whose 
happiness  it  is  still  practicable  to  disregard.  In 
an  improving  state  of  the  human  mind,  the 
influences  are  constantly  on  the  increase, 
which  tend  to  generate  in  each  individual  a 
feeling  of  unity  with  all  the  rest:  which,  if  per¬ 
fect,  would  make  him  never  think  of,  or  desire, 
any  beneficial  condition  for  himself,  in  the 
benefits  of  which  they  are  not  included.  If  we 
now  suppose  this  feeling  of  unity  to  be  taught 
as  a  religion,  and  the  whole  force  of  education, 
of  institutions,  and  of  opinion,  directed,  as  it 
once  was  in  the  case  of  religion,  to  make  every 
person  grow  up  from  infancy  surrounded  on 
all  sides  both  by  the  profession  and  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  it,  1  think  that  no  one,  who  can  realise 
this  conception,  will  feel  any  misgiving  about 
the  sufficiency  of  the  ultimate  sanction  for  the 
Happiness  morality.  To  any  ethical  student 
who  finds  the  realisation  difficult,  I  recom¬ 
mend,  as  a  means  of  facilitating  it,  the  second 
of  M.  Comte’s  two  principal  works,  the  Traitr 
dr  Politique  Positive .  I  entertain  the  strongest 
objections  to  the  system  of  politics  and  morals 
set  forth  in  that  treatise;  but  1  think  it  has 
superabundantly  shown  the  possibility  of  giv 
ing  to  the  service  of  humanity,  even  without 
the  aid  of  belief  in  a  Providence,  both  the  psy- 


HOW  PI 

chological  power  and  the  social  efficacy  of  a  re¬ 
ligion:  making  it  take  hold  of  human  life,  and 
colour  all  thought,  feeling,  and  action,  in  a 
manner  of  which  the  greatest  ascendancy  ever 
exercised  by  any  religion  may  be  but  a  type 
and  foretaste;  and  of  which  the  danger  is,  not 
that  it  should  be  insufficient,  but  that  it  should 
be  so  excessive  as  to  interfere  unduly  with  hu- 
man  freedom  and  individuality. 

Neither  is  it  necessary  to  the  feeling  which 
constitutes  the  binding  force  of  the  utilitarian 
morality  on  those  who  recognise  it,  to  wait  for 
those  social  influences  which  would  make  its 
obligation  felt  by  mankind  at  large.  In  the 
comparatively  early  state  of  human  advance¬ 
ment  in  which  we  now  live,  a  person  cannot 
indeed  feel  that  entireness  of  sympathy  with 
all  others,  which  would  make  any  real  discord¬ 
ance  in  the  general  direction  of  their  conduct 
in  life  impossible;  but  already  a  person  in 
whom  the  social  feeling  is  at  all  developed, 
cannot  bring  himself  to  think  of  the  rest  of 
his  fellow  creatures  as  struggling  rivals  with 
him  for  the  means  of  happiness,  whom  he 
must  desire  to  see  defeated  in  their  object  in 
order  that  he  may  succeed  in  his.  The  deeply 
rooted  conception  which  every  individual  even 
now  has  of  himself  as  a  social  being,  tends  to 
make  him  feel  it  one  of  his  natural  wants  that 
there  should  be  harmony  between  his  feelings 
and  aims  and  those  of  his  fellotv  creatures.  If 
differences  of  opinion  and  of  mental  culture 
make  it  impossible  for  him  to  share  many  of 
their  actual  feelings-perhaps  make  him  de¬ 
nounce  and  defy  those  feelings-he  still  needs 
to  be  conscious  that  his  real  aim  and  theirs  do 
not  conflict;  that  he  is  not  opposing  himself  to 
what  they  really  wish  for,  namely  their  own 
good,  but  is,  on  the  contrary,  promoting  it. 
This  feeling  in  most  individuals  is  much  in¬ 
ferior  in  strength  to  their  selfish  feelings,  and 
is  often  wanting  altogether.  But  to  those  who 
have  it.  it  possesses  all  the  characters  of  a 
natural  feeling.  It  does  not  present  itself  to 
their  minds  as  a  superstition  of  education,  or 
a  law  despotically  imposed  by  the  power  of 
society,  but  as  an  attribute  which  it  would  not 
be  well  for  them  to  be  without.  This  convic¬ 
tion  is  the  ultimate  sanction  of  the  greatest 
happiness  morality.  This  it  is  which  makes  an\ 
mind,  of  well-developed  feelings,  work  with, 
and  not  against,  the  outward  motives  to  care 
for  others,  afforded  by  what  I  have  called  the 
external  sanctions;  and  w'hen  those  sanctions 
are  wanting,  or  act  in  an  opposite  direction, 
constitutes  in  itself  a  powerful  internal  bind- 


IOVED  1 

ing  force,  in  proportion  to  the  sensitiveness 
and  thoughtfulness  of  the  character;  since  few 
but  those  whose  mind  is  a  moral  blank,  could 
bear  to  lay  out  their  course  of  life  on  the  plan 
of  paying  no  regard  to  others  except  so  far  as 
their  own  private  interest  compels. 

Chapter  4 

Of  what  sort  of  Proof  the  Principle  of 
Utility  is  Susceptible 

It  has  already  been  remarked,  that  questions 
of  ultimate  ends  do  not  admit  of  proof,  in  the 
ordinary  acceptation  of  the  term.  To  be  in¬ 
capable  of  proof  by  reasoning  is  common  to  all 
first  principles;  to  the  first  premises  of  our 
knowledge,  as  well  as  to  those  of  our  conduct. 
But  the  former,  being  matters  of  fact,  may  be 
the  subject  of  a  direct  appeal  to  the  faculties 
which  judge  of  fact-namely,  our  senses,  and 
our  internal  consciousness.  Can  an  appeal  be 
made  to  the  same  faculties  on  questions  of 
practical  ends?  Or  by  what  other  faculty  is  cog¬ 
nisance  taken  of  them? 

Questions  about  ends  are,  in  other  words, 
questions  what  things  are  desirable.  1  he  utili¬ 
tarian  doctrine  is.  that  happiness  is  desirable, 
and  the  only  thing  desirable,  as  an  end;  all 
other  things  being  only  desirable  as  means  to 
that  end.  What  ought  to  be  required  of  this 
doctrine-what  conditions  is  it  requisite  that 
the  doctrine  should  fulfil — to  make  good  its 
claim  to  be  believed? 

The  onlv  proof  capable  of  being  given  that 
an  object  is  visible,  is  that  people  actually  see 
it.  The  only  proof  that  a  sound  is  audible,  is 
that  people  hear  it:  and  so  of  the  other  sources 
of  our  experience.  In  like  manner.  I  appre¬ 
hend.  the  sole  evidence  it  is  possible  to  pro¬ 
duce  that  anything  is  desirable,  is  that  people 
do  actually  desire  it.  If  the  end  which  the  utili¬ 
tarian  doctrine  proposes  to  itself  were  not,  in 
theory  and  in  practice,  acknowledged  to  be  an 
end.  nothing  could  ever  convince  any  person 
that  it  was  so.  No  reason  can  be  given  why  the 
general  happiness  is  desirable,  except  that  each 
person,  so  far  as  he  believes  it  to  be  attainable, 
desires  his  own  happiness.  This,  however,  be¬ 
ing  a  fact,  we  have  not  only  all  the  proof  which 
the  case  admits  of,  but  all  which  it  is  possible 
to  require,  that  happiness  is  a  good:  that  each 
person's  happiness  is  a  good  to  that  person, 
and  the  general  happiness,  therefore,  a  good  to 
the  aggregate  of  all  persons.  Happiness  has 
made  out  its  title  as  one  of  the  ends  of  con- 


462  UTILITARIANISM 


duct,  and  consequently  one  of  the  criteria  of 
morality. 

But  it  has  not,  by  this  alone,  proved  itself  to 
be  the  sole  criterion.  To  do  that,  it  would 
seem,  by  the  same  rule,  necessary  to  show,  not 
only  that  people  desire  happiness,  but  that 
they  never  desire  anything  else.  Now  it  is  pal¬ 
pable  that  they  do  desire  things  which,  in  com¬ 
mon  language,  are  decidedly  distinguished 
from  happiness.  They  desire,  for  example,  vir¬ 
tue,  and  the  absence  of  vice,  no  less  really  than 
pleasure  and  the  absence  of  pain.  The  desire 
of  virtue  is  not  as  universal,  but  it  is  as  au¬ 
thentic  a  fact,  as  the  desire  of  happiness.  And 
hence  the  opponents  of  the  utilitarian  stand¬ 
ard  deem  that  they  have  a  right  to  infer  that 
there  are  other  ends  of  human  action  besides 
happiness,  and  that  happiness  is  not  the  stand¬ 
ard  of  approbation  and  disapprobation. 

But  does  the  utilitarian  doctrine  deny  that 
people  desire  virtue,  or  maintain  that  virtue  is 
not  a  thing  to  be  desired?  The  very  reverse.  It 
maintains  not  only  that  virtue  is  to  be  desired, 
but  that  it  is  to  be  desired  disinterestedly,  for 
itself.  Whatever  may  be  the  opinion  of  utili¬ 
tarian  moralists  as  to  the  original  conditions 
by  which  virtue  is  made  virtue;  however  they 
may  believe  (as  they  do)  that  actions  and  dis¬ 
positions  are  only  virtuous  because  they  pro¬ 
mote  another  end  than  virtue;  yet  this  being 
granted,  and  it  having  been  decided,  from 
considerations  of  this  description,  what  is  vir¬ 
tuous.  they  not  only  place  virtue  at  the  very 
head  of  the  things  which  are  good  as  means  to 
the  ultimate  end,  but  they  also  recognise  as  a 
psychological  fact  the  possibility  of  its  being, 
to  the  individual,  a  good  in  itself,  without 
looking  to  any  end  beyond  it;  and  hold,  that 
the  mind  is  not  in  a  right  state,  not  in  a  state 
conformable  to  Utility,  not  in  the  state  most 
conducive  to  the  general  happiness,  unless  it 
docs  love  virtue  in  this  manner— as  a  thing  de¬ 
sirable  in  itself,  even  although,  in  the  indi¬ 
vidual  instance,  it  should  not  produce  those 
other  desirable  consequences  which  it  tends  to 
produce,  and  on  account  of  which  it  is  held  to 
be  virtue.  This  opinion  is  not,  in  the  smallest 
degree,  a  departure  from  the  Happiness  prin¬ 
ciple.  I'he  ingredients  of  happiness  arc  very 
various,  and  each  of  them  is  desirable  in  itself, 
and  not  merely  when  considered  as  swelling 
ail  aggregate.  The  principle  of  utility  does  not 
mean  that  any  given  pleasure,  as  music,  for 
instance,  or  any  given  exemption  from  pain,  as 
for  example  health,  is  to  be  looked  upon  as 
means  to  a  collective  something  termed  happi¬ 


ness,  and  to  be  desired  on  that  account.  They 
are  desired  and  desirable  in  and  for  them¬ 
selves;  besides  being  means,  they  are  a  part  of 
the  end.  Virtue,  according  to  the  utilitarian 
doctrine,  is  not  naturally  and  originally  part 
of  the  end,  but  it  is  capable  of  becoming  so; 
and  in  those  who  love  it  disinterestedly  it  has 
become  so,  and  is  desired  and  cherished,  not 
as  a  means  to  happiness,  but  as  a  part  of  their 
happiness. 

To  illustrate  this  farther,  we  may  remember 
that  virtue  is  not  the  only  thing,  originally  a 
means,  and  which  if  it  were  not  a  means  to 
anything  else,  would  be  and  remain  indiffer- 
ent,  but  which  by  association  with  what  it  is  a 
means  to,  comes  to  be  desired  for  itself,  and 
that  too  with  the  utmost  intensity.  What,  for 
example,  shall  we  say  of  the  love  of  money? 
There  is  nothing  originally  more  desirable 
about  money  than  about  any  heap  of  glitter¬ 
ing  pebbles.  Its  worth  is  solely  that  of  the 
things  which  it  will  buy;  the  desires  for  other 
things  than  itself,  which  it  is  a  means  of  grati¬ 
fying.  Yet  the  love  of  money  is  not  only  one 
of  the  strongest  moving  forces  of  human  life, 
but  money  is,  in  many  cases,  desired  in  and 
for  itself;  the  desire  to  possess  it  is  often  strong¬ 
er  than  the  desire  to  use  it,  and  goes  on  in¬ 
creasing  when  all  the  desires  which  point  to 
ends  beyond  it,  to  be  compassed  by  it,  are  fall¬ 
ing  off.  It  may,  then,  be  said  truly,  that  money 
is  desired  not  for  the  sake  of  an  end,  but  as 
part  of  the  end.  From  being  a  means  to  happi¬ 
ness,  it  has  come  to  be  itself  a  principal  in¬ 
gredient  of  the  individual’s  conception  of  hap¬ 
piness.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  majority 
of  the  great  objects  of  human  life— power,  for 
example,  or  fame;  except  that  to  each  of  these 
there  is  a  certain  amount  of  immediate  pleas¬ 
ure  annexed,  which  has  at  least  the  semblance 
of  being  naturally  inherent  in  them;  a  thing 
which  cannot  be  said  of  money.  Still,  however, 
the  strongest  natural  attraction,  both  of  power 
and  of  fame,  is  the  immense  aid  they  give  to 
the  attainment  of  our  other  wishes;  and  it  is 
the  strong  association  thus  generated  between 
them  and  all  our  objects  of  desire,  which  gives 
to  the  direct  desire  of  them  the  intensity  it 
often  assumes,  so  as  in  some  characters  to  sur¬ 
pass  in  strength  all  other  desires.  In  these  cases 
the  means  have  become  a  part  of  the  end,  and 
a  more  important  part  of  it  than  any  of  the 
things  which  they  arc  means  to.  What  was 
once  desired  as  an  instrument  for  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  happiness,  has  come  to  be  desired  for 
its  own  sake.  In  being  desired  for  its  own  sake 


HOW  PROVED 


463 


it  is,  however,  desired  as  pari  of  happiness. 
The  person  is  made,  or  thinks  he  would  be 
made,  happy  by  its  mere  possession;  and  is 
made  unhappy  by  failure  to  obtain  it.  The  de- 
sire  of  it  is  not  a  different  thing  from  the  de¬ 
sire  of  happiness,  any  more  than  the  love  of 
music,  or  the  desire  of  health.  They  are  in¬ 
cluded  in  happiness.  They  are  some  of  the 
elements  of  which  the  desire  of  happiness  is 
made  up.  Happiness  is  not  an  abstract  idea, 
but  a  concrete  whole;  and  these  are  some  of 
its  parts.  And  the  utilitarian  standard  sanc¬ 
tions  and  approves  their  being  so.  Life  would 
be  a  poor  thing,  very  ill  provided  with  sources 
of  happiness,  if  there  were  not  this  provision 
of  nature,  by  which  things  originally  indiffer¬ 
ent,  but  conducive  to,  or  otherwise  associated 
with,  the  satisfaction  of  our  primitive  desires, 
become  in  themselves  sources  of  pleasure  moi  e 
valuable  than  the  primitive  pleasures,  both  in 
permanency,  in  the  space  of  human  existence 
that  they  are  capable  of  covering,  and  even  in 
intensity. 

Virtue,  according  to  the  utilitarian  con¬ 
ception,  is  a  good  of  this  description.  There 
was  no  original  desire  of  it,  or  motive  to  it, 
save  its  conduciveness  to  pleasure,  and  espe¬ 
cially  to  protection  from  pain.  But  through  the 
association  thus  formed,  it  may  be  felt  a  good 
in  itself,  and  desired  as  such  with  as  great  in¬ 
tensity  as  any  other  good;  and  with  this  dif¬ 
ference  between  it  and  the  love  of  money,  of 
power,  or  of  fame,  that  all  of  these  may,  and 
often  do,  render  the  individual  noxious  to  the 
other  members  of  the  society  to  which  he  be¬ 
longs,  whereas  there  is  nothing  which  makes 
him  so  much  a  blessing  to  them  as  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  the  disinterested  love  of  virtue.  And 
consequently,  the  utilitarian  standard,  while 
it  tolerates  and  approves  those  other  acquired 
desires,  up  to  the  point  beyond  which  they 
would  be  more  injurious  to  the  general  happi¬ 
ness  than  promotive  of  it,  enjoins  and  requires 
the  cultivation  of  the  love  of  virtue  up  to  the 
greatest  strength  possible,  as  being  above  all 
things  important  to  the  general  happiness. 

It  results  from  the  preceding  considerations, 
that  there  is  in  reality  nothing  desired  except 
happiness.  Whatever  is  desired  otherwise  than 
as  a  means  to  some  end  beyond  itself,  and  ulti¬ 
mately  to  happiness,  is  desired  as  itself  a  part 
of  happiness,  and  is  not  desired  for  itself  until 
it  has  become  so.  Those  who  desire  virtue  for 
its  own  sake,  desire  it  either  because  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  it  is  a  pleasure,  or  because  the 
consciousness  of  being  without  it  is  a  pain,  or 


for  both  reasons  united;  as  in  truth  the  pleas¬ 
ure  and  pain  seldom  exist  separately,  but  al¬ 
most  always  together,  the  same  person  feeling 
pleasure  in  the  degree  of  virtue  attained,  and 
pain  in  not  having  attained  more.  If  one  of 
these  gave  him  no  pleasure,  and  the  other  no 
pain,  he  would  not  love  or  desire  virtue,  or 
would  desire  it  only  for  the  other  benefits 
which  it  might  produce  to  himself  or  to  per¬ 
sons  whom  he  cared  for. 

We  have  now,  then,  an  answer  to  the  ques 
tion,  of  what  sort  of  proof  the  principle  of 
utility  is  susceptible.  If  the  opinion  which  I 
have  now  stated  is  psychologically  true— if  hu¬ 
man  nature  is  so  constituted  as  to  desire  noth¬ 
ing  which  is  not  either  a  part  of  happiness  or  a 
means  of  happiness,  we  can  have  no  other 
proof,  and  we  require  no  other,  that  these  are 
the  only  things  desirable.  If  so,  happiness  is  the 
sole  end  of  human  action,  and  the  promotion 
of  it  the  test  by  which  to  judge  of  all  human 
conduct;  from  whence  it  necessarily  follows 
that  it  must  be  the  criterion  of  morality,  since 
a  part  is  included  in  the  whole. 

And  now  to  decide  whether  this  is  really  so; 
whether  mankind  do  desire  nothing  for  itself 
but  that  which  is  a  pleasure  to  them,  or  of 
which  the  absence  is  a  pain;  we  have  evidently 
arrived  at  a  question  of  fact  and  experience, 
dependent,  like  all  similar  questions,  upon 
evidence.  It  can  only  be  determined  by  prac¬ 
tised  self-consciousness  and  self-observation, 
assisted  by  observation  of  others.  I  believe  that 
these  sources  of  evidence,  impartially  con¬ 
sulted,  will  declare  that  desiring  a  thing  and 
finding  it  pleasant,  aversion  to  it  and  thinking 
of  it  as  painful,  are  phenomena  entirely  in¬ 
separable,  or  rather  two  parts  of  the  same 
phenomenon;  in  strictness  of  language,  two 
different  modes  of  naming  the  same  psycholog¬ 
ical  fact:  that  to  think  of  an  object  as  desirable 
(unless  for  the  sake  of  its  consequences),  and 
to  think  of  it  as  pleasant,  are  one  and  the  same 
thing;  and  that  to  desire  anything,  except  in 
proportion  as  the  idea  of  it  is  pleasant,  is  a 
physical  and  metaphysical  impossibility. 

So  obvious  does  this  appear  to  me,  that  1 
expect  it  will  hardly  be  disputed:  and  the  ob¬ 
jection  made  will  be,  not  that  desire  can  pos¬ 
sibly  be  directed  to  anything  ultimately  except 
pleasure  and  exemption  from  pain,  but  that 
the  will  is  a  different  thing  from  desire;  that 
a  person  of  confirmed  virtue,  or  any  other  per¬ 
son  whose  purposes  are  fixed,  carries  out  his 
purposes  without  any  thought  of  the  pleasure 
he  has  in  contemplating  them,  or  expects  to 


464  utilitarianism 


derive  from  their  fulfilment;  and  persists  in 
acting  on  them,  even  though  these  pleasures 
are  much  diminished,  by  changes  in  his  char¬ 
acter  or  decay  of  his  passive  sensibilities,  or  are 
outweighed  by  the  pains  which  the  pursuit 
of  the  purposes  may  bring  upon  him.  All  this 
I  fully  admit,  and  have  stated  it  elsewhere,  as 
positively  and  emphatically  as  any  one.  Will, 
the  active  phenomenon,  is  a  different  thing 
from  desire,  the  state  of  passive  sensibility,  and 
though  originally  an  offshoot  from  it,  may  in 
time  take  root  and  detach  itself  from  the  par¬ 
ent  stock;  so  much  so,  that  in  the  case  of  an 
habitual  purpose,  instead  of  willing  the  thing 
because  we  desire  it,  we  often  desire  it  only 
because  we  will  it.  T  his,  however,  is  hut  an 
instance  of  that  familiar  fact,  the  power  of 
habit,  and  is  nowise  confined  to  the  case  of  vir¬ 
tuous  actions.  Many  indifferent  things,  which 
men  originally  did  from  a  motive  of  some  sort, 
they  continue  to  do  from  habit.  Sometimes 
this  is  done  unconsciously,  the  consciousness 
coming  only  after  the  action;  at  other  times 
with  conscious  volition,  but  volition  which 
has  become  habitual,  and  is  put  in  operation 
by  the  force  of  habit,  in  opposition  perhaps 
to  the  deliberate  preference,  as  often  happens 
with  those  who  have  contracted  habits  of  vi¬ 
cious  or  hurtful  indulgence. 

Third  and  last  comes  the  case  in  which  the 
habitual  act  of  will  in  the  individual  instance 
is  not  in  contradiction  to  the  general  inten¬ 
tion  prevailing  at  other  times,  but  in  fulfil¬ 
ment  of  it;  as  in  the  case  of  the  person  of  con¬ 
firmed  virtue,  and  of  all  who  pursue  deliber¬ 
ately  and  consistently  any  determinate  end. 
The  distinction  between  will  and  desire  thus 
understood  is  an  authentic  and  highly  impor¬ 
tant  psychological  fact:  but  the  fact  consists 
solely  in  this— that  will,  like  all  other  parts  of 
our  constitution,  is  amenable  to  habit,  and 
that  we  may  will  from  habit  what  we  no  longer 
desire  for  itself,  or  desire  only  because  we  will 
it  It  is  not  the  less  true  that  will,  in  the  be¬ 
ginning,  is  entirely  produced  by  desire;  in 
<  hiding  in  that  tei  m  the  repelling  influence  of 
pain  as  well  as  the  attractive  one  of  pleasure. 
Let  us  take  into  consideration,  no  longer  the 
person  who  has  a  conlumcd  will  to  do  right, 
hut  him  in  whom  that  virtuous  will  is  still 
feeble,  conquerable  b\  temptation,  and  not  to 
be  full)  relied  on;  by  what  means  can  it  be 
st  lengthened?  1  low  can  the  will  to  be  \  in  nous, 
where  it  does  not  exist  in  sulluicnt  force,  be 
implanted  or  awakened?  ()nl\  by  making  the 
person  desire  virtue— by  making  him  think  of 


it  in  a  pleasurable  light,  or  of  its  absence  in  a 
painful  one.  It  is  by  associating  the  doing  right 
with  pleasure,  or  the  doing  wrong  with  pain, 
or  by  eliciting  and  impressing  and  bringing 
home  to  the  person’s  experience  the  pleasure 
naturally  involved  in  the  one  or  the  pain  in 
the  other,  that  it  is  possible  to  call  forth  that 
will  to  be  virtuous,  which,  when  confirmed, 
acts  without  any  thought  of  either  pleasure  or 
pain.  Will  is  the  child  of  desire,  and  passes  out 
of  the  dominion  of  its  parent  only  to  come  un¬ 
der  that  of  habit.  That  which  is  the  result  of 
habit  affords  no  presumption  of  being  intrinsi¬ 
cally  good:  and  there  would  be  no  reason  for 
wishing  that  the  purpose  of  virtue  should  be¬ 
come  independent  of  pleasure  and  pain,  were 
it  not  that  the  influence  of  the  pleasurable  and 
painful  associations  which  prompt  to  virtue  is 
not  sufficiently  to  be  depended  on  for  unerring 
constancy  of  action  until  it  has  acquired  the 
support  of  habit.  Both  in  feeling  and  in  con¬ 
duct.  habit  is  the  only  thing  which  imparts 
certainty:  and  it  is  because  of  the  importance 
to  others  of  being  able  to  rely  absolutely  on 
one’s  feelings  and  conduct,  and  to  oneself  of 
being  able  to  rely  on  one’s  own,  that  the  will 
to  do  right  ought  to  be  cultivated  into  this 
habitual  independence.  In  other  words,  this 
state  of  the  will  is  a  means  to  good,  not  intrin¬ 
sically  a  good;  and  does  not  contradict  the  doc¬ 
trine  that  nothing  is  a  good  to  human  beings 
but  in  so  far  as  it  is  cither  itself  pleasurable,  or 
a  means  of  attaining  pleasure  or  averting  pain. 

But  if  this  doctrine  be  true,  the  principle 
of  utility  is  proved.  Whether  it  is  so  or  not, 
must  now  be  left  to  the  consideration  of  the 
thoughtful  reader. 

Chapter  5 

On  the  Connection  between  Justice 
and  Utility 

In  ai. i.  ages  of  speculation,  one  of  the  strongest 
obstacles  to  the  reception  of  the  doctrine  that 
Utility  or  Happiness  is  the  criterion  of  right 
and  wrong,  has  been  drawn  from  the  idea  of 
Justice.  The  powerful  sentiment,  and  appar- 
cntl\  clear  perception,  which  that  word  recalls 
with  a  rapidity  and  certainty  resembling  an 
instinc  t,  have  seemed  to  the  majority  of  think¬ 
ers  to  point  to  an  inherent  quality  in  things;  to 
show  that  the*  Just  must  have  an  existence  in 
Nature  as  something  absolute,  gcncrically 
distinct  from  every  variety  of  the  Expedient, 
and,  in  idea,  opposed  to  it,  though  (as  is  com- 


HOW  CONN ECTEL 

nrionly  acknowledged)  never,  in  the  long  run, 
disjoined  from  it  in  fact. 

In  the  case  of  this,  as  of  our  other  moral  sen- 
timents,  there  is  no  necessary  connection  be¬ 
tween  the  question  of  its  origin,  and  that  of  its 
binding  force.  That  a  feeling  is  bestowed  on  us 
by  Nature,  does  not  necessarily  legitimate  all 
its  promptings.  The  feeling  of  justice  might  be 
a  peculiar  instinct,  and  might  yet  require,  like 
our  other  instincts,  to  be  controlled  and  en¬ 
lightened  by  a  higher  reason.  If  we  have  intel¬ 
lectual  instincts,  leading  us  to  judge  in  a  par¬ 
ticular  way,  as  well  as  animal  instincts  that 
prompt  us  to  act  in  a  particular  way.  there  is 
uo  necessity  that  the  former  should  be  more 
infallible  in  their  sphere  than  the  latter  in 
theirs:  it  may  as  well  happen  that  wrong  judg¬ 
ments  are  occasionally  suggested  by  those,  as 
wrong  actions  by  these.  But  though  it  is  one 
thing  to  believe  that  we  have  natural  feelings 
of  justice,  and  another  to  acknowledge  them 
as  an  ultimate  criterion  of  conduct,  these  two 
opinions  are  very  closely  connected  in  point 
of  fact.  Mankind  are  always  predisposed  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  any  subjective  feeling,  not  otherwise 
accounted  for,  is  a  revelation  of  some  objec¬ 
tive  reality.  Our  present  object  is  to  determine 
whether  the  reality,  to  which  the  feeling  of  jus¬ 
tice  corresponds,  is  one  which  needs  any  such 
special  revelation;  whether  the  justice  or  in¬ 
justice  of  an  action  is  a  thing  intrinsically  pe¬ 
culiar,  and  distinct  from  all  its  other  qualities, 
or  only  a  combination  of  certain  of  those  qual¬ 
ities,  presented  under  a  peculiar  aspect.  For 
the  purpose  of  this  inquiry  it  is  practically  im¬ 
portant  to  consider  whether  the  feeling  itself, 
of  justice  and  injustice,  is  sui  generis  like  our 
sensations  of  colour  and  taste,  or  a  derivative 
feeling,  formed  by  a  combination  of  others. 
And  this  it  is  the  more  essential  to  examine,  as 
people  are  in  general  willing  enough  to  allow, 
that  objectively  the  dictates  of  Justice  coincide 
with  a  part  of  the  field  of  General  Expediency; 
but  inasmuch  as  the  subjective  mental  feeling 
of  Justice  is  different  from  that  which  com¬ 
monly  attaches  to  simple  expediency,  and,  ex¬ 
cept  in  the  extreme  cases  of  the  latter,  is  far 
more  imperative  in  its  demands,  people  find  it 
difficult  to  see,  in  Justice,  only  a  particular  kind 
or  branch  of  general  utility,  and  think  that  its 
superior  binding  force  requires  a  totally  dif- 
ferent  origin. 

To  throw  light  upon  this  question,  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  to  attempt  to  ascertain  what  is  the  dis¬ 
tinguishing  character  of  justice,  or  of  injustice: 
what  is  the  quality,  or  whether  there  is  any 


>  WITH  JUSTICE  465 

quality,  attributed  in  common  to  all  modes  of 
conduct  designated  as  unjust  (for  justice,  like 
many  other  moral  attributes,  is  best  defined  by 
its  opposite),  and  distinguishing  them  from 
such  modes  of  conduct  as  are  disapproved,  but 
without  having  that  particular  epithet  of  dis¬ 
approbation  applied  to  them.  If  in  everything 
which  men  are  accustomed  to  characterise  as 
just  or  unjust,  some  one  common  attribute  or 
collection  of  attributes  is  always  present,  we 
may  judge  whether  this  particular  attribute  or 
combination  of  attributes  would  be  capable  of 
gathering  round  it  a  sentiment  of  that  peculiar 
character  and  intensity  by  virtue  of  the  general 
laws  of  our  emotional  constitution,  or  whether 
the  sentiment  is  inexplicable,  and  requires  to 
be  regarded  as  a  special  provision  of  Nature. 

If  we  find  the  former  to  be  the  case,  we  shall, 
in  resolving  this  question,  have  resolved  also 
the  main  problem:  if  the  latter,  we  shall  have 
to  seek  for  some  other  mode  of  investigating  it. 

To  find  the  common  attributes  of  a  variety 
of  objects,  it  is  necessary  to  begin  by  surveying 
the  objects  themselves  in  the  concrete.  Let  us 
therefore  advert  successively  to  the  various 
modes  of  action,  and  arrangements  of  human 
affairs,  which  are  classed,  by  universal  or  widely 
spread  opinion,  as  Just  or  as  Unjust.  The  things 
well  known  to  excite  the  sentiments  associated 
with  those  names  are  of  a  very  multifarious 
character.  I  shall  pass  them  rapidly  in  review, 
without  studying  any  particular  arrangement. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  mostly  considered  un¬ 
just  to  deprive  any  one  of  his  personal  liberty, 
his  property,  or  any  other  thing  which  belongs 
to  him  by  law.  Here,  therefore,  is  one  instance 
of  the  application  of  the  terms  just  and  unjust 
in  a  perfectly  definite  sense,  namely,  that  it  is 
just  to  respect,  unjust  toviolate,  the  legal  rights 
of  any  one.  But  this  judgment  admits  of  sev¬ 
eral  exceptions,  arising  from  the  other  forms 
in  which  the  notions  of  justice  and  injustice 
present  themselves.  For  example,  the  person 
who  suffers  the  deprivation  may  (as  the  phrase 
is)  have  forfeited  the  rights  which  he  is  so  de¬ 
prived  of:  a  case  to  which  we  shall  return  pres¬ 
ently.  But  also, 

Secondly;  the  legal  rights  of  which  he  is  de¬ 
prived,  may  be  rights  which  ought  not  to  have 
belonged  to  him;  in  other  words,  the  law  which 
confers  on  him  these  rights,  may  be  a  bad  law. 
When  it  is  so, or  when  (which  is  the  same  thing 
for  our  purpose)  it  is  supposed  to  be  so,  opin¬ 
ions  will  differ  as  to  the  justice  or  injustice  of 
infringing  it.  Some  maintain  that  no  law,  how- 


.66  UTILITARIANISM 


ever  bad,  ought  to  be  disobeyed  by  an  individ¬ 
ual  citizen;  that  his  opposition  to  it.  if  shown 
at  all,  should  only  be  shown  in  endeavouring 
to  get  it  altered  by  competent  authority.  This 
opinion  (which  condemns  many  of  the  most 
illustrious  benefactors  of  mankind,  and  would 
often  protect  pernicious  institutions  against 
the  only  weapons  which,  in  the  state  of  things 
existing  at  the  time,  have  any  chance  of  suc¬ 
ceeding  against  them)  is  defended,  by  those 
who  hold  it,  on  grounds  of  expediency;  princi- 
pallyon  thatof  the  importance,  to  the  common 
interest  of  mankind,  of  maintaining  inviolate 
the  sentiment  of  submission  to  law.  Other  per¬ 
sons,  again,  hold  the  directly  contrary  opinion, 
that  any  law,  judged  to  be  bad,  may  blameless¬ 
ly  be  disobeyed,  even  though  it  be  not  judged 
to  be  unjust,  but  only  inexpedient;  while  oth¬ 
ers  would  confine  the  licence  of  disobedience 
to  the  case  of  unjust  laws:  but  again,  some  say, 
that  all  laws  which  are  inexpedient  are  unjust; 
since  every  law  imposes  some  restriction  on  the 
natural  liberty  of  mankind,  which  restriction 
is  an  injustice,  unless  legitimated  by  tending 
to  their  good.  Among  these  diversities  of  opin¬ 
ion,  it  seems  to  be  universally  admitted  that 
there  may  be  unjust  laws,  and  that  law,  con¬ 
sequently,  is  not  the  ultimate  criterion  of  jus¬ 
tice,  but  may  give  to  one  person  a  benefit,  or 
impose  on  another  an  evil,  which  justice  con¬ 
demns.  When,  however,  a  law  is  thought  to  be 
unjust,  it  seems  always  to  be  regarded  as  being 
so  in  the  same  way  in  which  a  breach  of  law 
is  unjust,  namely,  by  infringing  somebody’s 
right;  which,  as  it  cannot  in  this  case  be  a  legal 
right,  receives  a  different  appellation,  and  is 
called  a  moral  right.  We  may  say,  therefore, 
that  a  second  case  of  injustice  consists  in  taking 
or  withholding  from  any  person  that  to  which 
he  has  a  moral  right . 

Thirdly,  it  is  universally  considered  just 
that  each  person  should  obtain  that  (whether 
good  or  evil)  which  he  deserves:  and  unjust 
that  he  should  obtain  a  good,  or  be  made  to 
undergo  an  evil,  which  he  does  not  deserve. 
This  is,  perhaps,  the  clearest  and  most  em¬ 
phatic  form  in  which  the  idea  of  justice  is  con¬ 
ceived  by  the  general  mind.  As  it  involves  the 
notion  of  desert,  the  question  arises,  what 
constitutes  desert?  Speaking  in  a  general  way, 
a  person  is  understood  to  deserve  good  if  lie 
does  right,  evil  if  he  does  wrong;  and  in  a  more 
particular  sense,  to  deserve  good  from  those 
to  whom  he  does  or  has  done  good,  and  evil 
from  those  to  whom  lie  does  or  has  done  evil, 
rhe  precept  of  returning  good  for  evil  has 


never  been  regarded  as  a  case  of  the  fulfil¬ 
ment  of  justice,  but  as  one  in  which  the  claims 
of  justice  are  waived,  in  obedience  to  other 
considerations. 

Fourthly,  it  is  confessedly  unjust  to  break 
faith  with  any  one:  to  violate  an  engagement, 
either  express  or  implied,  or  disappoint  expec¬ 
tations  raised  by  our  own  conduct,  at  least  if  we 
have  raised  those  expectations  knowingly  and 
voluntarily.  Like  the  other  obligations  of  jus¬ 
tice  already  spoken  of,  this  one  is  not  regarded 
as  absolute,  but  as  capable  of  being  ovei ruled 
by  a  stronger  obligation  of  justice  on  the  other 
side;  or  by  such  conduct  on  the  part  of  the 
person  concerned  as  is  deemed  to  absolve  us 
from  our  obligation  to  him,  and  to  constitute 
a  forfeiture  of  the  benefit  which  he  has  been 
led  to  expect. 

Fifthly,  it  is,  by  universal  admission,  incon¬ 
sistent  with  justice  to  be  partial;  to  show  fa¬ 
vour  or  preference  to  one  person  over  another, 
in  matters  to  which  favour  and  preference  do 
not  properly  apply.  Impartiality,  however,  does 
not  seem  to  be  regarded  as  a  duty  in  itself,  but 
rather  as  instrumental  to  some  other  duty;  for 
it  is  admitted  that  favour  and  preference  are 
not  always  censurable,  and  indeed  the  cases  in 
which  they  are  condemned  are  rather  the  ex¬ 
ception  than  the  rule.  A  person  would  be  more 
likely  to  be  blamed  than  applauded  for  giv¬ 
ing  his  family  or  friends  no  superiority  in  good 
offices  over  strangers,  when  he  could  do  so 
without  violating  any  other  duty;  and  no  one 
thinks  it  unjust  to  seek  one  person  in  prefer¬ 
ence  to  another  as  a  friend,  connection,  or 
companion.  Impartiality  where  rights  arc  con¬ 
cerned  is  of  course  obligatory,  but  this  is  in¬ 
volved  in  the  more  general  obligation  of  giv¬ 
ing  to  every  one  his  right.  A  tribunal,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  must  be  impartial,  because  it  is  bound 
to  award,  without  regard  to  any  other  con¬ 
sideration,  a  disputed  object  to  the  one  of  two 
parties  who  has  the  right  to  it.  There  are  other 
cases  in  which  impartiality  means,  being  sole¬ 
ly  influenced  by  desert;  as  with  those  who,  in 
tile  capacity  of  judges,  preceptors,  or  parents, 
administer  reward  and  punishment  as  such. 
There  are  cases, again,  in  which  it  means,  being 
solely  influenced  by  consideration  for  the  pub¬ 
lic  interest;  as  in  making  a  selection  among 
candidates  for  a  government  employment.  Im¬ 
partiality,  in  short,  as  an  obligation  of  justice, 
may  be  said  to  mean,  being  exclusively  influ¬ 
enced  by  the  considerations  which  ii  is  sup¬ 
posed  ought  to  influence  the  particular  case  in 
hand;  and  resisting  the  solicitation  of  any 


HOW  CONNECTED  WITH  JUSTICE 


motives  which  prompt  to  conduct  different 
from  what  those  considerations  would  dictate. 

Nearly  allied  to  the  idea  of  impartiality  is 
that  of  equality ;  which  often  enters  as  a  com¬ 
ponent  part  both  into  the  conception  of  jus¬ 
tice  and  into  the  practice  of  it,  and,  in  the  eyes 
of  many  persons,  constitutes  its  essence.  But 
in  this,  still  more  than  in  any  other  case,  the 
notion  of  justice  varies  in  different  persons, 
and  always  conforms  in  its  variations  to  their 
notion  of  utility.  Each  person  maintains  that 
equality  is  the  dictate  of  justice,  except  where 
he  thinks  that  expediency  requires  inequality. 
The  justice  of  giving  equal  protection  to  the 
rights  of  all,  is  maintained  by  those  who  sup¬ 
port  the  most  outrageous  inequality  in  the 
rights  themselves.  Even  in  slave  countries  it 
is  theoretically  admitted  that  the  rights  of  the 
slave,  such  as  they  are,  ought  to  be  as  sacred  as 
those  of  the  master;  and  that  a  tribunal  which 
fails  to  enforce  them  with  equal  strictness  is 
wanting  in  justice;  while,  at  the  same  time, 
institutions  which  leave  to  the  slave  scarcely 
any  rights  to  enforce,  are  not  deemed  unjust, 
because  they  are  not  deemed  inexpedient. 
Those  who  think  that  utility  requires  distinc¬ 
tions  of  rank,  do  not  consider  it  unjust  that 
riches  and  social  privileges  should  be  unequal¬ 
ly  dispensed;  but  those  who  think  this  inequal¬ 
ity  inexpedient,  think  it  unjust  also.  Who¬ 
ever  thinks  that  government  is  necessary,  sees 
no  injustice  in  as  much  inequality  as  is  con¬ 
stituted  by  giving  to  the  magistrate  powers 
not  granted  to  other  people.  Even  among  those 
who  hold  levelling  doctrines,  there  are  as  many 
questions  of  justice  as  there  are  differences  of 
opinion  about  expediency.  Some  Communists 
consider  it  unjust  that  the  produce  of  the  la¬ 
bour  of  the  community  should  be  shared  on 
any  other  principle  than  that  of  exact  equal¬ 
ity;  others  think  it  just  that  those  should  re¬ 
ceive  most  whose  wants  are  greatest,  while 
others  hold  that  those  who  work  harder,  or 
w  ho  produce  more,  or  wdiose  services  are  more 
valuable  to  the  community,  may  justly  claim 
a  larger  quota  in  the  division  of  the  produce. 
And  the  sense  of  natural  justice  may  be  plausi¬ 
bly  appealed  to  in  behalf  of  every  one  of  these 
opinions. 

Among  so  many  diverse  applications  of  the 
term  Justice,  which  yet  is  not  regarded  as  am¬ 
biguous,  it  is  a  matter  of  some  difficulty  to  seize 
the  mental  link  which  holds  them  together, 
and  on  which  the  moral  sentiment  adhering 
to  the  term  essentially  depends.  Perhaps,  m 
this  embarrassment,  some  help  may  be  derived 


467 

from  the  history  of  the  word,  as  indicated  by 
its  etymology. 

In  most,  if  not  in  all,  languages,  the  etymol¬ 
ogy  of  the  word  w’hich  corresponds  to  Just, 
points  distinctly  to  an  origin  connected  with 
the  ordinances  of  law.  Justum  is  a  form  of 
jussum ,  that  which  has  been  ordered.  Agatov 
comes  directly  from  5k7j,  a  suit  at  law.  Recht, 
from  w’hich  came  right  and  righteous ,  is  syn¬ 
onymous  w’ith  law7.  The  courts  of  justice,  the 
administration  of  justice,  are  the  courts  and 
the  administration  of  law.  La  justice,  in  French, 
is  the  established  term  for  judicature.  I  am 
not  committing  the  fallacy  imputed  with  some 
show  of  truth  to  Horne  Tooke,  of  assuming 
that  a  word  must  still  continue  to  mean  what 
it  originally  meant.  Etymology  is  slight  evi¬ 
dence  of  what  the  idea  now  signified  is,  but  the 
very  best  evidence  of  how  it  sprang  up.  There 
can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt  that  the  idee  mere, 
the  primitive  element,  in  the  formation  of  the 
notion  of  justice,  was  conformity  to  law.  It 
constituted  the  entire  idea  among  the  Hebrews, 
up  to  the  birth  of  Christianity;  as  might  be 
expected  in  the  case  of  a  people  whose  law's 
attempted  to  embrace  all  subjects  on  which 
precepts  were  required,  and  who  believed  those 
laws  to  be  a  direct  emanation  from  the  Su¬ 
preme  Being.  But  other  nations,  and  in  partic¬ 
ular  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  who  knew  that 
their  laws  had  been  made  originally,  and  still 
continued  to  be  made,  by  men,  w’ere  not  afraid 
to  admit  that  those  men  might  make  bad  laws; 
might  do,  by  law,  the  same  things,  and  from 
the  same  motives,  w’hich  if  done  by  individuals 
without  the  sanction  of  law,  would  be  called 
unjust.  And  hence  the  sentiment  of  injustice 
came  to  be  attached,  not  to  all  violations  of 
law7,  but  only  to  violations  of  such  law’s  as 
ought  to  exist,  including  such  as  ought  to 
exist,  but  do  not;  and  to  laws  themselves,  if 
supposed  to  be  contrary  to  what  ought  to  be 
law’.  In  this  manner  the  idea  of  law  and  of  its 
injunctions  was  still  predominant  in  the  no¬ 
tion  of  justice,  even  when  the  laws  actually  in 
force  ceased  to  be  accepted  as  the  standard 

of  it. 

It  is  true  that  mankind  consider  the  idea  01 
justice  and  its  obligations  as  applicable  to 
many  things  which  neither  are,  nor  is  it  de¬ 
sired  that  they  should  be,  regulated  by  law. 
Nobody  desires  that  laws  should  interfere  with 
the  whole  detail  of  private  life;  yet  every  one 
allows  that  in  all  daily  conduct  a  person  may 
and  does  show’  himself  to  be  either  just  or  un¬ 
just.  But  even  here,  the  idea  of  the  breach  of 


468  UTILITARIAN  IS  M 


what  ought  to  be  law,  still  lingers  in  a  modified 
shape.  It  would  always  give  us  pleasure,  and 
chime  in  with  our  feelings  of  fitness,  that  acts 
which  we  deem  unjust  should  be  punished, 
though  we  do  not  always  think  it  expedient 
that  this  should  be  done  by  the  tribunals.  We 
forego  that  gratification  on  account  of  inci¬ 
dental  inconveniences.  We  should  be  glad  to 
see  just  conduct  enforced  and  injustice  re¬ 
pressed.  even  in  the  minutest  details,  if  we  were 
not,  w'ith  reason,  afraid  of  trusting  the  magis¬ 
trate  with  so  unlimited  an  amount  of  power 
over  individuals.  When  we  think  that  a  person 
is  bound  in  justice  to  do  a  thing,  it  is  an  ordi¬ 
nary  form  of  language  to  say,  that  he  ought  to 
be  compelled  to  do  it.  We  should  be  gratified 
to  see  the  obligation  enforced  by  anybody  who 
had  the  power.  If  we  see  that  its  enforcement 
by  law  wrould  be  inexpedient,  we  lament  the 
impossibility,  we  consider  the  impunity  given 
to  injustice  as  an  evil,  and  strive  to  make 
amends  for  it  by  bringing  a  strong  expression 
of  our  own  and  the  public  disapprobation  to 
bear  upon  the  offender.  Thus  the  idea  of  legal 
constraint  is  still  the  generating  idea  of  the 
notion  of  justice,  though  undergoing  several 
transformations  before  that  notion,  as  it  exists 
in  an  advanced  state  of  society,  becomes  com¬ 
plete. 

The  above  is,  I  think,  a  true  account,  as  far 
as  it  goes,  of  the  origin  and  progressive  growth 
of  the  idea  of  justice.  Hut  we  must  observe, 
that  it  contains,  as  yet,  nothing  to  distinguish 
that  obligation  from  moral  obligation  in  gen¬ 
eral.  For  the  truth  is,  that  the  idea  of  penal 
sanction,  which  is  the  essence  of  law,  enters 
not  only  into  the  conception  of  injustice,  but 
into  that  of  any  kind  of  wrong.  We  do  not 
call  anything  wrong,  unless  we  mean  to  imply 
that  a  person  ought  to  be  punished  in  some  way 
or  other  for  doing  it:  if  not  by  law,  by  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  his  fcllowcreatures;  if  not  by  opinion, 
by  the  reproaches  of  his  own  conscience.  This 
seems  the  real  turning  point  of  the  distinction 
between  morality  and  simple  expediency.  It 
is  a  part  of  the  notion  of  Duty  in  every  one  of 
its  forms,  that  a  person  may  rightfully  be  com¬ 
pelled  to  fulfil  it.  Duty  is  a  thing  which  may 
be  exacted  from  a  person,  as  one  exacts  a  debt. 
Unless  we  think  that  it  may  be  exacted  from 
him,  we  do  not  call  it  his  duty.  Reasons  of 
prudence,  or  the  interest  of  other  people,  may 
militate  against  actually  exacting  it;  but  the 
person  himself,  it  is  clearly  understood,  would 
not  be  entitled  to  complain.  There  are  other 
things,  on  the  contrary,  which  we  wish  that 


people  should  do,  which  wre  like  or  admire 
them  for  doing,  perhaps  dislike  or  despise 
them  for  not  doing,  but  yet  admit  that  they 
are  not  bound  to  do;  it  is  not  a  case  of  moral 
obligation;  wre  do  not  blame  them,  that  is,  we 
do  not  think  that  they  are  proper  objects  of 
punishment.  How  we  come  by  these  ideas  of 
deserving  and  not  deserving  punishment,  will 
appear,  perhaps,  in  the  sequel;  but  I  think 
there  is  no  doubt  that  this  distinction  lies  at 
the  bottom  of  the  notions  of  right  and  wrong; 
that  w-e  call  any  conduct  wrong,  or  employ, 
instead,  some  other  term  of  dislike  or  dispar¬ 
agement,  according  as  w'e  think  that  the  person 
ought,  or  ought  not,  to  be  punished  for  it;  and 
we  say,  it  would  be  right  to  do  so  and  so,  or 
merely  that  it  would  be  desirable  or  laudable, 
according  as  we  would  wish  to  see  the  person 
whom  it  concerns,  compelled,  or  only  per¬ 
suaded  and  exhorted,  to  act  in  that  manner.1 

This,  therefore,  being  the  characteristic  dif¬ 
ference  which  marks  off,  not  justice,  but  moral¬ 
ity  in  general,  from  the  remaining  provinces 
of  Expediency  and  Worthiness;  the  character 
is  still  to  be  sought  which  distinguishes  justice 
from  other  branches  of  morality.  Now7  it  is 
know'n  that  ethical  waiters  divide  moral  duties 
into  two  classes,  denoted  by  the  ill-chosen  ex¬ 
pressions,  duties  of  perfect  and  of  imperfect 
obligation;  the  latter  being  those  in  wrhich, 
though  the  act  is  obligatory,  the  particular 
occasions  of  performing  it  are  left  to  our  choice; 
as  in  the  case  of  charity  or  beneficence,  which 
wre  are  indeed  bound  to  practise,  but  not  to¬ 
wards  any  definite  person,  nor  at  any  pre¬ 
scribed  time.  In  the  more  precise  language  of 
philosophic  jurists, duties  of  perfect  obligation 
are  those  duties  in  virtue  of  which  a  correla¬ 
tive  right  resides  in  some  person  or  persons; 
duties  of  imperfect  obligation  are  those  moral 
obligations  which  do  not  give  birth  to  any 
right.  I  think  it  will  be  found  that  this  dis¬ 
tinction  exactly  coincides  with  that  which 
exists  between  justice  and  the  other  obliga¬ 
tions  of  morality.  In  our  survey  of  the  vari¬ 
ous  popular  acceptations  of  justice,  the  term 
appeared  generally  to  involve  the  idea  of  a 
personal  right— a  claim  on  the  part  of  one  or 
more  individuals,  like  that  which  the  law'  gives 
when  it  confers  a  proprietary  or  other  legal 
right.  Whether  the  injustice  consists  in  dc- 

lScc  this  point  enforced  and  illustrated  by  Pro¬ 
fessor  Bain,  in  an  admirable  chapter  (entitled  “  I  lie 
Ethical  Emotions,  or  the  Moral  Sense”),  of  the 
second  of  the  two  treatises  composing  his  elabo¬ 
rate  and  profound  work  on  the  Mind. 


HOW  CONNECTED  WITH  JUSTICE 


priving  a  person  of  a  possession,  or  in  break¬ 
ing  faith  with  him,  or  in  treating  him  worse 
than  he  deserves,  or  worse  than  other  people 
who  have  no  greater  claims,  in  each  case  the 
supposition  implies  two  things-a  wrong  done, 
and  some  assignable  person  who  is  wronged. 
Injustice  may  also  be  done  by  treating  a  per¬ 
son  better  than  others;  but  the  wrong  in  this 
case  is  to  his  competitors,  who  are  also  assign¬ 
able  persons. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  feature  in  the  case 
a  right  in  some  person,  correlative  to  the  moral 
obligation— constitutes  the  specific  difference 
between  justice,  and  generosity  or  beneficence. 
Justice  implies  something  which  it  is  not  only 
right  to  do,  and  wrong  not  to  do,  but  which 
some  individual  person  can  claim  from  us  as 
his  moral  right.  No  one  has  a  moral  right  to 
our  generosity  or  beneficence,  because  we  are 
not  morally  bound  to  practise  those  virtues 
towards  any  given  individual.  And  it  will  be 
found  with  respect  to  this  as  to  every  correct 
definition,  that  the  instances  which  seem  to 
conflict  with  it  are  those  which  most  confirm 
it.  For  if  a  moralist  attempts,  as  some  have 
done,  to  make  out  that  mankind  generally, 
though  not  any  given  individual,  have  a  right 
to  all  the  good  we  can  do  them,  he  at  once,  by 
that  thesis,  includes  generosity  and  beneficence 
within  the  category  of  justice.  He  is  obliged 
to  say,  that  our  utmost  exertions  are  due  to 
our  fellow  creatures,  thus  assimilating  them  to 
a  debt;  or  that  nothing  less  can  be  a  sufficient 
return  for  what  society  does  for  us,  thus  class¬ 
ing  the  case  as  one  of  gratitute;  both  of  which 
are  acknowledged  cases  of  justice.  Wherever 
there  is  a  right,  the  case  is  one  of  justice,  and  not 
of  the  virtue  of  beneficence:  and  whoever  does 
not  place  the  distinction  between  justice  and 
morality  in  general,  where  we  have  now  placed 
it,  will  be  found  to  make  no  distinction  be¬ 
tween  them  at  all,  but  to  merge  all  morality 
in  justice. 

Having  thus  endeavoured  to  determine  the 
distinctive  elements  which  enter  into  the  com¬ 
position  of  the  idea  of  justice,  we  are  ready 
to  enter  on  the  inquiry,  whether  the  feeling, 
which  accompanies  the  idea,  is  attached  to  it 
by  a  special  dispensation  of  nature,  or  whether 
it  could  have  grown  up,  by  any  known  laws, 
out  of  the  idea  itself;  and  in  particular,  whether 
it  can  have  originated  in  considerations  of  gen¬ 
eral  expediency. 

I  conceive  that  the  sentiment  itself  does  not 
arise  from  anything  which  would  commonly. 


4^9 

or  correctly,  be  termed  an  idea  of  expediency; 
but  that  though  the  sentiment  does  not,  what¬ 
ever  is  moral  in  it  does. 

We  have  seen  that  the  two  essential  ingredi¬ 
ents  in  the  sentiment  of  justice  are,  the  desire 
to  punish  a  person  who  has  done  harm,  and 
the  knowledge  or  belief  that  there  is  some 
definite  individual  or  individuals  to  whom 
harm  has  been  done. 

Now  it  appears  to  me,  that  the  desire  to 
punish  a  person  who  has  done  harm  to  some 
individual  is  a  spontaneous  outgrowth  from 
two  sentiments,  both  in  the  highest  degree 
natural,  and  which  either  are  or  resemble  in¬ 
stincts;  the  impulse  of  self-defence,  and  the 
feeling  of  sympathy. 

It  is  natural  to  resent,  and  to  repel  or  re¬ 
taliate,  any  harm  done  or  attempted  against 
ourselves,  or  against  those  with  whom  we  sym¬ 
pathise.  The  origin  of  this  sentiment  it  is  not 
necessary  here  to  discuss.  Whether  it  be  an  in¬ 
stinct  or  a  result  of  intelligence,  it  is,  we  know, 
common  to  all  animal  nature;  for  every  animal 
tries  to  hurt  those  who  have  hurt,  or  who  it 
thinks  are  about  to  hurt,  itself  or  its  young. 
Human  beings,  on  this  point,  only  differ  from 
other  animals  in  two  particulars.  First,  in  being 
capable  of  sympathising,  not  solely  with  their 
offspring,  or,  like  some  of  the  more  noble 
animals,  with  some  superior  animal  who  is 
kind  to  them,  but  with  all  human,  and  even 
with  all  sentient,  beings.  Secondly,  in  having 
a  more  developed  intelligence,  which  gives  a 
wider  range  to  the  whole  of  their  sentiments, 
whether  self-regarding  or  sympathetic.  By  vir¬ 
tue  of  his  superior  intelligence,  even  apart 
from  his  superior  range  of  sympathy,  a  human 
being  is  capable  of  apprehending  a  commu¬ 
nity  of  interest  between  himself  and  the  human 
society  of  which  he  forms  a  part,  such  that  any 
conduct  which  threatens  the  security  of  the 
society  generally,  is  threatening  to  his  own,  and 
calls  forth  his  instinct  (if  instinct  it  be)  of  self- 
defence.  The  same  superiority  of  intelligence, 
joined  to  the  power  of  sympathising  with  hu¬ 
man  beings  generally,  enables  him  to  attach 
himself  to  the  collective  idea  of  his  tribe,  his 
country,  or  mankind,  in  such  a  manner  that 
any  act  hurtful  to  them,  raises  his  instinct  of 
sympathy,  and  urges  him  to  resistance. 

The  sentiment  of  justice,  in  that  one  of  its 
elements  which  consists  of  the  desire  to  punish, 
is  thus,  I  conceive,  the  natural  feeling  of  re¬ 
taliation  or  vengeance,  rendered  by  intellect 
and  sympathy  applicable  to  those  injuries,  that 
is,  to  those  hurts,  which  wound  us  through,  or 


UTILITARIANISM 


in  common  with,  society  at  large.  This  senti¬ 
ment,  in  itself,  has  nothing  moral  in  it;  what 
is  moral  is.  the  exclusive  subordination  of  it 
to  the  social  sympathies,  so  as  to  wait  on  and 
obey  their  call.  For  the  natural  feeling  would 
make  us  resent  indiscriminately  whatever  any 
one  does  that  is  disagreeable  to  us;  but  when 
moralised  by  the  social  feeling,  it  only  acts  in 
the  directions  conformable  to  the  general 
good:  just  persons  resenting  a  hurt  to  society, 
though  not  otherwise  a  hurt  to  themselves, 
and  not  resenting  a  hurt  to  themselves,  how¬ 
ever  painful,  unless  it  be  of  the  kind  which  so¬ 
ciety  has  a  common  interest  with  them  in  the 
repression  of. 

It  is  no  objection  against  this  doctrine  to 
say,  that  when  we  feel  our  sentiment  of  justice 
outraged,  we  are  not  thinking  of  society  at 
large,  or  of  any  collective  interest,  but  only  of 
the  individual  case.  It  is  common  enough  cer¬ 
tainly.  though  the  reverse  of  commendable, 
to  feel  resentment  merely  because  we  have 
suffered  pain;  but  a  person  whose  resentment 
is  really  a  moral  feeling,  that  is,  who  considers 
whether  an  act  is  blamable  before  he  allows 
himself  to  resent  it— such  a  person,  though  he 
may  not  say  expressly  to  himself  that  he  is 
standing  up  for  the  interest  of  society,  certainly 
does  feel  that  he  is  asserting  a  rule  which  is 
for  the  benefit  of  others  as  well  as  for  his  own. 
If  he  is  not  feeling  this— if  he  is  regarding  the 
act  solely  as  it  affects  him  individually— he  is 
not  consciously  just:  he  is  not  concerning  him¬ 
self  about  the  justice  of  his  actions.  I  his  is 
admitted  even  by  anti-utilitarian  moralists. 
When  Kant  (as  before  remarked)  propounds 
as  the  fundamental  principle  of  morals,  “So 
ac  t,  that  thy  rule  of  conduc  t  might  be  adopted 
as  a  law  by  all  rational  beings,”  he  virtually 
acknowledges  that  the  interest  of  mankind  col¬ 
lectively,  or  at  least  of  mankind  indiscrimi¬ 
nately,  must  be  in  the  mind  of  the  agent  when 
conscientiously  deciding  on  the  morality  of 
the  act.  Otherwise  he  uses  words  without  a 
meaning:  for,  that  a  rule  even  of  utter  selfish¬ 
ness  could  not  possibly  be  adopted  by  all  ra¬ 
tional  beings— that  there  is  any  insuperable 
obstacle  in  the  nature  of  things  to  its  adop¬ 
tion— cannot  beeven  plausibly  maintained.  To 
give  any  meaning  to  Kant’s  principle,  the  sense 
put  upon  it  must  be,  that  we  ought  to  shape 
our  conduc  t  by  a  rule  which  all  rational  beings 
might  adopt  with  benefit  to  their  collective  in¬ 
terest. 

I  o  recapitulate:  the  idea  of  justice  supposes 
two  things;  a  rule  of  conduc  t,  and  a  sentiment 


which  sanctions  the  rule.  The  first  must  be 
supposed  common  to  all  mankind,  and  in¬ 
tended  for  their  good.  The  other  (the  senti¬ 
ment)  is  a  desire  that  punishment  may  be  suf¬ 
fered  by  those  who  infringe  the  rule.  There  is 
involved,  in  addition,  the  conception  of  some 
definite  person  who  suffers  by  the  infringe¬ 
ment;  whose  rights  (to  use  the  expression  ap¬ 
propriated  to  the  case)  are  violated  by  it.  And 
the  sentiment  of  justice  appears  to  me  to  be, 
the  animal  desire  to  repel  or  retaliate  a  hurt 
or  damage  to  oneself,  or  to  those  with  whom 
one  sympathises,  widened  so  as  to  include  all 
persons,  by  the  human  capacity  of  enlarged 
sympathy,  and  the  human  conception  of  in¬ 
telligent  self-interest.  From  the  latter  elements, 
the  feeling  derives  its  morality:  from  the 
former,  its  peculiar  impressiveness,  and  energy 
of  self-assertion. 

I  have,  throughout,  treated  the  idea  of  a 
right  residing  in  the  injured  person,  and  vio¬ 
lated  by  the  injury,  not  as  a  separate  clement 
in  the  composition  of  the  idea  and  sentiment, 
but  as  one  of  the  forms  in  which  the  other  two 
elements  clothe  themselves.  These  elements 
are,  a  hurt  to  some  assignable  person  or  per¬ 
sons  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  demand  for  pun¬ 
ishment  on  the  other.  An  examination  of  our 
own  minds,  I  think,  will  show,  that  these  two 
things  include  all  that  we  mean  when  we  speak 
of  violation  of  a  right.  When  we  call  anything 
a  person’s  right,  we  mean  that  he  has  a  valid 
c  laim  on  society  to  protect  him  in  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  it,  either  by  the  force  of  law,  or  by 
that  of  education  and  opinion.  If  he  has  what 
we  consider  a  sufficient  claim,  on  whatever 
account,  to  have  something  guaranteed  to  him 
by  society,  we  say  that  he  has  a  right  to  it.  If 
we  desire  to  prove  that  anything  does  not  be¬ 
long  to  him  by  right,  we  think  this  done  as 
soon  as  it  is  admitted  that  society  ought  not  to 
take  measures  for. securing  it  to  him,  but  should 
leave  him  to  chance,  or  to  his  own  exertions. 
Thus,  a  person  is  said  to  have  a  right  to  what 
he  can  earn  in  fair  professional  competition; 
because  society  ought  not  to  allow  any  other 
person  to  hinder  him  from  endeavouring  to 
earn  in  that  manner  as  much  as  he  can.  But 
he  has  not  a  right  to  three  hundred  a-ycar, 
though  he  may  happen  to  be  earning  it;  be¬ 
cause  society  is  not  called  on  to  provide  that 
he  shall  earn  that  sum.  On  the  contrary,  if  he 
owns  ten  thousand  pounds  three  per  cent, 
stock,  he  has  a  right  to  three  hundred  a-year; 
because  society  has  come  under  an  obligation 
to  provide  him  with  an  income  of  that  amount. 


HOW  CONNECTED  WITH  JUSTICE 


To  have  a  right,  then,  is,  I  conceive,  to  have 
something  which  society  ought  to  defend  me 
in  the  possession  of.  If  the  objector  goes  on  to 
ask,  why  it  ought?  I  can  give  him  no  other 
reason  than  general  utility.  If  that  expression 
does  not  seem  to  convey  a  sufficient  feeling  of 
the  strength  of  the  obligation,  nor  to  account 
for  the  peculiar  energy  of  the  feeling,  it  is 
because  there  goes  to  the  composition  of  the 
sentiment,  not  a  rational  only,  but  also  an 
animal  element,  the  thirst  for  retaliation;  and 
this  thirst  derives  its  intensity,  as  well  as  its  mor¬ 
al  justification,  from  the  extraordinarily  im¬ 
portant  and  impressive  kind  of  utility  which  is 
concerned.  The  interest  involved  is  that  of  secu¬ 
rity,  to  every  one’s  feelings  the  most  vital  of 
all  interests.  All  other  earthly  benefits  are 
needed  by  one  person,  not  needed  by  another; 
and  many  of  them  can,  if  necessary,  be  cheer¬ 
fully  foregone,  or  replaced  by  something  else; 
but  security  no  human  being  can  possibly  do 
without;  on  it  we  depend  for  all  our  immu¬ 
nity  from  evil,  and  for  the  whole  value  of  all 
and  every  good,  beyond  the  passing  moment; 
since  nothing  but  the  gratification  of  the  in¬ 
stant  could  be  of  any  worth  to  us,  if  we  could 
be  deprived  of  anything  the  next  instant  by 
whoever  was  momentarily  stronger  than  our¬ 
selves.  Now  this  most  indispensable  of  all  nec¬ 
essaries,  after  physical  nutriment,  cannot  be 
had,  unless  the  machinery  for  providing  it  is 
kept  unintermittedly  in  active  play.  Our  no¬ 
tion,  therefore,  of  the  claim  we  have  on  our 
fellow-creatures  to  join  in  making  safe  for  us 
the  very  groundwork  of  our  existence,  gathers 
feelings  around  it  so  much  more  intense  than 
those  concerned  in  any  of  the  more  common 
cases  of  utility,  that  the  difference  in  degree 
(as  is  often  the  case  in  psychology)  becomes  a 
real  difference  in  kind.  The  claim  assumes  that 
character  of  absoluteness,  that  apparent  in¬ 
finity,  and  incommensurability  with  all  other 
considerations,  which  constitute  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  the  feeling  of  right  and  wrong 
and  that  of  ordinary  expediency  and  inexpe¬ 
diency.  The  feelings  concerned  are  so  power¬ 
ful.  and  we  count  so  positively  on  finding  a 
responsive  feeling  in  others  (all  being  alike 
interested),  that  ought  and  should  grow  into 
must ,  and  recognised  indispensability  becomes 
a  moral  necessity,  analogous  to  physical,  and 
often  not  inferior  to  it  in  binding  force. 

If  the  preceding  analysis,  or  something  re¬ 
sembling  it,  be  not  the  correct  account  of  the 
notion  of  justice;  if  justice  be  totally  inde- 


47 1 

pendent  of  utility,  and  be  a  standard  per  se, 
which  the  mind  can  recognise  by  simple  intro¬ 
spection  of  itself;  it  is  hard  to  understand  why 
that  internal  oracle  is  so  ambiguous,  and  why 
so  many  things  appear  either  just  or  unjust, 
according  to  the  light  in  which  they  are  re¬ 
garded. 

We  are  continually  informed  that  Utility  is 
an  uncertain  standard,  which  every  different 
person  interprets  differently,  and  that  there 
is  no  safety  but  in  the  immutable,  ineffaceable, 
and  unmistakable  dictates  of  Justice,  which 
carry  their  evidence  in  themselves,  and  are 
independent  of  the  fluctuations  of  opinion. 
One  would  suppose  from  this  that  on  ques¬ 
tions  of  justice  there  could  be  no  controversy; 
that  if  we  take  that  for  our  rule,  its  application 
to  any  given  case  could  leave  us  in  as  little 
doubt  as  a  mathematical  demonstration.  So 
far  is  this  from  being  the  fact,  that  there  is  as 
much  difference  of  opinion,  and  as  much  dis¬ 
cussion,  about  what  is  just,  as  about  what  is 
useful  to  society.  Not  only  have  different  na¬ 
tions  and  individuals  different  notions  of  jus¬ 
tice,  but  in  the  mind  of  one  and  the  same  in¬ 
dividual,  justice  is  not  some  one  rule,  princi¬ 
ple,  or  maxim,  but  many,  which  do  not  always 
coincide  in  their  dictates,  and  in  choosing  be¬ 
tween  which,  he  is  guided  either  by  some  ex¬ 
traneous  standard,  or  by  his  own  personal  pre¬ 
dilections. 

For  instance,  there  are  some  who  say,  that 
it  is  unjust  to  punish  any  one  for  the  sake  of 
example  to  others;  that  punishment  is  just, 
only  when  intended  for  the  good  of  the  sufferer 
himself.  Others  maintain  the  extreme  reverse, 
contending  that  to  punish  persons  who  have 
attained  years  of  discretion,  for  their  own  bene¬ 
fit,  is  despotism  and  injustice,  since  if  the  mat¬ 
ter  at  issue  is  solely  their  own  good,  no  one 
has  a  right  to  control  their  own  judgment  of 
it;  but  that  they  may  justly  be  punished  to 
prevent  evil  to  others,  this  being  the  exercise 
of  the  legitimate  right  of  self-defence.  Mr. 
Owen,  again,  affirms  that  it  is  unjust  to  pun¬ 
ish  at  all;  for  the  criminal  did  not  make  his 
own  character;  his  education,  and  the  circum¬ 
stances  which  surrounded  him,  have  made  him 
a  criminal,  and  for  these  he  is  not  responsible. 
All  these  opinions  are  extremely  plausible; 
and  so  long  as  the  question  is  argued  as  one  of 
justice  simply,  without  going  down  to  the  prin¬ 
ciples  which  lie  under  justice  and  are  the 
source  of  its  authority,  I  am  unable  to  see  how 
any  of  these  reasoners  can  be  refuted.  For  in 
truth  every  one  of  the  three  builds  upon  rules 


UTILITARIANISM 


472 

of  justice  confessedly  true.  The  first  appeals 
to  the  acknowledged  injustice  of  singling  out 
an  individual,  andmakinghim  a  sacrifice,  with¬ 
out  his  consent,  for  other  people’s  benefit.  The 
second  relies  on  the  acknowledged  justice  of 
self-defence,  and  the  admitted  injustice  of 
forcing  one  person  to  conform  to  another’s 
notions  of  what  constitutes  his  good.  The 
Owenite  invokes  the  admitted  principle,  that 
it  is  unjust  to  punish  any  one  for  what  he  can¬ 
not  help.  Each  is  triumphant  so  long  as  he  is 
not  compelled  to  take  into  consideration  any 
other  maxims  of  justice  than  the  one  he  has 
selected;  but  as  soon  as  their  several  maxims 
are  brought  face  to  face,  each  disputant  seems 
to  have  exactly  as  much  to  say  for  himself  as 
the  others.  No  one  of  them  can  carry  out  his 
own  notion  of  justice  without  trampling  upon 
another  equally  binding. 

These  are  difficulties;  they  have  always  been 
felt  to  be  such;  and  many  devices  have  been 
invented  to  turn  rather  than  to  overcome 
them.  As  a  refuge  from  the  last  of  the  three, 
men  imagined  what  they  called  the  freedom 
of  the  will;  fancying  that  they  could  not  justify 
punishing  a  man  whose  will  is  in  a  thoroughly 
hateful  state,  unless  it  be  supposed  to  have 
come  into  that  state  through  no  influence  of 
anterior  circumstances.  To  escape  from  the 
other  difficulties,  a  favourite  contrivance  has 
been  the  fiction  of  a  contract,  whereby  at  some 
unknown  period  all  the  members  of  society  en¬ 
gaged  to  obey  the  laws,  and  consented  to  be 
punished  for  any  disobedience  to  them;  there¬ 
by  giving  to  their  legislators  the  right,  which 
it  is  assumed  they  would  not  otherwise  have 
had,  of  punishing  them,  cither  for  their  own 
good  or  for  that  of  society.  This  happy  thought 
was  considered  to  get  rid  of  the  whole  diffi¬ 
culty,  and  to  legitimate  the  inflict  ion  of  punish¬ 
ment,  in  virtue  of  another  received  maxim  of 
justice,  Volenti  non  fit  injuria;  that  is  not  un¬ 
just  which  is  done  with  the  consent  of  the  per¬ 
son  who  is  supposed  to  be  hurt  by  it.  I  need 
hardly  remark,  that  even  if  the  consent  were 
not  a  mere  fiction,  this  maxim  is  not  superior 
in  authority  to  the  others  which  it  is  brought 
in  to  supersede.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  an  in- 
striKtive  specimen  of  the  loose  and  irregular 
manner  in  which  supposed  principles  ol  jus¬ 
tice  grow  up.  This  particular  one  evidently 
came  into  use  as  a  help  to  the  coarse  exigencies 
of  courts  of  law,  which  are  sometimes  obliged 
10  be  content  with  very  uncertain  presump¬ 
tions,  on  account  of  the  greater  evils  which 
would  often  arise  from  any  attempt  on  their 


part  to  cut  finer.  But  even  courts  of  law  are 
not  able  to  adhere  consistently  to  the  maxim, 
for  they  allow  voluntary  engagements  to  be 
set  aside  on  the  ground  of  fraud,  and  some¬ 
times  on  that  of  mere  mistake  or  misinforma¬ 
tion. 

Again,  when  the  legitimacy  of  inflicting 
punishment  is  admitted,  how  many  conflicting 
conceptions  of  justice  come  to  light  in  dis¬ 
cussing  the  proper  apportionment  of  punish¬ 
ments  to  offences.  No  rule  on  the  subject  rec¬ 
ommends  itself  so  strongly  to  the  primitive 
and  spontaneous  sentiment  of  justice,  as  the 
lex  talionis ,  an  eye  for  an  eye  and  a  tooth  for 
a  tooth.  Though  this  principle  of  the  Jewish 
and  of  the  Mahometan  law  has  been  gen¬ 
erally  abandoned  in  Europe  as  a  practical 
maxim,  there  is,  I  suspect,  in  most  minds,  a 
secret  hankering  after  it;  and  when  retribution 
accidentally  falls  on  an  offender  in  that  pre¬ 
cise  shape,  the  general  feeling  of  satisfaction 
evinced  bears  witness  how  natural  is  the  senti¬ 
ment  to  which  this  repayment  in  kind  is  ac¬ 
ceptable.  With  many,  the  test  of  justice  in 
penal  infliction  is  that  the  punishment  should 
be  proportioned  to  the  offence;  meaning  that 
it  should  he  exactly  measured  by  the  moral 
guilt  of  the  culprit  (whatever  be  theirstandard 
for  measuring  moral  guilt):  the  consideration, 
what  amount  of  punishment  is  necessary  to 
deter  from  the  offence,  having  nothing  to  do 
with  the  question  of  justice,  in  their  estima¬ 
tion:  while  there  are  others  to  whom  that  con¬ 
sideration  is  all  in  all;  who  maintain  that  it  is 
not  just,  at  least  for  man,  to  inflict  on  a  fellow- 
creature,  whatever  may  be  his  offences,  any 
amount  of  suffering  beyond  the  least  that  will 
suffice  to  prevent  him  from  repeating,  and 
others  from  imitating,  his  misconduct. 

To  take  another  example  from  a  subject 
already  once  referred  to.  In  a  co-operative  in¬ 
dustrial  association,  is  it  just  or  not  that  talent 
or  skill  should  give  a  title  to  superior  remu¬ 
neration?  On  the  negative  side  of  the  question 
it  is  argued,  that  whoever  does  the  best  he  can, 
deserves  equally  well,  and  ought  not  in  justice 
to  be  pm  in  a  position  of  inferiority  for  no 
fault  of  his  own:  that  superior  abilities  have 
already  advantages  more  than  enough,  in  the 
admiration  they  excite,  the  personal  influence 
they  command,  anil  the  internal  sources  of 
satisfaction  attending  them,  without  adding 
to  these  a  superior  share  of  t lie  world’s  goods; 
and  that  society  is  bound  in  justice  rather  to 
make  compensation  to  the  less  favoured,  for 
this  unmerited  inequality  of  advantages,  than 


HOW  CONNECTED  WITH  JUSTICE 


to  aggravate  it.  On  the  contrary  side  it  is  con¬ 
tended,  that  society  receives  more  from  the 
more  efficient  labourer;  that  his  services  being 
more  useful,  society  owes  him  a  larger  return 
for  them;  that  a  greater  share  of  the  joint  re¬ 
sult  is  actually  his  work,  and  not  to  allow  his 
claim  to  it  is  a  kind  of  robbery;  that  if  he  is 
only  to  receive  as  much  as  others,  he  can  only 
be  justly  required  to  produce  as  much,  and  to 
give  a  smaller  amount  of  time  and  exertion, 
proportioned  to  his  superior  efficiency.  AVho 
shall  decide  between  these  appeals  to  con¬ 
flicting  principles  of  justice?  Justice  has  in  this 
case  two  sides  to  it,  which  it  is  impossible  to 
bring  into  harmony,  and  the  two  disputants 
have  chosen  opposite  sides;  the  one  looks  to 
what  it  is  just  that  the  individual  should  re¬ 
ceive,  the  other  to  what  it  is  just  that  the  com¬ 
munity  should  give.  Each,  from  his  own  point 
of  view,  is  unanswerable;  and  any  choice  be¬ 
tween  them,  on  grounds  of  justice,  must  be 
perfectly  arbitrary.  Social  utility  alone  can  de¬ 
cide  the  preference. 

How  many,  again,  and  how  irreconcilable, 
are  the  standards  of  justice  to  which  reference 
is  made  in  discussing  the  repartition  of  taxa¬ 
tion.  One  opinion  is,  that  payment  to  the  State 
should  be  in  numerical  proportion  to  pecu¬ 
niary  means.  Others  think  that  justice  dictates 
what  they  term  graduated  taxation;  taking  a 
higher  percentage  from  those  who  have  more 
to  spare.  In  point  of  natural  justice  a  strong 
case  might  be  made  for  disregarding  means 
altogether,  and  taking  the  same  absolute  sum 
(whenever  it  could  be  got)  from  every  one:  as 
the  subscribers  to  a  mess,  or  to  a  club,  all  pay 
the  same  sum  for  the  same  privileges,  whether 
they  can  all  equally  afford  it  or  not.  Since 
the  protection  (it  might  be  said)  of  law  and 
government  is  afforded  to,  and  is  equally  re¬ 
quired  by  all,  there  is  no  injustice  in  making 
all  buy  it  at  the  same  price.  It  is  reckoned  jus¬ 
tice,  not  injustice,  that  a  dealer  should  charge 
to  all  customers  the  same  price  for  the  same 
article,  not  a  price  varying  according  to  their 
means  of  payment.  This  doctrine,  as  applied 
to  taxation,  finds  no  advocates,  because  it  con¬ 
flicts  so  strongly  with  man’s  feelings  of  human¬ 
ity  and  of  social  expediency;  but  the  principle 
of  justice  which  it  invokes  is  as  true  and  as 
binding  as  those  which  can  be  appealed  to 
against  it.  Accordingly  it  exerts  a  tacit  influ¬ 
ence  on  the  line  of  defence  employed  for  other 
modes  of  assessing  taxation.  People  feel  obliged 
to  argue  that  the  State  does  more  for  the  rich 
than  for  the  poor,  as  a  justification  for  its  tak- 


473 

ing  more  from  them:  though  this  is  in  reality 
not  true,  for  the  rich  would  be  far  better  able 
to  protect  themselves,  in  the  absence  of  law 
or  government,  than  the  poor,  and  indeed 
would  probably  be  successful  in  converting 
the  poor  into  their  slaves.  Others,  again,  so  far 
defer  to  the  same  conception  of  justice,  as  to 
maintain  that  all  should  pay  an  equal  capita¬ 
tion  tax  for  the  protection  of  their  persons 
(these  being  of  equal  value  to  all),  and  an  un¬ 
equal  tax  for  the  protection  of  their  property, 
which  is  unequal.  To  this  others  reply,  that  the 
all  of  one  man  is  as  valuable  to  him  as  the  all 
of  another.  From  these  confusions  there  is  no 
other  mode  of  extrication  than  the  utilitarian, 

Is,  then,  the  difference  between  the  Just  and 
the  Expedient  a  merely  imaginary  distinction? 
Have  mankind  been  under  a  delusion  in  think¬ 
ing  that  justice  is  a  more  sacred  thing  than 
policy,  and  that  the  latter  ought  only  to  be 
listened  to  after  the  former  has  been  satisfied? 
By  no  means.  The  exposition  we  have  given 
of  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  sentiment, 
recognises  a  real  distinction;  and  no  one  of 
those  who  profess  the  most  sublime  contempt 
for  the  consequences  of  actions  as  an  element 
in  their  morality,  attaches  more  importance 
to  the  distinction  than  I  do.  While  I  dispute 
the  pretensions  of  any  theory  which  sets  up 
an  imaginary  standard  of  justice  not  grounded 
on  utility,  I  account  the  justice  which  is 
grounded  on  utility  to  be  the  chief  part,  and 
incomparably  the  most  sacred  and  binding 
part,  of  all  morality.  Justice  is  a  name  for  cer¬ 
tain  classes  of  moral  rules,  which  concern  the 
essentials  of  human  well-being  more  nearly, 
and  are  therefore  of  more  absolute  obligation, 
than  any  other  rules  for  the  guidance  of  life; 
and  the  notion  which  we  have  found  to  be  of 
the  essence  of  the  idea  of  justice,  that  of  a  right 
residing  in  an  individual,  implies  and  testifies 
to  this  more  binding  obligation. 

The  moral  rules  which  forbid  mankind  to 
hurt  one  another  (in  which  we  must  never 
forget  to  include  wrongful  interference  with 
each  other’s  freedom)  are  more  vital  to  human 
well-being  than  any  maxims,  however  impor¬ 
tant,  which  only  point  out  the  best  mode  of 
managing  some  department  of  human  affairs. 
They  have  also  the  peculiarity,  that  they  are 
the  main  element  in  determining  the  whole 
of  the  social  feelings  of  mankind.  It  is  their 
observance  which  alone  preserves  peace  among 
human  beings:  if  obedience  to  them  were  not 
the  rule,  ancl  disobedience  the  exception,  every 


UTILITARIANISM 


one  would  see  in  ever)*  one  else  an  enemy, 
against  whom  he  must  be  perpetually  guard¬ 
ing  himself.  What  is  hardly  less  important, 
these  are  the  precepts  which  mankind  have 
the  strongest  and  the  most  direct  inducements 
for  impressing  upon  one  another.  By  merely 
giving  to  each  other  prudential  instruction  or 
exhortation,  they  may  gain,  or  think  they  gain, 
nothing:  in  inculcating  on  each  other  the  duty 
of  positive  beneficence  they  have  an  unmis¬ 
takable  interest,  but  far  less  in  degree:  a  per¬ 
son  mav  possibly  not  need  the  benefits  of 
others;  but  he  always  needs  that  they  should 
not  do  him  hurt.  Thus  the  moralities  which 
protect  every  individual  from  being  harmed 
by  others,  either  directly  or  by  being  hindered 
in  his  freedom  of  pursuing  his  own  good,  are 
at  once  those  which  he  himself  has  most  at 
heart,  and  those  which  he  has  the  strongest 
interest  in  publishing  and  enforcing  by  word 
and  deed.  It  is  by  a  person’s  observance  of 
these  that  his  fitness  to  exist  as  one  of  the  fel¬ 
lowship  of  human  beings  is  tested  and  decided; 
for  on  that  depends  his  being  a  nuisance  or 
not  to  those  with  whom  he  is  in  contact.  Now 
it  is  these  moralities  primarily  which  compose 
the  obligations  of  justice.  The  most  marked 
cases  of  injustice,  and  those  which  give  the 
tone  to  the  feeling  of  repugnance  which  char¬ 
acterises  the  sentiment,  are  acts  of  wrongful 
aggression,  or  wrongful  exercise  of  power  over 
some  one;  the  next  are  those  which  consist  in 
wrongfully  withholding  from  him  something 
which  is  his  due;  in  both  cases,  inflicting  on 
him  a  positive  hurt,  either  in  the  form  of  direct 
suffering,  or  of  the  privation  of  some  good 
which  he  had  reasonable  ground,  either  of  a 
physical  or  of  a  social  kind,  for  counting  upon. 

The  same  powerful  motives  which  command 
the  observance  of  these  primary  moralities,  en¬ 
join  the  punishment  of  those  who  violate  them; 
and  as  the  impulses  of  self-defence,  of  defence 
of  others,  and  of  vengeance,  are  all  called  forth 
against  such  persons,  retribution,  or  evil  for 
evil,  becomes  closely  connected  with  the  senti¬ 
ment  of  justice,  and  is  universally  included  in 
the  idea.  Good  for  good  is  also  one  of  the  dic¬ 
tates  of  justice;  and  this,  though  its  social  util¬ 
ity  is  evident,  and  though  it  carries  with  it  a  nat¬ 
ural  human  feeling,  has  not  at  first  sight  that 
obvious  connec  tion  with  hurt  or  injury,  which, 
existing  in  the  most  elementary  cases  of  just 
and  unjust,  is  tile  source  of  the  characteristic 
intensity  of  the  sentiment.  But  the  connection, 
though  less  obvious,  is  not  less  real.  lie  who 
accepts  benefits,  and  denies  a  return  of  them 


when  needed,  inflicts  a  real  hurt,  by  disap¬ 
pointing  one  of  the  most  natural  and  reason¬ 
able  of  expectations,  and  one  which  he  must 
at  least  tacitly  have  encouraged,  otherwise  the 
benefits  would  seldom  have  been  conferred. 
The  important  rank,  among  human  evils  and 
wrongs,  of  the  disappointment  of  expectation, 
is  shown  in  the  fact  that  it  constitutes  the  prin¬ 
cipal  criminality  of  two  such  highly  immoral 
acts  as  a  breach  of  friendship  and  a  breach  of 
promise.  Few  hurts  which  human  beings  can 
sustain  are  greater,  and  none  wound  more, 
than  when  that  on  which  they  habitually  and 
with  full  assurance  relied,  fails  them  in  the 
hour  of  need;  and  few  wrongs  are  greater  than 
this  mere  withholding  of  good;  none  excite 
more  resentment,  either  in  the  person  suffer¬ 
ing,  or  in  a  sympathising  spectator.  The  prin¬ 
ciple,  therefore,  of  giving  to  each  what  they  de¬ 
serve,  that  is,  good  for  good  as  well  as  evil  for 
evil,  is  not  only  included  within  the  idea  of 
Justice  as  we  have  defined  it.  but  is  a  proper 
object  of  that  intensity  of  sentiment,  which 
places  the  Just,  in  human  estimation,  above 
the  simply  Expedient. 

Most  of  the  maxims  of  justice  current  in  the 
world,  and  commonly  appealed  to  in  its  trans¬ 
actions,  are  simply  instrumental  to  carrying 
into  effect  the  principles  of  justice  which  we 
have  now  spoken  of.  That  a  person  is  only  re¬ 
sponsible  for  what  he  has  done  voluntarily,  or 
could  voluntarily  have  avoided;  that  it  is  un¬ 
just  to  condemn  any  person  unheard;  that  the 
punishment  ought  to  be  proportioned  to  the 
offence,  and  the  like,  arc  maxims  intended  to 
prevent  the  just  principle  of  evil  for  evil  from 
being  perverted  to  the  infliction  of  evil  with¬ 
out  that  justification.  The  greater  part  of 
these  common  maxims  have  come  into  use 
from  the  practice  of  courts  of  justice,  which 
have  been  naturally  led  to  a  more  complete 
recognition  and  elaboration  than  was  likely 
to  suggest  itself  to  others,  of  the  rules  necessary 
to  enable  them  to  fulfil  their  double  function, 
of  inflicting  punishment  when  due,  and  of 
awarding  to  each  person  his  right. 

That  first  of  judicial  virtues,  impartiality,  is 
an  obligation  of  justice,  partly  for  the  reason 
last  mentioned;  as  being  a  necessary  condition 
of  the  fulfilment  of  the  other  obligations  of 
justice.  But  this  is  not  the  only  source  of  the 
exalted  rank,  among  human  obligations,  of 
those  maxims  of  equality  and  impartiality, 
which,  both  in  popular  estimation  and  in  that 
of  the  most  enlightened,  are  included  among 
the  precepts  of  justice.  In  one  point  of  view, 


HOW  CONNECTED  WITH  JUSTICE 


they  may  be  considered  as  corollaries  from  the 
principles  already  laid  down.  If  it  is  a  duty  to 
do  to  each  according  to  his  deserts,  returning 
good  for  good  as  well  as  repressing  evil  by  evil, 
it  necessarily  follows  that  we  should  treat  all 
equally  well  (when  no  higher  duty  forbids) 
who  have  deserved  equally  well  of  us,  and  that 
society  should  treat  all  equally  well  who  have 
deserved  equally  well  of  it ,  that  is,  who  have 
deserved  equally  well  absolutely.  This  is  the 
highest  abstract  standard  of  social  and  dis¬ 
tributive  justice;  towards  which  all  institu¬ 
tions,  and  the  efforts  of  all  virtuous  citizens, 
should  be  made  in  the  utmost  possible  degree 
to  converge. 

But  this  great  moral  duty  rests  upon  a  still 
deeper  foundation,  being  a  direct  emanation 
from  the  first  principle  of  morals,  and  not  a 
mere  logical  corollary  from  secondary  or  de¬ 
rivative  doctrines.  It  is  involved  in  the  very 
meaning  of  Utility,  or  the  Greatest  Happiness 
Principle.  That  principle  is  a  mere  form  of 
words  without  rational  signification,  unless 
one  person’s  happiness,  supposed  equal  in  de¬ 
gree  (with  the  proper  allowance  made  for 
kind),  is  counted  for  exactly  as  much  as  an¬ 
other’s.  Those  conditions  being  supplied,  Ben- 
tham’s  dictum,  “everybody  to  count  for  one, 
nobody  for  more  than  one,’’  might  be  written 
under  the  principle  of  utility  as  an  explana¬ 
tory  commentary.1  The  equal  claim  of  every- 

1This  implication,  in  the  first  principle  of  the 
utilitarian  scheme,  of  perfect  impartiality  between 
persons,  is  regarded  by  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  (in 
his  Social  Statics)  as  a  disproof  of  the  pretensions 
of  utility  to  be  a  sufficient  guide  to  right;  since 
(he  says)  the  principle  of  utility  presupposes  the 
anterior  principle,  that  everybody  has  an  equal 
right  to  happiness.  It  may  he  more  correctlv  de¬ 
scribed  as  supposing  that  equal  amounts  of  hap¬ 
piness  are  equally  desirable,  whether  felt  by  the 
same  or  by  different  persons.  I  his,  however,  is  not 
a  pre-supposition;  not  a  premise  needful  to  sup¬ 
port  the  principle  of  utility,  but  the  very  prin¬ 
ciple  itself;  for  what  is  the  principle  of  utility,  if  it 
be  not  that  “happiness”  and  “desirable”  are  syn¬ 
onymous  terms?  If  there  is  any  anterior  principle 
implied,  it  can  be  no  other  than  this,  that  the  truths 
of  arithmetic  are  applicable  to  the  valuation  of 
happiness,  as  of  all  other  measurable  quantities. 

[Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  in  a  private  communica¬ 
tion  on  the  subject  of  the  preceding  Note,  objects 
to  being  considered  an  opponent  of  utilitarianism, 
and  states  that  he  regards  happiness  as  the  ulti¬ 
mate  end  of  morality;  but  deems  that  end  only 
partially  attainable  by  empirical  generalisations 
from  the  observed  results  of  conduct,  and  com¬ 
pletely  attainable  only  by  deducing,  from  the  laws 
of  life  and  the  conditions  of  existence,  what  kinds 
of  action  necessarily  tend  to  produce  happiness, 
and  what  kinds  to  produce  unhappiness.  With  the 


475 

body  to  happiness  in  the  estimation  of  the 
moralist  anclof  the  legislator,  involvesan  equal 
claim  to  all  the  means  of  happiness,  except  in 
so  far  as  the  inevitable  conditions  of  human 
life,  and  the  general  interest,  in  which  that  of 
every  individual  is  included,  set  limits  to  the 
maxim;  and  those  limits  ought  to  be  strictly 
construed.  As  every  other  maxim  of  justice,  so 
this  is  by  no  means  applied  or  held  applicable 
universally;  on  the  contrary,  as  I  have  already 
remarked,  it  bends  to  every  person’s  ideas  of 
social  expediency.  But  in  whatever  case  it  is 
deemed  applicable  at  all,  it  is  held  to  be  the 
dictate  of  justice.  All  persons  are  deemed  to 
have  a  right  to  equality  of  treatment,  except 
when  some  recognised  social  expediency  re¬ 
quires  the  reverse.  And  hence  all  social  in¬ 
equalities  which  have  ceased  to  be  considered 
expedient,  assume  the  character  not  of  simple 
inexpediency,  but  of  injustice,  and  appear  so 
tyrannical,  that  people  are  apt  to  wonder  how 
they  ever  could  have  been  tolerated;  forgetful 
that  they  themselves  perhaps  tolerate  other  in¬ 
equalities  under  an  equally  mistaken  notion 
of  expediency,  the  correction  of  which  would 
make  that  which  they  approve  seem  quite  as 
monstrous  as  what  they  have  at  last  learnt  to 
condemn.  The  entire  history  of  social  im¬ 
provement  has  been  a  series  of  transitions,  by 
which  one  custom  or  institution  after  another, 
from  being  a  supposed  primary  necessity  of 
social  existence,  has  passed  into  the  rank  of  a 
universally  stigmatised  injustice  and  tyranny. 
So  it  has  been  with  the  distinctions  of  slaves 
and  freemen,  nobles  and  serfs,  patricians  and 
plebeians;  and  so  it  will  be,  and  in  part  al¬ 
ready  is,  with  the  aristocracies  of  colour,  race, 
and  sex. 

exception  of  the  word  “necessarily,  I  have  no  dis¬ 
sent  to  express  from  this  doctrine;  and  (omitting 
that  word)  l  am  not  aware  that  any  modern  ad¬ 
vocate  of  utilitarianism  is  of  a  different  opinion. 
Bentham,  certainly,  to  whom  in  the  Social  Statics 
Mr.  Spencer  particularly  referred,  is,  least  of  all 
writers,  chargeable  with  unwillingness  to  deduce 
the  effect  of  actions  on  happiness  from  the  laws  of 
human  nature  and  the  universal  conditions  of  hu¬ 
man  life.  The  common  charge  against  him  is  of 
relying  too  exclusively  upon  such  deductions,  and 
declining  altogether  to  lie  bound  by  the  general¬ 
isations  from  specific  experience  which  Mr.  Spen¬ 
cer  thinks  that  utilitarians  generally  coniine  them¬ 
selves  to.  My  own  opinion  (and,  as  1  collect,  Mr. 
Spencer’s)  is,  that  in  ethics,  as  in  all  other  branches 
of  scientific  study,  the  consilience  of  the  results  of 
both  these  processes,  each  corroborating  and  veri¬ 
fying  the  other,  is  requisite  to  give  to  any  general 
proposition  the  kind  and  degree  of  evidence  which 
constitutes  scientific  proof.] 


UTILITARIANISM 


476 

It  appears  from  what  has  been  said,  that  jus¬ 
tice  is  a  name  for  certain  moral  requirements, 
which,  regarded  collectively,  stand  higher  in 
the  scale  of  social  utility,  and  are  therefore  of 
more  paramount  obligation,  than  any  others; 
though  particular  cases  may  occur  in  which 
some  other  social  duty  is  so  important,  as  to 
overrule  any  one  of  the  general  maxims  of 
justice.  Thus,  to  save  a  life,  it  may  not  only  be 
allowable,  but  a  duty,  to  steal,  or  take  by  force, 
the  necessary  food  or  medicine,  or  to  kidnap, 
and  compel  to  officiate,  the  only  qualified  med¬ 
ical  practitioner.  In  such  cases,  as  we  do  not 
call  anything  justice  which  is  not  a  virtue,  we 
usually  say,  not  that  justice  must  give  way  to 
some  other  moral  principle,  but  that  what  is 
just  in  ordinary  cases  is,  by  reason  of  that  other 
principle,  not  just  in  the  particular  case.  By 
this  useful  accommodation  of  language,  the 
character  of  indefeasibility  attributed  to  jus¬ 
tice  is  kept  up,  and  we  are  saved  from  the  ne¬ 
cessity  of  maintaining  that  there  can  be  laud¬ 
able  injustice. 

The  considerations  which  have  now  been 
adduced  resolve,  1  conceive,  the  only  real  dif¬ 
ficulty  in  the  utilitarian  theory  of  morals.  It 
has  always  been  evident  that  all  cases  of  justice 


are  also  cases  of  expediency:  the  difference  is 
in  the  peculiar  sentiment  which  attaches  to  the 
former,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  lat¬ 
ter.  If  this  characteristic  sentiment  has  been 
sufficiently  accounted  for;  if  there  is  no  neces¬ 
sity  to  assume  for  it  any  peculiarity  of  origin: 
if  it  is  simply  the  natural  feeling  of  resent¬ 
ment,  moralised  by  being  made  coextensive 
with  the  demands  of  social  good;  and  if  this 
feeling  not  only  does  but  ought  to  exist  in  all 
the  classes  of  cases  to  which  the  idea  of  justice 
corresponds;  that  idea  no  longer  presents  it¬ 
self  as  a  stumbling-block  to  the  utilitarian 
ethics. 

Justice  remains  the  appropriate  name  forcer- 
tain  social  utilities  which  are  vastly  more  im¬ 
portant,  and  therefore  more  absolute  and  im¬ 
perative,  than  any  others  are  as  a  class  (though 
not  more  so  than  others  may  be  in  particular 
cases);  and  which,  therefore,  ought  to  be,  as 
well  as  naturally  are,  guarded  by  a  sentiment 
not  only  different  in  degree,  but  also  in  kind; 
distinguished  from  the  milder  feeling  which 
attaches  to  the  mere  idea  of  promoting  human 
pleasure  or  convenience,  at  once  by  the  more 
definite  nature  of  its  commands,  and  by  the 
sterner  character  of  its  sanctions. 


I  KINTID  IN  Tllk  U.S.A. 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 

RELATION 

MECHANICS 

RELIGION 

MEDICINE 

REVOLUTION 

MEMORY  AND 

RHETORIC 

IMAGINATION 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

METAPHYSICS 

SCIENCE 

MIND 

SENSE 

MONARCHY 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 

NATURE 

SIN 

NECESSITY  AND 

SLAVERY 

CONTINGENCY 

SOUL 

OLIGARCHY 

SPACE 

ONE  AND  MANY 

STATE 

OPINION 

TEMPERANCE 

OPPOSITION 

THEOLOGY 

PHILOSOPHY 

TIME 

PHYSICS 

TRUTH 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

TYRANNY 

POETRY 

UNIVERSAL  AND 

PRINCIPLE 

PARTICULAR 

PROGRESS 

VIRTUE  AND  VICE 

PROPHECY 

WAR  AND  PEACE 

PRUDENCE 

WEALTH 

PUNISHMENT 

WILL 

QUALITY 

WISDOM 

QUANTITY 

WORLD 

REASONING 

. . . . . ******* . . . . 

